
I am a black American woman from a working class and poor background. I can 
never separate those identities; they operate all at once. Though it’s critical 
to create a community where working class people and black people can coexist 
and share resources, I know that, even if we operate in a class struggle where 
I’ve achieved parity with white middle-class workers, I’ll still occasionally 
experience racism in some form about my body in public spaces. Henry Louis 
Gates was arrested outside his own home in 2009 because his Cambridge neighbor 
didn’t recognize him and called the police. He wasn’t new to the neighborhood. 
He teaches at Harvard.

When a white person says they don’t see race, that’s racist: sameness is an 
erasure when stark numbers – like the disproportionate police killings of black 
people – show that we don’t all exist in the world with equal safeguards and 
privileges. Black Lives Matter is a vision for valuing the lives of black and 
brown people, for whom a trip to work for the fair wages for which we all 
fought for can end with a black woman in a body bag from a botched traffic stop 
(and the only reason we know it was botched because there was a dashboard 
camera and a body camera video to prove it).

So when I was following a Twitter discussion between an African American, 
progressive Black Lives Matter supporter (and a likely Sanders supporter) and a 
white, progressive Sanders supporter, I felt my anger start to rise when the 
white progressive referred to Black Lives Matter as “your movement”. They were 
tweeting about thecontroversial protest action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/11/bernie-sanders-black-lives-matter-squirm>
 initiated by two women in Seattle: the African American acquaintance stated 
that the purpose of the protest was to advance the visibility and message of 
police violence black and brown communities face; the other vehemently 
responded that the action alienates the very candidate that would support “your 
movement”.

It’s always only “your movement” when the movement centers on racism and 
critiques of structural racism with American civil society; it’s “our movement” 
when it focused on economic inequality.

But it’s too simple to view class struggle without constantly acknowledging 
the kind of disproportionate terror and discrimination people of color face as 
workers and citizens demanding equal protections. The 25,000-plus masses that 
attend Sanders rallies are mostly white, and from following a series of 
comments and discussions on social media, it seems that many are ignorant to 
how income inequality, fair wages, housing opportunities and education overlap 
with disproportionate levels of discrimination that black and brown communities 
experience. Racism and capitalism are fire and air. They cannot exist without 
the other. Social democrats may ideologically align with black issues and 
causes on the surface but they feel loathed to apply a critical analysis of 
racism on the same footing as their class one.

Jennifer Roesch, writing for the Jacobin 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/08/black-lives-matter-racism-marxism-capitalism/>
, rightly and presciently points out this cognitive dissonance:

‘Economic inequality’ is an inadequate phrase to capture the sheer brutality 
of this process, and the idea that racial inequality is a symptom of it fails 
to capture the dynamics by which capitalism was established in the United 
States and by which it is sustained. Racism is not merely a product of economic 
inequality, but also part of how that inequality is produced and maintained. It 
is so woven into the fabric of capitalism that the system itself must be 
dismantled. But at the same time, a socialist project in this country can only 
be successful if it is accompanied by astruggle for black liberation 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/06/black-lives-matter-police-brutality-allies/>
.

My anger at white progressive responses with efforts to engage Sanders and his 
supports on race issues – like with the Seattle protest anger – is an old one, 
rooted in previous discussions and electoral cycles, where I’ve been on the 
receiving end of good, well-meaning white folk who insist that my priorities 
are flawed because I demand the inclusion of an analysis of racism in the 
struggle for equality when I “should” really center it on the identity of the 
worker and worker’s rights. In past heated exchanges – before I was overpowered 
by the bellicose booming voice of a white male ally or bro, and I checked out – 
what was revealed in that exchange is how many people view race and class as 
separate things in American society.

Labor unions have a noble history of fighting for fair wages and conditions 
for American workers – but, like every American story, they have a spotty and 
questionable history in allowing blacks and women equal opportunity to 
participate and compete for wages and work. Early in the American Federation of 
Labor’s history, union membership for black workers was excluded. That policy 
gradually ended through the formation of the Committee for Industrial 
Organization in 1935; yet, as late as the early 2000s, I witnessed community 
board members from Harlem in New York City insist that recruitment by trade 
unions for local black Harlem residents remained lackluster and ineffectual.

Sanders participated in a critical moment in our history; he marched with 
Martin Luther King 50 years ago, as his usually white supporters like to remind 
African American liberals at every opportunity. I can’t tell you decade by 
decade precisely what his civil rights record has been since; I’m inclined to 
believe that his voting record has shown great consistency, from voting to 
renew the voting rights act to supporting civil rights and fair housing 
protections. I’ve felt and believe him to be an ally. However, I think as avoter
considering his candidacy to be the next American president, I’m asking him to 
show me evidence of his depth of commitment to my concerns for criminal justice 
reform by directly speaking to this moment where criminal justice reform and 
income inequality intersect.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fbernie-sanders-pledges-to-end-institutional-racism-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%3A%20I%20will%20work%20to%20end%20institutional%20racism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fbernie-sanders-pledges-to-end-institutional-racism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%3A%20I%20will%20work%20to%20end%20institutional%20racism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fbernie-sanders-pledges-to-end-institutional-racism-video&media=>
 At a rally Monday night in Los Angeles, Democratic presidential candidate 
Bernie Sanders pledged to fight harder than any other candidate to end 
institutional racism 
Arguably, Sanders was less of the target of the message from the Netroots and 
Seattle Black Lives Matter protesters than were his supporters and their 
professed allyship. Those Seattle supporters, for instance, proceeded to prove 
the protesters’ point when they produced a counter chant to drown out the 
message from possible and probable future BLM protests at Sanders rallies: 
“Which side are you on?”

(Which Side Are You On? 
<http://genius.com/Pete-seeger-which-side-are-you-on-lyrics> is a song written 
by Florence Reece during the Harlan County coal miner’s strike in 1931, which 
was also sung during the Civil Rights Movement – notably during the Selma 
marches – and, most recently, adapted in the art protest action by folks in St 
Louis after the Mike Brown murder.)

Sanders has adopted the language from the movement to articulate his vision to 
address this criticism, but it falls short of defining specific actions to 
dismantle structural racism with any real clarity. Former Maryland governor and 
fellow democratic candidate Martin O’Malley, whoseactual 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/05/21/8_chilling_new_revelations_about_policing_in_baltimore_partner/>
record 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/martin-omalley-attempts-save-day-baltimore-n350431>
 in criminal justice is worthy of intense scrutiny, has put fortha tangible plan
 
<http://www.ebony.com/news-views/omalley-debuts-criminal-justice-reform-plan-interview-503#axzz3ihy09gDs>
 that actually speaks to the intersections of income equality and criminal 
justice reform. O’Malley, whose public appearance last month was also 
“disrupted” by Black Lives Matter protests, has often more adeptly responded to 
criticism from movement leaders and actors than Sanders.

Sanders’s base of supporters display a rather simplistic understanding of the 
stakes that black voters – and specifically, black progressives – feel in this 
moment. Their critiques are paternalistic in character, most notably from
Gawker’s Hamilton Nolan 
<http://gawker.com/dont-piss-on-your-best-friend-1723074461>, who charged 
“don’t piss on your best friend”, to others who provide a truncated and myopic 
history lesson of liberal support for black causes that drip with condescension 
and the presumption of blacks’ loyalty for their past efforts, even though the 
crisis for black and brown communities has not abated. And within those 
critiques demonizing Black Lives Matter protesters and sympathizers, many white 
progressives reveal their near-religious simplicity, embracing the gospel that 
wealth redistribution will magically erase racism, bias and difference.

Such white progressives should re-read Martin Luther King Jr’s A Letter From a 
Birmingham Jail 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2013/04/martin-luther-kings-letter-from-birmingham-jail/274668/>
 before commenting, and meditate on King’s meaning of the “silence of good 
people”. I’d ask that, instead of demanding black voters’ unquestioning loyalty 
to Sanders, they interrogate what racism is before demurring to a class 
analysis that still leaves my working-class family members dead in the street.

 