
After three months of weekly bee updates, we at Buzzfeeds have decided to 
redirect our focus to take a deeper look at the declining bee population by 
switching to a new, monthly feature. The all new Buzzfeeds will be unveiled in 
November, but to bring the weekly updates to a close, we had The Guardian's 
resident bee expert Alison Benjamin select the most significant Buzzfeeds 
stories and explain their impact.

Benjamin is the co-author of A World Without Bees 
<http://www.amazon.com/World-Without-Bees-Allison-Benjamin/dp/B006CDGQKW>, Bees 
in the City: The Urban Beekeepers' Handbook 
<http://www.amazon.com/Bees-City-Urban-Beekeepers-Handbook/dp/0852652313> and 
Keeping Bees and Making Honey 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Keeping-Bees-Making-Honey-2nd/dp/1446303551/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1375193993&sr=1-2>
.

Honey bees in trouble? Blame farm chemicals, study says 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/science/honey-bees-trouble-blame-farm-chemicals-study-says-6C10736740>

What happened:
Bees pollinating crops including watermelon, cucumbers and blueberries return 
to their hives with pollen contaminated by agricultural chemicals – leaving 
insects more susceptible to a lethal parasite, according to astudy published 
online in July 
<http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0070182>. 
Pollen filled with fungicides, insecticides and other agriculture chemicals was 
fed to healthy bees, that were then more likely to be infected by Nosema 
ceranae – a gut parasite linked to the decimation of honey bees.

Key quote: 

Dennis van Engelsdorp, an entomologist at the University of Maryland and 
senior author of the new study, said:

Fungicides, which we didn't expect to harm insects, seem to have a sub-lethal 
effect on bee health ... And that is important, of course, because there is not 
a lot of regulation for fungicides when they are being applied to flowering 
plants … so this suggests that we need to rethink and reevaluate how we write 
label laws for some fungicides.

Why this is so important:
Fungicides have been seen as fairly safe for honeybees and are used 
extensively by farmers. Yet this research shows that they are a danger to 
honeybees because there is an increased probability of Nosema infection – which 
has been linked to increased bee mortality – in bees that consumed pollen with 
high levels of fungicide. So, what this research shows is that the recent 
decline in honeybee populations may be attributable to more factors than recent 
research suggests. In addition to pesticides, poor nutrition and parasites, 
their demise may also be linked to other common agricultural chemicals. It is 
more proof that modern agricultural practices are unsustainable and we need to 
change these practices to safeguard our pollinators.

Let it bee: the politicians who want to save America's bees 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2013/07/31/earl-blumenauer-and-john-conyers-want-to-save-america-s-bees.html>

What happened:
In an effort to abate the decimation of the bee population, two US 
representativesintroduced a bill 
<http://blumenauer.house.gov/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2233> 
that would put a temporary ban on the insecticides commonly associated with 
colony collapse disorder – neonicotinoids. The congressmen hope that such a ban 
would move the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to conduct more 
comprehensive studies on these insecticides and to have the government conduct 
a nationwide study of bee mortality.

Key Quote:
Blumenauer told the Daily Beast: 

This is something that's not particularly partisan. What we're seeing is the 
emergence of a large and growing sector of agricultural producers that realize 
the cost and consequences of this problem. People are also understanding that 
it's cheaper and more effective to use non-chemical techniques.

Why this is so important:
Chemical giants Syngenta and Bayer have both filed legal challenges against 
the European Commission's two-year ban on itsneonicotinoid pesticides. 
<http://www.beyondpesticides.org/dailynewsblog/?p=11739> As a result, the ban, 
which was supposed to come into force by the end of 2013, could be delayed or 
even quashed. So it's vitally important that the US takes on the might of these 
companies and gives the EPA the power and confidence to protect honeybees and 
other pollinators from dangerous pesticides through a much more rigorous 
registration process.

Urban hives boom could be 'bad for bees' <http://www.bbc.co.uk/nature/23631206>

What happened: 
Two scientists from a University of Sussex 
<http://www.sussex.ac.uk/newsandevents/?id=20465> laboratory are urging 
wannabe-urban beekeepers to consider planting more flowers instead of taking up 
the increasingly popular hobby. The scientists say that a dense population of 
bees in areas with fewer feeding plants puts more pressure on the species, 
potentially doing more harm than good.

Key quote:
Professor Ratnieks said:

It's great that the public are concerned for bees and want to help. But this 
enthusiasm needs to be better channelled. We would not want to discourage 
anyone from taking up beekeeping if that is what they want to do. Beekeeping 
can be a fascinating hobby, but should not be seen as a way of helping bees 
when done in areas such as London, where honey bees are already very abundant.

Why this is so important: 
This story created much debate and some great suggestions in the thread, 
particularly from SteB1 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26046849>, about how we 
can create more forage for all bees and other pollinators in towns and cities. 
It's important because people desperately want to help save bees and they need 
to know how they can do this by planting the right trees and flowers.

The Sussex scientists suggest that for every new hive introduced into London 
that we would need the equivalent of one hectare of borage, a plant that 
attracts mainly honey bees, or 8.3 hectares of lavender, a plant that attracts 
mainly bumblebees but some honey bees.

But some parts of London are covered in brambles, buddleia and lime trees – 
which are all important bee and butterfly forage. What we need is a pollinator 
audit of London and other cities to establish what forage is available and 
where and what more could be done to increase bee and pollinator food. While 
planting hectres of borage may be impractical in cities where space is scarce, 
planting more bee-friendly trees, making roofs more bee-friendly and less 
mowing of dandelions and other pollinator-friendly 'weeds' are all possible.
 