
If you want to regain faith in our elected representatives, read some first 
speeches <http://australianpolitics.com/parliament/maiden-speeches>.


Not necessarily the attention-seeking ones that make the news – such as 
Pauline Hanson’s fact-free musing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-first-speech-senate-calls-for-immigration-ban>
on the latest minority group she thinks we should fear the most, orDerryn 
Hinch’s use of parliamentary privilege to name convicted sex offenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/12/derryn-hinch-uses-parliamentary-privilege-to-name-sex-offenders-in-maiden-speech>
. The other ones. The speeches that seek to answer what Liberal minister 
Christian Porter described in his own first speech three years ago as “the 
existential questions of politics: who is the member? Why are they here? What 
do they believe?”

They’re not all good. Some plod through the not-particularly-interesting 
attributes of the electorate from which the MP has just been elected, move on 
to the fairly pedestrian life story of said MP and finish with the ubiquitous 
heartfelt thanks to spouses, parents and friends.

Turnbull attacks George Christensen and Pauline Hanson's anti-Muslim rhetoric
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/16/turnbull-attacks-george-christensen-and-pauline-hansons-anti-muslim-rhetoric>
But some are fascinating and moving – telling personal stories that have 
shaped and motivated, setting individual goals and priorities before they are 
diluted by the mendacity of the political process or dulled by meaningless 
talking points.

Julia Banks, the new Liberal member for the Victorian seat of Chisholm, 
delivered a particularly powerful one this week, a defence of feminism and 
multiculturalism and a personal story of the effects of hate speech.

She contradicted John Howard’s view that women would never achieve equal 
representation in politics, saying it was “never right to say never ever” and 
describing her own life as a working parent.

“It is true to say that women have borne the brunt of the caring 
responsibilities, but it is not right to say that we will never achieve a 50-50 
ratio simply because that has been the case historically. This is the modern 
world. Increasingly, men and women share the responsibilities of domestic life 
and childcare,” she said.

“The impact of male and female models who reverse traditional roles should not 
be underestimated. The pursuit of gender equality is intrinsically linked to 
love and respect and the dignity of work.”

She mused that her late father, Sofoulis Phillip Lolatgis, who arrived in 
Australia in 1949 as a 15-year-old who had fled post-war poverty in Greece 
without his parents and unable to speak English, would have considered it a 
“miracle” that his daughter had been elected to parliament.

And she described her own childhood experience of racial abuse and 
intolerance, back when Greeks were the ethnic group that was being told to go 
back to where they came from.

“In my early years, prejudice and discrimination shattered my childhood world. 
Despite what I would describe as my very Aussie upbringing … I did not know 
what a boy at primary school meant when he said to me, ‘Wog, go back to your 
home country.’ ‘Home?’ I asked myself. I was born and raised and knew and loved 
no other country than Australia as my home. I did not know the meaning of the 
word ‘wog’ and the first thing I did when I got home from school that day was 
to look up the word in my brother’s dictionary. Incredulously, I read the 
definition over and over: ‘Someone of dark skin who is foreign to the land on 
which he lives.’ I was hurt more by the tone of the word and less by its 
definition. I felt ugly, scared and very alone,” she said, immediately linking 
that experience to the current debate about hate speech.

“I am a passionate believer in free speech … (but) ‘hate speech’ is simply not 
part of Australia’s moral code, regardless of our views … whilst this was just 
a primary school playground experience, it sowed the seeds for my belief that 
public figures, and those who have a big share of voice in the media and other 
forums, have a higher duty of care and responsibility to think before they 
write and speak. This is not ‘political correctness gone mad’; rather, that 
those who have this voice should apply the test of respect and responsibility, 
and ask themselves: how would that Australian child who is watching or reading 
this feel? I suspect the same way I felt that day at primary school.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbeyond-hanson-and-hinch-politicians-first-speeches-are-a-tonic-for-the-jaded-voter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5832debdc39f3cd9042962ba219a17c8470bd7f1%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Hanson%20and%20Hinch%3A%20politicians'%20first%20speeches%20are%20a%20tonic%20for%20the%20jaded%20voter%20%7C%20Lenore%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbeyond-hanson-and-hinch-politicians-first-speeches-are-a-tonic-for-the-jaded-voter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Hanson%20and%20Hinch%3A%20politicians%27%20first%20speeches%20are%20a%20tonic%20for%20the%20jaded%20voter%20%7C%20Lenore%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbeyond-hanson-and-hinch-politicians-first-speeches-are-a-tonic-for-the-jaded-voter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5832debdc39f3cd9042962ba219a17c8470bd7f1%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Peter Khalil is congratulated by Labor deputy leader Tanya Plibersek after 
giving his first speech in the House of Representatives. Photograph: Mike 
Bowers for the Guardian 
A few days earlier, Peter Khalil, the son of Egyptian migrants, who won the 
seat of Wills for Labor, had nailed his colours to the mast on the issue of 
asylum policy.

“I believe Australia has a moral obligation, at the minimum, to take 
responsibility for the care of those refugees that have been physically or 
emotionally damaged by the long-term detention that we have submitted them to,” 
he said.

“I also think we should re-examine the assumed nexus between detention centres 
and discouraging people smugglers to ascertain how much this argument holds in 
the context of robust turn-back policies.

If you want a response from the Muslim community, first understand it | 
Mostafa Rachwani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/16/if-you-want-a-response-from-the-muslim-community-first-understand-it>
“I supported our leader, Bill Shorten, when he made clear that if we won the 
election one of his first acts would be to negotiate with the UNHCR the 
resettlement of the refugees to safe and secure countries … But I recognise 
that even this falls far too short in our moral, legal and international 
obligations as a good international citizen.”

Julian Leeser, the new Liberal member of the New South Wales seat of Berowra 
gave a searing account of his father’s suicide 20 years ago, including finding 
his final note “on the glass-topped table in the hall”.

“Like so many of the notes from my father [it was] written in red pen on the 
back of a used envelope. It said simply: ‘I am sorry Sylvia. I just can’t cope, 
love, John’.”

Leeser was open about his regrets at not noticing the signals his father had 
been giving and his view that despite many many programs and millions of 
dollars in spending, Australia is still failing in mental health services and 
suicide prevention.

Susan Templeman, the new Labor member for Macquarie, described how, 10 years 
ago, her “family’s foundations were rocked” by her daughter’s first experience 
of mental illness, something that started Templeman on the path that led to 
this speech, watched by her family from the public gallery, including her 
daughter who was “determined that her history is something not to be ashamed 
of”.

“I vividly remember a distressing night, standing in my kitchen with my 
husband, asking: how do other families do this?,” Templeman recounted.

“And while I did not then and there declare my intention to run for 
parliament, that was the moment I look back on as transformative, when 
something in me shifted. It turned out we were not the only ones facing the 
same challenge. Having mental illness in a family makes you question your 
parenting and your values, and I have learned more from that experience than 
any other in my life … So that was how I became someone who did not just sit 
around solving the problems of the world at a dinner party, but an advocate and 
an activist … The funny thing about standing up on an issue is that once you 
start it is hard to stop. Injustice is injustice, no matter what form it takes.”

There was Mike Freelander, the new Labor member for Macarthur, describing his 
work as a doctor with children with developmental problems and illnesses and 
how it motivated him to fight inequality on healthcare. Anne Aly, the new Labor 
member for Cowan, an anti-radicalisation expert whose work was used by the
Coalition during the election campaign to make claims she was “soft on 
terrorism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/24/julie-bishop-steps-up-attack-on-anne-aly-in-hate-preacher-row>
, and who saw her election as a kind of vindication.

“It is no secret that I find the politics of division, this attempt to ... set 
people against each other to win votes, to be desperate, dangerous and 
undemocratic, especially at times like this, when unwise words can be bullets,” 
she said.

Politicians and Muslim leaders condemn Hanson: 'She doesn't know what she's 
talking about'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/politicians-and-muslim-leaders-condemn-hanson-she-doesnt-know-what-shes-talking-about>
Parliamentarians can mostly blame themselves for the fact the public view them 
with mounting disdain. Voters think politicians put political power and tactics 
ahead of real world problem solving because very often they do.

But it is also true that we don’t always see the best of them, the people 
committed to being good representatives, according to their own beliefs and 
ideologies, motivated to serve by their own diverse human experiences.

First speeches are a benchmark, a permanent record of a politicians’ 
starting-line ideals and aspirations, words that will be used as a reference 
point for the rest of their careers. Reading them reveals that, despite our 
cynicism, we seem to have elected some very good ones.
 