
Black lives matter? It’s tough to keep saying something like that – to shout 
it in anything but protest – with this impending reality: At some point in the 
next few days, it’s likely that Darren Wilson willnot be indicted 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/11/how-ferguson-is-preparing-michael-brown-grand-jury.html>
, bythe US justice department 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/federal-civil-rights-charges-unlikely-against-police-officer-in-ferguson-shooting/2014/10/31/56189d80-6055-11e4-8b9e-2ccdac31a031_story.html?wpisrc=al_national>
 orthe state of Missouri 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/11/06/us/ferguson-rules-protests/index.html>, for the 
extrajudicial killing of Michael Brown – an 18-year-old unarmed black man – in 
Ferguson, in broad daylight, three long months ago.
It is at once horrific and predictable that a law enforcement officer may 
never have to answer for his crimes in criminal court, that his life will 
remained buttressed by thepower of a blue wall 
<http://news.uic.edu/police-corruption-enabled-by-blue-code-of-silence> as more 
black people areshot dead in America simply for existing 
<http://www.truth-out.org/opinion/item/26960-applauding-black-death-in-the-hour-of-chaos>
, and bysecret online donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/01/george-zimmerman-darren-wilson-crowd-sourced-legal-fees>
 from supporters with names like “Jim Crow” who applaud him for“taking out the 
trash” 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/08/22/darren_wilson_gofundme_campaign_has_become_hub_of_racism_and_hate/>
, like George Zimmerman and so many others before him.
But to understand a non-indictment in Ferguson as simply par for the course in 
the United States case is not to say that Brown’s life is unworthy of 
defending, nor that his death and its international aftermath are unworthy of 
redress. This reality check simply locates another officer in the context of 
the white supremacist law-enforcement apparatus that defends him in lieu of 
protecting its (black) citizens, thatoperates with impunity 
<http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/26986-amid-shootings-chicago-police-department-upholds-culture-of-impunity>
. And for the rest of us to view black life as worthy of defending, to 
unequivocally repeat thatblack lives matter <http://blacklivesmatter.com/> in a 
world that insists otherwise, is a radical act – if a tiresome one.
The hard truth about no justice for Mike Brown is that we must reassess our 
standards for justice 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/181841/michael-dunn-was-found-guilty-thats-not-enough-ensure-justice-unjust-world>
 to create a kind of peace – for his family, for Ferguson, and for those of 
whose anger and grief emerge anew each time a black life is taken without 
consequence.

With the Missouri grand jury expected to announce its decision 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/08/us/ferguson-missouri.html?_r=0> as early as 
“mid-November”, Ferguson community members are preparing a response and asking 
that they be given48 hours’ notice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/06/ferguson-protest-leaders-48-hours-notice>
 to do so. TheDon’t Shoot Coalition <http://www.dontshootstl.org/> has issued a 
set of 19 demands 
<http://media.wix.com/ugd/9c5255_9d5572481c7840fbad088ef6d8ae82d4.pdf> – and 
they are, like thedesire for Wilson to be indicted 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/10/15/justice/five-things-grand-jury-michael-brown-ferguson/>
 for a crime no one denies he committed, very modest. Especially the first 
demand:

The first priority be the preservation of human life.

It is a simple request, perhaps the simplest we know as humans – the desire to 
exist freely without imminent, disproportionate threat to our lives. And yet, 
the weeks since Brown’s death have seencontinued violence 
<http://www.ebony.com/news-views/ferguson-forward-when-i-close-my-eyes-at-night-i-see-people-running-from-tear-ga#axzz3IVu7oToc>
 from the state, including the fatal, officer-involved shootings of two other 
young black men in nearby St Louis,Vonderrit Myers 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/10/27/autopsy_indicates_off_duty_st_louis_cop_shot_vonderrit_myers_six_times_from_behind/>
 andKajieme Powell 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/08/suicide_by_cop_the_dangerous_term_that_stops_us_from_asking_hard_questions.html>
.


The US justice system has failed to provide solutions to the problems it 
creates. It cannot reform a policing apparatusfirst conceived as a runaway 
slave patrol 
<http://truth-out.org/news/item/13890-the-second-amendment-was-ratified-to-preserve-slavery>
 with cursoryracial sensitivity training 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/doj-offers-police-training-ferguson>. And while 
outgoing US attorney general Eric Holder stressed the need for“wholesale change”
 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/holder-supports-wholesale-change-ferguson-police-department>
 in the Ferguson police department, his Department of Justice is limited by 
bureaucracy and allegiance to its own conventions. President Obama’snomination 
of two-time US attorney Loretta Lynch 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2014/11/08/362526366/obama-nominates-loretta-lynch-for-attorney-general-post>
 to succeed Holder may offer renewed momentum, but renewed from what? From 
begging for some semblance of justice? From having to stage the most 
influential protest on race in a generation only to see absolutely zero 
decrease in the level of violence faced by the black community?

That we must beg for the government to take up the mantle for victims in cases 
where black folks’ blood has been unceremoniously spilled is not without 
precedent: Zimmerman wasnot arrested for more than six weeks 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2012/04/11/150449405/zimmerman-arrested-on-murder-charge-in-martin-case>
 following the 2012 killing of Trayvon Martin. The jury’sfailure to convict 
Zimmerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/22/ferguson-black-community-justice-elusive-michael-brown>
 on murder charges sparked awave of black youth activism 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/181404/how-trayvon-martins-death-launched-new-generation-black-activism>
 that channels righteous anger and inexplicable pain into community-driven 
advocacy initiatives not wholly unlike the collective awakening that emerged 
after the1992 beating of Rodney King 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/rodney-king-death-sparks-debate-over-civil-rights-legacy-call-for-peace-during-1992-riots/2012/06/18/gJQAI7qulV_story.html>
.

Community members on the ground in Ferguson and in the surrounding areas have 
already been demonstrating the power oftransformative, compassionate organizing 
<http://thefeministwire.com/2014/10/fergusonfridays-black-freedom-fighters-men-interview-black-women-front-line-ferguson/>
. They arebroadcasting it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/18/business/media/view-of-ferguson-thrust-michael-brown-shooting-to-national-attention.html>
 to the rest of the world, inviting us to bear witness and offer our support as 
they demand full justice – even if they don’t get it. For those of us on the 
outside awaiting an inevitably frustrating decision, the primary task remains to
listen to local activists, and lend our support 
<http://thisisthemovement.launchrock.com/> in the ways they envision it.

But there is work we can do in our own backyards: In confronting all this 
exhausting disillusionment and fear, we can boldly redefine our visions of 
justice such that they no longer privilege punitive, carceral responses to
“isolated incidents” 
<http://dailycaller.com/2013/08/28/police-brutality-in-america-these-are-not-isolated-incidents/>
 of wrongdoing – officer-involved or otherwise.

We cannot indict white supremacy, but we can divest of institutions that 
enforce it <http://imaginealternatives.tumblr.com/> by developing community 
responses to violence <http://www.stopviolenceeveryday.org/index-of-stories/>, 
collectivelymonitoring police activity <http://copwatchnyc.org/>, and 
structuring our safety initiatives toprotect the most vulnerable 
<http://alp.org/community/sos> among us rather than relying on systems more 
likely to harm them 
<http://www.incite-national.org/page/community-accountability>.

We can treat the root of our pain and hold one another accountable 
<http://www.usprisonculture.com/blog/transformative-justice/> whenever we take 
it out, sometimes violently, on one another. We may not have control of a 
justice system that suppresses the people it’s supposed to protect, but we have 
each other. And even when the grandest of grand juries dares to deny the 
sanctity of our lives while the world watches, we still matter. We always will.
 