
Author and poet Marcus Clarke defined a certain type of Australian culture 
back in 1869: “They are not a nation of snobs like the English or of 
extravagant boasters like the Americans or of reckless profligates like the 
French, they are simply a nation of drunkards.”

Certainly, there’s evidence to suggest that Clarke’s analysis has some 
contemporary currency. Despite the NSW premier, Mike Baird’s,energetic efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/feb/11/sydneys-lockout-laws-five-key-facts-about-the-citys-alcohol-debate>
 to impose restrictions on the drinking habits of our nation’s first colonial 
settlement, a culture of boozing remains vibrantly alive across the continent.

I have written elsewhere of Australia’s negative achievement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/16/im-no-prohibitionist-but-sobriety-is-my-most-radical-pleasure>
 in this arena; as of last year, alcohol abuse was killing 15 people and 
hospitalising a further 430 each day, and was categorised as one of “the more 
prominent health risks” faced by the community, in the short and long term, by 
the Australian Bureau of Statistics.

But while “Casino Mike” pursues a kind of East Coast puritanism – prohibiting 
takeaway alcohol sales after 10pm, barring patrons from entering venues after 
1:30am, and enforcing a last call at 3am – a more organic reaction to 
Australia’s drinking culture may be evolving in an equal-and-opposite response, 
without heavy-handed interference or authoritarian instruction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fbeyond-craft-beer-the-tea-revolution-thats-ready-to-take-over%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc240bf42efeff8f0f633d196c61b9a89784f3899%2F0_0_4016_6016%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20craft%20beer%3A%20the%20tea%20revolution%20that's%20ready%20to%20take%20over&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fbeyond-craft-beer-the-tea-revolution-thats-ready-to-take-over%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20craft%20beer%3A%20the%20tea%20revolution%20that%27s%20ready%20to%20take%20over&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fbeyond-craft-beer-the-tea-revolution-thats-ready-to-take-over%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc240bf42efeff8f0f633d196c61b9a89784f3899%2F0_0_4016_6016%2F4016.jpg>
 Tea-totalers peruse the wares at the Melbourne Tea festival. Photograph: Simon 
Shiff 
I refer to the delightful emergence of Australia’s tea culture, in vibrant and 
visible display at last weekend’s inaugural MelbourneTea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/tea> festival, where 53 stallholders 
took over the Melbourne Conference and Exhibition Centre, catering to more than 
4,200 ticket buyers.

The festival is actually a Sydney export, started in 2014 in partnership 
between Perfect South – a green tea specialist company – and the Rabbit Hole 
Organic Tea Bar, based in Sydney’s Redfern. Both businesses are booming, their 
wares popular with customers who’ve perhaps refined their tea palate through 
years of shopping at T2.

Unsurprisingly, T2 is among the stallholders at the festival as well. It’s 
likely the now-internationally successful chain was the first indication that 
there was something steeping in the water of the Australian beverage market; 
beginning in a colourful shopfront in Melbourne’s Fitzroy, the creative 
collaboration between two friends who’d initially planned to open a homewares 
store has been retailing a rainbow of different boxed brews for 20 years now.

Recently sold 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/t2s-new-owner-unilever-sees-global-domination-in-the-tea-leaves-20140504-37qrk.html>
 to multinational Unilever for an undisclosed but plainly comfortable sum, T2 
now employs more than 700 staff worldwide, and is franchised in New Zealand, 
the UK and US. Even for those who grew up in tea-drinking families like mine, 
the idea that the Australian retailing of tea would extend beyond a bagged 
Bushell’s or Lipton – or the rare treat of a Twinings – into a competitive 
international market of boutique tea blending marks a most visual cultural 
shift.

Darjeeling by Jeff Koehler review – a history of the world’s best tea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/17/darjeeling-jeff-koehler-review-history-of-worlds-best-tea>
At the tea festival, the diversity that can dazzle on the shelves at T2 is far 
superseded by the offerings of many other tea vendors. As a tea fanatic, the 
tasting bowl I’m given with my admission ticket is rapidly coated with the 
flavours of tea diversity; five chai vendors offer variations, from a 
turmeric-based health chai to the enterprising brewer of Chai-Walli, whose 
personal blend of the traditional Indian tea she infuses beyond tasty cups into 
(delicious) doughnuts and candles. An organic herbal blend from Oovio is so 
rich with berry flavours a sip tastes like French-kissing a liquid blueberry. 
Mass-market vendors Madame Flavour engage an act of marketing genius by 
including a sample of their “Paris Afternoon Blend” – single-origin Keemun 
blend infused with vanilla and rose petals – in the festival goody-bag. As a 
tea connoisseur, I’m forced to admit it’s delicious.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fbeyond-craft-beer-the-tea-revolution-thats-ready-to-take-over%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf7c8c0f9ab7fb4c985ea00f1484fc57cceba8d9%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20craft%20beer%3A%20the%20tea%20revolution%20that's%20ready%20to%20take%20over&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fbeyond-craft-beer-the-tea-revolution-thats-ready-to-take-over%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20craft%20beer%3A%20the%20tea%20revolution%20that%27s%20ready%20to%20take%20over&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fbeyond-craft-beer-the-tea-revolution-thats-ready-to-take-over%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf7c8c0f9ab7fb4c985ea00f1484fc57cceba8d9%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
 Tell your oolongs from your matchas: tasting notes from a tea appreciation 
workshop. Photograph: Van Badham for the Guardian 
And just in case you can’t tell your oolongs from your matchas, the festival 
runs workshops in tea appreciation all day. My tasting notes from a session 
with Rabbit Hole’s impassioned owner Amara Jarratt are heavy with her specific 
instructions for temperature rates and brewing times, alongside verdicts of 
“delightful!”, “delicious!”, “amazing!” after a procession of samples from 
white tea through oolong, Japanese and China greens ,as well as gorgeous black 
blends.

It’s interesting to compare, too, the Australian state cultures that inform 
the tea vendor’s offerings. Jarratt retails her Sydney tea bar with the 
enthusiasm of a high-end sommelier. Hannah Dupree from Melbourne’s Storm in a 
Teacup imports her speciality blends to a bespoke space in Northcote, where 
she’s available to chat you through her passions on a drop-in basis on 
Wednesdays. Former scientist Samantha Brown, from Tasmania’s Art of Tea, sells 
blends mixed with the juicy produce of her home state from a stall in the 
Salamanca markets, and bespoke varieties at the Museum of Old and New Art.

The day-long tea adventure is so intoxicating, I’m in something of my cups 
when I burn far past my budget and leave with my army laden with new teas and 
samples. It makes me think; maybe instead of persecuting the denizens of 
Sydney’s booze bars, Casino Mike could champion the lifestyle alternative 
offered at the Tea festival instead? There’s one coming up at Carriageworks in 
Sydney on 21 August, for a start.

It would be great for New South Wales if its premier could take a moment to be 
stirred by the reflective persuasion of some good steamy tannins. I’m not the 
first to suggest the man may need a cup of tea and a good lie down.

• Sydney Tea festival will be held at Carriageworks on 21 August
 