
The majority of the biggest companies from emerging markets are failing to 
lift the lid on their operations and scoring badly on country-by-country 
reporting, creating an environment where corruption can thrive, according to a
study 
<http://%20http//www.transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/transparency_in_corporate_reporting_assessing_emerging_market_multinat>
 from Transparency International.

With growth-sapping corruption damaging the economies of these countries even 
asthey struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/27/brics-bubble-burst-brazil-russia-india-china-south-africa>
 with the effects of a global growth slowdown, the report called on companies 
to become more transparent.

Emerging markets, and the so-called Brics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/brics> economies of Brazil, Russia, 
India, China and South Africa, account for roughly 30% of the world’s output.

“Pathetic levels of transparency in big emerging market companies raises the 
question of just how much the private sector cares about stopping corruption, 
stopping poverty where they do business, and reducing inequality,” said José 
Ugaz, chair ofTransparency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/transparency-and-development> 
International.

“Although many companies say they want to fight corruption, this is not 
enough. Action speaks louder than words,” he added.

Transparency International <https://www.transparency.org/> studied 100 of the 
fastest-growing companies based in 15 emerging markets countries. The firms are 
active in 185 countries. Researchers evaluated their anti-corruption 
programmes, disclosure of structures and holdings, and disclosure of key 
financial information, on a country-by-country basis.

They found that 75% of companies scored less than five out of 10, while 72 
firms disclose no tax information in foreign countries.

The overall average score was 3.4 out of 10, slightly worse than in 2013, when 
the last report was published, but almost on a par with the 3.8 overall score 
obtained in a2014 Transparency International report 
<http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/transparency_in_corporate_reporting_assessing_worlds_largest_companies_2014>
 assessing the world’s 124 largest multinationals.

Indian telecommunications firm Bharti Airtel  
<http://www.airtel.in/about-bharti/about-bharti-airtel>was adjudged the most 
transparent company, while Chilean retailer Falabella was the only one to score 
50% or more in all categories.

“Despite some scattered signs of improvement since 2013, the overall results 
of the assessed companies remain weak, a clear indication that emerging market 
multinationals still practise low standards of transparency,” the report said, 
adding that reform was critical as these economies sought to extend their 
footprint.

“Their most dynamic firms will continue to seek business opportunities at home 
and abroad. And, like other leading multinationals, they must play their role 
in fighting corruption and raising standards of integrity and transparency in 
business.”

Overall, publicly listed companies did better than state-owned or privately 
held firms. On one criterion, organisational transparency, they outperformed 
the publicly listed firms in the2014 report 
<http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/transparency_in_corporate_reporting_assessing_worlds_largest_companies_2014>
.

Country-by-country reporting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/eu-tax-transparency-plans-campaigners-google-amazon>
 – a key demand of global advocates of tax reform – was the weakest area for 
most of the multinationals, but they still managed a higher average than the 
world’s largest multinationals achieved in the 2014 report. Of the emerging 
firms, 43 companies scored zero in this category.

Chinese companies were of particular concern, scoring an average of 1.6 out of 
10 on the overall index, with just one making it to the top 25.


“The performance of Chinese companies continues to be disappointing overall, 
but there are a few notable exceptions, particularly with regard to the 
disclosure of anti-corruption programmes. Chinese entities have different 
standards of disclosure: levels of transparency for China-based, state-owned 
parent companies are lower than those adopted for their publicly listed foreign 
subsidiaries and associated entities,” the report said.

The report noted that public statements on anti-corruption programmes cannot 
be equated with actual performance. For example, 84 companies said they were 
committed to the law, including anti-corruption measures, but only 19 said they 
ban “facilitation payments” or bribes.

Even so, Transparency International says public disclosure can drive 
improvement, and it called on all companies to pursue comprehensive public 
reporting, and make anti-corruption programmes publicly available to stop 
bribery, and enable whistleblowers to report corruption.

“Customers should demand the companies they patronise live up to the highest 
anti-corruption standards or risk losing their business,” Ugaz said.

Companies must provide “exhaustive lists of subsidiaries, affiliates, joint 
ventures and other entities” and make them easily accessible, while governments 
must enact strong anti-bribery laws, like theUK bribery act 
<http://www.transparency.org.uk/our-work/business-integrity/bribery-act/>, 
Transparency International said.

Technology companies came top in the anti-corruption programmes category with 
an average score of 74%, compared with an average of 65% for 35 global 
telecommunications firms assessed last year. The 19 Indian companies assessed 
in the report achieved the best score of any country, with an average 77%.

One of the sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 – the blueprint adopted by world leaders last year to end inequality and 
poverty by 2030 – isto tackle corruption and bribery 
<http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/peace-justice/>.

“The findings of this report show that emerging market multinationals have 
work to do before they have in place the policies and programmes that are 
needed to help achieve the SDG target,” the report said.

The sometimes opaque workings of the world’s multinationals came into sharp 
focus after the leaking of thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> this year, which fanned 
public anger over the use by corporate giants and the global elite oflegal 
loopholes to avoid taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/european-commission-announces-crackdown-on-corporate-tax-loopholes>
.

“The Panama Papers and other recent scandals have put the spotlight on the 
urgent need to end corporate secrecy, and add to the momentum towards corporate 
transparency that is already under way,” the report said.


“Emerging market multinationals will not be able to escape these trends, given 
their expanding business footprint. As this study shows, they must raise the 
bar on their transparency performance if they are to do business competitively 
in a global marketplace.”

 