
Only a quarter of aid meets transparency standards with most donors failing to 
honour commitments to open their books, preventing poorer countries from making 
the best use of the funds they receive, astudy 
<http://ati.publishwhatyoufund.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/ATI-2016_Report_Proof_DIGITAL.pdf>
 (pdf) says.

Publish What You Fund <http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/>, a global campaign 
for aid transparency, analysed funds from 46 donors and found that most had 
failed to uphold commitments made in 2011 inBusan 
<http://www.oecd.org/development/effectiveness/busanpartnership.htm>, South 
Korea, to publish details of their development projects to a common open 
standard: theInternational Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI). 
<http://www.aidtransparency.net/>

Hosting refugees now uses 9% of foreign aid budgets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/aid-budgets-hosting-refugees-oecd-figures>
This year’s index shows that 10 out of 46 of the largest and most influential 
donors, which account for 25% of global aid, provided enough information to 
enable recipient governments to plan, or for citizens to hold their governments 
to account, said Rupert Simons, CEO of Publish What You Fund.

“The ‘data revolution’ isn’t reaching the world’s poorest countries,” he said. 


The report said more than half the organisations included in the index 
published data to the IATI registry at least quarterly.

“However, most of the organisations covered fall into the lowest three 
categories, scoring below 60% and demonstrating that the publication of timely, 
comparable and disaggregated information about their development projects to 
the IATI registry is far from complete.

“The index also finds that over half of the organisations included do not 
publish budget information for the next one to three years – a key demand of 
partner countries,” it said.


The UN’s Development Programme <http://www.undp.org/>, headed by Helen Clark, 
who is a candidate for UN secretary general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/helen-clark-former-new-zealand-prime-minister-confirms-bid-for-united-nations-top-job>
, came top ofthe rankings 
<http://ati.publishwhatyoufund.org/index-2016/results/> for the second year, 
followed by the US aid agencyMillennium Challenge Corporation 
<https://www.mcc.gov/>, and the UN children’s agency Unicef 
<http://www.unicef.org/>, which entered the “very good” category for the first 
time.

Britain’s Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-international-development>
 ranked fourth,down from second place in the 2014 index 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/oct/10/aid-donors-failing-transparency-targets-publish-what-you-fund>
, followed by theGlobal Fund <http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/>. The World 
Bank’s International Development Association, the Asian Development Bank and 
the African Development Bank were also “very good”.A progress review 
<http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/index/2015-mid-term-progress-review/>, 
rather than a full index, was published last year as signatories tried to meet 
the December 2015 deadline for implementing the initiative.

The United Arab Emirates was ranked bottom, below China, France’s economy and 
finance ministry, Japan’s foreign ministry and Italy.


With aid under attack, let's be honest about how we spend taxpayers' money | 
Simon O'Connell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/06/aid-under-attack-honest-spend-taxpayers-money-dfid-mercy-corps-syria>
Calls for transparency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/17/fix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders>
 have been increasing as the world grapples with multiple, protracted crises, 
and seeks to activate thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, an ambitious blueprint for ending inequality and poverty that was adopted by 
the UN general assembly in September. Recognising the shortcomings of the aid 
system in an ever more volatile world, the UN has convened the firstworld 
humanitarian summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/12/people-disaster-response-aid-world-humanitarian-summit-antoine-gerard>
 next month to discuss reform.

“It is encouraging that there has been a marked improvement in aid 
transparency – but more needs to be done to ensure that development is as 
effective as possible,” said Clark.

Publish What You Fund classed 12 organisations as performing poorly. Of these, 
eight do not make information on their aid contributions publicly accessible to 
the IATI; others are not yet publishing good enough data.

The donors ranked “poor” included the World Bank’s investment arm – the 
International Finance Corporation 
<http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/home>
, Ireland, South Korea, the International Monetary Fund, and theUN’s Office for 
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs <http://www.unocha.org/>. 

The US Agency for International Development <https://www.usaid.gov/> ranked 
19th,Japan’s International Cooperation Agency <http://www.jica.go.jp/english/> 
was 33rd while theGates Foundation <http://www.gatesfoundation.org/> was 30th.
Table of donors 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1H8THCxCZNTmYvmEBY6QRWT_EgqPak2GZWLkYxAEmjVo>
“Many of these donors are well established and have the structures in place to 
perform better. Based on these findings, the report recommends that all 
publishers should recognise the right to information enshrined in the SDGs,” 
the report said.

“Publishers should improve the quality and comprehensiveness of their data to 
provide a full picture of all development flows. This should be implemented 
along with strategies to realise the full potential of their data … Governments 
and civil society should work together to fill the gaps and advance open data 
and transparency in the development sector worldwide.”

The report pointed to the Ebola outbreak in west Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/03/ebola-death-toll-west-africa-could-be-much-higher-than-initial-estimates>
 as an example of the cost of poor information, citing Oxfam findingsthat $1.9bn
 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/media-centre/press-releases/2016/01/international-community-fails-west-africa-yet-again-ebola>
 (£1.3bn) of the $5.8bn committed to help Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone 
recover had not yet been allocated.

But it stressed progress was being made, noting that when the index was first 
produced in 2010 no donors were in the “very good” or “good” category.

“Aid is getting more transparent, but there is a long way to go. Governments 
and civil society need to work together to identify the biggest gaps and help 
to close them. We also know that development is moving beyond aid. So we are 
calling for donors to make humanitarian aid, climate finance and development 
finance transparent as well.”
 