
Peabody Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>, America’s 
biggest coalmining company, has funded at least two dozen groups that cast 
doubt on manmade climate change and oppose environment regulations, analysis by 
the Guardian reveals.

The funding spanned trade associations, corporate lobby groups, and industry 
front groups as well as conservative thinktanks and was exposed in court 
filings last month.

The coal company also gave to political organisations, funding twice as many 
Republican groups as Democratic ones.

Peabody, the world’s biggest private sector publicly traded coal company, was 
long known as an outlier even among fossil fuel companies for its public 
rejection of climate science and action. But its funding of climate denial 
groups was only exposed in disclosures after the coal titanwas forced to seek 
bankruptcy protection in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/13/worlds-largest-coal-producer-files-for-bankruptcy-protection>
, under competition from cheap natural gas.

Environmental campaigners said they had not known for certain that the company 
was funding an array of climate denial groups – and that the breadth of that 
funding took them by surprise.

The company’s filings reveal funding for a range of organisations which have 
foughtBarack Obama’s plans to cut greenhouse gas emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/obamas-clean-power-plan-hailed-as-strongest-ever-climate-action-by-a-us-president>
, and denied the very existence of climate change.


“These groups collectively are the heart and soul of climate denial,” said 
Kert Davies, founder of the Climate Investigation Center, who has spent 20 
years tracking funding for climate denial. “It’s the broadest list I have seen 
of one company funding so many nodes in the denial machine.”

Among Peabody’s beneficiaries, the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and 
Global Change has insisted – wrongly – that carbon emissions are not a threat 
but “the elixir of life” while the American Legislative Exchange Council is 
trying to overturn Environmental Protection Agency rules cutting emissions from 
power plants. Meanwhile, Americans for Prosperity campaigns against carbon 
pricing. The Oklahoma chapter was on the list.

Contrarian scientists such as Richard Lindzen and Willie Soon also feature on 
the bankruptcy list.

So does the Washington lobbyist and industry strategist Richard Berman, whose 
firm has launched awelter of front groups attacking the EPA rules. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/23/lobbyist-dubbed-dr-evil-behind-front-groups-attacking-obama-power-rules>

The filings do not list amounts or dates. But the documents suggest Peabody 
supported dozens of groups engaged in blocking environmental regulations in 
addition to a number of contrarian scientists who together have obstructed US 
and global action on climate change.

The support squares up with Peabody’s public position on climate change. The 
company went further than the fossil fuel companies and conservative groups 
that merely promoted doubt about the risks of climate change,asserting that 
rising carbon emissions were beneficial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/19/the-truth-behind-peabodys-campaign-to-rebrand-coal-as-a-poverty-cure>
.

The truth behind Peabody's campaign to rebrand coal as a poverty cure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/19/the-truth-behind-peabodys-campaign-to-rebrand-coal-as-a-poverty-cure>
Just last year, Peabody wrote to the White House Council on Environmental 
Quality describing carbon dioxide as “a benign gas that is essential for all 
life” and denying the dangers of global warming.

 “While the benefits of carbon dioxide are proven, the alleged risks of 
climate change are contrary to observed data, are based on admitted 
speculation, and lack adequate scientific basis,” the company wrote in the 24 
March 2015 letter.

The company agreed in November to make fuller disclosures about global warming 
risks under asettlement deal reached with the New York attorney general. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/12/peabody-strikes-deal-with-new-york-attorney-general-over-climate-risk-filings>
 Peabody had been under investigation for misleading investors and the public 
about the potential impact of climate change on its business.

Even so, the full extent of Peabody’s financial support for climate denial is 
unlikely to be revealed until the completion of bankruptcy proceedings.

“The breadth of the groups with financial ties to Peabody is extraordinary. 
Thinktanks, litigation groups, climate scientists, political organisations, 
dozens of organisations blocking action on climate all receiving funding from 
the coal industry,” said Nick Surgey, director of research for the Center for 
Media and Democracy.

“We expected to see some denial money, but it looks like Peabody is the 
treasury for a very substantial part of the climate denial movement.”


Peabody’s filings revealed funding for the American Legislative Exchange 
Council, the corporate lobby group which opposes clean energy standards and 
tried toimpose financial penalties on homeowners with solar panels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/04/alec-freerider-homeowners-assault-clean-energy>
, as well as a constellation of conservative thinktanks and organisations.


These included the State Policy Network and the Franklin Center for Government 
and Public Integrity, which worked to defeat climate bills in Congress and are 
seeking to overturn Environmental Protection Agency rules to reduce carbon 
pollution from power plants, as well as the Congress for Racial Equality, which 
was a major civil rights organisation in the 1960s.

The filings also revealed funding for the George C Marshall Institute, the 
Institute for Energy Research, and the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide 
and Global Change, which are seen as industry front groups.

The names of a number of well-known contrarian academics also feature in the 
Peabody filings, including Willie Soon, a researcher at the Harvard-Smithsonian 
Center for Astrophysics. Soon has been funded almost entirely by the fossil 
fuel industry,receiving more than $1.2m from oil companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/21/climate-change-denier-willie-soon-funded-energy-industry>
 and utilities, but this was the first indication of Peabody funding.

Soon and the Smithsonian did not respond to requests for comment. 

Richard Lindzen and Roy Spencer, two contrarian scientists who appeared for 
Peabody athearings in Minnesota last month on the social cost of carbon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/may/02/peabody-coals-contrarian-scientist-witnesses-lose-their-court-case>
, were also included in the bankruptcy filings.

Peabody refused to comment on its funding for climate denial groups, as 
revealed by the bankruptcy filings.

“While we wouldn’t comment on alliances with particular organizations, Peabody 
has a track record of advancing responsible energy and environmental policies, 
and we support organizations that advocate sustainable mining, energy access 
and clean coal solutions, in line with our company’s leadership in these 
areas,” Vic Svec, Peabody’s senior vice-president for global investor and 
corporate relations, wrote in an email.

Over the last decade, fossil fuel companies distanced themselves from open 
climate denial. Much of the funding for climate denial went underground, with 
corporations and conservative billionaires routing the funds throughsecretive 
networks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/09/secretive-donors-gave-us-climate-denial-groups-125m-over-three-years>
 such as Donors’ Trust.

But the sharp drop in coal prices, under competition from cheap natural gas, 
and a string of bankruptcies among leading US coal companies has inadvertently 
revealed the coal industry’s continued support for climate denial - even as oil 
companies moved away from open rejection of the science.


Earlier this year, bankruptcy filings from the country’s second-biggest coal 
company, Arch Coal Inc,revealed funding 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/bankruptcy/2016/03/11/arch-coal-made-10000-gift-to-energy-environment-legal/>
 to a group known mainly for its unsuccessful lawsuit against the climate 
scientist Michael Mann.

The $10,000 donation to the Energy and Environment Legal Institute (E&E) was 
made in 2014, according to court documents filed in Arch’s chapter 11 
bankruptcy protection case.

Last October, court filings from another coal company seeking bankruptcy 
protection, Alpha Natural Resources,revealed an $18,600 payment to Chris 
Horner, a fellow at E&E <https://theintercept.com/2015/08/25/chris-horner-coal/>
.
 