
My father, Bill Ogilvie, who has died aged 87, was a senior social welfare 
officer for the Coal Industry Social Welfare Organisation until his retirement 
in 1989. He worked with miners who were disabled, or approaching retirement, 
liaising with rehabilitation centres and retirement homes and organising brass 
band, art and football competitions. He also led a full life, contributing much 
to his community.

Born into a mining family in Ashington, Northumberland, the son of Nora 
Ogilvie (nee Robinson) and Tom Ogilvie, he left Park secondary school. He 
completed national service in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) and on returning home met 
Connie, also from Ashington, whom he married in 1955.

Away from work he took on roles including athletics coaching, becoming a 
founding member of Wansbeck Citizens Advice Bureau, sitting on the selection 
committee for magistrates, being a school governor, and working for the 
National Playing Fields Association. He was twice captain of Newbiggin Golf 
Club (later becoming president) and was chairman of BomarsundCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club, where he also coached junior 
cricketers. After Connie died in 2010 he continued to take on new 
responsibilities, including becoming a parish councillor.

One of Billâ€™s proudest moments was being nominated to run with the Olympic 
torch in June 2012. In 2013 he was appointed MBE for services to sport and the 
community in south-east Northumberland. He was thrilled at being given his MBE 
by Prince William, but the biggest smile he had that day was as he left 
Buckingham Palace and his eye was caught by a little boy standing with his 
parents watching what was going on. When asked by the mother what he had been 
in the palace for, he whipped the MBE box out of his pocket, let the boy hold 
it in his hand, making sure he got lots of photographs taken with the palace in 
the background. Bill got more of a thrill from pleasing others than anything 
else.

He is survived by his daughters, Helen, Alison and me, and grandchildren 
Hannah, Matthew, Joe and Eve.
 