
A lot can happen in six seconds.

For users of Vine, a video-sharing platform and social networking site 
acquired by Twitter in 2012 
<http://techcrunch.com/2012/10/09/if-twitter-gets-into-the-video-hosting-game-it-could-be-a-wonderful-and-horrible-thing/>
, six seconds is enough time to shine.

The relative ubiquity of smartphones and ease with which a six-second clip can 
be filmed have enabled the platform toskyrocket in popularity 
<https://gigaom.com/2015/01/26/vine-rings-in-its-second-year-by-hitting-1-5-billion-daily-loops/>
 among users of all backgrounds since its initial launch. The platform plays 
host to comedians, singers, dancers and“regular” folk 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/05/magazine/borecore.html?_r=0> alike.

But a closer look reveals the unique, culturally specific creative genius of 
its black users, a loosely connected community more similar to its“Black 
Twitter” 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/black-twitter-a-virtual-community-ready-to-hashtag-out-a-response-to-cultural-issues/2014/01/20/41ddacf6-7ec5-11e3-9556-4a4bf7bcbd84_story.html>
 and“Black Tumblr” 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/theslice/blackout-the-day-black-beauty-created-a-storm-on-tumblr>
 counterparts than to Facebook.

Black users utilize Vine in hilarious, multi-faceted, complex and 
game-changing ways. A look at some ofVine’s biggest trends 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/tielerc/all-of-vines-trends-xgl7#.cyLyWP7rY6> 
highlights the extent to which black Vine culture sets the tone for the 
platform writ large. But the beauty of Vine is how well it lends itself to 
being shared elsewhere: a video that starts on Vine easily makes the leap to 
Facebook, email, text message threads and, of course, sites like Twitter and 
Tumblr, where the videos are not only posted but embedded for users to play 
without clicking off their tabs.

To that end, Vine is both its own ecosystem of cultural production 
<http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/05/03/six-seconds-of-loopy-creativity-and-millions-of-fans/>
and an engine that powers cross-platform social media trends. Unlike Facebook, 
some of Vine’s most active content consumers are people without their own 
accounts, who have never made videos and likely never will. Its time limit 
makes it by default more easily digestible than YouTube (whichrarely promotes 
its black stars 
<http://fusion.net/story/50243/youtube-rarely-promotes-black-youtube-stars-even-during-black-history-month/>
). There is a Vine to describe almost any feeling or situation, making it 
something of a21st century meta-language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/17/the-social-media-you-are-too-old-to-use>
 unto itself.

If the most static characteristic of the internet itself is its malleability 
and Vinesteers the influence engine 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/tracyclayton/do-it-for-the-vine#.dxKaOx3oDX> that is 
social media, then the power of its trend-setting black users is particularly 
prescient. Black Viners have birthed countless memes and accompanying 
sociolinguistic phenomena, from“or nah” <https://vine.co/v/h0mQWqjBThF> to “hoe 
don’t do it” <https://vine.co/v/MlvhELHZreU> to “do it for the vine” 
<https://vine.co/v/MuzPTKxzpYB>.

Black Vine is unique in form, but it inherits the legacy of the analog black 
creative expression that predates it. Black cultural production – from art to
music 
<http://fusion.net/story/107215/meet-sister-rosetta-tharpe-the-black-woman-who-invented-that-rock-and-roll-sound/>
 to dance – has always set trends and predicted the nation’s creative 
landscape, regardless of medium.

Among the built-in idiosyncrasies of Vine’s particular format, the 
breathtaking brevity of its parameters, is the crispness of its users’ comedic 
execution. There is no time to waste, so jokes and music alike must be 
perfectly on beat. Blackness thrives rhythmically, andVine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/vine> puts that percussive precision on 
infinite loop.

At a time when barriers to entry in Hollywood 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/03/25/hollywood-s-still-racist-why-the-deadline-ethnic-casting-piece-is-dangerous.html>
 and formal creative industries continue to be almost insurmountable for black 
media-makers, the ability to simply record a video with one’s phone and share 
it widely presents a more widely accessible opportunity for creative ingenuity. 
And six seconds isn’t necessarily enough time to give backstory, to explain 
your punch line (or yourself) to viewers who don’t already have the context 
they need to understand.

To the extent that the nebulous trope of relatability restricts non-white 
creatives by measuring their work against a rubric of“universality” (read: 
whiteness) <http://www.salon.com/2013/04/25/how_can_white_americans_be_free/>, 
then a medium that makes it almost impossible to explain oneself is a 
democratizing entity. While some black Viners make videos applicable to all 
audiences, trafficking in the “relatable” meta language for which the platform 
is known, others cultivate culturally specific comedy.

An entire crop of users who joke about the predictability of BET movies’ 
opening sequences <https://vine.co/v/OYa9LaTnglg>, the hilariously unique 
auntie swag of R&B singer Mary J. Blige <https://vine.co/v/O2nJvLw2DW9>, or the 
nonsensical reasons black people sometimes give forhanging up the phone 
<https://vine.co/v/MKdnHMjmbdQ> all articulate and satirize their experiences 
without giving a point by point guide to their cultural references. Users like
DeStorm Power <https://vine.co/v/OvrzElbw2j3>, Jerry Purpdrank 
<https://vine.co/v/O69X0KpZnVF>, Darius Benson <https://vine.co/v/OgdnVUj10mg>, 
Summerella_ <https://vine.co/v/OhZ1QuQEHma>and teen sensation Jay Versace 
<https://vine.co/v/OOw5XYqp7tn> are gaining attention and giving people 
liiiiife. The platform is awash in digitally rendered inside jokes: if you 
know, you just know.

Blackness contains multitudes and black Vine magnifies the diversity therein. 
African and West Indian users make videos asfluid 
<https://vine.co/v/O1OnAZ07Vqq> as their own understanding of their racial and 
cultural heritage. Popular VinerSamTakesOff <https://vine.co/SamTakesOff> 
gained notoriety for hisAfrican dad parodies <https://vine.co/v/MH1Jvn3AuMx>, a 
series of videos that lovingly caricature the absurd, unscripted experiences of 
growing up with African immigrant parents. UserJamaicanRuby chronicles the 
comedic moments <https://vine.co/v/M5aZZI2vxiB> of living in a Caribbean 
household.

Black Vine has launched musical careers 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/the-juice/6229388/bobby-shmurda-vine-hot-shmoney-dance-epic-records-interview>
,documented protests <https://vine.co/tags/Ferguson> when mainstream media 
turned a blind eye and enabled its users to find community within and beyond 
the platform. In the widely expanding web, it’s one more tool through which 
black youth can tell our stories and jokes alike – and there’s something 
magical about six seconds of blackness.
 