
To create art amid sorrow or oppression is to insist on excavating meaning 
from the dull senselessness of pain. It is to be alive and speaking back. Art 
dives headfirst into the uncharted perils and delights of the human condition. 
For people whosehumanity is often denied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/20/2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not>
, taking that plunge with an audience is inherently rebellious.

In Black Women Writers at Work 
<http://www.amazon.com/Black-Women-Writers-Work-Paper/dp/0826402437>, a series 
of conversations with black women whose words shape(d) and shift(ed) movements,
poet Sonia Sanchez <http://soniasanchez.net/> makes a powerful case for the 
importance of the Black Arts Movement:

The black artist is dangerous. Black art controls the ‘Negro’s’ reality, 
negates negative influences, and creates positive images.

The text was first published in 1984, almost 15 years after the unofficial end 
of the Black Arts Movement, and 30 years before theresurgence of activism in 
Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/24/ferguson-no-indictment-darren-wilson-protest>
 andbeyond 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2015/01/women-and-blacklivesmatter/384855/>
, but Sanchez’s vivid defense of black artistic self-determination still rings 
true.

The beauty of black art lies in its ability (perhaps even its mandate) to 
marry the personal and political, to arrange festering sores of social 
circumstance into striking patterns that are hypnotic as they heal. Black art 
highlights both inter- and intra-community dynamics,playing with shadow 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/22/magazine/a-true-picture-of-black-skin.html?smid=tw-share>
 and light in spaces that may otherwise not be illuminated.

Tatyana Fazlalizadeh <http://t.co/deqfuVyxPD>’s “Stop Telling Women to Smile 
<http://stoptellingwomentosmile.com/>” public art series addresses street 
harassment by speaking directly to offenders with publicly displayed portraits 
of women speaking back against harassers’ aggression.King Texas 
<http://kingtexas.net/about>’s portrait series, BLACKNESS 
<http://kingtexas.net/>, documents and celebrates the diversity of the African 
diaspora across spectrums of gender, sexuality and ethnic heritage.Danez Smith 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/danez-smith>’s poetry calls attention to 
the heavy burden of anti-black violence 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/danezsmith/not-an-elegy-for-mike-brown-two-poems-for-ferguson>
 with tenderness and urgency. Kendrick Lamar’s music offersblues-y meditations 
on working class black life 
<http://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/when-the-lights-shut-off-kendrick-lamar-and-the-decline-of-the-black-blues-narrative>
 andaffirmations amid the chaos 
<http://grantland.com/hollywood-prospectus/being-real-black-for-you-who-kendrick-lamar-is-rapping-to-on-the-blacker-the-berry/>
.

Art <https://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign> makes visible the 
pain that buries itself in the cavities that logic and reason alone cannot 
access. It forces its audience to contend with truths that may otherwise be 
buried in the perfunctory rhythm of everyday life. Black art is the lifeline 
that sustains movements and makes sense of the moments theory cannot adequately 
grasp.

In the wake of the creative activism 
<http://thenerdsofcolor.org/2013/10/25/growing-octavias-brood-the-science-fiction-social-justice-created/>
 of#BlackLivesMatter <http://blacklivesmatter.com/> and other collectives, 
black art has held communities together when policy and protest are not enough. 
Aslaw enforcement continues to kill <http://bayareane.ws/1xuWLOd> black people 
<http://www.propublica.org/article/deadly-force-in-black-and-white> across the 
country 
<http://www.rawstory.com/rs/2015/02/family-asks-cops-to-check-on-74-year-old-vet-after-surgery-and-they-break-in-and-kill-him/>
with impunity 
<http://justice.gawker.com/police-reform-is-impossible-in-america-1683262551>, 
artists have beencoming together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/20/respond-blacklivesmatter-artists-bold-urgent>
 to try to make sense of the horror and pain – and offer visions of a different 
future.

Afrofuturist <http://www.magcloud.com/browse/issue/839341> works like Wangechi 
Mutu’s “Fantastic Journey” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/13/wangechi-mutu-art-afrofuturism> 
allow black artists and their audiences to play with time. Much of the art is 
quite literally suspended but transports viewers through different periods of 
Mutu’s life, the ancestral history that informs it, and visions of an emergent 
future. It emboldens audiences to reconceive of black experience by imagining 
alternate endpoints, to envision a sort of redemption and restoration.

Though not new, afrofuturism’s potential to still serve as a vehicle by which 
black people can envision a different world feels especially prescient in a 
time in whichnon-indictments and non-convictions are a norm 
<http://weird-sister.com/2015/01/07/we-out-there-afrofuturism-in-the-age-of-non-indictments/>
 when black people are killed. To insist on taking up space not just in the 
present, but also in the future, is a radical act when you are all too aware 
that your untimely death would likely not cause a ripple in the American 
justice system.

To assert your existence in a homogenous art world is itself a similarly 
daunting task. In aninterview with AFROPUNK 
<http://www.afropunk.com/profiles/blogs/kim-drew-and-black-contemporary-art>, 
Kimberly Drew, founder ofBlack Contemporary Art 
<http://blackcontemporaryart.tumblr.com/>, a multi-platform community dedicated 
to celebrating the art by and about people of African descent, shared the 
motivation behind its creation: “My interest in Black artists stems from my 
interest in Blackness. Studying art can be a very daunting task for the Black 
scholar. You’re taught to apotheosize certain artists and worship their work in 
a vacuum. You learn about Pablo Picasso, notWifredo Lam 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wifredo_Lam>. You learn about Andy Warhol, not 
Jean-Michel Basquiat. You learn about Marcel DuChamp, notAdam Pendleton 
<http://adampendleton.net/>.”

The Black Arts Movement, which spanned the 1960s, was often referred to as the 
“aesthetic and spiritual sister of the Black Power Concept 
<http://xroads.virginia.edu/~ug01/hughes/intro.html>”, and its beginning is 
generally dated to the month immediately following the assassination of Malcolm 
X, whenpoet Amiri Baraka <http://www.amiribaraka.com/> (born LeRoi Jones) moved 
to Harlem <http://www.english.illinois.edu/maps/blackarts/historical.htm> and 
established a black arts theatre in the home of the early 20th centuryblack 
artistic renaissance <http://exhibitions.nypl.org/harlem/> shepherded by the 
work of artists likeLangston Hughes 
<http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/langston-hughes>, Jacob Lawrence 
<http://collection.whitney.org/artist/759/JacobLawrence> and Zora Neale Hurston 
<http://zoranealehurston.com/>.

Much of the work of the Black Arts Movement remains resonant today 
<http://hyperallergic.com/63789/brooklyn-museum-acquires-important-black-arts-movement-collection/>
 – powerful not simply in its beauty but also in its commitment to political 
resistance. Artists of the era, includingBenny Andrews 
<http://bennyandrews.com/>, Dindga McCannon 
<http://www.brooklynmuseum.org/opencollection/artists/18281/Dindga_McCannon> and
Kay Brown <http://www.artslant.com/global/artists/show/37022-kay-brown>, were 
less interested in convincing white audiences of their inherent worth and more 
in representing and (re)discovering the spectacular kaleidoscope of black 
experience with authenticity and reverence.

Black art, like black people, is not a monolith. It is diverse, expressive and 
resists simple categorization. Black art exists everywhere – in museums and 
galleries, on buildings and in the streets, on blogs and digital showcases, on 
the canvases of our bodies. Like the movements it complements, black art is 
powerful, personal and feels more present than ever. It challenges audiences, 
activists and artists alike to do the difficult work of interrogating the 
subtle biases, deep beliefs, and core values that shape our world in order to 
change it for the better – to feel so we can be free.
 