
Battling to rebuff the criticisms in the Chilcot report on the war in Iraq, 
Tony Blair has repeatedly argued thatthe world and the Middle East would have 
been worse off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-crushing-verdict-tony-blair-iraq-war>
 if Saddam Hussein had not been overthrown in 2003.

“I sincerely believe we would have been in a worse position if we hadn’t 
acted,” the former prime minister insisted in an interview forBBC Radio 4’s 
Today programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p040pk72> on Thursday. “I 
don’t believe this struggle was in vain in the end.”

While it is impossible to know what would have happened if Saddam had stayed 
in power, it is possible to test Blair’s defence against evidence about global 
terrorism, the situation inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and 
Middle Eastern instability.

What impact did the invasion have on Iraq? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=chilcot_iraq>
Global terrorism

Statistics endorsed by the US state department 
<http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/239628.pdf> show incidents and 
fatalities of global terrorism rising steadily from 2004 to 2007, dropping from 
2008 to 2012, rising again in 2013, and nearly doubling in 2014 to 32,727 dead. 
In 2015 fatalities caused by terrorist activitydeclined by 14% 
<http://www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2015/257526.htm>. More than 55% of terrorist 
attacks in 2015 occurred in five countries: Iraq, Pakistan, India, Afghanistan 
and Nigeria.

Iraq 

The same statistics show that by a wide margin the highest numbers of 
terrorist attacks in 2014 took place in Iraq. The increase coincided with the 
expansion of Islamic State. The Chilcot report documents pre-war warnings about 
the risks of increased terrorism by Sunni extremist groups, including the 
al-Qaida-affiliated group led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the precursor to Isis. 
The current Baghdad government of Hayder al-Abadi is perceived as sectarian and 
deeply corrupt. Kurds, enjoying semi-independence in the north, are relatively 
happy, though now engaged in fighting Isis.

Iranian influence/sectarianism

Iran’s role in Iraq has increased markedly since 2003, as predicted by the UK 
joint intelligence committee. Its empowerment has fuelled Sunni-Shia sectarian 
tensions across the region, with Sunni, western-backed Saudi Arabia leading the 
opposing camp. Chilcot is shot through with references to the role played by 
the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Corps, including its elite Quds force, in Iraq.
Iran works closely 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/special-report-irans-military-chiefs-operate-iraq-102350689.html?soc_src=mediacontentsharebuttons&soc_trk=tw&utm_content=buffer683be&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer&ref=gs>
 with Iraqi Shia militias, which have been accused of atrocities against Sunni 
Muslims.

Arab spring

Surveying the Middle East today, Blair said: “The struggle that is going on … 
is all to do with [this question]: can these countries get to religiously 
tolerant and pluralistic societies … to rule-based economies and democracy? 
What we did in removing Saddam had terrible consequences that we did not 
foresee … but when I look at [the region] today we moved with where the grain 
of the future is going to be.”

But that future is barely visible. The uprisings of 2011 saw the overthrow of 
four Arab leaders – in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and Yemen. With the partial 
exception of Tunisia, none of those countries are in a better condition than 
before; Libya and Yemen,wracked by war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/we-are-trapped-in-war-no-end-in-sight-for-yemen-civilians>
, are far worse. Experts dislike “counter-factual” or “what if” questions, so 
it is impossible to judge Blair’s reasonable, though speculative, view that if 
Saddam had remained in place he would have crushed dissent.

 Iraqis themselves often say they wish the dictator was still in charge 
because even that would bepreferable to the current mayhem and misery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/they-should-have-known-better-chilcot-report-means-little-to-iraqis-mourning-baghdad-attack>
. Most academics reject any causal link between the overthrow of Saddam and the
short-lived advances of the Arab spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/iraq-war-still-casts-a-long-shadow-over-a-dangerous-and-deeply-unstable-region?CMP=share_btn_tw>
. Religious tolerance, democracy and pluralism are in desperately short supply 
everywhere, but especially in Saudi Arabia, a key ally for the US and Britain.


Syria

“Are we better off in Syria than we are in Iraq?” Blair asked. Raw statistics 
can give only a partial and superficial answer.The Iraq Body Count says 241,000 
<https://www.iraqbodycount.org/analysis/numbers/2015/> Iraqis died from March 
2003 to the end of last year. According to recent estimates,470,000 people have 
been killed in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/report-on-syria-conflict-finds-115-of-population-killed-or-injured>
and half the 23 million population has been made homeless since 2011.

But it is also widely accepted that Isis, which now runs a self-proclaimed 
“caliphate” across both countries, expanded because of the postwar situation in 
Iraq and became a deadly player in the Syrian war. The absence of coherent US 
and western policies in Syria, compared with determined backing for Bashar 
al-Assad by Russia and Iran, is widely blamed on the discrediting of western 
intervention because of the 2003 war.

Israel and Palestine

Blair made considerable efforts to ensure that the case for war with Iraq was 
bolstered by a US commitment to restart Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, an 
issue that was rightly identified as a source of anti-western resentment and 
hostility in the Arab and Muslim worlds. He told Bush it would“have a massive 
impact in Europe and the Arab world” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/tony-blair-george-bush-letters-notes-and-memos-published-by-chilcot-inquiry_uk_577cd52de4b073366f100055>
. But little progress was made. Three wars over Gaza and one in Lebanon have 
taken place since 2003 and prospects for Israeli-Palestinian peace are 
currently remote.

US standing

The long-term effect of the Iraq war and the current Syrian crisis has been to 
undermine the standing of the US in the Arab world, where Barack Obama is 
treated with near contempt because of his efforts to reach a nuclear agreement 
with Iran. Britain is perceived as an ineffectual junior partner to a 
discredited US.
 