
With the original tape long destroyed in some needless ITV purge, such was the 
hubbub of excitement whena recording of Bob Paisley’s 1977 appearance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KYHWOXGCcwc> on This Is Your Life surfaced 
unexpectedly last week that one could have been forgiven for assuming intrepid 
relic hunters had actually been searching for it in the first place. Indiana 
Jones and the Quest For A Complete Recording Of The Appearance Of A Former 
Liverpool Manager On A Once Ridiculously Popular Midweek Light Entertainment 
Show Presented By Eamonn Andrews might not have much of a ring to it, but would 
almost certainly have made for far more entertaining viewing than the intrepid 
archaeologist’s critically panned search for the legendary crystal skull of 
Akator.

The truth seems more mundane. A bloke called Pete Day seems to have chanced 
upon a complete recording of the Paisley tribute on VHS (teenagers, ask your 
parents) and uploaded it to YouTube (parents, ask your teenagers) for anyone 
who might like to watch it. Indeed, perhaps the most surprising thing about 
Day’s exotic find is that, in the fine tradition of hidden video treasure in 
that dusty cupboard under grandad’s telly, the crucial moment when Andrews 
surprised Paisley with the iconic Big Red Book did not segue abruptly into a 
recording of a different show: an episode of Minder or Ned’s Atomic Dustbin 
soundtracking a hideously drunk Oliver Reed as he slurred his way through Wild 
Thing on Channel 4’s much maligned but sadly defunct weekend “yoof” vehicle The 
Word.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKYHWOXGCcwc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKYHWOXGCcwc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKYHWOXGCcwc&media=>
 Bob Paisley on This Is Your Life in 1977 
Readers of a certain age may be unfamiliar with the concept of This Is Your 
Life, a one-time staple of the TV schedule that could well have flashed up on 
screen when the Scottish scientist John Logie Baird switched on the first 
television in 1926 and more or less ran weekly with the occasional hiatus until 
its controversial conclusion 13 years ago. A salute to assorted luminaries 
including those known for their work on stage, screen and in the sporting 
arena, each episode featured a well-known “victim”, who was surprised by the 
microphone-wielding host before being whisked away to the TV studios where they 
were taken through a life invariably well lived with the assistance of various 
special guests including fellow notables, family members and assorted childhood 
acquaintances whose identity certain subjects of the show often visibly 
struggled to remember.

Paisley was by no means the first or last football personality to appear on 
This Is Your Life and before him the Tottenham and Northern Ireland legend 
Danny Blanchflower had made history by refusing to participate, going so far as 
to actually run away upon being ambushed by Andrews. “As I straightened up and 
turned to present him with the book, there was no Danny,” recalled the Irish 
presenter in his autobiography. “He had headed for the door of that studio like 
a greyhound from a trap. Angus [Mackay, then the BBC’s sports editor] lunged 
forward to try to stop him, caught hold of his coat and Danny wriggled out of 
it, went through the door in his shirtsleeves and I could hear him pounding 
down the stone steps, shouting: ‘Let me out! Let me out!’.”

Boxing brawls, junior Joe Cole, plus Bob Paisley – This is Your Life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/boxing-brawls-junior-joe-cole-plus-bob-paisley-this-is-your-life>
There were no such problems with Paisley although, perhaps mindful of the 
peculiarity of his unfortunate experience with Blanchflower, Andrews approached 
him on a moving bus from which there was no escape: the Liverpool team coach 
making its way from Loftus Road after a 2-0 defeat at the hands of QPR. “How 
the secret was kept from Bob Paisley has the hallmarks of bizarre fiction,” the 
journalist Michael Charters wrote in theLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> Echo. “Not only his family 
were involved in the preparations for the programme, but dozens of people on 
the Anfield staff, including the players, had to be told.”

Among them were Emlyn Hughes, Tommy Smith and Billy Liddell, who appeared 
alongside Paisley’s wife, Jessie, his younger brother Hughie, coaches and 
future Liverpool managers Joe Fagan and Ronnie Moran, his friend, the Hong 
Kong-based racehorse trainer Frank Carr, and a couple of Paisley’s colleagues 
from his days as a bricklayer in Durham. Having helped Liverpool to a league 
and European Cup double the previous season, Kevin Keegan had moved to Hamburg, 
but was on hand to pay homage to his charming former manager with a video 
message he concluded by saying: “Auf Wiedersehen … which in case you don’t 
know, in Germany means something like, eh, ta-ra wack”. Paisley’s predecessor, 
Bill Shankly, was also present as well as various comrades with whom he 
occupied dugouts of a different kind in the Middle East during the second world 
war.

Months in the planning, it later emerged that Paisley’s appearance on This Is 
Your Life had almost been derailed in its infancy when he had taken the 
European Cup and league trophies to his home village of Hetton-le-Hole in 
Durham to show childhood pals and had been decidedly nonplussed when several of 
his closest failed to turn up. It was later revealed the show’s organisers had 
got wind of his visit and ordered anyone earmarked for an appearance on his 
televised tribute to stay away. Liverpool fans are occasionally mocked for 
their obsession with history but in stumbling upon a copy of their late 
manager’s long lost appearance on what was once the most popular show on 
British television, one amateur archivist has uncovered a fascinating chapter.

• This article was amended on 11 December 2016 to point out that Danny 
Blanchflower was a Northern Ireland legend and not a Republic of Ireland legend.
 