
Suicide bombings across the Muslim world, in Baghdad, Dhaka and Istanbul, have 
made for a grim and bloody Ramadan. Nowthree apparently coordinated attacks in 
Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/04/saudi-arabia-bombings-jeddah-medina-prophets-mosque-qatif>
 have underlined a determined effort to target the conservative kingdom hated 
by the jihadis of Islamic State.


The most prominent of Monday’s incidents was in Medina, burial place of the 
prophet Muhammad and the second holiest place in Islam, visited by millions 
annually. Four policemen died there, but two attacks elsewhere inSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> failed – testimony perhaps to 
the relative efficiency of the country’s internal security forces.

 No claim of responsibility has yet been made, but Isis has trumpeted its 
hostility towards Saudi Arabia since the declaration of its “caliphate” across 
swaths of Iraq and Syria two years ago. Its propaganda calls the Al Saud 
monarchy the “Al Saloul” – a derogatory reference to an infamous figure from 
pre-Islamic history.

For Isis – or Daesh, as it is known pejoratively across the Arab world – 
targeting Medina was probably intended to undermine the legitimacy claimed by
King Salman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/king-salman>’s formal title, 
“guardian of the two holy shrines”, which refers to Mecca and Medina. The 
bombings were widely condemned as an assault “on Islam itself” on the eve of 
the Eid al-Fitr holiday.


The two other attacks hit the jihadis’ other main enemies. The first was near 
the US consulate in Jeddah, but the attacker killed only himself after 
detonating an explosive device. The second targeted a mosque in Qatif, in the 
Eastern province and home to the country’s Shia minority. The bomber was the 
only fatality there, too.

“That these attacks failed to produce high casualty counts is irrelevant to 
the group,” said the Soufan Group, which monitors jihadist movements. “The 
attention and symbolism are enough.”

Suicide bombers attack sites in Saudi Arabia including mosque in Medina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/04/saudi-arabia-bombings-jeddah-medina-prophets-mosque-qatif>
 Saudis react badly when their country is described as the land that gave 
birth to jihadi ideology, which does include elements from elsewhere. Critics 
invariably cite Osama bin Laden, who was sent to fight the Soviets in 
Afghanistan, then founded al-Qaida and in 2001 brought down New York’s Twin 
Towers.

In the words 
<http://www.jamestown.org/programs/tm/single/?tx_ttnews[tt_news]=43625&cHash=9f42e030fa6e8e47a53701a4da6dee4d#.V3uv3dfKDIp>
 of the Jamestown Foundation <>, a US thinktank: “An additional challenge is 
that the ultraconservative forms of Wahhabist and Salafist ideologies 
propagated by Saudi Arabia’s religious establishment – in many respects, Saudi 
Arabia is the wellspring of these ideas – are hard to distinguish from the 
world views being espoused by the Islamic State.”

 But Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of Isis, vilifies the Saudis as lackeys 
of the American “crusaders” and as apostates and heretics who are worse than 
Christians and Jews. Riyadh in turn dismisses Isis askhawarij, or deviants, 
though beheadings and other sharia punishments are common to both. Isis uses the
takfiri doctrine of excommunication to justify the slaughter of Shias and 
Yazidis. The Saudi state, intolerant though it is, does not.

In recent years the Saudis have made efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/saudi-arabia-isis-riyadh-terror-threat>
 – only partially successful – to rein in conservative clerics, including over 
the solicitation of funds for aid and relief in Syria and prohibiting attempts 
by Saudis to join the conflicts there and in Iraq. In 2014 they proscribed Isis 
and Jabhat al-Nusra, al-Qaida’s Syrian affiliate. An estimated 3,000 Saudis 
have been to Syria since 2011, and 700 have returned. Riyadh, committed to the 
overthrow of Bashar al-Assad, is also part of the US-led anti-Isis coalition.


 Western diplomats complain of an “outdated stereotype” of Saudi tolerance for 
terrorism. But they also admit that admiration for a Sunni group that is 
uncompromising in its hostility to Iran and to Shias everywhere means the 
kingdom is fertile ground for homegrown extremism.

Baghdad suicide bombing death toll reaches 175
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/baghdad-suicide-bombing-death-toll-reaches-175>
In the mid-2000s, when al-Qaida mounted a campaign of bombings and 
assassinations, the Saudi authorities were caught off-guard. Now they are 
better prepared. Highlighting the security challenge, the Jeddah bomber was 
named on Tuesday as a Pakistani man who had lived in the city for 12 years – 
one of 9 million foreign workers in the country. The latest attacks will 
understandably fuel fears about security during the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 
September.

 Arabic social media reflected the ugly sectarian mood across the region, with 
some users noting the paucity of condemnation from the Sunni world of theIsis 
bombings that killed 175 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/baghdad-suicide-bombing-death-toll-reaches-175>
 – many of them Shias – in the Baghdad suburb of Karada on Sunday. Other 
comments suggested that targeting Medina would only reinforce the image of Isis 
as a group whose hateful ideology and murderous violence are anathema to 
hundreds of millions of ordinary Muslims.

“There are no more red lines left for terrorists to cross,” tweeted the 
Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, his pious sentiments shared by 
many other Muslim leaders. “Sunnis, Shias will both remain victims unless we 
stand united as one.”
 