
EL Doctorow’s World’s Fair is a story of the past with its eyes on the future, 
the tale of an unremarkable Bronx schoolboy stumbling towards manhood. 
Tellingly, the book takes its title froma lavish 1939 event 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1939_New_York_World%27s_Fair> that set out to 
construct the world of tomorrow on the marshland of Flushing Meadows, New York. 
Some 15 years before, this same site had doubled as the blighted “Valley of 
Ashes” in F Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby. Today, it is home to the US 
Open tennis tournament, where singles champions pocket a $3.5m pay cheque. 
Implicitly and explicitly, Doctorow tells us that landscapes – like people – 
are subject to change and growth, collapse and renewal. The process can be 
difficult and is frequently knotted with problems. But such surging, forward 
motion is in and of itself hopeful.

The dustjacket of my battered hardback edition bills World’s Fair as “a novel” 
- a claim that’s almost as rich as the prose that follows. Doctorow’s hero, 
like him, is called Edgar. Like him, he had an elder brother called Donald. His 
mother and father were called Rose and Dave and they all lived in an apartment 
on Eastburn Avenue. The narrative amounts to a rush of memory. The plot is as 
vividly messy as life itself. So in what way is this a novel, exactly? It is as 
though, having poured his childhood out onto the page, the author was so 
alarmed by the portraits he’d painted and the confidences he’d betrayed that he 
made a last-ditch attempt to disguise the whole thing as fiction.

If so, I think his fears were groundless because World’s Fair looks back not 
with anger but with warmth and compassion. Doctorow was in his mid-50s when he 
wrote the book – old enough to know that human frailty is a given and that all 
families are imperfect. With the benefit of hindsight he can see that his 
charming dad was a feckless dreamer, losing money hand over fist, and that his 
mum was too harried and hard-bitten to wring much enjoyment from life. Still, 
he is reassured that they loved him and that he loved them right back. On 
balance, that’s probably the way with most families. When all the grudges and 
grievances wear down, what remains is the love.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fbooks-to-give-you-hope-worlds-fair-by-el-doctorow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd93a9fdab6664a2613803abdab0c689c91623daa%2F0_170_3332_2403%2F3332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20to%20give%20you%20hope%3A%20World's%20Fair%20by%20EL%20Doctorow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fbooks-to-give-you-hope-worlds-fair-by-el-doctorow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20to%20give%20you%20hope%3A%20World%27s%20Fair%20by%20EL%20Doctorow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fbooks-to-give-you-hope-worlds-fair-by-el-doctorow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd93a9fdab6664a2613803abdab0c689c91623daa%2F0_170_3332_2403%2F3332.jpg>
 Visitors to General Motors’ Futurama exhibit
at the 1939 World’s Fair, which promised to show visitors ‘the world of 
tomorrow, from comfortable moving sound chairs while touring a vast scale model 
of the American countryside, covering more than 35,00 square feet.’ Photograph: 
Bettmann Archive 
As well as unpicking his own roots, however, Edgar is intent on devouring the 
world, making sense of its mysteries. He steps on to the street with his eyes 
out on stalks and his nostrils positively flaring. And all around him as he 
goes, the Bronx explodes in a flutter of comic-books and kosher butchers, 
pushcart vendors and street-corner radicals. Heroes come in the shape of FDR 
and Benny Goodman; villains in the shape of Adolf Hitler and the teenage 
hoodlums who vault across the backyard fences. To the sophisticated eye, the 
1939 World’s Fair would seem the epitome of vulgarity with its brash exhibits 
(Gay New Orleans, Forbidden Tibet), calliope soundtrack and tacky sideshows 
(“Norma’s job was to wrestle with Oscar the Amorous Octopus in a tank of 
water”). Doctorow makes us see it as it ought to be seen – a fabulous, 
futuristic Oz, newly sprung at the end of the elevated railway.

Towards the end of World’s Fair, Edgar enters an essay-writing competition on 
the theme of the typical American boy. “The Typical American Boy is not fearful 
of Dangers,” he writes. “If he is Jewish he should say so. If he is anything he 
should say what it is when challenged.” In a more sappy coming-of-age story (a 
novel, let’s say) this effort would win first prize and its author be hailed as 
a literary star in the making. In the real world, though, magic takes softer, 
more subtle forms. So no, Edgar’s earnest, heartfelt essay can’t mend his 
parents’ failing marriage or save his dad’s floundering music shop. But it does 
earn honourable mention in the local paper. Indirectly it allows his mother and 
father to part as friends. Perhaps also indirectly, it announces the end of one 
story and the start of another.

Ever so gently, with no fanfare to speak of, the book’s final section shows 
owl-eyed Edgar taking his first steps from home. He has written and been 
noticed; he’s forging an independent life. And this, of course, is how it 
should be; it’s happening all over. One generation collapses into its valley of 
ashes. Another clambers up to take its place. And therefore, while World’s Fair 
is a specific recollection about a specific child in a specific time and place, 
I’ve always felt there’s something gorgeously, expansively universal about it 
too. Doctorow’s book is a salute to every runtish, unrecognised kid who (with a 
little help) learned how to write their name or ride a bike. They come wobbling 
out into the world on their own, outpacing their parents, in search of 
adventure.
 