
One of Boris Johnson’s Eurosceptic disciples interrupted a live Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> broadcast on Friday night on the 
mayor of London’s orders.

European referendum campaign kicks off as rivals roll out big guns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/15/european-referendum-campaign-boris-johnson-alistair-darling>
Political reporter Michael Crick was broadcasting live on Channel 4 News as 
Johnson launched the official Vote Leave campaign for the 23 June referendum.


Crick began delivering a piece to camera midway through Johnson’s speech, in 
which the Tory MP dismissedDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> and other supporters of 
Britain’s membership of the EU as “Gerald Ratners of modern politics” – who 
admit the EU is “crap” but insist there is no alternative.

The remark was a reference to notorious comments by the jewellery chain owner 
in 1991 when he described one of his own products – a £4.95 sherry decanter and 
six glasses – as “total crap”.


“Can someone go and interrupt Crick at the back there?” asked Johnson, as 
Crick’s voice rose above his own in the old Granada Studios in Manchester.

Channel 4 News (@Channel4News) 
This is the moment @BorisJohnson <https://twitter.com/BorisJohnson> MP urges 
the crowd to interrupt@MichaelLCrick <https://twitter.com/MichaelLCrick>'s live 
report from a#Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> rally
https://t.co/JooHlMQ46v <https://t.co/JooHlMQ46v>
 <https://twitter.com/Channel4News/status/721044715127222272> April 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Channel4News/status/721044715127222272> 
One of Johnson’s fans duly obliged, marching up to Crick and asking him to 
pipe down.

“The guy’s trying to talk, you’re interrupting,” said Spencer Radcliffe, 
before blocking the camera with his fleece-clad torso. Afterwards, the 
unemployed welder said: “I just didn’t like his attitude. It was total 
ignorance.”


Another man in a pinstriped suit heckled Johnson and ordered him to do his tie 
up properly: the London mayor duly obliged. Someone else, sporting a Bernie 
Ecclestone bowl-cut, asked Johnson for haircare tips.


Johnson was challenged on Vote Leave’s claim that the UK’s £350m weekly 
contribution to the EU could be spent on the NHS if the UK voted to leave.

The BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg pointed out that much of that figure is actually 
spent in the UK, accusing him of “not being completely straight with the 
public”.

She was booed, as Johnson conceded that some money did come back to the UK, 
albeit allocated by EU officials. But he insisted that much UK money vanished 
“into the wide blue yonder. It literally goes up in smoke in the form of 
tobacco subsidies to Greek tobacco growers, or funds Potemkin olive groves”.

Johnson’s speech boasted that Britain was now exporting UK-built bicycles to 
Germany and French knickers to France and indicated that trade would continue 
even if the UK left the EU.


“I ask you – would the Germans discriminate against our bicycles, if they 
thought we would discriminate against their BMWs?” he asked, to peals of 
laughter.

“I know it must be maddening for the French to see British-made saucy knickers 
in their shops – but would they discriminate against our knickers if they 
thought we would discriminate against their champagne? Of course not, so let us 
say knickers to the pessimists and the merchants of gloom and do a new deal 
that will be good for Britain and good forEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.”

Gerald Ratner's 'crap' comment haunts jewellery chain: from the archive, 22 
August 1992
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/22/gerald-ratner-jewellery-total-crap-1992-archive>
Johnson’s light-hearted remarks were designed to address one of the potential 
weaknesses at the heart of the Brexit campaign – the perception that membership 
of the EU, for all its imperfections, is the safest option for the UK.

Johnson told the rally: “You know the most depressing thing about the campaign 
to Bremain? It is that there is not a shred of idealism.

“Not a single one of them will stand up and admit that it is political. No one 
will say: ‘You know what, I love the idea of a federal Europe’, because that is 
the true logic of their position.

“But that is not what they say – oh no. They keep saying that they are 
Eurosceptics, but we have no choice. We agree with you about the democratic 
problem, they say – but it’s the price we have to pay.”


 