
I can tell you from bitter experience that there are more relaxing ways of 
preparing for an interview with a legendary pop star than reading their memoirs 
and unexpectedly stumbling across a page where they explain at some length why 
they think you’re an arsehole. But there it is, or rather there I am, onpage 
133 of Boy George’s second autobiography 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=6M68felxAa8C&pg=PA133&lpg=PA133&dq=alexis+petridis+boy+george+review&source=bl&ots=2JVRbk0RuD&sig=DTIpyqmql680_N2O4JFCvOyJJ9I&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjM9MiWh-LQAhWjOsAKHfVJC4YQ6AEINzAE#v=onepage&q=alexis%20petridis%20boy%20george%20review&f=false>
, 2006’s Straight, getting it in the neck as the result ofan unnecessarily sour 
live review I wrote years and years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/jun/17/artsfeatures.popandrock>. Worse, 
I think he’s probably got a point; although I didn’t say he had never written a 
good song, I did say “Culture Club never had many good songs to start with”, 
which rather reckons withoutTime (Clock of the Heart) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8tI1_KlO6xI> and Victims 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OH6KApqmrBk> and It’s a Miracle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YewVugPHon4>, among others, let alone his solo 
songs such as 2013’s gospelly power balladKing of Everything 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nCNF3wPgqFc>. At least I can console myself 
with the fact that I’m in pretty glittering company on the old blacklist: over 
the course of Straight, he lets pretty much everyone have it, from George 
Michael (“please shut up – throw her a cerise boa”) to Prince (“the Artist 
Formerly Known As Get a Personality”).

Nevertheless, it’s hard not to arrive at his publicist’s office with a degree 
of trepidation. But no, we’re all good. He has long distanced himself from 
Straight – he told an interviewer a couple of years ago that it was “the 
rantings of a deranged drug user”, written during a grim spiral that culminated 
in him ending up in prison in 2009 for assault and false imprisonment. He says 
he can’t remember the review in question, and he doesn’t bear grudges. “I 
forgive very easily, and I suppose, in the same way, I expect to be forgiven 
very easily as well. I grew up with that. My dad was very explosive, God rest 
his soul. He could fly off the handle like no one I’ve ever known, and I have 
definitely got that in my personality, that ability to sort of smash the house 
up and then say: ‘Put the kettle on,’ to have that kind of attitude of: ‘Well, 
I’m OK now, so everybody else has got to be OK.’ People are like: ‘No, I’m not 
OK, you just screamed at me,’ and I’m like: ‘Yeah, but get over it.’”

Boy George: 'I’m much more successful and happy now I'm sober'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/17/boy-george-im-much-more-successful-and-happy-now-im-sober-the-voice>
He laughs, an infectious, throaty, dirty chuckle: as the journalist Simon 
Price once noted, an MP3 of it should be available on the NHS. In fact, he 
seems in a particularly sunny mood. He looks great, dressed in clothes that 
would look completely ridiculous on anyone other thanBoy George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/boy-george> – black and lime green, matching 
trainers and hat – a bit of makeup around the eyes. He’s in London on a flying 
visit from his home in Los Angeles. He once said he thought he had destroyed 
his career in the US overnight by accepting an award at the 1984 Grammys with 
the words “You know a good drag queen when you see one” (“I think what happened 
had more to do with the fact that the band was falling apart and I started 
taking drugs,” he shrugs today). Now, however, he loves it there. “I love 
American positivity. When I went back to America, five years ago, I got my visa 
and I was fully expecting to get all that ‘You did community service, you went 
to prison, la la la,’ but nothing. Nothing. I think in America if they can see 
you’re in a good place, that’s enough for them, they don’t want to dredge up 
the miserable shit and the negative shit and I like that. In the UK, they like 
to put you in a box, don’t they? The National Treasure box: tolerated and 
occasionally revered. It’s a bit restrictive.”

Furthermore, Culture Club are once more back in business, touring the US and 
Australia, with a headline show at Wembley Arena next week, and it all appears 
to be going remarkably well, given the band’s famously combustible reputation. 
The last time British audiences clapped eyes on them was on a BBC documentary 
about their attempts to record an album and play a tour in 2014. How well that 
went can be gleaned from the programme’s title: From Karma to Calamity. 
Everyone knows that Culture Club’s stretch of success in the 80s – 
Beatlemania-like scenes around the world, tens of millions of records sold – 
was pockmarked by internal strife, mostly as the result of George’s frequently 
violent relationship with drummer Jon Moss. But watching them writing songs in 
a Spanish studio, you found yourself wondering how they ever functioned at all: 
the surprisingly geezerish band members seemed so utterly unlike their 
frontman, who, for his part, spent the programme looking like a man who would 
rather be almost anywhere else than in their company. And yet, here they are, 
18 months on, knocking them dead at the Hard Rock Hotel, Tulsa, getting along 
famously.

“Well, I think at this point, you just have to let people be who they are,” 
says George. “You’re in a band with someone, it doesn’t necessarily mean you’re 
going to agree with everything they think or do. Me and Jon have always 
bickered and we’ll always bicker, because, you know, he says things like: 
‘It’ll be great if Trump got it, it’ll be interesting,’ with a straight face. 
He uses a lot of hyperbole, he says extreme things, but me arguing with Jon has 
nothing to do with our relationship. I mean, people say: ‘Do you get on with 
the rest of them?’ but I wouldn’t go on the road with them if I didn’t like 
them. I do love those guys, I really love them, and that’s genuine. There’s a 
little bit of me that feels like I wouldn’t be here without them. So, you know, 
I respect them, I don’t always agree with them, and I always say that there’s 
something very magical about us playing together, that’s when it makes sense.” 
Another laugh. “And the rest of the time, it’s like: ‘What the fuck am I doing 
on the road with you?’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fboy-george-were-all-clinging-to-a-rock-and-some-people-have-got-a-better-grip-than-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F506ca0a61dd63d94ab0a0c5c34bf407894b505ec%2F0_0_2398_3616%2F2398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boy%20George%3A%20%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20all%20clinging%20to%20a%20rock%2C%20and%20some%20people%20have%20got%20a%20better%20grip%20than%20others%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fboy-george-were-all-clinging-to-a-rock-and-some-people-have-got-a-better-grip-than-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boy%20George%3A%20%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99re%20all%20clinging%20to%20a%20rock%2C%20and%20some%20people%20have%20got%20a%20better%20grip%20than%20others%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fboy-george-were-all-clinging-to-a-rock-and-some-people-have-got-a-better-grip-than-others%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F506ca0a61dd63d94ab0a0c5c34bf407894b505ec%2F0_0_2398_3616%2F2398.jpg>
 Culture Club in Washington DC in 1983 ... (clockwise from top left) Boy 
George, Roy Hay, Mikey Craig and Jon Moss. Photograph: Michael Putland/Getty 
Images 
Still, he concedes, they have their moments. “Oh God, we were doing Prince’s 
club in Minneapolis, and I decided we were going to do Purple Rain, and we had 
the biggest row we’ve had in 20 years. We had a row about the arrangement, then 
a runner at the club said to Roy [Hay, guitarist]: ‘Oh, everybody does Prince 
songs when they come here,’ which just made it worse. I really kicked off, I 
had to go and apologise: ‘Oh, I’m sorry, I haven’t done that since 1984.’ Then 
we played it and the whole sound system broke down. I think it was Prince, up 
there” – he gestures to the skies – “shitstirring it.”

He thinks at least one of the reasons why relations have improved is because 
he feels “comfortable in his own skin”. He used to be much more self-conscious 
when he was younger, he says: he would get dressed up as Boudicca or a geisha 
to go clubbing, then lose his temper when people remarked on how he looked. 
“Yeah, kind of look at me, but don’t look at me – that’s the dichotomy of 
exhibitionism in a way. You want people to look at you, but you don’t want them 
to comment. You want to be a spectacle, but you don’t want them to home in on 
you, you don’t want to be analysed.”

He says Culture Club’s vast success only compounded matters. He looked like 
someone born to be a pop star, but often found the experience weirdly 
uncomfortable. Onstage, he couldn’t look at the audience: “I used to go and see 
Bowie or Grace Jones, who were just awe-inspiring, they had that confidence, 
they were in command, and I would think: ‘I need to be more like that.’”

Offstage, he continued to struggle with attention. “It’s all fun at the 
beginning because you’re being carted everywhere in limousines and trucks and 
then when you start wanting to go out in the real world, it doesn’t quite work. 
It takes years to get your head around how to have some sort of normal life 
whilst also enjoying the spoils of being Boy George. I think I’ve got that 
balance now. If someone comes up and wants a selfie, I’m not going to be rude 
or hostile or arsey. I just pull a silly face. If in doubt, pout.”

He understandably doesn’t want to talk about drugs or prison – “I’m nine years 
sober in February, just short of a decade, so there’s got to be a point where 
it’s like ‘Move on, I have’” – but it’s still pretty clear what happened in 
2008 was the big turning point in his life. “I unceremoniously fucked things up 
myself. There was a point, nine years ago, where I said to myself: ‘You really 
fucked this up, and you’ve really got to fix it, and you can fix it.’ I knew it 
would take time, but I really believed it.”

Boy George and Jon Moss: how we made Do You Really Want to Hurt Me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/20/how-we-made-do-you-really-want-to-hurt-me-culture-club-boy-george>
Certainly, his career now seems to be blooming again. His recent documentary 
for the BBC about life in the suburbs in 70s Britain 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b07z7y5v/sign/boy-georges-1970s-save-me-from-suburbia>
 was rapturously received. There’s talk of him launching his own makeup range 
and of a Vegas residency with Cyndi Lauper. He’s not returning as a judge on 
the UK version of The Voice; instead, he’s currently a contestant on The New 
Celebrity Apprentice in the US, now helmed by Arnold Schwarzenegger, rather 
than the president-elect, alongside “a lot of footbally, sportsy-type American 
guys and Vince Neil from Mötley Crüe”. There was even talk of his own US 
reality series, but he abandoned the idea. “It was going to be about me moving 
to America, but I think I was too interesting. I’m not really a fan of that 
whole reality show ‘Let’s create a scenario’ thing. I don’t need to create 
scenarios. Look at my life! I’ve got scenarios coming out of my ears.”

You can understand the lure of primetime US TV, but it still seems a shame 
he’s given up The Voice. For one thing, he was very good on it: funny and 
generous and engaging. For another, it was just nice to see someone try to flip 
the usual, boring script of TV pop talent shows on their heads. He went out of 
his way to pick the weirdest contestants, then gave them Antony and the 
Johnsons songs to sing. It was as if he was trying to singlehandedly will pop 
music back to the way it was when Culture Club broke. Watching their early Top 
of the Pops appearances on BBC4 recently, what was striking wasn’t so much how 
extraordinary Boy George looks, but the fact that, with the benefit of 
hindsight, he doesn’t look that out of place: the chart was still largely a 
playground for freaks and eccentrics.

“It feels like the mainstream has been hijacked by hitmakers, people who are 
really good at writing songs that all drop in the right places, they’re all 
pleasant, but there’s not many people who really give of themselves, if you 
know what I mean,” he says. “When I was 19, there was still the mystery of 
rock’n’roll, there was still the wizard behind the curtain. Kids now, they know 
how to make records, they know where to get their clothes. They don’t have to 
walk to Deptford High Street to look at the platform shoes in the window, they 
can go online and get them from Asos, whereas we had to dream about it: is this 
possible? Now, it’s like: ‘Yeah, you can be famous, you get on this show, you 
do that, you do this,’ but I think the thing is, I don’t think it necessarily 
means that much. I’m glad I had that exciting first part of my career in a 
decade when you could make a cultural difference of sorts, you know? There’s a 
lot of no-neck tracks around with 400m hits and you think they don’t mean 
anything, whereas Madonna’s cone bra still has some sort of resonance! But 
then, maybe if you’re 14, they do. I still get excited about lots of music, but 
it’s not stuff that you hear in the mainstream. I lovethe Knife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-knife>, the Lower Dens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/26/lower-dens-escape-from-evil-review>
 – if it was the 80s the Lower Dens would be massive. I sawLet’s Eat Grandma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/31/lets-eat-grandma-eat-shiitake-mushrooms-deep-six-textbook>
 on TV and I fucking loved them. I can say I like Zayn Malik, he’s got a 
beautiful voice, he’s beautiful looking, but it’s not the same feeling as I get 
from looking at Jam Rostron fromPlanningtorock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/22/planningtorock-jam-rostron-feminism-all-loves-legal>
. I think she’s amazing, so beautiful, but it’s a kind of distorted beauty. 
Looking at her and hearing the message of her music, for me, it’s just the same 
as it always was. It’s great pop music and it’s about something.”

Despite the reality TV and the makeup range, he says he still thinks of 
himself as a songwriter first. He’s been working with hisold friend and 
sparring partner Marilyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/27/marilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films>
, there’s a new Culture Club album due next year and he’s been mentoring a trio 
called Brando who he describes as “total glam, total Roxy, massive Smiths 
fans”. “Worrying about the industry and the radio and all of that, it’s just 
pointless, you just have to get on with it. ‘OK, that door’s shut, let’s go 
through another door.’ That’s always been my policy. I’m very adaptable. Very 
Darwinian.”

I start saying something about his new, positive outlook on life, but he 
corrects me. “No, I’ve always been positive. I wouldn’t still be here if I 
wasn’t. I think you’re always who you are, but life distracts you, particularly 
because of fame – everybody treats you different, therefore you end up with a 
distorted idea of who you are. Don’t you think that life’s about growing into 
yourself in a funny kind of way? You’re looking for answers and I think as you 
get older, you realise there aren’t really answers. You just have to kind of 
get on with it. Life is kind of like clinging to a rock, isn’t it? We’re all 
clinging to a rock, and some people have got a better grip than others. Some 
people look bedraggled,” he smiles, “and other people look like Jerry Hall 
dressed as mermaid onthat Roxy Music album cover 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siren_%28Roxy_Music_album%29#/media/File:Roxysiren.jpg>
.”

Culture Club play SSE Arena Wembley on 14 December
 