
As strange as it may sound, for the next few weeks, the future of 
left-of-centre politics might revolve around a verdant corner of west London, 
where a trailblazing step into a better future has been taken by two underrated 
revolutionary organisations, theRichmond and Twickenham branch 
<https://richmond.greenparty.org.uk/> of the Green party, and its counterpart 
in Kingston-upon-Thames.

For the last week or so, a loud debate has raged about the looming Richmond 
Park byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/anticipation-abounds-as-the-lib-dems-begin-battle-for-richmond-park>
, and how the various non-Tory parties ranged against the faux-independent Zac 
Goldsmith should respond to a contest called at his behest. He wants everything 
to be focused onhis opposition to Heathrow expansion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/26/zac-goldsmith-heathrow-decision-an-outrage-video>
, but the vote that will happen on 1 December isinevitably about much more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/zac-goldsmith-vote-extreme-brexit-byelection-labour-not-contest-richmond-park>
, not least because of Goldsmith’s belief in Brexit and the high court’s 
decision about parliament’s role. In that context, the people of Richmond Park 
have a simple enough choice: should they return someone who will view a vote on 
article 50 as a chance to hold the government to account, avoid hard Brexit and 
even push for a second referendum? Or do they prefer a convinced leaver who is 
likely to approach things from the opposite standpoint?

Division haunts the left. Richmond is our chance to lay it to rest | Zoe 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/30/left-division-richmond-byelection-zac-goldsmith>
Labour managed to get 12% of the local vote in 2015 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/politics/constituencies/E14000896>; in 2010, when 
the Liberal Democrats lost the seat to Goldsmith and the Tories, it was on a
princely 5% 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/election2010/results/constituency/d70.stm>. In 
the last week, a few high-profile Labour people have made the case fortheir 
party standing down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/labour-frontbenchers-urge-party-not-to-contest-richmond-park-byelection>
 in favour of Tim Farron’s lot, but they are up against the various strands of 
their party still united by their undying tribalism, up to and including the 
supposedly radical party leadership.

At the same time, with an apparent reluctance, the local Greens – who got 6% 
last time – decided they should field a candidate (their conclusion, said the 
party’s co-leader Caroline Lucas, was that “it would be difficult not to field 
a candidate unlessLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> did the 
same”), before changing their minds. Now, the two relevant party branches have 
commendably decided to bow out, and give the Lib Dems a clearer run.

The Lib Dems ought to honour the Greens’ move by sooner or later giving 
something back in kind. Labour, meanwhile, is set to formally pick its 
candidate this Saturday. Given deep divisions in the party about whether Brexit 
is to be questioned, the high court decision will throw it into a spin, and 
colour its approach to what it does in Richmond Park. But if Labour were 
collectively clever, it could view a defeat for the government as the key 
priority, stand down with honour, and demand a clear payback. That payback 
could be, for example, the Lib Dems backing off at the next election (which may 
come sooner than some people think) in nearby Brentford and Isleworth, where 
the boot is on the other foot: in 2015, Labour won the seat with43.8% of the 
vote <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/politics/constituencies/E14000593> to the 
Tories’ 42.9%, with the Lib Dems and Greens between them polling just under 8%.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zac%20Goldsmith%20resigns%20after%20government's%20go-ahead%20to%20Heathrow%20third%20runway%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zac%20Goldsmith%20resigns%20after%20government%27s%20go-ahead%20to%20Heathrow%20third%20runway%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video&media=>
Zac Goldsmith resigns after government’s go-ahead to Heathrow third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/25/zac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video>
So why not? Bound up with all that tribalism, there is a deep conviction that 
the Lib Dems remainConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> by any other name, so 
untouchable that the better option is to hand a Tory a win. To that, there is 
one obvious response: a sigh of frustration, and a reminder that we are now in 
the Brexit age, where the record of Nick Clegg et al might still understandably 
rankle, but there are much, much bigger things at stake.

We all know the most likely outcome of our current political and economic 
turbulence: the mean, crabby, low-tax, light-regulation Tory/Ukip vision of 
Britain’s future. If you want any kind of alternative – some salvaged 
relationship with Europe, a better tenor of debate, and renewed hope for 
progressive politics in England – there is only one way to get it: the Tories 
and their allies have to be beaten, at every available opportunity. A seat 
largely in a borough that voted70% for remain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/anticipation-abounds-as-the-lib-dems-begin-battle-for-richmond-park>
, where the sitting MP is an enthusiastic Brexiteer, surely represents an ideal 
opportunity. But rather than the fragile comfort of tactical voting, that 
prospect requires something game-changing, and symbolic.

There is another strand to this story, which is to do with the wider social 
climate, and the fact that in the wake of the referendum, the political 
discourse in England seems to get grimmer every day. Last summer, Goldsmith’s 
campaign for the London mayoralty was an augury of what was to come: a low, 
shameless quest to associate Sadiq Khanwith militant Islam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/12/zac-goldsmith-accuses-rival-sadiq-khan-of-giving-cover-to-extremists>
, tap into fears supposedly coursing around the suburbs, and clinch a win. If 
he had been successful, the upshot would have been a huge warning sign standing 
in the way of anyone Muslim standing for public office – but in the 
post-referendum climate, who would be surprised if similar campaigns are waged 
again and again? Richmond Park offers a chance to underline the awfulness of 
what Goldsmith did – and the fact that it ought to be avenged not once, but 
twice.

A vote against Zac Goldsmith is a vote against extreme Brexit | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/zac-goldsmith-vote-extreme-brexit-byelection-labour-not-contest-richmond-park>
By a mixture of accident and design, the right of British politics is healing 
up, for the moment at least. In thelatest Guardian/ICM poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/are-you-worried-about-labours-polling-figures>
, the Tories are on 43% in the polls to Labour’s 27%, while Ukip looks to be 
imploding (by way of saving money and cementing what some people call the 
“regressive alliance”, it has pledged its support to Goldsmith, and decided not 
to run a candidate at the byelection).

On the liberal left, by contrast, the picture is of division and looming 
defeat, even as large swaths of activists from Labour, the Lib Dems, the 
Greens, and the nationalist parties increasingly share many of the same 
priorities: not just opposition to hard Brexit – or Brexit, period – but a 
belief that we need to change our rotten voting system, so as to ensure that 
further calamities don’t happen in the future. Endless defeat is not the way to 
advance those causes. Dialogue and cooperation are the key, coupled with a much 
smarter approach to electoral politics.

To use the term put on the agenda by the cross-party left-leaning pressure 
group Compass, we need aprogressive alliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/04/greens-alliances-work-britain-progressive-parties>
. If the idea is to have any mileage, it will have to be manifested in local 
initiatives rather than top-down edicts – and in that sense, there is a flavour 
of the future in the fact that the Greens’ move has come not at the insistence 
of the national leadership, but thanks to a change of heart by grassroots 
activists.

Whenever the next election arrives, people need to be pressuring parties into 
operating in new ways, and making clear that the urgency of the moment demands 
nothing less. The Greens have just done exactly that, and pointed the way. As 
they probably say in Richmond, bravo.
 