
An evangelical bishop has been elected mayor of Rio de Janeiro, as rightwing 
candidates acrossBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> strengthened 
their influence at the expense of a decimated Workers’ party.

Despite his past condemnation of Catholics and homosexuals, Marcelo Crivella 
of the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God won control of the city in a 
second round of municipal elections that underscoredthe rise of religious 
conservatism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/brazil-far-right-dilma-rousseff-impeachment>
 and the demise of the leftwing party that has dominated national politics for 
more than a decade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe240bf1e7571ec45f42dbf83da5b780958891fb%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil's%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%27s%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe240bf1e7571ec45f42dbf83da5b780958891fb%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Marcelo Crivella embraces his wife, Sylvia Jane, after his election victory. 
Photograph: Yasuyoshi Chiba/AFP/Getty Images 
The Workers’ party lost every mayoral post it contested on Sunday, including 
two in São Paulo state, where it was founded, and Recife, which was long 
considered a stronghold. This followed heavy defeats elsewhere in the first 
round of local elections earlier this month.

With Rousseff on the ropes, Brazil's far right sees an opening
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/brazil-far-right-dilma-rousseff-impeachment>
 It extends a horrendous period for the party, which was pushed out of power 
this year withthe impeachment of former president Dilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeached-president-brazilian-senate-michel-temer>
, and has subsequently seen its founder, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva,ordered to 
stand trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/29/lula-da-silva-trial-obstruction-petrobras-corruption>
 on charges of corruption and obstruction of justice in the Lava Jato (Car 
Wash) investigation into bribery at the state-run oil firm Petrobras. Both deny 
wrongdoing.

Although almost all the major parties were involved in the scandal, Michael 
Mohallem, law professor at the Getúlio Vargas Foundation, said the Workers’ 
party (PT) was worst hit and would be severely weakened in the run-up to the 
2018 presidential election.

“The PT suffered the most. It has regressed 20 years in terms of its number of 
votes. That is a direct impact of the Lava Jato operation,” he said.

Disgusted by the revelations of Lava Jato – which implicated dozens of 
politicians across the ideological spectrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeachment-brazil-what-you-need-to-know>
 in a massive kickback system – and tired of a lingering recession, voters 
nationwide showed their contempt for the entire political system. There was a 
record number of spoiled and blank ballots and many people failed to vote 
altogether despite a legal obligation to do so.

They also showed a willingness to choose candidates from outside the 
mainstream. In Belo Horizonte, the mayoral race was won by Alexandre Kalil, a 
former football club president from the little-known Humanist Solidarity party, 
who campaigned on a platform of not being a politician.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa3e79684bd2dfd8eb23a3b89fc6d436c36f5698%2F0_113_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil's%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%27s%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa3e79684bd2dfd8eb23a3b89fc6d436c36f5698%2F0_113_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
 Alexandre Kalil, a former football club president, greets people on the 
campaign trail in Belo Horizonte. Photograph: Amira Hissa/AP 
In Rio, the runoff was between candidates from two parties that were once 
considered on the fringe. Crivella, a conservative from the small Brazilian 
Republican party, won with 59.4%, comfortably ahead of Marcelo Freixo, a 
respected human rights activist with the leftwing Socialism and Freedom party. 
The third-placed candidate, knocked out in the first round, was also an 
evangelical conservative, Flávio Bolsonaro, whose father Jair – a national 
deputy – dedicated his impeachment vote to a dictatorship-era torturer.

Crivella, a former gospel singer and nephew of the founder of his powerful 
church, was running for the third time. His conservative religious background, 
as well as accusations of fraud, were cited as negative factors in his two 
previous attempts, but they may have worked in his favour this time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F118dc6d1dcc0e851fde25ca5d70c6d2fdd204393%2F0_364_3820_2292%2F3820.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil's%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%27s%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F118dc6d1dcc0e851fde25ca5d70c6d2fdd204393%2F0_364_3820_2292%2F3820.jpg>
 Supporters of Marcelo Freixo react after hearing their candidate lost the 
election to Marcelo Crivella in Rio de Janeiro. Photograph: Tasso 
Marcelo/AFP/Getty Images 
Evangelicals have long been increasing their influence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/01/brazil-evangelicals-politics-presidential-election>
 in traditionally Catholic Brazil. As well as growing numbers of followers 
(about a fifth of the population, according to the last census), their 
electoral impact has been boosted by recent campaign financing reforms, which 
restrict corporate donations but continue to allow churches to direct their 
congregations – and their TV and radio channels – towards favoured candidates.

They are also making greater inroads into the longer established parties that 
form the base of the centre-right coalition of President Michel Temer. The 
biggest gains in this month’s elections were made by the rightwing Brazilian 
Social Democratic party (PSDB), which won São Paulo. Temer’s Brazil Democratic 
Movement party largely held its ground to retain the biggest number of 
mayoralties in the country.

Several leaders of these parties, along with Crivella, who denies wrongdoing, 
have been reportedly named in testimony in the Lava Jato scandal, but they came 
out of the elections not only unscathed but victorious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f746a98860827a2f0cb23951f2d7030fdc102d7%2F0_32_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil's%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%27s%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f746a98860827a2f0cb23951f2d7030fdc102d7%2F0_32_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 People queue to vote in the elections which have seen a record number of 
spoiled or blank ballots. Photograph: Marcelo Sayao/EPA 
Some blame this on the bias of the media and the judges involved in the 
investigation. “Lava Jato contributes to discrediting the political system as a 
whole. The voters are finding themselves not believing in politics as a whole,” 
said João Feres Jr, of the Institute of Social and Political Studies at Rio de 
Janeiro State University. “The big winners here are the PSDB, who have taken 
control despite losing the [last presidential] election. They hold several key 
ministries in the Temer government, and are able to push through conservative 
reforms.”

Others expect the move to the right to continue now that fiscal conservatives 
and evangelical leaders hold more powerful positions. The rise of the religious 
right – and the more morally intrusive government that it may bring – generates 
fear and hope, depending on what side of the political spectrum you are on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d86f84aaac40411b4f5ce8db74f7cb51f48f55c%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil's%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%27s%20religious%20right%20on%20the%20march%20as%20bishop%20elected%20mayor%20of%20Rio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fevangelical-bishops-mayoral-win-in-rio-shows-rise-of-brazils-religious-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d86f84aaac40411b4f5ce8db74f7cb51f48f55c%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Marcelo Freixo thanks supporters after losing the Rio mayoral election to 
Crivella. Photograph: Tasso Marcelo/AFP/Getty Images 
At a Crivella rally last week, supporters were already in a celebratory mood, 
dancing to a campaign song which included countless mentions of Lava Jato. 
Everyone the Guardian spoke to played down the link between politics and 
religion, but all were members of the candidate’s church and expected bigger 
changes to come.

“The old interests are still in power, but Crivella is different. He’s pure,” 
said Karine Cruz, a student. “We’ll see more corrupt people going to prison. 
Lava Jato was an attempt to clear up politics. But it is only the beginning of 
something bigger.”

Rio – once famed as a party capital, then as an Olympic host – looks set to 
enter a conservative new era.

Additional reporting by Shanna Hanbury
 