
By midnight, the Olympic Stadium can’t have been a quarter-full. But in years 
to come, as this story grows in the telling, we’ll discover that the crowd must 
have been much larger than it seemed because so many Brazilians say that they 
were there. There was only one competition going on. The track finals were over 
and for an hour no one had anything to watch but the men’s pole vault, which 
had begun as a low comedy and finished, over three hours later, in high drama.

At the end of it, Thiago Braz da Silva, a 22-year-old Paulista, had won 
Brazil’s first men’s gold medal in athletics not just at these Olympics, but 
any Olympics since 1984. The celebrations of the few thousand who had stayed 
were as loud as any that will sound around Rio this week. They were still 
chanting his name in the stands long after he was gone.

Shaunae Miller's dive denies Allyson Felix 400m gold in dramatic final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/shaunae-miller-allyson-felix-400m-race-rio-2016-olympics>
To win it, Da Silva had to vault 6.03m, 10cm more than his personal best, and 
6cm more than the Olympic record set at London 2012 by the only other man still 
in the competition at that point, France’s Renaud Lavillenie. The air is rare 
up where Lavillenie lives, six metres and more above the ground, and a country 
mile ahead of his competitors. No one has ever vaulted higher than he did in 
2014, when he cleared 6.16m.

Here, he was trying to become the second man in history to win two Olympic 
titles, after the “vaulting vicar” Bob Richards in 1952 and ‘56. He looked 
bound to do it, too. After he made his third vault, at 5.93m, every one of the 
five men left in the field needed to equal or beat their personal best to stay 
in with him.

Da Silva was the only one to do it, on his second attempt. When he landed, 
Lavillenie swallowed, set himself to go again. The bar moved up to 5.98m, a 
height Lavillenie has cleared many times, but well beyond anything Da Silva had 
ever been near achieving. Which made what happened next all the more 
extraordinary.

Da Silva raised the stakes on Lavillenie by choosing to sit out that height 
and take a shot, instead, at 6.03m. You sensed, right then, that channels were 
being changed across the country. All of sudden this pole vault contest was 
showing in houses and bars across Brazil, and had the attention of everybody 
who could see a TV or hear a radio.

Da Silva made it at his second attempt, the best vault of his young life. 
Lavillenie had already failed his first two. So he had one shot left. As he 
stood there at the end of the runway, the crowd began to boo. Their wild 
excitement drove them to it. Until that point they had been cheering everything.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdavid-rudisha-shaunae--miller-thiago-da-silva-win-rio-olympics-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rudisha%2C%20Miller%20and%20Da%20Silva%20all%20win%20at%20Rio%20Olympics%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdavid-rudisha-shaunae--miller-thiago-da-silva-win-rio-olympics-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rudisha%2C%20Miller%20and%20Da%20Silva%20all%20win%20at%20Rio%20Olympics%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdavid-rudisha-shaunae--miller-thiago-da-silva-win-rio-olympics-video-highlights&media=>
Rudisha, Miller and Da Silva all win at Rio Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/16/david-rudisha-shaunae--miller-thiago-da-silva-win-rio-olympics-video-highlights>
But Lavillenie is a sportsman, and had even been applauding his own rivals a 
little earlier in the night. He refused to move, and flicked his thumb down to 
show his disapproval. They fell quiet, and he set off in his sprint, lowered 
his pole, pushed off and up into the air, 19 feet high and rising. But he 
brushed the bar with his knee, and started to sigh even as he began his journey 
back down to the mat.

The competition had run on so late because an ill wind was up in Rio, blowing 
nobody any good. The sailors struggled in 40 knot gusts out in Guanabara Bay, 
and across town at the Aquatics Centre, the springboard divers had been 
buffeted off their boards. At the Olympic Stadium, it was measured at a force 
seven on the beaufort scale, or a “moderate gale”, so stiff that when that you 
needed to lean forward to walk into it.

Not ideal conditions, then, for the already perilous business of pole 
vaulting. By the time the final started at 8.35pm, the wind had dropped a 
little but a torrential rain storm had just arrived. Two men tried to vault the 
opening height of 5.50m. Neither made it. A third, an ornery Argentine named 
German Chiaraviglio, threw down his pole before he’d made it to the end of the 
runway.

At that point, the organisers wisely decided to call the whole thing off for 
the foreseeable, and the vaulters broke for the cover of the ready room. The 
Olympic stadium has a lovely swooping roof which been ingeniously designed to 
provide no cover whatsoever from the weather, so the few thousand who had 
turned up to watch were soaked through.

After an hour, the pole vault was restarted from scratch, after much mop work 
on the track. Unfortunately no one had thought to dry off the mat, so the first 
man up, China’s Changrui Xue, landed with an enormous splash in the huge puddle 
on the far side of the bar. Judges awarded him 6.5 for the dive.

Lavillenie, meanwhile, took a seat over by the grandstand and had a friendly 
chat with his his coach. He could afford to bide his time, since it had started 
raining again and at this point the hottest contest was a blazing row between 
Chiaraviglio and assorted men in blazers about the conditions.

Lavillenie seemed more absorbed by the men’s 800m final, and strode over to 
the edge of the track to roar and clap for David Rudishaas he hurtled into the 
home straight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/athletics-david-rudisha-olympic-800m-title>
. Lavillenie didn’t get interested in his own competition until the bar reached 
5.75m. At the last European Championships this tactic somewhat backfired when 
Lavillenie passed the first four heights, came in at 5.75m, and duly failed all 
three attempts.

Here, though, the plan seemed like it was going to work rather better. By the 
time Lavillenie entered Shawnacy Barber, the man who beat him at the World 
Championships last year, was already out at 5.65m. And as Lavillenie cruised 
through the heights, 5.75m, 5.85m, 5.93m, the others fell away.

All but one, anyway, the kid from Sao Paolo competing in his very first 
Olympics, who had never even won a Diamond League meeting, much less a medal at 
the World Championships. Or Brazil’s new national hero, as he is now.
 