
The Brazilian brutalist Paulo Mendes da Rocha 
<http://www.archdaily.com/tag/paulo-mendes-da-rocha/>, an architect known for 
his massive concrete forms and daring structural acrobatics, has won RIBA’s 
prestigious royal gold medal for 2017.

A figure far removed from the usual cast of international “starchitects”, the 
87 year old has spent the past six decades building a body of work, primarily 
in his home country, that stands out for its force of expression and bold 
structural power, married with finely crafted detail.

“His work has a courage and clarity few can match,” said architect Neil 
Gillespie, who nominated Mendes da Rocha for the accolade. “His structures are 
daring and joyous, his use of concrete bold and innovative. There is a quality 
that renders it timeless.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fbrazilian-architect-paulo-mendes-da-rocha-wins-riba-royal-gold-medal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff029cd084b86734744c2f9fe33abab13d99be11c%2F0_157_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazilian%20architect%20Paulo%20Mendes%20da%20Rocha%20wins%20RIBA%20royal%20gold%20medal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fbrazilian-architect-paulo-mendes-da-rocha-wins-riba-royal-gold-medal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazilian%20architect%20Paulo%20Mendes%20da%20Rocha%20wins%20RIBA%20royal%20gold%20medal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fbrazilian-architect-paulo-mendes-da-rocha-wins-riba-royal-gold-medal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff029cd084b86734744c2f9fe33abab13d99be11c%2F0_157_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Far from the world of the starchitect … Paulo Mendes da Rocha. Photograph: Ana 
Ottoni/EPA 
I have always been attracted to … the humility of simple things. Everything 
superfluous is irritating

Mendes da Rocha’s buildings have an archaic, almost primal air, with huge fins 
of concrete possessing a raw, visceral roughness. He shot to prominence at the 
age of 30 with his design for thePaulistano Athletic Club 
<http://architectuul.com/architecture/the-paulistano-athletic-club> in São 
Paulo, which consists of six concrete blades supporting a thin circular 
concrete roof supported by 12 slender cables. Built in 1958, it was a startling 
sight – a remarkable circus balancing act that pushed the limits of what was 
physically possible.

His Brazilian pavilion <https://uk.pinterest.com/pin/400257485609605599/> for 
the Expo 70 in Osaka was equally experimental, suspending a gigantic concrete 
space frame in the air, balanced on the ground at a single point. As architect 
John McAslan, who seconded the nomination, put it: “His engineering 
intelligence has always equalled his formal originality.” It was an outlook he 
learned from his father, who was an engineer and designer of hydraulic works 
and port facilities. Mendes da Rocha has said his father taught him to respect 
“technique”, deriving his forms from coherent structural ideas.

That same originality can be seen in his Brazilian public buildings in the 
1970s and 80s – from the Estádio Serra Dourada and the Museum of Contemporary 
Art at the University of São Paulo in 1975, to the Saint Peter Chapel in 1987 
and the widely celebrated Pinacoteca do Estado gallery (1993), winner of the 
Mies van der Rohe award.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fbrazilian-architect-paulo-mendes-da-rocha-wins-riba-royal-gold-medal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22aad2c3bcc74887df74916ad859e8b7a430717e%2F0_0_3499_2357%2F3499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazilian%20architect%20Paulo%20Mendes%20da%20Rocha%20wins%20RIBA%20royal%20gold%20medal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fbrazilian-architect-paulo-mendes-da-rocha-wins-riba-royal-gold-medal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazilian%20architect%20Paulo%20Mendes%20da%20Rocha%20wins%20RIBA%20royal%20gold%20medal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fbrazilian-architect-paulo-mendes-da-rocha-wins-riba-royal-gold-medal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22aad2c3bcc74887df74916ad859e8b7a430717e%2F0_0_3499_2357%2F3499.jpg>
 ‘Engineering intelligence’ … São Paulo’s FIESP cultural centre, 1997. 
Photograph: Nelson Kon/RIBA 
Last year he completed the long-awaited Lisbon Coach Museum 
<http://www.uncubemagazine.com/blog/10731003>, which stands as a gargantuan 
concrete hangar near Belém. It is one of his few works outside Brazil.

This has been a bumper year of gongs for Mendes da Rocha, picking up Japan’s 
prestigiousPraemium Imperiale <http://www.praemiumimperiale.org/en/> award as 
well as Venice Biennale Golden Lion for lifetime achievement. The Venice jurors 
praised his “astonishing consistency” and “structural genius”.

But his haul of medals – he also won the Pritzker prize in 2006 – is unlikely 
to change his down-to-earth approach. “Unlike many people who are afraid of 
poverty,” he wrote in 2003, “I have always been attracted to it, to simple 
things, without knowing why. Not hardship, but the humility of simple things. I 
think everything superfluous is irritating. Everything that is not necessary 
becomes grotesque, especially in our time.”
 