
Brazilian police have arrested a prominent community journalist in the Alemão 
favela complex ofRio de Janeiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rio-de-janeiro>, underlining the 
authorities’ often weak respect for media freedom, particularly when it comes 
to coverage of poor neighbourhoods.

Rene Silva, the founder of Voz da Comunidades 
<http://www.vozdascomunidades.com.br/> (Community Voice), was detained 
alongside a photographer, Renato Moura, on Saturday night as they attempted to 
report on the forced relocation of residents who had reoccupied their 
demolished homes in the Skol community.

Police first seized Moura to prevent him from taking pictures of the 
evictions. Silva used his mobile phone to live-broadcast what was happening, 
until he was handcuffed, pepper-sprayed and taken to the police station where 
he was charged with contempt of authority and trespass.

When other community activists attempted to record what was happening, they 
too came under assault from police using teargas and rubber bullets. Video of 
the start of the incident shows police harassing the journalist and knocking a 
phone from his hand.

Silva said he had only been doing his job. “The police wanted to prevent our 
access. They didn’t want to let us get there. We insisted, we explained we were 
media, but they didn’t want to allow it,” he told the Guardian.

Another reporter, Raul Santiago, from the Papo Reto Collective, noted that 
such intimidation was common andcalled on the police 
<https://www.facebook.com/ColetivoPapoReto/posts/995412210585358> to stop their 
repression of independent voices.

Community journalists have reported from the frontline of the conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/olympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela>
 between police and gang members – a conflict that has resulted in the deaths 
of numerous residents, often at the hands of the authorities.

Silva became one of their best-known figures  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/18/teenagers-changing-world-malala-yousafzai>
when he live-tweeted a huge military and police operation to “pacify” the 
Alemão favela in 2010.

Media freedom organisations called on the authorities to respect freedom of 
expression. “All journalists must be allowed to report freely on sensitive 
topics without fear of retribution,” said Andrew Downie, Brazil representative 
of theCommittee to Protect Journalists <https://www.cpj.org/>. “The CPJ has 
consistently called on authorities to put an end to these kind of procedures by 
law enforcement officers

“In addition to ensuring the rule of law, a key part of policing is 
guaranteeing the safety of all members of the media covering public protests.”

Brazil has long been one of the most dangerous countries in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/environmental-activist-murders-global-witness-report>
 for journalists, environmentalists and social activists.According to the CPJ 
<https://cpj.org/blog/2016/09/in-brazil-journalists-face-injury-from-violent-pro.php>
, attacks on the press have increased in the past year as a result of 
increasing political polarisation.

Since 2013 there have been more than 300 attacks 
<http://www.abraji.org.br/?id=90&id_noticia=3593> on journalists attempting to 
cover protests in Brazil, mostly by police, according to theBrazilian 
Association of Investigative Journalism <http://www.abraji.org.br/>. 
 