
It felt as if every one of the 11 players on the pitch was wearing the wrong 
boots. After taking the 1970World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> finals by storm, 
Brazil were faltering at a crucial moment. After only 19 minutes of their 
semi-final, Pelé and co had fallen behind to Uruguay, courtesy of a mis-hit 
Luis Cubilla shot that made the goalkeeper Felix look silly. Worse, the team 
looked overanxious. Fortunately, a moment of brilliance by Clodoaldo resulted 
in an equaliser that brought huge relief at the stroke of half-time but still 
did not spare Brazil from the mother of all dressing downs by their manager, 
Mário Zagallo.

“Zagallo gave us bollocking in the dressing room – I had never seen him that 
angry,” says Carlos Alberto,captain of that fabled side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2014/may/21/brazil-carlos-alberto-1970-brick-world-cup-video>
. “He kept saying that we should forget all that talk about the past. During 
preparations for that game the press kept on talking about theGhost of 1950 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/feb/18/world-cup-25-stunning-moments-no2-uruguay-brazil-1950-scott-murray>
 and even a group of experienced players like ours were affected. Imagine these 
boys now.”

In the second half, Brazil scored twice to complete a comeback that may not 
have properly avenged the famous defeat on home soil by their South American 
neighbours but still sent them to the final and brought some kind of closure to 
Zagallo, who witnessed the loss in Rio as a territorial army soldier brought in 
to provide security for the 1950 World Cup games. The anecdote, nonetheless, is 
used by Carlos Alberto to exemplify the pressure that the Neymar generation are 
already under and that will increase come Thursday, when Brazilopen their 
campaign against Croatia in São Paulo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2014/may/23/-sp-world-cup-2014-brazil-results-fixtures-live-scores-tables-schedule>
.

Unlike the glorious 1970 team, who contained first-team survivors from the 
disastrous campaign that was Brazil’s participation in England in 1966 (for the 
first time in 32 years they failed to clear the group stages), the class of 
2014 arrive home largely untested at the biggest stage. Of the23 men called up 
by Luiz Felipe Scolari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/05/brazil-squad-2014-world-cup> 
last month, only six have experienced a World Cup – goalkeeper Júlio César, 
centre-back Thiago Silva, full-backs Dani Alves and Maicon, as well as 
midfielder Ramires.

Since Brazil were spared the league-formatted South American qualifiers for 
2014, most of the group can only draw on last year’sConfederations Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/confederations-cup> for competitive 
football in Brazil’s colours.

So the talk of the 1950 final defeat adds to the pressure. That the Uruguayans 
wereclose to upsetting Brazil in the warm-up tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/27/brazil-uruguay-confederations-cup-report>
 will not help either – the centre-back partnership of Silva and David Luiz had 
a nightmare afternoon in Belo Horizonte and Brazil were grateful to Júlio César 
for saving a penalty in the 14th minute. “Uruguay are the only team to have 
rattled Brazil in the last few months,” says Brazil legend andGuardian and 
Observer columnist Zico <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zico>. “They 
didn’t allow theSeleção to impose their rhythm and pushed Brazil back in a way 
that Spain couldn’t. I actually wouldn’t like to see Brazil playing Uruguay in 
the World Cup.”

Naturally, supporters are wondering how Brazil will react to so much history 
and expectation. In the buildup to the tournament, Scolari has focused on 
players’ responsibilities, while appealing to national pride, a formula similar 
to the one he used to spur Portugal into their first major final at Euro 2004 – 
never mind that Luís Figo and co werebeaten in that match at home by Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/jul/05/euro2004.sport1>.

Carlos Alberto Parreira, who has had two stints as national manager and is now 
acting as Scolari’s de facto deputy, has praised the hunger shown byNeymar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/neymar> and his team-mates. “This group 
might be formed by a lot of players who have not been to a World Cup but they 
are aware of the opportunity presented to them in the form of a chance to win 
it at home,” he says.

“They want it – it’s quite different from working with players that have 
already been at the top,” explains Parreira, who oversaw the comedown in 2006 
when a side boasting several 2002 World Cup winners, including an overweight 
Ronaldo, succumbed toan apathetic defeat by France in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/jul/03/worldcup2006.match>.

Brazil are in a much better place since Scolari took over in November 2012 – 
they had been pickpocketedby Mexico in the London Olympics final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/11/mexico-olympic-football-gold-brazil>
 and were then enduring a three-year dry spell against established sides, in 
which a flattering 3-2 defeat by Germany in Stuttgart in 2011 had rung an 
orchestra of alarm bells. Spirits were lifted by victories over Italy and Spain 
last year but the apprehension remains, thanks also to a draw that put the
Seleção on a possible collision course with either Spain or Holland in the 
first round of the knockout stages.

“We know Brazilians always expect the Seleção to win and it wouldn’t be 
different now that we have a second chance to lift the World Cup at home,” 
admits the captain, Silva. “But we need to make sure the pressure doesn’t turn 
into something too bad. A lot of people are still talking about 1950 and the 
only way we will write a new chapter will be by winning in 2014.”

As the biggest idol in the Brazilian team, another level of expectation weighs 
on Neymar. After a first season in Barcelona that failed to ignite La Liga and 
the Champions League, the World Cup has become an even more defining moment for 
the 22-year-old, who has scored 31 goals in 48 matches forBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> in the past four years. “The 
pressure to perform follows you since you play youth tournaments. I’d rather 
enjoy the experience of playing in a World Cup than to fear it. I’ve had this 
dream ever since I was a little kid.”

Awarded the tournament in 2007 without any competitors thanks to much horse 
trading at Fifa, Brazil promised a tournament that would not be marred by the 
desperation shown by football’s ruling body while dealing with the South 
Africans in 2010. But the plan to have an event largely bankrolled by private 
investments has backfired spectacularly: delays and Brazilian bureaucracy have 
sent costs soaring and the 2014 tournament will be the most expensive of all 
time. Fewer than half the non-football related projects will actually be 
anywhere near completion by the time Brazil and Croatia kick-off on Thursday.

That was petrol poured on the fire of unrest that has definitely set its 
sights on the tournament, to the point where public support for the World Cup 
fell from more than 75% of Brazilians in 2007 to 52% earlier this year.Violent 
protests have erupted in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/16/anti-world-cup-protests-across-brazil>
since last year.

Although Brazil’s players were quick to defend the democratic right to dissent 
in a country that spent a third of the 20th century under some form of 
dictatorship, the feeling is their performance over the next few weeks will 
have a strong influence on the popular mood beyond the national enthusiasm for 
the game.

So far, there is a strange and subdued atmosphere in some cities in Brazil. 
The journey from the Tom Jobim International Airport to downtown Rio de Janeiro 
is marked by heavy traffic and posters reminding travellers of Brazil’s 
long-dreamed second shot at a home World Cup. The city used to be covered in 
the national colours of green and yellow every four years.

It can throw a hell of a party, though, but that more than ever will depend on 
how Scolari’s side fares on the pitch. For Neymar and co, the pressure is on.
 