
Kuala Lumpur in the final week of May 2002 was enjoying what some may call 
World Cup fever by proxy. In a matter of days, the firstWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> on Asian soil would 
kick off with the holders, France, facing newbies Senegal in South Korea, the 
country sharing hosting privileges with Japan. As part of their preparations to 
synchronise players’ and technical staffs’ body clocks to Far Eastern time 
zones, the Brazil squad had stopped in Malaysia on their way to the tournament, 
where they would also fulfil commercial commitments by playing a warm-up 
friendly against the Malaysian national team, after a big cheque had landed at 
the CBF headquarters in Rio.

Following the caravan was the press corps, including the army of people 
regularly shipped by TV Globo to whereverBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> are playing. Among the troupe 
collecting bags and trying to negotiate passage from the luggage to the 
arrivals hall was Paulo Roberto Falcão. Age had treated him well, even though 
his once long crop of hair had been considerably deforested by the passing of 
time. Falcão was exhausted after the long-haul flight from Barcelona – from 
where the whole circus had departed following a bizarre friendly against 
Andorra arranged by the sponsor Nike.

It had been a mismatch so pointless to World Cup preparations that even Falcão 
had struggled to refrain from openly criticising it, ultimately only holding 
his tongue because his pundit job for TV Globo, who owned the World Cup 
broadcasting rights, walked hand in hand with the Brazilian FA. He was not in 
the best of tempers, therefore, and his mind was probably wandering somewhere 
else when he handed his passport to the immigration officer. Said officer took 
several looks at passport and passport holder. Suddenly, the official fired the 
question: “How come Brazil lost that game?”

Falcão does not remember what he answered, but the immigration officer had 
acted as an unlikely trigger for old emotions.That game. THAT game. The game 
that defined the most feted group of Brazilian footballers since Pelé’s 
generation, but the tournament still seemed unfinished to Falcão. It just 
refused to go away. Twenty years had passed since the 1982 World Cup but the 
tournament still seemed unfinished to Falcão.

So it arguably did to a whole nation, although the intensity of the 1982 
outrage had calmed over the two decades. “That episode in Kuala Lumpur was just 
different. It was the realisation that the impact of that World Cup was much 
stronger than any of us players could even imagine. But that question also got 
me thinking again about what had taken place 20 years before. It’s not that I 
had ever put those events to the back of my mind but all of a sudden they came 
flooding back.” A nudge was all it was, but it would still take another decade 
for the man once known as “the King of Rome” to finally face his demons.

The 1982 World Cup had significant format changes from 1978. The number of 
teams had increased from 16 to 24, which forced changes to the format of the 
knockout stages. The best two teams from each of the six groups would advance 
and then be bundled into four groups of three for a round-robin. Brazil had 
been drawn in Group Six alongside the Soviet Union, Scotland and newcomers New 
Zealand. They would be based in Seville. Thanks to their international 
exploits, the Seleção arrived in Spain with a fearsome reputation.

A crowd of 68,000 turned out for Brazil’s debut at the Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán 
against the Soviet Union. Three days earlier, though, Brazil had been dealt a 
blow: during practice, Careca had suffered a serious thigh injury and had been 
ruled out of the tournament. Telê Santana decided to give Serginho the No9 
shirt. History would be unkind to the controversial centre-forward: Sérgio 
Bernardino stuck out like a sore thumb in that team full offantasistas, but to 
dismiss his more workmanlike attributes is to undermine his ability as a 
footballer. Serginho still figures as São Paulo FC’s all-time top goalscorer, 
with 242 goals in 401 games, and, although he was never as graceful on the 
pitch as many of his contemporaries, he still managed to be a threat with both 
feet, in the air and at set pieces.

But apart from questions about his tactical suitability within the team, there 
were also fears about Serginho’s behaviour. He had missed the chance to play in 
the 1978 World Cup thanks to a 14-month suspension for kicking a linesman and 
in the 1981 Campeonato Brasileiro final he caused a national outcry for putting 
a boot to the goalkeeper Leão’s face. The same Leão who had also been called up 
to the World Cup squad. Needless to say, Santana felt it necessary to have 
several pep talks with Serginho in order to try to tame that side of his 
character and so prevent the striker from adding to his collection of red cards 
– a move that, in hindsight, would actually neuter his performances.

With 34 minutes gone against the USSR a long-distance speculative shot by 
Andrei Bal went pathetically through the Brazil goalkeeper Waldir Peres’s legs. 
Eight out of the 11 players that Santana had selected to start, Peres included, 
were playing their first World Cup game and nerves seemed to have got the 
better of them. But in the second half they started putting more pressure on 
their opponents.

In the 65th minute, Sócrates escaped two markers and scored with a wondrous 
long-distance shot. Then, three minutes from time, in a sequence of moves that 
echoed 1970, came pure magic: Isidoro stole the ball near the Soviet box and 
rolled it to Falcão who instead of having a go opened up his legs, 
wrong-footing half of the defence and allowing Éder to pounce and hit a raking 
volley past the great Rinat Dasayev.

Brazil had survived the debut jitters and would face Scotland, who had 
assembled a squad that was arguably even stronger than in 1978. To everybody’s 
surprise, the Scots found themselves in front after 18 minutes, courtesy of a 
powerful shot by David Narey, who legend says was mockingly told off afterwards 
by his team-mates for making Brazil angry. There was 15 minutes of relative 
unease among the Brazilians after falling behind for the second time running 
before Zico hit a perfect free-kick to equalise. Four minutes into the second 
half Oscar headed Brazil in front, and Éder scored the third after 65 minutes 
by chipping over a disheartened Alan Rough. Falcão completed a rout that 
pundits in Brazil believed had made theSeleção favourites for the title.

In all fairness, it was easy to get carried away. While Brazil were unbeaten 
and had already qualified for the second stage, other traditionally strong 
teams were struggling. Argentina had been beaten by Belgium in the opening 
game; West Germany were humbled by Algeria; and Spain were held to a 1-1 draw 
by the debutant Honduras. Only England had managed to look good, in a 3-1 
victory over France.

Within 30 minutes of the meeting with New Zealand on 23 June, Brazil were 2-0 
up thanks to two from Zico. Falcão scored the third and Serginho finally opened 
his account to complete a comprehensive win. At the end of the group stage, 
Brazil had qualified with maximum points for the first time in three World 
Cups. Elsewhere only England had managed to win all three group games but even 
their impressive displays weren’t enough to strip the mantle of favourites from 
the Brazilians.

To get to the semi-finals Brazil would have to see off Argentina and Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy>. In 1980 Italian football was 
plunged head-first into controversy when a match-fixing scandal involving five 
top-flight teams was uncovered. Players were arrested in dressing rooms and 
investigations led to severe punishments. Among those banned was Paolo Rossi, 
then the most expensive player in the world. Initially suspended for three 
years, he had his suspension reduced to two on appeal.

That meant Rossi did not play a single game until two months before the World 
Cup and few people in Italy expected Enzo Bearzot to include the striker in his 
World Cup squad. Bearzot did more than that: Rossi was named in the starting XI 
for the first game. His impact, however, was negligible. Italy drew all their 
group stage matches and neither of their two goals was scored by Rossi. Their 
campaign had been pitiful and they only managed to edge past Cameroon for the 
second spot in Group One on goals scored. Lambasted by their media, the Italian 
players decided to stop talking to the press and the mood was sombre by the 
time they came to prepare for their match against Argentina.

A 2-1 win suggested the Azzurri were at last starting to click. The 
Brazilians, however, were understandably more worried about facing a wounded 
Argentina. After the defeat by Italy, Diego Maradona and co would have to beat 
their neighbours to stay alive and that was enough to focus the minds of the
Seleção. Just before kick-off, Argentina’s midfielder Daniel Bertoni, who 
played for Fiorentina and had a cordial relationship with Falcão, whispered a 
warning to his fellow Italy-based South American. “Mind your legs, mate.”

The match did not quite become a pitched battle but it was still marred by 
some ugly moments. It was also a cracking game. Zico, and Serginho put Brazil 
2-0 up before a Zico pass split the Argentina defence for Júnior to slot the 
ball through the goalkeeper’s legs; he celebrated the third goal with some 
samba steps for the crowd. Ramón Díaz pulled back a consolation for Argentina 
in the 89th minute. It was a consummate performance. All that separated Brazil 
from a third consecutive World Cup semi-final, therefore, was Italy.

“You play there. Is there anything you want to say about them?” Santana had 
waited until the end of his team talk to address Falcão. Of all the 22 
Brazilian players at the 1982 World Cup, the midfielder had most reason to feel 
anxious about the game to be played on 5 July. He played for Roma and would be 
facing well-known opponents. And Falcão was worried that his team-mates had got 
the wrong idea after Italy stumbled through the group stage. “Some of the lads 
were teasing me and saying it must have been quite easy to earn a living in 
Serie A,” he remembers. “But I did tell them Italy were a much better team than 
their results suggested.”

Rossi had yet to score and the Italian media were screaming for Bearzot to 
drop him. The striker’s confidence had not been helped by Brazil’s momentum. 
“They did not look from this planet,” Rossi would say. “That Brazil side was 
the best I had seen. Those players could have worn blindfolds and they would 
still have known where each other were. As for me, I felt like I was still 
learning to play football again after the two-year suspension.”

In the other camp, the mood couldn’t be more different. “In the dressing room 
before the game against Italy, Telê mentioned the fact that a draw would be 
enough to see us through – but only to remind us not to relax,” Zico recalls. 
“He would never tell us to hold back. Our commitment was always to go for the 
win. That was the true Brazilian way.”

The crowd packed into the Estadi de Sarrià in Barcelona had barely taken their 
seats after the national anthems when Rossi scored. He had broken his duck just 
when the team needed him most.

Zico, chased relentlessly by Claudio Gentile, who was like a second shadow, 
would finish the first half with his shirt torn after it had been tugged so 
much by his marker. But in a rare escape in the 12th minute, Zico provided 
Sócrates with a perfect assist for the equaliser.

The Italians, though, were rattling Brazil and disturbing the fluidity of 
movement in midfield that had been so crucial to the previous success. Under 
pressure from the swarming defence, Cerezo managed to mis-hit a pass in the 
27th minute that worked as an assist for Rossi, who fired the ball past Waldir 
Peres to put Italy back into the lead.

The fact that Brazil could still rely on the draw was encouraging for those 
watching the game but the dressing room had a charged atmosphere at half-time. 
Frustration and anger were accompanied by Cerezo’s tears. The midfielder was so 
distraught and only calmed down after a long pep-talk by Sócrates.

On 68 minutes, the momentum swung again. A great sequence of moves by Zico and 
Cerezo pulled Italy’s defence out of shape and opened space for Falcão, who 
fired a piledriver past Dino Zoff to equalise. His emotional celebration became 
almost as iconic as the powerful left-foot shot that looked to be sending 
Brazil to the semis. With a jugular vein almost popping from his neck, Falcão 
ran towards the Brazilian bench to celebrate and almost choked on the gum he 
had been chewing. “Some of the Italian players would later ask why I was 
scowling at them during the celebration, but I was just trying desperately to 
clear my throat,” he remembers with a smile.

With the game level, it seemed certain that the Seleção would now settle down 
and play with an eye on securing the draw, but for six minutes they gave no 
impression of wanting to change tactics. Santana replaced Serginho with Paulo 
Isidoro, which would in theory balance the defence a bit better, but Brazil 
still pressed for a winner, with the right-back Leandro playing almost as a 
centre-forward.

Italy’s creative midfielder Giancarlo Antognoni used the space created by 
Leandro pushing forward to win his team’s first corner of the game, in the 74th 
minute. He took it and the poor clearance fell to Marco Tardelli. His shot was 
nothing special but still made it to the Brazilian box, where Rossi had been 
left alone by a botched attempt to spring the offside trap; with time and space 
on his side, the striker made no mistake to secure his hat-trick, becoming only 
the second player ever to do so against theSeleção in a World Cup game.

Brazil were once again on the end of a huge World Cup upset and the shock of 
their exit hit them and their fans hard. Just like in 1950, when the team lost 
to Uruguay in the Maracanã when a draw would have secured the trophy, they had 
woken up on cloud nine only to crash from the heights by the day’s end. But 
while recriminations immediately began, with Cerezo and Serginho – two black 
players – becoming targets of particular criticism, the general reaction could 
not have been more different to 32 years before.

While the generation of Barbosa, Zizinho and Ademir had reached a World Cup 
final, the class of 1982 had fallen even further short; but the difference was 
that they had fired the public’s imagination to the point that they are often 
spoken in more revered tones than a squad that actually won the trophy – the 
1994 team, much to the irritation of players from that generation such as 
Carlos “Dunga” Verri.

“There is nothing wrong in losing with dignity, it is a part of the game,” 
Zico says. “We were obviously saddened by the result but everybody had clear 
consciences. TheSeleção were going home but we had stood by our convictions 
till the end. We didn’t allow the win-at-any-costs mentality to compromise our 
belief in the beautiful game.”

At the press conference, Santana was applauded when he arrived and when he 
departed. The manager did not offer any excuses and simply gave credit to 
Italy. In the desolation that had been the Brazilian dressing room, Santana had 
told the players they had to be proud: “The whole world was enchanted by you. 
Be aware of that.”

The fans also acknowledged it. They headed en masse to Rio de Janeiro’s 
international airport to welcome the team back home. Santana was particularly 
moved by the reception but, while he refused to publicly acknowledge his grief, 
especially when consoling some of his distraught players, inside the manager 
was heartbroken. So heartbroken that just a few weeks after returning from 
Spain he accepted an offer to work in Saudi Arabia. “It was a self-imposed 
exile for my father who had been really shaken by that defeat,” explains Renê, 
his son.

Critics, nevertheless, lashed out at Santana for not holding his players back 
after the second equaliser, an argument that over the years has morphed into a 
kind of “exhibit A” of Brazil’s tactical naivety and their tendency to concede 
as often as they scored. The main opposition to that line of thought was 
Falcão, who was in a much better position to judge the reasons behinds the 
“Sarrià Tragedy” – the nickname the Brazilian press adopted to describe the 
match – than any commentator.

“I find it laughable that people say that our team couldn’t defend properly,” 
he says. “In five matches in that World Cup we scored 15 goals and conceded 
five. Against Italy we made more tackles than the Italians and they scored 
their third goal when we had pretty much everybody back in our area for that 
corner. We lost to a team that seized their opportunities, but even some of my 
Italian team-mates couldn’t believe theAzzurri had knocked us out.”

Few people felt that defeat as deeply as Falcão, who would have to resume his 
life in Italy. The defeat also hit Sócrates hard. In order to arrive at the 
tournament in perfect condition he had quit smoking and drinking for several 
months; after the defeat in Barcelona, he fell off the wagon spectacularly. 
Twenty-two years later in Leeds, Sócrates would still struggle to express his 
feelings about that game. “We had a hell of a team and played with happiness. 
Then we came across the Italians. Rossi had three touches and scored a 
hat-trick. Football as we know it died that day.”

Falcão tried to exorcise his own demons by releasing Why Did We Lose? – a 
collection of mini-essays by him and some team-mates in commemoration of the 
30th anniversary of the Italy game. It ends with a touching sentiment. “We lost 
that game but won a place in history,” wrote Falcão. “Of course all of us 
suffered a great deal with the defeat but I am also grateful that I was part of 
one the greatest games in the history of football and part of a team that is 
associated with great football. It was a privilege to play alongside those 
guys.”

This is an edited extract from Shocking Brazil, Six Games That Shook The World 
Cup by Fernando Duarte, available now from Arena Sport Books at £12.99 from all 
good bookshops andwww.birlinn.co.uk  <http://www.birlinn.co.uk/>
 