
When the prophet Isaiah forecast the time when “the ears of the deaf shall be 
unstopped”, it’s unlikely that he was far-sighted enough to be thinking of 
tonight’sChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> schedule. But 
in Breaking the Silence Live, viewers will witness the moment when doctors at 
Manchester Royal Infirmary switch on for the first time cochlear implants that 
could restore hearing.

Although success would clearly be heartwarming (and audiological clinics can 
expect a deluge of requests from hearing-impaired people for the procedure) 
some of us planning to watch might also find the prospect slightly 
spine-chilling.

What is the benefit of asking a patient to undergo such an intensely private 
moment of discovery or disappointment on national TV? Has theNHS funding crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> reached the point that clinics are 
having to subsidise treatment through broadcast fees?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6cd474db5cb708c3d35cdd839ad2fc6c950b65%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20the%20Silence%20Live%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20set%20to%20make%20deaf%20people%20hear%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20the%20Silence%20Live%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20set%20to%20make%20deaf%20people%20hear%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6cd474db5cb708c3d35cdd839ad2fc6c950b65%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 The switch-on … viewers will witness Fiona having her cochlear implant turned 
on – but what if it fails to deliver its promise? Photograph: Channel 4 
Nervousness increases because Channel 4 has form in this genre of surprising 
scenarios offered as live entertainment. In Russian Roulette (2003), the 
illusionist Derren Brown appeared to be gambling with his life by using logic 
and psychology to calculate which chamber of a gun contained a live bullet. He 
was followed in 2006 by Going Cold Turkey Live – in which heroin addicts were 
shown nightly as they underwent withdrawal – before an unofficial trilogy of 
medical-jeopardy TV was completed by Surgery Live (2011), where heart, brain, 
stomach and pituitary operations were transmitted as they were happening.

It is no coincidence that all these programmes were screened by Channel 4, 
which is also showing Breaking the Silence Live. Set up with a remit to be more 
daring than other terrestrial channels, the network has consistently been less 
hidebound by guidelines and regulators. And, if you want to take risks on TV, 
live shows are, in one way, the most sensible environment. The absence of 
material that can be previewed prevents the pressure for re-editing or removal 
from the schedules that can affect contentious pre-recorded shows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff4705b73786b1b5444eab1c4bd4b955c3dedcfd%2F0_27_680_408%2F680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20the%20Silence%20Live%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20set%20to%20make%20deaf%20people%20hear%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20the%20Silence%20Live%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20set%20to%20make%20deaf%20people%20hear%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff4705b73786b1b5444eab1c4bd4b955c3dedcfd%2F0_27_680_408%2F680.jpg>
 Jeopardy TV … Derren Brown playing Russian Roulette live on Channel 4. 
Photograph: Channel 4 
The level of actual hazard in Brown’s Russian Roulette stunt was subsequently 
questioned bya statement from police in Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/oct/08/broadcasting.channel41> (where 
it was filmed) that the production company had given an undertaking to use 
blank ammunition. This suggests that Brown was either misleading the audience, 
or had misled the police. Even so, that broadcast – like Surgery Live and Going 
Cold Turkey Live – tantalised viewers with the oxymoronic possibility of a live 
death.

Breaking the Silence Live is clearly the most benign idea, as the biggest risk 
is that an implant may not work (and the percentage chance of that eventuality 
can presumably be predicted from off-screen clinical experience).

Even so, the transmission does raise some ethical dilemmas, and so I put them 
to the production team. They stressed that the clinical procedure would never 
be affected by the needs of TV. Whereas I had feared that patients might have 
been persuaded to wait until Channel 4 was ready to see if they could hear, the 
usual gap between surgery and switch-on (there is a standard delay to let the 
device embed) has been observed.

In choosing the patients to take part, consideration has also been given to 
the likelihood of success in their case and their mental robustness to deal 
with a setback being witnessed by millions. And, while many would sympathise if 
the NHS were using Channel 4 as emergency subsidy, only a small fee has been 
paid to the hospital to cover additional staffing and cleaning costs caused by 
the presence of the TV team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8a57724c1914e085632087178b920d3ca918c5b%2F0_289_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20the%20Silence%20Live%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20set%20to%20make%20deaf%20people%20hear%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20the%20Silence%20Live%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20set%20to%20make%20deaf%20people%20hear%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fbreaking-the-silence-live-the-tv-show-set-to-make-deaf-people-hear-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8a57724c1914e085632087178b920d3ca918c5b%2F0_289_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 In choosing the patients, consideration has been given to the likelihood of 
success – and their mental robustness. Photograph: Channel 4 
On the question of why the stories could not have been filmed for transmission 
in the more normal way of factual TV, the producers accept that the buzz of 
live jeopardy makes the show more attractive, but also see it as an experiment 
in a new way of making docs about docs.

These answers satisfied my qualms about what might happen. I still can’t quite 
see what either the patient or a viewer would gain from witnessing a cochlear 
implant fail to deliver its promise, but – beside Russian Roulette, Going Cold 
Turkey Live and Surgery Live – Breaking the Silence Live sounds as if it has 
listened hard to the concerns raised by its predecessors.

• Breaking the Silence Live is on Channel 4 tonight at 8pm. 
 