
These are crazy times for British politics. What on earth is going to happen 
next? That’s what we’re all wondering. It’s like a TV series that just got 
cancelled so the writers are trying to cram five seasons of plot ideas into the 
last episode. It genuinely feels like it’s nearly all over.

Don’t worry, though, it isn’t! No one can stop time. This is just a weird bit. 
Before you know it we’ll be back to the quiet aeons of comforting magma. In the 
meantime, what about all the party leadership contests, eh? Labour, the
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> and Ukip. 
Nice timing, guys! Here we are in midstream and the horses we’re riding keep 
squabbling and resigning. Serves us right for making them take us into the 
stream, I suppose. We were heading for a perfectly good bridge.

To be fair, the Tories have sorted themselves out for now. Faced with the 
prospect of their fate being decided by the party’s 150,000 weirdo members, the 
MPs have agreed not to have a contest at all. Very sensible. I don’t know why 
political parties ever started asking their memberships to choose new leaders. 
That was the one thing MPs actually did well.

The ousting of Thatcher by Tory MPs in 1990 was amazing. It was a betrayal of 
spellbinding political astuteness and exquisite timing. The membership would 
have voted overwhelmingly to keep her – they’d probably still elect her 
postmortem – but the MPs were right. She’d lost her judgment and would have 
gone on to lose the next election as well. Slinging her out in 1990 bought them 
seven more years of power.

It’s as if they’re all playing a board game without having finished reading 
the instructions

Unfortunately the Labour lot aren’t as good at that sort of thing. I like them 
more, but they’re rubbish at politics. I reckon they’re proud of it too. They 
think it shows good character, like not recognising the cast ofMade in Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/apr/13/made-in-chelsea-cast-series-nine>
. They probably look down on how the Tories manage to be in power so much more 
– at how they evaded addressing their division over Europe with a referendum, 
the aftermath of which has left the Labour party crippled by divisions of its 
own.

That’s not how Labour does things. The discredited New Labour crypto-Tory 
notion of spin, that dirty washing is best not done in public, and that 
compromises can reasonably be made in order to get into office, has beenchucked 
through Angela Eagle’s window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/angela-eagles-constituency-office-vandalised-after-leadership-bid-launch>
. The party’s attempts to have a leadership contest have been so confusing and 
fractious – so many scrambled new rules about who can vote and how much it 
costs – you’d think it was the first political party that ever tried to do such 
a thing. There was barely more fur flying in Westminster when they 
executed a king.

There’s no agreed system. It’s as if they’re all playing a board game without 
having finished reading the instructions. “Take 51 nomination cards or you do 
not pass go.” “Ah, but what if I play my incumbency joker?” “Erm…” It would all 
be good fun for politics nerds if it weren’t so incredibly urgent. At a pivotal 
moment in the country’s history, there’s no functioning opposition.

So what’s going to happen in the coming years? How will our major parties 
align and govern themselves? Fortunately, thanks to the awesome power of 
guesswork, I can tell you precisely.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fbreaking-up-hard-to-do-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff82ae46be09ed04d4fb3d5185d5d838c7a8d197d%2F0_0_1948_3646%2F1948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20up%20is%20hard%20to%20do%2C%20unless%20you%E2%80%99re%20in%20politics%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fbreaking-up-hard-to-do-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20up%20is%20hard%20to%20do%2C%20unless%20you%E2%80%99re%20in%20politics%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fbreaking-up-hard-to-do-david-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff82ae46be09ed04d4fb3d5185d5d838c7a8d197d%2F0_0_1948_3646%2F1948.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Proper Conservatives


When the Tory party acrimoniously split soon after winning a 200-seat majority 
in 2017’s Snap general election (there was actually plenty of notice, but it 
was sponsored by the manufacturers of the card game), the right wing of the 
parliamentary party and the majority of the membership re-formed as the “Proper 
Conservatives”. “Well, we are the Proper Conservatives and that’s all there is 
to it. The party of Pitt, the party of Peel, not so much the party of Disraeli 
if you know what I mean,” announced their first leader just before resigning. 
The subsequent leadership contest was decided on a system where “every member 
gets one vote per £1,000 they can prove they’ve owned since before 
decimalisation”.

The Nasty party


The more liberal Tory remnant took the bold step of embracing irony when 
choosing a name. “We thought, hey, let’s take that whole ‘Nasty Party’ thing 
and totally reclaim it, like black people did with n-” explained their first 
leader just before resigning. The subsequent leadership election was decided 
thus: candidates first had to obtain the nominations of any 12 gay 
millionaires, and then the applicant who could express a basic policy of 
austerity and tax cuts with the most frequent use of the prefix “pro-” was 
given the job.

The Lib Dems and Steve


The shrunken parliamentary party of the Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> took to discussing 
their political strategy at a discreet branch of Pizza Express not far from 
Westminster. This was where they met Steve, who was sitting at a nearby table 
and said he recognised Nick Clegg fromDownton Abbey. They all thought Steve was 
great and bought him a few drinks. Steve explained he didn’t usually bother to 
vote because “all politicians are wankers”, which went down very well with the 
self-loathing Lib Dems. Pizza night with Steve became a regular part of their 
week and they soon hit upon the notion that, whenever they faced a difficult 
decision, they’d just ask Steve.

New Labour

When the Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party split in 
two, the Blairite wing re-adopted the name with which it had once come to 
power. “We provide very slightly progressive policies that appeal to people who 
would actually be marginally better off if the Nasty party got in. People who 
say ‘Yeah, it costs a bit more, but it’s a good feeling.’ Very much like 
holidaying in Italy,” explained Lord Mandelson, the party’s leader since it 
lost its last seat in the Commons. He was given the position by dint of his 
large number of Twitter followers.

Brand New Labour


This new party, with no affiliation to either Labour party, was set up by 
Russell Brand. Its policies are to achieve world peace and sell hair-care 
products. Not in that order.

Labour – The Point

“The Point is workers’ rights, The Point is an end to tax breaks for the rich, 
The Point is freedom from want and tyranny, The Point is a juster world. That’s 
Labour – The Point” explained the party’s first party political broadcast, 
voiced by Ray Winstone (“It’s just a gig!”). “We mean to win,” announced leader 
Jeremy Corbyn. “We now have more than 700,000 members – that’s more members 
than we actually got votes in the general election. I think that really says 
something.”
 