

Mass deportations of the estimated 2.9 million EU nationals living in the UK 
would be impractical and they should not be used as a “bargaining chip” in 
Brexit negotiations, the government is being warned.

In a strongly-worded report published on Monday, parliament’s influential joint
committee on human rights 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/joint-select/human-rights-committee/>
 (JCHR) highlights the political uncertainty over the residential status of 
both EU citizens in the UK and the 1.2 million Britons believed to be living 
elsewhere within the European Union.

“The government must not use human rights as a bargaining chip,” Harriet 
Harman MP, the former deputy Labour leader and chair of JCHR, said: “The UK 
government could not deport the large numbers of EU nationals currently in the 
UK.

Campaigners urge PM to give EU nationals in UK permanent right to stay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/the3million-campaign-group-letter-theresa-may-eu-citizens-in-uk-right-to-remain>
“In the unlikely and unwelcome event that the government sought to deport EU 
nationals there could be the potential for significant, expensive and lengthy 
litigation leading to considerable legal uncertainty for a prolonged period of 
time. These cases would have the potential to clog up and overwhelm the court 
system.”

The government, Harman points out, will continue to have obligations under 
Article 8 of theEuropean convention on human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/oct/03/what-is-european-convention-on-human-rights-echr>
 which guarantees the right to privacy, home and family life. “Any dilution of 
human rights standards would be extremely undesirable,” Harman added.

The JCHR, which is made up of both peers and MPs, stressed the urgency of 
resolving the question of residence rights. It is concerned about comments made 
by Liam Fox, the secretary of state for international trade, who described EU 
nationals in the UK asone of the “main cards” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/liam-fox-refuses-to-guarantee-right-of-eu-citizens-to-remain-in-uk>
 in Brexit negotiations.

Sir Oliver Heald, the justice minister responsible for human rights, told the 
committee last month that the prime minister was seeking an “early agreement” 
on the status of UK nationals inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and EU nationals in the UK. He 
confirmed the government’s view that to take a unilateral position on the issue 
would not be helpful.

The report recommends ministers safeguard the residence rights of UK nationals 
in other EU states at the outset of Brexit negotiations through a separate 
preliminary agreement.

UK citizens forced to return from overseas might have problems over 
entitlement to benefits, including job seeker’s allowance, universal credit and 
pensions because of the habitual residence test.

Even if not formally deported, their existence are likely to become more 
precarious. “UK citizens currently benefit from a right to healthcare under EU 
law,” the report says. “If such benefits were withdrawn, post-Brexit, it is 
possible that great numbers of UK nationals, many of them pensioners, would 
need to return to the UK.”

Individuals’ rights will depend on length of residence and other factors. EU 
nationals who have been in the UK for over five years may nonetheless not 
satisfy the criteria for permanent residence if they have not been exercising 
treaty rights – such as working – in the UK, the report suggests.

Family connections and residence rights of any children will be relevant; each 
case would have to be considered separately. “It would not be possible for the 
government to establish a rule that would allow the deportation of EU nationals 
merely on the grounds that they had only been resident for a fixed period of 
time,” the report says.

EU citizens should collect proof of living in UK, says Helena Kennedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/eu-citizens-collect-proof-of-living-in-uk-helena-kenney-qc-lords-brexit-reports>
The committee says it was contacted by those anxious about residence rights. 
It was also asked to consider the impact on the hundreds of thousands of 
couples where one partner is British and the other from another EU country.

The committee criticises the justice secretary, Liz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-truss>, for declining to appear and 
answer questions. “We are firmly of the view that the secretary of state should 
have appeared,” the JCHR report states. “The fact that she chose not to is 
unacceptable.” Heald gave evidence instead.

It is regrettable, the report adds, that the government has not been able “to 
set out any clear vision as to how it expects Brexit will impact the UK’s human 
rights framework”.

A government spokesperson said: “The UK has a long-standing tradition of 
ensuring our rights and traditional liberties are protected domestically and of 
fulfilling our international human rights obligations. The decision to leave the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> does not change that.

“The Prime Minister has been clear that she wants to protect the status of EU 
nationals already living here, and the only circumstances in which that 
wouldn’t be possible is if British citizens’ rights in European member states 
were not protected in return.”



 