
Britain could become more attractive to foreign criminals after the UK leaves 
the EU, one of the country’s most senior police officers has warned.

Steve Ashman, chief constable of Northumbria police, dismissed the argument of 
many of those who campaigned to leave the bloc that Britain’s departure would 
lead to a reduction in foreign criminals operating in the UK.

He added that he would be very concerned if Brexit meant UK police could no 
longer apply for aEuropean arrest warrant 
<http://ec.europa.eu/justice/criminal/recognition-decision/european-arrest-warrant/index_en.htm>
 (EAW) or have access to surveillance and information-sharing systems from 
their European counterparts.


Europol chief says Brexit would harm UK crime-fighting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/22/europol-chief-says-brexit-would-harm-uk-crime-fighting>
“I think if you lose the ability to extradite people effectively then one 
might also argue that that’s going to make us quite attractive to a particular 
criminal group,” he told the Guardian.


“I think we are always going to have a problem with foreign national 
offenders. What’s important to me – and, I think, what’s important for UK law 
enforcement – is that we have effective and efficient means of dealing with 
them when they are here. Because I think we are dreaming if we think the 
position is ever going to be arrived at when there are no foreign national 
offenders in this country.”

Asked if he could see any policing benefits to Brexit, Ashman paused for 18 
seconds and said: “There’s your answer.”

Much of his force area, which serves a population of 1.5 million people and 
covers an area of more than 2,000 square miles in the north-east, voted to 
leave the EU. Only Newcastle, with its large student population, voted to stay, 
by a narrow 1% margin.

Ashman said the government must acknowledge that membership of the EU had 
brought real policing benefits: “We have benefited from our access to 
information from our European counterparts, our ability to form joint 
investigation teams where you have cross-border criminal behaviour and our 
ability to secure European arrest warrants.”

“[These] are clearly working and have worked for a number of years. I would 
have some real concerns if we were to walk away from or tear up those 
agreements,” he said.

Europe is safer when we join forces to beat crime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/08/europe-safer-join-forces-beat-crime>
The EAW, which came into operation in 2004, allows for the speedy extradition 
of suspects from one European country to another to face trial or serve a 
prison sentence. More than 900 suspected serious criminals, including 
paedophiles, rapists and murderers, have been extradited either in or out of 
this country, thanks to the EAW. The mechanism was used in the case ofHussain 
Osman, who was wanted in connection with the 21 July 2005 attempted London 
bombings <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/02/italy.july7>. Extradited 
from Italy in September 2005, he was subsequently sentenced to a minimum term 
of imprisonment of 40 years.

In September the home secretary Amber Rudd was asked 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-09-05/debates/1609052000016/EuropeanArrestWarrant>
 what discussions she had had with her international counterparts on the UK’s 
continued participation in the EAW. She said: “Officials are exploring options 
for future cooperation arrangements once the UK has left the European Union. We 
will do what is necessary to keep people safe, but it would be wrong to set out 
unilateral positions before that negotiation has taken place.”

Ashman said he was not surprised that the north-east voted to leave. “It is a 
matter of fact that we are a long way from London – we are further than anyone 
from London – and it is very easy to see why communities here have become quite 
disaffected with government and that’s irrespective of which colour government 
it is. But in particular, in recent years, the public service cuts that have 
been suffered here are far, far, far worse than anywhere else in the country. 
So as the chief constable of the sixth largest force in England and Wales, I’ve 
taken the biggest hit because we were the most heavily dependent upon the 
government grant.”

Northumbria police saw a sharp rise in reports of religious or racially 
motivated race crime after the Brexit vote. Internal force statistics shared 
exclusively with the Guardian show that in Sunderland, which voted 61.3% in 
favour of Brexit, there was a 50% increase in racist/faith crimes recorded from 
24 June, the day after the vote, to 21 November. This year there were 132 such 
crimes, compared with 88 in the same period in 2015.

National anti-hate crime campaign to launch after spike in incidents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/national-anti-hate-campaign-to-launch-after-spike-in-incidents-betterthanthat->
Three times as many eastern Europeans reported abuse: 27, compared with nine 
in 2015. People of Afro-Caribbean and Asian origin also reported more hate 
crimes than last year (14 and 42 respectively, compared with 10 and 36 in 2015).

Examples of these crimes included a Polish woman and her son being told “go 
back to Poland”; a foreign national being told “why are you here? We’re out of
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> now” after challenging 
someone who pushed in a queue; and the word “Paki” being scratched into the 
paintwork of a convenience store.


Just 3.6% of Sunderland residents were born outside the UK, according to the 
2011 census. But Michal Chantowski, a Pole who runs the International Community 
Organisation of Sunderland, said he believed the true migrant population of the 
city was nearer 10%. He said there had been a “clear increase” in hate crime in 
Sunderland since the Brexit vote.
 