
Tougher regulations on the use of antibiotics on farm animals are needed as a 
matter of urgency as part of Brexit negotiations, campaigners and politicians 
have urged, after fresh revelations of superbugs found in UK supermarket meat 
products.

E coli germs resistant to all of the currently used antibiotics have been 
found in UK supermarket meat, with a quarter of chickens found to contain the 
deadly superbugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/05/antibiotic-resistant-e-coli-uk-supermarket-chicken-samples-contain>
, in research from Cambridge University.

The discovery has been strongly linked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2015/jun/18/superbugs-la-mrsa-pigs-antibiotics-video>
 to the overuse of antibiotic medicines among farm animals, including chickens 
and pigs.

Overuse of antibiotics among farm animals fosters the development of resistant 
germs, which can then infect people and cause serious illness. The Guardianhas 
previously revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2015/jun/18/superbugs-la-mrsa-pigs-antibiotics-video>
 strong evidence of another “superbug” resistant to antibiotics - MRSA - found 
in nearly one in 10 samples of UK supermarket pork.

Current curbs on antibiotic use on UK livestock are among the regulations 
under discussion as the government prepares for Brexit.Campaigners fear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/14/post-brexit-farming-subsidies-must-protect-nature-84-groups-say>
 that these rules will be watered down under pressure from trading partners, 
with potentially catastrophic results for UK consumers.

Peter Melchett, policy director of the Soil Association, told the Guardian: 
“We want the government to ban all routine use of antibiotics on groups of 
entirely healthy animals, to phase out the use of critically important 
antibiotics [on animals] and ensure that last-resort antibiotics are only used 
to treat individual farm animals, and only if no other antibiotics are found to 
be working. We want to see this enacted whether we are in the EU or out of it.”

Philip Lymbery, chief executive of Compassion in World Farming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/farming>, said: “This new research 
makes it clear that the UK government must take urgent steps to save our 
antibiotics and avert a post-antibiotic era. The government must put in place 
policies to ban the routine preventative use of antibiotics in groups of 
entirely healthy animals.”

One in four supermarket chicken samples contain antibiotic-resistant E coli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/05/antibiotic-resistant-e-coli-uk-supermarket-chicken-samples-contain>
He also called for the use of certain critical antibiotics, regarded as the 
last line of defence against devastating human illnesses, to be kept from 
routine use in animals in order to retain their efficacy.

“If we continue to sacrifice animal welfare in the name of cheap meat, future 
generations will pay the price for a long time to come,” he said.

Important trading partners such as the US and China have much lower animal 
welfare standards, and more lax controls on the use of antibiotics on their 
farms, than the UK and the EU. UK trade negotiators are likely to be under 
pressure to accept lower standards as a result, and more than 80 civil society 
organisations have called for the government to resist such attempts.

E coli can kill or cause serious illness, and the potency of the antibiotics 
used to counter it is being eroded, which scientists have linked to the 
over-use of antibiotics in treating farm animals. The discovery of food 
products on general sale in the UK harbouring resistant bugs has raised concern 
that current regulations on the use of antibiotics are insufficient to protect 
consumers.

Under current rules, little oversight is kept of the use of antibiotics on 
individual farms. The UK’s Department of Environment,Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Rural Affairs keeps track of 
the volume of such drugs used overall in farming each year, but without keeping 
records of individual use and the reasons for it, leaving this to vets.

Vets can find themselves under pressure, from farmers anxious to ensure they 
can continue to sell their livestock, and because they make money from 
prescriptions as well as advice.

Even the current regulations - regarded as too weak by campaigners - are now 
under threat, as the government prepares for the“bonfire of red tape” on 
farming, that was called for by Brexiteers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/12/would-vote-brexit-help-reduce-red-tape-vat-moss-smes>

Antibiotics have been at the forefront of the war against disease since the 
middle of the last century, but scientific developments have failed to keep up 
with the progress of the bugs. When antibiotics are used, most of the germs 
they target are killed, but a few can remain that evolve to develop and 
propagate resistance.

When antibiotic medicines are over-used, for instance in healthy people or 
farmyard animals not at risk of disease, a higher proportion of the bugs 
develop this resistance, leading to larger populations of lethal superbugs.

The discovery of germs resistant to E coli in many supermarket foods follows on
revelations by the Guardian that MRSA-resistant bacteria was present in about a 
tenth of UK supermarket pork products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/18/mrsa-superbug-in-supermarket-pork-raises-alarm-farming-risks>
. MRSA is another antibiotic-resistant “superbug” that can be fatal to 
vulnerable people, such as the very old and young, and can cause severe illness 
even in healthy people.

The government could help to reward farmers with high animal welfare standards 
by blocking cheap foreign imports from countries with lower standards under 
future post-Brexit trade deals, added Tracy Worcester, director of Farms Not 
Factories, a pressure group.

She said: “Livestock from high animal welfare farms very rarely need to be 
given antibiotics. Farmers and the government could agree the farm gate price 
that reflects production costs. Cheap foreign imports could be blocked and all 
public services could procure meat produced with high animal welfare labels.”

She called on people to write to supermarkets to urge them to crack down on 
antibiotic use among their suppliers, and to take to social media on the issue.

Molly Scott Cato, an MEP for the Green arty, said the party was strongly in 
favour of curbing routine antibiotic use in farming and monitoring the use of 
powerful drugs as a last resort. She said: “We need to ensure that human and 
animal health is put before the interests and profits of industrial-scale 
farming. The emerging EU legislation on the use of antibiotics in farming is 
setting a global standard for the sensible use of these drugs that are so 
essential for human health. It is vital that the UK adopt the highest standards 
that emerge from this legislative process.”

She added that farming subsidies to be paid for by UK taxpayers, after Brexit, 
must also only be handed out on the basis of strong health and environmental 
standards. “We need to ensure any new subsidies for agriculture should 
prioritise a transition away from intensive farming and towards an 
environmentally and ecologically sustainable agricultural industry,” she said.
 