
A British exit from the EU would make it “even more dangerous and difficult” 
to manage the world, the former head of the CIADavid Petraeus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/david-petraeus> has said.

In the latest intervention into the EU referendum security debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/27/eu-cooperation-key-tackling-terrorism-observer-editorial>
, Petraeus called for the west to draw together at a precarious time in global 
affairs as he warned that an isolationist approach always ends with calamitous 
results.

In an article for the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/12205094/David-Petraeus-Brexit-would-weaken-the-Wests-war-on-terror.html>
, Petraeus wrote: “Given the dangers and challenges that threaten us around the 
world, this is a moment when the west and its institutions, including the EU, 
need to be drawing together – not pulling apart. At least from a national 
security standpoint, none of the problems the US and UK face will become easier 
to solve if the UK is out of the EU; on the contrary, I fear that a ‘Brexit’ 
would only make our world even more dangerous and difficult to manage.”

The comments from Petraeus came as the rival campaigns in the EU referendum 
clashed on business support, health and security.

The Vote Leave campaign group was forced to revise a list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/vote-leave-supporters-list-remove-phone-tycoons-anti-eu-brexit-carphone-warehouse>
 of more than 250 business supporters after two leading figures – David Ross, 
the co-founder of Carphone Warehouse, and John Caudwell, the co-founder of 
Phones 4u – said their names had been wrongly included.

A spokesman for Ross told the Sunday Times: “Mr Ross has not made any 
commitment at all. We have no idea where this has come from. Mr Ross will make 
a decision one way or the other when he gets back from his Easter break in a 
couple of weeks.”

A spokesman for Caudwell said he had not added his name to the list, although 
he has supported a UK exit from the EU. “You have to question how this list has 
been compiled,” the spokesman told the newspaper.

Nick Herbert, the chairman of Conservatives for Reform in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, said Vote Leave’s claim that 
it has the support of business leaders had fallen apart. Herbert told the 
Sunday Times: “Less than 24 hours after its launch, the Vote Leave business 
letter is falling apart. Some of those named on the letter say they never 
signed it, many are not business ‘leaders’ at all – there isn’t a single FTSE 
100 [chief executive] among them – and others have publicly admitted [that] 
Brexit would cause severe damage to Britain’s economy.”

Divisions in the Conservative party were once again highlighted when Jeremy 
Hunt, the health secretary, was accused by his former cabinet colleague Liam 
Fox of running an “absurd and demeaning” scare story about the impact of a 
Brexit on the NHS. In an Observer article, Hunt said the “economic shock” of 
the UK leaving the EUwould lead to budget cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/26/nhs-under-threat-from-brexit>.

Petraeus, a former four-star US army general who served as CIA diector for 
just over a year from 2011-12, entered the fray amid differences among senior 
security figures over the impact of a British exit. The former head of MI6 Sir 
Richard Dearlove said last week thatBrexit would not be damaging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/24/europol-chief-rob-wainwright-brexit-mistake-uk-security-richard-dearlove>
 to UK security because most EU security bodies are of little value. Britain’s 
security relationship with the US – its most significant – would be unaffected, 
Dearlove added.

But Petraeus warned that Britain voting to leave would reduce the UK’s 
influence. “There is no question in my mind that a ‘Brexit’ would deal a 
significant blow to the EU’s strength and resilience at exactly the moment when 
the west is under attack from multiple directions,” he wrote. “A Brexit would 
also reduce considerably Great Britain’s ability to influence and guide the 
future of Europe, still the world’s largest economic bloc; it would undoubtedly 
reduce British influence on the world stage, as well.”
 