
Brexit is set to cause a severe shortage of nurses in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, which is already facing a chronic 
lack of them in many hospitals, research suggests.


Britain’s decision to leave the EU could deprive the health service of nurses 
from countries such as Spain, Portugal and Ireland, from which it has recruited 
heavily in recent years, analysis by the Institute for Employment Studies found.

A growing reluctance among EU nurses to come to work in the NHS could pose 
serious difficulties for hospitals, some of which get as many as 20% of their 
nurses from the European Economic Area.

The potential of EU nurses could also prove problematic because it would 
coincide with a spike in demand for care caused by a growing number of 
over-85-year-olds in the population, putting even greater strain on the NHS, 
according to the IES.

“The current and projected shortage of nurses has left the NHS nursing 
workforce in England particularly vulnerable to any disruption to its 
recruitment pipelines, both from the EEA and outside of it,” says the study, 
which was led by Dr Rachel Marangozov.

“Whatever form Brexit eventually takes, it could well lead to a reduced supply 
of labour from the EU. Given the current uncertainty around the status of EU 
workers, many EU nurses may voluntarily choose not to take up positions in the 
UK, while those already working here could make plans to return home if they 
feel unwelcome or no longer see a future in the UK.”

Could Brexit prove terminal for the NHS?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/16/could-brexit-prove-terminal-for-the-nhs>
Non-UK EU nurses make up almost 5% of the total NHS nursing workforce in 
England.Hospitals <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> in London, 
the Thames Valley and east of England will be hardest hit by EU nurses no 
longer coming to Britain because they rely so heavily on them, the IES says.

For example, 20.3% of nurses at the Royal Brompton and Harefield specialist 
heart and lung trust in London are from the EU, as are 18.4% of nurses at Queen 
Elizabeth Hospital in King’s Lynn in Norfolk and 15.4% at Papworth, another 
heart and lung centre of excellence, in Cambridgeshire.

Jeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, the health 
secretary, and NHS leaders have voiced deep unease about Brexit potentially 
exacerbating the existing big gaps across the health and social care workforce 
and have praised EU nationals’ contribution to the NHS in an effort to persuade 
them to stay.

The Royal College of Nursing said the findings showed that problems in nurse 
recruitment could reach “catastrophic proportions”. It said the NHS was facing 
a perfect storm of an ageing population and growing need for healthcare 
coinciding with Brexit and fewer nurses being trained at British universities 
in the wake of the government deciding toaxe bursaries for student nurses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/21/nhs-bursaries-for-student-nurses-will-end-in-2017-government-confirms>
.

Applications to study nursing are down 20% for next year. “Coupled with the 
effects of Brexit, this may become a double whammy for the nursing profession 
which could make NHS services nigh-on impossible to sustain,” said Stephanie 
Aiken, the RCN’s deputy director of nursing.

NHS nurses are being cast into a perfect Brexit storm | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/nurses-brexit-cuts-eu-staff-nhs-crisis>
“Patients can be put at risk when there are too few staff,” she added. She 
called the big drop in nursing degree applications “a very worrying situation 
that could cause the staffing crisis to deteriorate pat the point of no return”.

A spokeswoman for the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said: “As the health secretary has 
repeatedly made clear, overseas workers form a crucial part of our dedicated 
nursing workforce. They are a crucial part of delivering safe staffing in 
hospitals, and we want to see their outstanding work continue as we meet the 
needs of a changing population.”

She said there were plans to train more homegrown nurses, with 51,000 nurses 
currently in training, to help deliver the government’s promised “truly 
seven-day NHS” by 2020.
 