
The Cornish pasty has a habit of biting back at moments of political tension, 
and the EU referendum is no exception. When Boris Johnsonlaunched his Vote 
Leave battlebus tour in Truro in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/consent-key-immigration-debate-boris-johnson-vote-leave-bus-tour>
, he brandished the local meat pie and promised that Brexit would enable him to 
protect the best of British produce.

Cornish pasty makers were not impressed. 

Although they had forced a sharp U-turn on George Osborne and his pasty tax in 
2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/28/george-osborne-u-turns-pasties-caravans>
, they now declared in favour of the chancellor’s position on Europe. “After 
working so hard to gain recognition for the Cornish pasty through the 
EU-protected food names scheme … the Cornish Pasty Association supports Britain 
remaining in,”they announced 
<http://www.cornishpastyassociation.co.uk/2016/06/a-statement-on-europe/>.

It is no coincidence that food and drink is at the heart of so much of the 
debate about whether we are better off in or out of the EU. Worth £80bn a year 
and employing 400,000 people, it is our largest manufacturing sector and a big 
exporter and importer. Moreover, 38% of its workers are foreign-born, placing 
its demand for cheap labour at the centre of arguments about immigration.

The common agriculture policy (CAP) swallows up nearly 40% of the total EU 
budget; it has reshaped not just farming but our landscape in the decades since 
Britain joined the European Economic Community in 1973. The free movement of 
goods, people and capital – enshrined in EU treaties – and EU common policies 
adopted on trade, fisheries and regional development, as well as agriculture, 
have been the framework through which the UK has globalised.

Britain produces just more than half what it consumes and depends on Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to provide more than a quarter 
of the rest, while the EU’s population of more than 500 million people provides 
the UK’s most significant export market for food. The referendum has therefore, 
perhaps not surprisingly, polarised ministers from the Department for 
Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (Defra), and divided industry and political 
parties left and right.

The Conservative food and farming minister, George Eustice, disagrees with his 
secretary of state, Elizabeth Truss, and is campaigning for a leave vote. He 
describes the EU rules affecting Defra as “all pervasive” and “stifling” and 
believes the UK could get better value subsidising its farmers itself rather 
than being part of a wasteful CAP.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff669836e06cdb6d1e044cd0673a4508ddaeec90b%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20meal%20ticket%3F%20Food%20and%20drink%20at%20heart%20of%20referendum%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20meal%20ticket%3F%20Food%20and%20drink%20at%20heart%20of%20referendum%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff669836e06cdb6d1e044cd0673a4508ddaeec90b%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Boris Johnson holds a Cornish pasty as he boards the Vote Leave campaign bus 
in Truro, Cornwall. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
He said: “80% of legislation affecting Defra comes from the EU. When it comes 
to crucial things such as food labelling, food safety, then yes we would 
negotiate bilateral agreements with the EU, but there is a whole raft of other 
regulation – the maximum width of a gateway, the minimum width of a hedge – 
where frankly we could do better.”

British traditional foods such as stilton, Jersey Royal potatoes and the 
Cornish pasty could be protected using international trademark law as they were 
before Britain joined the EU.

As a former strawberry farmer who typically employed 300 workers, many of whom 
were migrants, Eustice nevertheless said Britain needed to “take back control 
of immigration by switching from freedom of movement to limited work permit 
visas.

“I understand the challenge of labour but it’s very easy for us to put in 
place a work permit scheme for one year, say, or three,” he said. “Immigration 
causes problems when it becomes permanent resettlement.”

Truss, on the other hand, has warned that a Brexit vote would be a “leap in 
the dark” that could put trade and farmers’ livelihoods at risk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cdae0761115015b0c31ed02d6a6eeebcac3f07c%2F0_144_2080_2600%2F2080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20meal%20ticket%3F%20Food%20and%20drink%20at%20heart%20of%20referendum%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20meal%20ticket%3F%20Food%20and%20drink%20at%20heart%20of%20referendum%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cdae0761115015b0c31ed02d6a6eeebcac3f07c%2F0_144_2080_2600%2F2080.jpg>
 George Eustice has described EU rules as ‘stifling’ and ‘all pervasive’ 
Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
Nearly three-quarters of the food and drink industry is on her side, according 
to its trade body, the Food and Drink Federation.

Iain Wirght, the FDF’s director general, said: “71% of members believe the 
interests of their business will be best served by the UK voting to remain in 
theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>

“Members identified the single market, access to raw materials and the free 
movement of labour among key considerations.”

The leading supermarkets, whose model depends on supply chains for fresh food 
stretching right across Europe and beyond, have been reluctant to express a 
view, no doubt for fear of alienating customers.


On the left, the divide is as great. Critics say the EU has driven through a 
neoliberal vision of food and farming that subsidises richer landowners and the 
overproduction of industrial fats and sugars. It is a system that is unhealthy, 
environmentally destructive and captures profits for a small number of dominant 
corporate interests.

For them, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) currently 
being negotiated behind closed doors between the EU and the US is just the 
latest alarming development in an undemocratic EU trend, they say. TTIP could 
result in the European market being opened to US beef produced with hormones, 
US poultry washed with chlorine, lower animal welfare standards and the lifting 
of restrictions on genetically modified organisms and threatens to allow 
companies to sue national governments if their policies cause a loss of profits.

Jenny Jones, the former chair of the Green party, has articulated this view 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/08/eu-reform-green-brexit> 
and wants out. “The most profound weakness of the EU is that it is a 
super-sized top-down dogmatic project of endless industrial development and 
growth,” she said.

“It fosters the pointless carting of goods enormous distances, and it smashes 
local resilience. Often well-intentioned environmental policies are outweighed 
at every turn by the more fundamental drivers of its bid to turn the whole of 
Europe into a paradise for agribusiness and industry.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc21dba011b538502ff47b02548c429ed3fc0a88c%2F121_223_4236_2542%2F4236.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20meal%20ticket%3F%20Food%20and%20drink%20at%20heart%20of%20referendum%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20meal%20ticket%3F%20Food%20and%20drink%20at%20heart%20of%20referendum%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbritains-meal-ticket-food-and-drink-at-heart-of-referendum-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc21dba011b538502ff47b02548c429ed3fc0a88c%2F121_223_4236_2542%2F4236.jpg>
 Caroline Lucas is in the remain camp. Photograph: Mark Thomas/Rex/Shutterstock 
Green MP and former MEP Caroline Lucas is in the other camp, however, and a 
passionate proponent of staying in the EU. The EU is tired, damaged and in need 
of reform but without it the struggle against climate change would already have 
been lost, she says. She agrees with those on the rightwho say our sovereignty 
has been compromised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/12/win-climate-struggle-remain-europe-paris-summit>
 but “we surrendered it not to the EU but to an anti-democratic market cult” 
that rightwing Brexiters would still promote if we voted to leave.

Jeremy Corbyn’s pledge to veto TTIP may have helped win over some Labour 
voters who are alarmed by the trade deal but are otherwise instinctively in 
favour of greater international solidarity in Europe.

The shadow environment and food secretary, Kerry McCarthy, thinks those hoping 
a leave vote might lead to a more local sustainable food system are deluded. 
“Everybody thinks CAP needs reform but some of the things blamed on CAP are the 
consequences of the market. The Brexit camp would negotiate a far more 
neoliberal trade deal with US or Canada than what can be achieved in EU,” she 
told us.

On immigration, she insists that “migrant workers have kept the economy 
going”. The real issue, and a key driver of immigration in to the sector, she 
added is “low pay and zero hours”. Fundamentally, having lived through Labour 
wilderness years, she believes in staying in because “I see the EU as a more 
progressive force than most British governments I’ve seen in my lifetime.”

The reality, according to Kath Dalmeny, the coordinator of Sustain, the 
campaign group for better food and farming, is that “you could create a good 
food and farming system in or out of the EU – it’s a question of values and 
political will. But it is naive to think we could set our own rules easily – we 
would be facing the same powers and institutions that control the food system 
whether we were in or out of the EU.”
 