
It has long been a sad truth that for a woman to be immortalised as a civic 
statue in the UK, she must either be a monarch – preferably Queen Victoria – or 
a naked nymph frolicking in a fountain. The male domination of public monuments 
may slowly be eroding, however, with three pioneering women to be celebrated in 
statue form in the next few years.

Fearless Labour MP “Red” Ellen Wilkinson, the only woman on the Jarrow march 
<https://www.theguardian.com/century/1930-1939/Story/0,6051,127027,00.html>, 
who introduced free milk and school dinners as education secretary, will become 
the first woman to grace a plinth in Middlesbrough.


In Bury, Greater Manchester, a statue of comic Victoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/victoria-wood> is expected to be unveiled 
this summer after a crowd-funding campaign by her brother. Dame Judi Dench 
contributed £1,000 towards the statue, which will show Wood as Bren from her TV 
sitcom Dinnerladies.


An earlier plan to site a memorial in Victoria station in Manchester never 
came to fruition. That design would have showed the comedienne in character as 
the beret-wearing girllooking for her friend Kimberley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CNMEUbUgWc0> (“She’s really, really tall and 
really really wide: if she had a suitcase on her ‘ead she’d look like a fitted 
wardrobe”). Chris Foote-Wood, her brother, hasraised almost £24,000 
<https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/chris-footewood> towards the statue, 
which will be erected in the town centre near the museum.

In Manchester, suffragette Emmeline Pankhurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/emmeline-pankhurst>, who was born in the 
city’s Moss Side neighbourhood, will become the city’s first female statue that 
isn’t of Queen Victoria after a campaign by local councillor Andrew Simcock.

His WoManchester project will receive no public money from the cash-strapped 
city council. He aims to fundraise the £100,000 cost in time for the unveiling 
on International Women’s Day in May 2019, 101 years after Pankhurst and 
colleagues won women the right to vote.

Six sculptors have been commissioned to produce a 40cm bronze maquette of 
their vision for the sculpture of Pankhurst. On the shortlist isMartin Jennings 
<http://www.martinjennings.com/>, whose work includes Sir John Betjeman at St 
Pancras Station,Women of Steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/27/sheffield-statue-celebrate-women-of-steel>
 in Sheffield and the recently unveiled Mary Seacole statue in London, andSean 
Hedges-Quinn <http://www.seanhedgesquinn.co.uk/> from Ipswich, creator of the 
new Gracie Fields statue in Rochdale, Captain Mainwaring in Thetford and 
football managers Sir Alf Ramsey and Sir Bobby Robson in Ipswich. The maquettes 
will be auctioned at a fundraising dinner in Manchester on 9 March, with the 
winner announced the following week.

In Middlesbrough, local people recently voted to celebrate Ellen Wilkinson, 
Labour MP for Middlesbrough East from 1924 until 1931 and nearby Jarrow from 
1935 until her death in 1947. The vote came after a campaign by local woman 
Emma Chesworth, who had noticed that all seven of the town’s statues were of 
men.

“There are many remarkable women who lived and do live in Middlesbrough, and 
this campaign aims to highlight their tremendous achievements,” said Chesworth, 
who works as a senior case worker for Middlesbrough MP Andy McDonald.

She received abuse and criticism when she launched her Eighth Plinth campaign 
last year, which asked people to vote from a shortlist of six women including 
Mary Jacques, a nurse who funded and opened Middlesbrough’s first cottage 
hospital;Gertrude Bell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/mar/12/iraq.jamesbuchan>, an academic, 
archaeologist, explorer, linguist and renowned mountaineer who drew the borders 
of modern Iraq; andViva Talbot 
<http://www.tees.ac.uk/sections/news/pressreleases_story.cfm?story_id=3350&this_issue_title=May%202012&this_issue=228>
, an artist who used woodblock prints to depict images of Teesside steelmaking.

“When I started the campaign, the abuse and backlash I got were quite 
unbelievable. People were saying things like, ‘I don’t know why you are 
bothering. I’ve never heard of anyone on your list’, which rather proves my 
point,” said Chesworth. “It is so important to celebrate women’s achievements 
in order to inspire the next generation. As the phrase goes: you cannot be what 
you cannot see.”

Some people pointed out that Middlesbrough already had a female statue, 
carrying the scales of justice, outside the law courts. “But she is an 
allegorical figure, a woman surrounded by two squabbling children. I think we 
should celebrate the achievements of real women,” said Chesworth, who will soon 
begin applying for grants and launch a crowdfunding campaign. She is determined 
to commission a female sculptor to cast Wilkinson.

Research 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/feminism/2016/03/i-sorted-uk-s-statues-gender-mere-27-cent-are-historical-non-royal-women>
 by the campaigner Caroline Criado-Perez, who has pressed for a female statue 
in Parliament Square, found that of 925 public statues in Britain, only 158 are 
of solo women. Of the 925 total, 110 listed in the database of thePublic 
Monuments and Sculptures Association 
<http://www.pmsa.org.uk/national-recording-project/nrp/> feature allegorical 
figures such as Justice or Art. A further 14 depict the Virgin Mary. Forty-six 
are of royalty, 29 of which are of Queen Victoria.

The Labour MP Sarah Champion, who is shadow minister for women and equalities, 
said: “The lack of women represented in public art can only be seen as a 
physical embodiment of how we fail to respect and recognise women’s 
achievements in our society.”

She said women’s taxes helped pay for the statues, yet our other contributions 
seemed unwanted because they were not publicly recognised.

 “Public art sends a clear message on the qualities of leadership and 
achievement we value. By not recognising women leaders in this way, we are 
denying them a place in history. Worse, we are preventing them becoming visible 
role models for the next generation.”

The best female statues in Britain

Sheffield’s Women of Steel

This wonderful statue of two women in overalls celebrates the thousands of 
women who were conscripted to work in Sheffield’s factories and steel mills 
during the two world wars while the men were away fighting. Standing proudly in 
Barker’s Pool in the city centre, the bronze statue by leading sculptorMartin 
Jennings <http://www.martinjennings.com/> was unveiled on 17 June 2016. Over 
100 surviving women of steel came along to the unveiling ceremony.

Gracie Fields in Rochdale

A statue of the entertainer Gracie Fields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/19/our-gracie-comes-home-rochdale-salutes-gracie-fields-with-statue>
, the world’s highest-paid female actor in the 1930s, was unveiled outside
Rochdale’s Grade I-listed town hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/07/parliament-is-falling-down-so-should-dunsop-bridge-be-the-new-capital-of-britain>
 in September. Fields, who was born above a Rochdale fish and chip shop in 
1898, often performed to crowds on her many return visits to the town during 
her travelling performances for the troops during the second world war.

Amy Johnson in Hull

Also in September last year, a statue of Amy Johnson, the first woman to fly 
solo from the UK to Australia, was unveiled in Hull. Actor and writer Maureen 
Lipman, also born on the Humber,described Johnson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-humber-37510715> as “the greatest export 
we ever had”. The sculpture is within a park in a new housing development near 
Hawthorne Avenue, close to Johnson’s childhood home.

A Real Birmingham Family in Birmingham

Turner Prize-winning artist Gillian Wearing made this sculpture  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/29/ordinary-birmingham-family-immortalised-statue-gillian-wearing>
of two single-mother sisters, Roma and Emma Jones, and their sons Kyan and 
Shaye, which has stood outside Birmingham library since 2014. The sisters were 
chosen from 372 nominations as representing a “real Birmingham family” after a 
four-year collaboration between the city’sIkon Gallery 
<http://ikon-gallery.org/> and Wearing. 
 