
 Britain would be “completely killed” in global trade negotiations if it voted 
to leave the EU because it would be reduced to the status of Jersey and 
Guernsey, the French economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, has said.

As David Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> said David 
Cameron should be stripped of his right to negotiate a British exit in the 
event of a vote to leave, Macron warned that major powers such as China would 
have little interest in negotiating with the UK outside the EU.

Macron, appearing on BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show to highlight the new political 
grouping he has established in France, raised Tata’s decision to abandon its UK 
steel operations to illustrate the dangers of a British exit. This includes 
selling off its Port Talbot steel plant, the UK’s largest, which employs 4,000 
workers.

Macron said Britain would have an even weaker hand in its negotiations with 
China, which is blamed for the crisis in the British steel industry after 
dumping cheap produce inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
if it were not part of a 500 million-strong trading block.

Macron said: “Your decision to be taken is much more about your role in 
globalisation. I think UK is not about becoming Jersey or Guernsey. Today, you 
are strong because you are part of the EU. When you discuss your steel industry 
with China you are credible because you are part of the EU, not because you are 
just UK. You will be completely killed otherwise.

“You will never be in the situation to negotiate face to face with the Chinese 
because your domestic market is not relevant for the Chinese in comparison with 
their domestic market. EU is the first global domestic market.”

Macron’s argument highlights a key argument of the remain campaign. This is 
that Britain is able to secure stronger trading deals as a member of the EU, 
with a population of 500 million, rather than as a single nation of 63 million. 
Trade policy is negotiated at an EU level.

He spoke out as David Davis said Cameron could remain as prime minister after 
a vote to leave the EU but would have to hand the breakup negotiations with 
Brussels to a minister who had supported a British exit. In a sign of how the 
prime minister’s personal future could become an issue during the referendum 
campaign, Davis took issue with the former chancellor Kenneth Clarke, who said
Cameron would be out of No 10 within 30 seconds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/16/cameron-wouldnt-last-30-seconds-if-he-lost-eu-vote-says-ken-clarke>
 if Britain left the EU.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fbritain-killed-in-trade-talks-eu-french-minister-emmanuel-macron%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0879d0ba551088d168e2aa250dfaccb321527d0%2F0_80_4510_2706%2F4510.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain%20%E2%80%98killed%E2%80%99%20in%20trade%20talks%20if%20it%20left%20EU%2C%20says%20French%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fbritain-killed-in-trade-talks-eu-french-minister-emmanuel-macron%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%20%E2%80%98killed%E2%80%99%20in%20trade%20talks%20if%20it%20left%20EU%2C%20says%20French%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fbritain-killed-in-trade-talks-eu-french-minister-emmanuel-macron%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0879d0ba551088d168e2aa250dfaccb321527d0%2F0_80_4510_2706%2F4510.jpg>
 David Davis: ‘If we vote for Brexit then David Cameron can’t lead the 
renegotiations.’ Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Davis said: “If we vote for Brexit then it is clear that David Cameron can’t 
lead that bit of his government’s activities, the renegotiations. He would have 
to appoint somebody who the public had faith in, his party had faith in but, 
most importantly, who believed in the negotiation. If he did that I don’t see 
any reason why he shouldn’t go on.”

Asked whether he, a supporter of a British exit, should lead the negotiations, 
David said: “Oh, go away. Let’s confine ourselves to the plausible.”

Downing Street is hoping that the campaign to keep Britain in the EU will 
receive a boost this week when Barack Obama endorses Britain’s membership of 
the EU. Boris Johnson has accused the president of hypocrisy because the US 
would never agree to surrender sovereignty in the way EU member states do.

Chris Grayling, the leader of the House of Commons, who supports a British 
exit, said Obama did not understand the nature of the pooling of sovereignty 
among EU member states. He said: “I don’t for a moment think that President 
Obama would tolerate a situation where the US gave away as much of its 
sovereignty as we have to Brussels. It is inconceivable. In my view, he perhaps 
doesn’t understand the nature of the transfer of power that has taken place. I 
can only think he doesn’t realise.”
 