
On YouTube, there are a plethora of clips of Roy Wood at the height of his 
fame, the years between January 1967 and December 1974 when he piloted 15 
singles into the Top 10, three of them No 1s. In all of the videos, he is 
pretty spectacular: wearing what looks like a warped version of a medieval 
knight’s outfit (accessorised, for some reason with a load of chains wrapped 
round his neck) to perform the Move’s 1968 hit Fire Brigade on Top of the Pops; 
fronting Wizzard’s peerless run of glam-era hits in deranged face paint, 
clashing tartan and explosive, multicoloured hair. But he also appears oddly 
uncomfortable, even when See My Baby Jive or Angel Fingers are at No 1, their 
glorious, chaotic updating of Phil Spector’s Wall of Sound – in which Wood’s 
sparkling pop hooks had to fight for space with the sound of four drummers, 
eight guitarists and umpteen saxophonists – outselling everything else. He 
keeps nervously glancing off to the side of the stage. He never looks directly 
into the camera, as if he thinks that ignoring it will make it go away. Roy 
Wood looks both like a fantastic pop star – one of those unreconstructed 
oddballs who wouldn’t get past reception at a major label nowadays – and 
someone genuinely ill at ease with the idea of being a pop star.

If Rundgren had come from Birmingham, if Zappa could have stopped sneering, 
they might have made records like Wood

Perhaps that’s one reason why Wood, who turns 70 on 8 November, keeps a low 
profile. By all accounts, he has always been painfully shy, a temperament 
aggravated by the kind of miserable experience of the music industry common to 
artists who had the misfortune to be managed by the appallingDon Arden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jul/25/guardianobituaries.musicnews>. 
(“Unfortunately, I seem to have mislaid the number for Interflora,”he mordantly 
remarked 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/3667317/Roy-Wood-was-the-grandfather-of-glam-rock.html>
 when his former manager died.) Wood hasn’t released an album of new music in 
29 years and rarely gives interviews – Simon Reynolds’ attempts to contact him 
for his definitive,new history of glam, Shock and Awe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/07/shock-awe-glam-rock-legacy-simon-reynolds-review>
, came to naught – although he pops up occasionally on TV when the time comes 
for Wizzard’s deathless 1973 smashI Wish It Could Be Christmas Every Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/dec/20/wizzard-christmas-every-day-rocks-backpages>
 to make its annual appearance in the charts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd6tx0NM8xUg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd6tx0NM8xUg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd6tx0NM8xUg&media=>
In fact, there is a sense that Wizzard’s biggest hit might have overshadowed 
Wood’s musical legacy. His influence has occasionally seeped into subsequent 
pop in some peculiar ways – not least the fact that Glen Matlock claimed the 
opening guitar riff of God Save the Queen by the Sex Pistols was based on the 
Duane Eddy-inspired twang of Fire Brigade – but you never hear Wood’s name 
dropped as an inspiration by a hip new band. The heritage rock mags never run 
grand retrospective features, tracing his career from the Move, through the 
formation of ELO to Wizzard and his extraordinary, maverick solo albums, 
Boulders and Mustard, in the 1970s. He is seldom placed on a par with all the 
other revered idiosyncratic pop craftsmen, which is exactly where he belongs. 
If Todd Rundgren had come from Birmingham, if Frank Zappa could have stopped 
himself sneering for five minutes, they might have made records like Roy Wood. 
Maybe if you’re best remembered for a seasonal novelty hit, it’s hard for 
people to see past it. There are worse fates for a musician than to write a 
song so indelible that it becomes part of the fabric of national life, but 
Wood’s latterday image as a hirsute bringer of seasonal jollity does seem to 
undersell his talent quite dramatically.

The Move started out as purveyors of tough psychedelia that dwelt on the dark, 
overwhelming side of the acid experience
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmQEPYfXWWnI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmQEPYfXWWnI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmQEPYfXWWnI&media=>
Or perhaps the problem is the nature of Wood’s talent, which is incredibly 
hard to pin down. My favourite line about him is in Bob Stanley’s fantastic book
Yeah Yeah Yeah: The Story of Modern Pop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/06/story-modern-pop-bob-stanley-review>
. “Roy Wood loved pop,” he wrote. “He was a superfan. He wanted to be all of 
pop, all at the same time.” It meant that, from the start, the music Wood made 
was marked by a kind of itchy restlessness, shifting and changing at a rate 
that was almost impossible to process. The Move started out as purveyors of 
tough psychedelia that, almost uniquely among their pop contemporaries, dwelt 
on the dark, overwhelming side of the acid experience. Wood didn’t indulge, but 
seemed to pick up on what was happening to their resident space cadet, bass 
player Ace Kefford, whose LSD experimentation played havoc with his already 
precarious mental state. Night of Fear, Disturbance and 1967’s peerless I Can 
Hear the Grass Grow prickled with anxiety, dread and nervous energy; their live 
show was so aggressive and violent it apparently terrified the tripping 
denizens of London’s UFO Club.

Yeah Yeah Yeah: The Story of Modern Pop by Bob Stanley – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/06/story-modern-pop-bob-stanley-review>
But they were equally wont to make records that sounded as if they were after 
a cushy billeting on the cabaret circuit: the parent-friendly pop of Curly and 
Blackberry Way, the latter a perfect example of Wood’s ability to pull a 
timeless melody, the kind of tune that sounds instantly familiar, out of the 
ether. They released homages to doo-wop, rock’n’roll and most confusingly, Wave 
the Flag and Stop the Train, which seemed to be a loving pastiche of the 
pre-psychedelic beat group sound that had only just gone out of fashion. Then 
they started knocking out clangorous proto-heavy metal, interspersed with mock 
music-hall numbers and faux country and western. It’s not all great, but huge 
swaths of it are. They got labelled as bandwagon-jumping dilettantes, a state 
of affairs not helped by their manager Tony Secunda’s penchant for 
headline-grabbing publicity stunts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXLRmhfayh2A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXLRmhfayh2A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXLRmhfayh2A&media=>
As it turned out, the Move’s back catalogue was just the sound of Roy Wood 
being Roy Wood: it was as if he just couldn’t stop the ideas gushing out, even 
when it was apparent that everyone else was struggling to keep up with or make 
sense of them. In 1972, he piloted the band’s final single, the aggressive, 
fuzzed-out California Man and came up with the idea of overdubbing cello after 
cello on to bandmate Jeff Lynne’s song 10538 Overture, until it sounded like “a 
monster heavy-metal orchestra”, thus birthing the idea of ELO.

He also played bass for Bo Diddley, attempted to write Britain’s Eurovision 
song contest entry for the MOR combo the New Seekers and formed Wizzard, who 
managed, thanks to Wood’s extravagant appearance, to glom on to the glam-rock 
movement, without really sounding anything like any other glam-rock band. 
Indeed, Wizzard occasionally sounded absolutely nothing like Wizzard, or at 
least not like the version whose songs got in the singles charts. Their debut 
album, Wizzard Brew, bore almost no resemblance to their singles: the 
13-minute-long Meet Me at the Jailhouse opens with a heavy riff, stops dead, 
goes into an extended passage of unaccompanied free-sax improvisation, then 
turns into a kind of stomping, wilfully ungainly boogie track, replete with 
much nosily atonal soloing. One review described it as “sonic terrorism”. A 
year later, his solo album, Boulders, offered baroque pop, art rock, pastoral 
folk and luscious west coast harmonies.

All of pop, all at the same time – no wonder people find Wood hard to place. 
And sometimes, it’s hard not to think Wood’s enthusiasm might have got the 
better of him: his record company balked at his idea for Wizzard’s second 
album, a double set containing one album of 50s rock’n’roll and one of 
experimental jazz rock; the world probably didn’t need a collaborative single 
featuring Wood, Phil Lynott and Chas Hodges from Chas and Dave called We Are 
the Boys. More often, however, it resulted in astonishing music, from You Sure 
Got It Now, which gamely attempted to meld “the Andrews Sisters and John 
Mayall”, to Forever, a solo hit that imagined what it would be like if Neil 
Sedaka had joined the Beach Boys with beautiful results. Then there was the 
honking blare of Wizzard’s Ball Park Incident and Angel Fingers, the latter a 
No 1 single about the transient nature of pop fandom, a song that, 
metaphorically speaking, keeps glancing nervously off to the side of the stage: 
“Will Dion still be so important to you on your wedding day?”

He effectively ended his commercial career by forming Wizzo Band in 1977 – of 
all his ideas, starting a tricky jazz-rock group at the height of punk wasn’t 
the most timely – although he still occasionally made fantastic records. If Red 
Cars Are After Me (1987) suffered a bit from the production techniques of the 
time, it also proved Wood’s pop smarts were entirely intact. It’s a shame that 
he hasn’t made more music in recent decades. You can’t blame the guy for being 
pragmatic and recordingI Wish It Could Be Christmas Every Day with the Wombles 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oyuxPjnFqyA>, but it’s hard not to think the 
end result might be less edifying than an album where he lets his 
idiosyncracies and eclecticism run riot. Still, as he reaches his 70th 
birthday, Wood’s is an oeuvre that’s ripe for rediscovery and reassessment: the 
sound of Britain’s great lost pop genius lurks just behind the familiar 
tinselly facade.
 