
It wouldn’t be an overstatement to say Charlie Simpson has had a change of 
heart. After he left Busted in 2005, he compared his time in the pop-punk boy 
band to “torture” and insisted he would never, under any circumstances, rejoin. 
Last May, though, he found himself headlining Wembley Arena with Busted in 
front of 12,500 fans. That’s some U-turn.

Simpson is now gearing up for the release of the third Busted album, Night 
Driver – 13 years after its predecessor,A Present for Everyone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/nov/28/popandrock.shopping11>. The trio 
come with a reinvented look and sound: gone are buoyant guitars and 
questionable lyrics about shagging teachers and jizzing in pants. Instead, 
Busted 2.0 play pop-aligned R&B, like Maroon 5 channellingGet Lucky 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HXEJjtBouRA>. The wacky facial expressions of 
their teens 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/films/2016/08/31/ryan-gosling-and-emma-stone-in-la-la-land-review/>
 are replaced by brooding, faraway gazes; their schoolboy shirts by satin 
bombers. Think Ryan Gosling in Drive, only with more baggage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7YQ_UY11uMw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7YQ_UY11uMw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7YQ_UY11uMw&media=>
At YouTube’s London headquarters, a multi-screen video wall is playing clips 
of seven-year-old singers and famous vloggers gesticulating, while Charli XCX 
booms from the speakers. The group is here to launch the record’s debut single, 
On What You’re On. It is a good song, I say.

“Shock horror!” Simpson replies.

How do they feel about people perhaps not having high expectations for their 
return?

“That’s a loaded question, but I like it,” replies Matt Willis.

“It feels good. I’m kind of at this point where I can’t wait for people to 
hear it,” Simpson says. ”It’s such a funny thing that I think people still 
don’t really get why we are here again, because they know the story of why it 
ended. It seems crazy that it might happen again.”

James Bourne and Willis formed the group in 2000. Simpson came later, in time 
for them to be launched as a pop-punk boy band in 2002, and also departed 
first. Bourne and Willis barely spoke to Simpson for the decade they were apart.

Then, one day in early 2013, they arrived on his doorstep to ask if he fancied 
giving Busted another shot. At this stage, Bourne and Willis had already 
committed to theMcBusted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/05/mcbusted-review> tours of 2014 
and 2015, a team up with their former proteges McFly, a lucrative run of dates 
that proved there was still an appetite for pop punk boybands, even if the 
groups concerned were no longer boys. Simpson, to their surprise, was 
interested in re-forming their original group. One might suspect the prospect 
of earning decent money might have played a part in his decision. Did it?

“There are plenty of things over the years that I could have done for the 
money,” replies Simpson.

Such as?

“Well for a start … what Matt and James did with the McFly guys. If there was 
ever a time for a massive amount of money to be made then that would be it. It 
wasn’t on my radar.” Details of the split are sketchy. The group, particularly 
Bourne and Simpson, seem keen to gloss over the past and concentrate on the 
future. Simpson left at the peak of their success, and you get the feeling from 
previous interviews that Bourne never really got closure, which hurt. He speaks 
of his time apart from Simpson – hearing songs on taxi radios, wondering 
whether Simpson might like them, too – with the kind of misty-eyed lament you 
imagine Marr and Morrissey would relate to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fbusted-reforming-new-album-night-driver-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeb6bedfb15aa913a5102696aaedfce4ecb0e8f8%2F66_0_2867_1721%2F2867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Busted%20on%20reforming%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20don%E2%80%99t%20get%20why%20we%20are%20here%20again%20%E2%80%A6%20they%20know%20how%20it%20ended%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fbusted-reforming-new-album-night-driver-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Busted%20on%20reforming%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20don%E2%80%99t%20get%20why%20we%20are%20here%20again%20%E2%80%A6%20they%20know%20how%20it%20ended%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fbusted-reforming-new-album-night-driver-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeb6bedfb15aa913a5102696aaedfce4ecb0e8f8%2F66_0_2867_1721%2F2867.jpg>
 Busted in Bournemouth in May. Photograph: Mark Holloway/Getty 
In the intervening decade, they have all kept busy, but never matched their 
former band’s fame. Simpson released one solo album and four with Fightstar, a 
venture that largely revolved around convincing the music press that he was 
rock enough. Bourne meanwhile launched a string of solo albums under guises 
such as Son of Dork, Future Boy and Call Me When I’m 18, and wrote some musical 
theatre. A natural pop hit songwriter, he also co-wrote tracks for the 
Saturdays, the Vamps, 5 Seconds of Summer and McFly. Willis made a solo album, 
appeared in Birds of a Feather and EastEnders and was crowned king of the 
jungle on I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here in 2006.

While Bourne felt “lost”, and finally relocated to the US in 2008, having 
spent a lot of time there, Simpson (who had formed Fightstar while still in 
Busted) says he was close to depression and turned to drink and drugs before he 
left. Willis, meanwhile, was admitted into the Priory in 2005 for alcohol 
abuse, and a year later for an addiction to weed. In 2008, he returned to rehab 
again. It’s something his wife, Emma Willis, spoke about in a documentary made 
in the run-up to the McBusted tour. She was naturally a little nervous about 
him going back out on the road. Given everything they have gone through, is it 
difficult for family members to see the band back together again?

“Different when you’re younger, different when you’re younger,” Bourne says.

“I think everything is different when you’re younger,” Willis agrees.

“Very different,” says Simpson.

“It’s a very weird thing to suddenly be in something enormous. Then for it to 
suddenly end. It’s hard to vocalise,” Willis says.

“It’s also weird because our perspectives were so drastically different,” 
Simpson suggests. “It affected us in different ways. It’s such a wide thing 
because we had such different things going on in our heads; different issues to 
deal with. And to be young in that situation … as hard as it is being young, 
you are also very naive, so you sort of take it more at face value. Now I know 
so much more about the industry, I know so much more about how things work.”

Bourne: “It’s night and day. You can’t compare it.”

Simpson: “What happened to us was 10 years ago, and I do want to move it past 
that.”

They are adamant that everything happens for a reason. Breaking up was a good 
thing because it meant they could preserve their friendship, and ultimately 
make this album, the album they wanted to make, without a label or any pressure.

“Had we stayed in the band, we would have driven our friendship into the 
ground,” says Simpson. “We probably wouldn’t have talked to each other again. 
It’s the only way this could have happened now, and I do quite want to move it 
on past talking about that because we are here to talk about something new and 
exciting.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D58t6kfAy6W0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D58t6kfAy6W0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D58t6kfAy6W0&media=>
A week or so later, we meet again at their rehearsal space. The mood is a 
little less intense. First time around, Busted were lumped in with the 
manufactured pop groups of their era; they were never really treated as a 
legitimate band. Perhaps that had something to do with the songs about jizzing 
in pants. But there was also a suspicion among the champions of “real music” 
about a group who could sell 5m albums and appear on Saturday morning TV. And 
they did get really famous, really fast; the sort of famous where you get 
disconcerting fan gifts: “On a birthday card,” says Willis, “someone had shaved 
their pubes and sellotaped it to the side. With her number.”

“We didn’t know how to open our mail,” Bourne recalls of their time living 
together as teens. “I think our cleaner once found some crazy cheque from a 
publishing company that nobody knew was there – it was just sitting there in 
our mail, this massive cheque that nobody saw.” Having a support structure was 
never even on the agenda. “After being signed, we used to get the tube in, the 
Piccadilly line to the West End. We would just ride the tube in,” he recalls. 
“When the single came out, people started to recognise us. [Before then we] 
operated quite simply.”

“We didn’t know that shit was available. It wasn’t like: ‘Why don’t we have a 
person?’ I remember when we went to see One Direction, I saw their setup and 
was, like … ‘Woah!’ we were just kind of rolling around getting on with shit,” 
adds Willis.

Nevertheless, Bourne says, even if they had assembled a support team, it would 
not have protected them from the effects of their escalating fame. “It doesn’t 
matter how well you think you are looked after or how happy you think you are 
at the time. The only way you really learn things is when you go through 
things. You know you have to … it’s an experience you learn yourself. It’s up 
to you to flag the things.”

We’re different people to the people we were. We were little kids back then

Busted still seem preoccupied with being taken seriously. They describe the 
recent spate of “big reunion” re-formations of pop bands as “tragic”; they say 
they don’t care about the success of Night Driver; they insist they would 
happily play in tiny venues if that were the only path open to them. You get 
the feeling they’re keen to erase a past that is too potent to ignore.

“Funnily enough, when we were out at a dinner I put on this fucking shit video 
from Busted back in the day, this thing of us hanging out, and someone filmed 
us and I was like, ‘Who the fuck is that guy?’” Willis says.

“You’re so young, 16, 17, you’re not really yourself yet. You’re copying other 
people. Your whole existence is made up from being what you’re supposed to be 
like,” Bourne says.

“A lot of that is that when you are 17, all you really give a shit about is 
what your mates think of you,” Willis says. “I just wanted my mates to think I 
was cool. Some of of them did and some of them did not. But now I don’t give a 
fuck.”

McBusted: Busted + McFly = one of 2014’s most unlikely pop stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/18/mcbusted-busted-mcfly-success-2014>
Their attitudes aren’t the only things that have evolved with time. Culture 
for one, has moved on. In a review of Busted’s show in London in May, the Daily 
Telegraph suggested the song Who’s David had dated badly, with its misogynistic 
undertones (“You stupid lying bitch, who’s David?”) all the more uncomfortable 
coming from people who no longer had the excuse of being teenagers.

“What do you mean, misogynistic undertones?” asks Bourne.

“You can’t say stupid lying bitch any more,” Willis replies.

“Really?” Bourne says.

Simpson: “As you say, society has changed hugely. Much more PC.”

Willis: “Basically, it’s not cool to call women bitches any more.”

Simpson: “I’m not sure it ever was.”

Willis: “That was kind of the point.”

Bourne: “Even if they lie?”

Willis: “Even if they have been a bitch to you.”

Bourne: “Even if she cheats on you, is she not a bitch?”

Simpson: “Derogotary terminology. Anyway, we would never write lyrics like 
that. We’re different people to the people we were. We were little kids back 
then.”

“It’s the difference between being 18 and 33, it’s that different,” concludes 
Bourne, on board with third-wave feminsim, on board with an all-new Busted.

Night Driver is out now on East West.
 