
It was amusing on TV’s This Morning, when Adele and Matt Allen from Brighton 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/1475855/off-grid-parents-whose-child-weed-live-on-this-morning-beg-strangers-for-100k-to-fund-their-hippy-lifestyle/>
 came on to talk about their unconventional “off-grid’ parenting lifestyle. As 
their son, Ulysses, five, clambered on the sofa, their one-year-old daughter, 
Ostara, decided to have a wee on the floor. (This was claimed as “nappy 
failure” by Adele.)

The Allens want people to donate £100,000 so that they can start a 
“self-sustaining” life in Costa Rica (the fund currently stands at £140). Their 
philosophies include: prolonged breastfeeding, anti-vaccination, anti-medicine, 
rejecting the school system, thefamily sleeping together in one bed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/sifting-the-evidence/2015/mar/18/bed-sharing-with-babies-is-it-safe>
, non-assistedhome births 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/18/home-births-and-hospital-births-in-the-uk-share-your-experiences>
 and keeping the placenta attached instead of cutting the cord.

Adele’s advice is to sprinkle the placenta with salt and flower petals and 
cart it around, like a macabre saline drip, until it drops off naturally. (Any 
pregnant women who would like to practise this technique could perhaps rustle 
in the bins at the back of Sainsbury’s for some out-of-date mince. Though I’m 
vegetarian, so I’d go withQuorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/01/quorn-bids-to-sate-global-appetites-after-550m-sale>
.)

As much as this made me giggle, it’s not my intention to attack the Allens – 
they seem perfectly nice, albeit a tad earnest, and their children look happy 
and well cared for. I’m not against “alternative lifestyles” (or alternative 
anything) per se. And who minds that Ostara, bless her, weed on the television 
studio floor?

If anything, the Allens seem to be extreme examples of a more generalised 
“off-grid” attitude to parenting, sometimes called child-centred. But is it 
still genuinely alternative? And is not the suspicion sometimes that there’s an 
element of pose, an evangelical parent-themed form of self-aggrandisement? Do 
such people realise how grindingly conventional this “unconventional”parenting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/26/stop-fetishising-parenting-youre-sucking-all-the-joy-out-of-it>
 has become, how cliched the behaviours, what an established type they are? 
How, when such parenting goes too far, it starts looking like ineptly disguised 
narcissism. As in: “Look at me, admire me, emulate me, my value system – how 
original and unorthodox I am!” And all you hear is “I” and “me”, with the 
children barely meriting a mention.

When taken to extremes, such attitudes err on dangerous (perhaps the Allens 
should consider themselves fortunate to have had straightforward births). Even 
when it’s just silly and tiring (anti-discipline this,anti-vaccination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/29/tribeca-de-niro-anti-vaccination-film-scientists-response>
 that, the usual central casting nu-hippy waffle), the impulse is to say: “I 
already know this – pretty much everyone knows it! We’ve just chosen to quietly 
select what works for us and try not to be tedious urban cartoons about it.”

What Parent Narcissists seem to find too unbearable to acknowledge is that 
most people are already operating “off grid” in different ways to varying 
degrees, but the vast majority don’t feel the need to make a big lifestyle song 
and dance about it. I’ve known people who have done prolonged 
breastfeeding/family beds/home schooling or whatever, but they didn’t feel the 
need to relentlessly harp on about their choices as though they were ancient 
seers gifted with special wisdom from the organic tie-dye parenting angels.

It seems that all too often the only thing that distinguishes the 
“unconventional” parents from the regular sort isn’t what they do, but that 
they never stop banging on about it. Also that, rather than carefully selecting 
what works for them, they’re usually doingall of it (sometimes as mindlessly 
and automatically as someone blindly following mainstream rules). If the 
definition of parental narcissism is when your style says more about you than 
it does about your child, then I’d wager that quite a few people out there need 
a reality check much more than, say, a self-sustaining sojourn in Costa Rica. A 
case of, hey there, all you off-grid people, maybe you just found a different 
(but just as rigid) grid after all?

Let David Bowie rest in peace
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Foff-grid-parenting-david-bowie-bob-geldof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa537a01cab01e7d5cf61437d3b6072dabc5be05f%2F1123_0_3766_2261%2F3766.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=By%20all%20means%20be%20%E2%80%98off-grid%E2%80%99%20parents%2C%20but%20do%20it%20quietly%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Foff-grid-parenting-david-bowie-bob-geldof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=By%20all%20means%20be%20%E2%80%98off-grid%E2%80%99%20parents%2C%20but%20do%20it%20quietly%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Foff-grid-parenting-david-bowie-bob-geldof%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa537a01cab01e7d5cf61437d3b6072dabc5be05f%2F1123_0_3766_2261%2F3766.jpg>
 A woman looks at a painting by Damien Hirst in front of a portrait of David 
Bowie at Sotheby’s. Photograph: Frank Augstein/AP 
It seems that there is some previously unreleased material from the late David 
Bowie. An album calledThe Gouster, a soul-funk experiment, which was later 
turned into 1975’sYoung Americans, will form part of the forthcoming box set 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/david-bowie-box-set-includes-unreleased-album-the-gouster-w430406>
,Who Can I Be Now (1974-1976).

I’m partly comforted by the fact that Tony Visconti, Bowie’s producer, was 
involved inThe Gouster. I say partly, because I was relieved to hear that the 
greatNile Rodgers was the musical director for Lady Gaga’s Bowie 
<https://duckduckgo.com/?q=Nile+Rodgers+was+the+musical+director+for+Lady+Gaga%E2%80%99s+Bowie+site%3Atheguardian.com&ia=web>
 tribute at the Grammys. Which, as some will recall, turned out to be a bizarre 
blend ofStars in Their Eyes, a giant synthesiser falling down a fire escape and 
what sounded like 1,000 cats yowling as they were castrated. Watching the 
nightmare unfold, I learned an important life lesson – sometimes cool people, 
such as Rodgers, do uncool things.

The Gouster promises better, the completists must be euphoric (though some of 
the material has surfaced elsewhere) and it’s not exactly a surprise – there’s 
usually unreleased material after an artist’s death.

However, Bowie was a control freak and relentlessly creative to the end 
(leaving fans a deathbed album); if he had wanted a decades-old project to be 
released, then surely it would already have happened?

It could be that The Gouster had Bowie’s blessing (the box set was announced 
on Bowie’s official Facebook page), but generally I think there’s something 
more honest about straightforward compilations. Just as with the recent news of 
previously unreleased material from Prince, my feeling is that these decisions 
should be made by the artist alone and anything else is disrespectful, 
especially regarding musicians of this calibre.

Just because the music “death industry” has always happened, it doesn’t mean 
that it alwayshas to happen.







Mock snakeskin is nothing to brag about either, Bob
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Foff-grid-parenting-david-bowie-bob-geldof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3d909d76bb2e7afc184a0ba2d52314ef5275ff4%2F0_187_3536_2122%2F3536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=By%20all%20means%20be%20%E2%80%98off-grid%E2%80%99%20parents%2C%20but%20do%20it%20quietly%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Foff-grid-parenting-david-bowie-bob-geldof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=By%20all%20means%20be%20%E2%80%98off-grid%E2%80%99%20parents%2C%20but%20do%20it%20quietly%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Foff-grid-parenting-david-bowie-bob-geldof%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3d909d76bb2e7afc184a0ba2d52314ef5275ff4%2F0_187_3536_2122%2F3536.jpg>
 Bob Geldof: who, exactly is the fashion victim? Photograph: Action 
Press/REX/Shutterstock 
Perhaps it was just his version of onstage bantz when Bob Geldof, playing with 
the Boomtown Rats, told the crowd at Brentwood music festival that they all 
looked as ifthey were dressed in Primark clothing 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/bob-geldof-boomtown-rats-brentwood-festival-walkout-crowd-primark-a7148686.html>
. This was after Geldof bragged about his mock-snakeskin suit (psst, Bob, if 
it’s personal style we’re talking about, glass houses, mate).

If this was old-school baiting of what he saw as the lower orders, Geldof got 
his sociological cursors all mixed up. The middle classes are the most prone to 
dressing “laid back” (scruffy); the working classes are much more likely to 
dress up. Put simply, when all you have is yourself, you become your own 
billboard. Even if such people were able to afford only Primark, they’d make it 
look expensive.

I’m in a generous mood, so I’m going to put this one down to Geldof, in scenes 
reminiscent ofSpinal Tap and the puppet show, being piqued to discover that 
he’d been tricked by his management and the Rats weren’t headlining the Pyramid 
stage at Glastonbury after all. It’s either that or acknowledge that the public 
face of famine relief has an unexpected attitude towards the limited clothing 
budgets of ordinary British people.
 