
As the majority of Americans who didn’t vote for Donald Trump come to terms 
with having elected a shameless bigot and liar as our next president, there’s 
been quite a bit of pontificating about how best to make progress under his 
administration. Do we pay attention to tweets or cabinet appointments? Focus on 
making sure the white supremacists celebrating Trump’s win aren’t normalized in 
the media? Take on fake news?

Time magazine didn't give Trump devil horns. God did | Jonathan Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/time-magazine-trump-devil-horns>
Unfortunately, progressives and those who care about our country’s future will 
have to do it all. But what we don’t need to – and shouldn’t – do is heed the
wide 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/opinion/trevor-noah-lets-not-be-divided-divided-people-are-easier-to-rule.html>
calls 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2016/dec/2/donald-trump-calls-unity-during-thank-you-tour/>
 for everyone to embrace “unity” moving forward. Trump’s campaign was built on 
a foundation of racism and misogyny; to ask marginalized people to woo those 
who think we’re worthless is a waste of precious time better spent on more 
urgent issues. Especially now that so many Americans’ rights are at risk.

As Kara Brown at Jezebel smartly wrote 
<http://jezebel.com/love-is-not-the-answer-1789753903>, the love and kindness 
tactic “suggests blindness, endless patience and a great deal of emotional 
labor on the part of people who are already exhausted”.


Instead, let’s do something both effective and enjoyable: become big, sharp, 
nasty thorns in Trump’s side. Get under his skin and reside there for four 
years.

Lucky for us, irritating a narcissistic wannabe-despot doesn’t take much 
effort. It’s especially easy for women. Our president-elect says he “goes 
through the roof 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/6/2/11833912/donald-trump-1994-women-buildings-misogyny>
” when he comes home and dinner isn’t ready. (So please, ladies, step away from 
the oven for a while and cook up some plans on how todefend 
<https://www.plannedparenthood.org/get-involved> Planned Parenthood instead.) 
Trump has alsosaid 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/06/02/politics/trump-wife-comments-abc-interview/> 
that “putting a wife to work is a very dangerous thing”, he has bemoaned women 
who “shout 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/2016-gop-primary-live-updates-and-results/2016/04/trump-hillary-clinton-woman-card-222519>
” at orcriticize <http://fortune.com/2015/08/09/trump-blood-megyn-kelly/> him, 
and he has expressed disgust with any sort of female body function, from
breastfeeding 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/29/politics/trump-breast-pump-statement/> to 
urinating <http://gothamist.com/2015/12/22/trump_schlongs_america.php>. It 
turns out all women have to do to be “nasty” in Trump’s eyes is exist.

But anyone, regardless of gender, can get on Trump’s bad side; all you have to 
do to infuriate the thin-skinned reality star is disagree with him. Indiana 
union leader Chuck Jones, for example, is the latest target of Trump’s ire.
Twenty minutes after 
<https://twitter.com/brianstelter/status/806664198918963200> Jones corrected 
Trump’s numbers about jobs saved on the Carrier deal, our soon-to-be 
commander-in-chief tweeted an insult about Jones that resulted in scores of
threats against him 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/08/union-leader-who-called-out-donald-trump-says-hes-getting-threats-from-trump-supporters.html>
.

In this sort of political climate, where the president-elect targets 
individual citizens andhate crimes have skyrocketed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
 across the country, calls for reconciliation feel more like a demand for 
acquiescence: unify, or else. But people can’t be expected to be gracious 
losers when what we’re losing is our healthcare, safety, families and rights. 
In a time like this, being disagreeable is necessary.

It’s also strategic. Vann Newkirk II pointed out 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/12/discussing-racism-white-voters/509528/>
 in the Atlantic, in a piece about the expectation that people of color reach 
out to bigots with empathy, that “abandoning civility” has its upsides: “The 
labels of racism and bigotry can impose a social cost on bigoted actions, 
policy preferences, or speech, regardless of whether hearts or minds are 
changed. Stigma can be useful.”

Now is the not the time to grovel for hard-won rights or to appeal to the 
better angels of people who have shown themselves to be horrific, over and over 
again. Now is the time to fight, and to be as nasty as we can.
 