
A powerful parliamentary committee has called on the Turnbull government to 
pave the way for security-cleared lawyers to speak up for terrorism suspects in 
closed court proceedings.

The panel stopped short of demanding the measures be put in place before the 
government presses ahead with controversial changes to control order laws that
would allow the court to consider evidence that is hidden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/13/government-could-retrospectively-use-secret-evidence-in-anti-terror-hearings>
 from the suspect.

Government could retrospectively use secret evidence in anti-terror hearings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/13/government-could-retrospectively-use-secret-evidence-in-anti-terror-hearings>
Under Australian law, the federal police can apply to a court to issue a 
control order 
<https://www.ag.gov.au/nationalsecurity/counterterrorismlaw/pages/controlorders.aspx>
 against someone in a bid to prevent a terrorist attack or restrain the 
movements of someone who has previously trained with a listed terrorist 
organisation or been convicted of such offences.

Control orders can include a range of conditions including a requirement to 
wear a tracking device and bans on being in certain areas or associating with 
particular people.

The government’s latest round of national security laws would lower the 
minimum age for a control order to 14 years, allow the monitoring of people to 
ensure they did not breach their control order conditions, and make it illegal 
to advocate genocide.

The bill also contains measures that would allow the court to consider 
information that was not disclosed to the subject of the control order or their 
lawyer, raising concerns about people having a fair opportunity to challenge 
the veracity of evidence against them.


On Monday the bipartisan committee that reviews national security legislation 
called for the passage of the bill but made 20 other suggestions it said would 
improve safeguards, oversight and transparency.

It recommended “a system of special advocates be introduced to represent the 
interests of persons subject to control order proceedings where the subject and 
their legal representative have been excluded under the proposed amendments”.

These special advocates would represent the interests of the excluded party 
and provide advice on redactions and the admissibility of evidence, but would 
be prohibited from disclosing secret information to the person. The system in 
place in the United Kingdom has been cited as an example for the government to 
consider.

The parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security (PJCIS) said 
legislation for special advocates “should be introduced to the parliament as 
soon as practicable and no later than the end of 2016”, but argued the secret 
evidence measures should be passed in the meantime.


“The committee accepts that there is an increasing need to rely on and protect 
sensitive national security information in control order proceedings,” the PJCIS
said in its report 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Intelligence_and_Security/CT_Amendment_Bill_2015/Report>
.

“Accordingly, the committee supports the amendments proposed in schedule 15 
[the secret evidence provisions] and considers they should proceed without 
delay. The committee notes that this approach does not preclude the court from 
exercising its existing discretion to appoint special advocates on an ad-hoc 
basis.”

This differs from the approach suggested by the independent national security 
legislation monitor, Roger Gyles QC, whosaid the secret evidence measures 
should not come into force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/05/special-advocates-should-oversee-secret-evidence-under-control-orders-says-qc>
 until the special advocates regime was implemented.

Gyles said he knew from his own experience as a defence counsel that it was 
“possible to play a useful role in testing the prosecution case where no 
positive defence can be put forward on behalf of an accused” and the proposed 
system “would assist in satisfying the constitutional requirement for 
procedural fairness and in complying with international obligations”.

The government wants to allow courts to make three new types of orders when 
dealing with control order cases. They would allow the court to:

 * Provide the subject of a control order and their lawyer with a censored or 
summarised form of “national security information” against them even if the 
court considers other, secret details when making its decision; or,

 * Provide the subject and lawyer with none of the information in the source 
document, even if the court considers all of that information when making its 
decision;

 * Call a witness to provide information without disclosing this to the 
subject or their lawyer, even if the court considers this evidence when making 
its decision.

The attorney general would be able to ask the court to exclude a person and 
their lawyer from closed hearings to decide whether one of the above secrecy 
orders should be made.

The government has argued the secrecy proposals “pursue a legitimate 
objective, being the protection of national security information in control 
order proceedings where disclosure may be likely to prejudice national 
security” or jeopardise informants.

The PJCIS chairman, Dan Tehan, in his last report before taking up a new role 
as the veterans’ affairs minister, said the bipartisan committee had proposed 
changes to ensure “a balanced and proportionate outcome”.

The recommendations included requiring the best interests of a young person to 
be the “primary” consideration in deciding whether control order restrictions 
are necessary, while the safety of the community would be the “paramount” 
consideration. The committee also called for “recklessness” to be taken into 
account for the offence of advocating genocide.

The attorney general, George Brandis, said he welcomed the unanimous report on 
thecounter-terrorism legislation amendment bill (No. 1) 2015 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Bills_LEGislation/Bills_Search_Results/Result?bId=s1023>
 and the government would consider its response in consultation with the states 
and territories.

“The report makes 21 recommendations of which the most important is the 
recommendation that the parliament pass the bill,” he said.
 