
If you're poor, the only way you're likely to injure someone is the old 
traditional way: artisanal violence, we could call it – by hands, by knife, by 
club, or maybe modern hands-on violence, by gun or by car.

But if you're tremendously wealthy, you can practice industrial-scale violence 
without any manual labor on your own part. You can, say, build a sweatshop 
factory that willcollapse in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/bangladesh-factory-building-collapse-community>
 and kill more people than any hands-on mass murderer ever did, or you can 
calculate risk and benefit about putting poisons or unsafe machines into the 
world, as manufacturers do every day. If you're the leader of a country, you 
can declare war and kill by the hundreds of thousands or millions. And the 
nuclear superpowers – the US and Russia – still hold the option of destroying 
quite a lot of life on Earth.


So do the carbon barons. But when we talk about violence, we almost always 
talk about violence from below, not above.

Or so I thought when I received a press release last week from a climate group 
announcing that "scientists say there is a direct link between changing climate 
and an increase in violence 
<http://www.climatenewsnetwork.net/2014/03/climate-change-makes-violence-likelier/>
". What the scientists actually said, in a not-so-newsworthyarticle in Nature 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v476/n7361/abs/nature10311.html> two and 
a half years ago, is that there is higher conflict in the tropics in El Nino 
years, and that perhaps this will scale up to make our age of climate change 
also an era of civil and international conflict.

The message is that ordinary people will behave badly in an era of intensified 
climate change.

All this makes sense, unless you go back to the premise and note that climate 
change is itself violence. Extreme, horrific, longterm, widespread violence.

Climate change is anthropogenic – caused by human beings, some much more than 
others. We know the consequences of that change: the acidification of oceans 
and decline of many species in them, the slowdisappearance of island nations 
such as the Maldives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2013/sep/26/maldives-test-case-climate-change-action>
, increased flooding, drought, crop failure leading to food-price increases and 
famine, increasingly turbulent weather. (ThinkHurricane Sandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hurricane-sandy> and the recent typhoon in 
the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/08/typhoon-haiyan-batters-philippines>
, andheat waves that kill elderly people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/04/heat-related-deaths-climate-change>
 by the tens of thousands.)

Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is 
violence.

So if we want to talk about violence and climate change – and we are talking 
about it, afterlast week's horrifying report from the world's top climate 
scientists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/31/new-climate-report-food-prices-already-here>
 – then let's talk about climate change as violence. Rather than worrying about 
whether ordinary human beings will react turbulently to the destruction of the 
very means of their survival, let's worry about that destruction – and their 
survival. Of course water failure, crop failure, flooding and more will lead to 
mass migration and climate refugees –they already have 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/interactive/2013/may/13/newtok-alaska-climate-change-refugees>
 – and this will lead to conflict. Those conflicts are being set in motion now.

You can regard the Arab Spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/16/leader-2-arab-spring-tunisia-egypt>
, in part, as a climate conflict: the increase in wheat priceswas one of the 
triggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jul/17/bread-food-arab-spring> 
for that series of revolts that changed the face of northernmost Africa and the 
Middle East. On the one hand, you can say, how nice if those people had not 
been hungry in the first place. On the other, how can you not say, how great is 
it that those people stood up against being deprived of sustenance and hope? 
And then you have to look at the systems that created that hunger - the 
enormous economic inequalities in places such as Egypt and the brutality used 
to keep down the people at the lower levels of the social system, as well as 
the weather.

People revolt when their lives are unbearable. Sometimes material reality 
creates that unbearableness: droughts, plagues, storms, floods. But food and 
medical care, health and well-being, access to housing and education – these 
things are also governed by economic means and government policy. That's what 
the revolt called Occupy Wall Street was against.

Climate change will increase hunger as food prices rise and food production 
falters, but we already have widespread hunger on Earth, and much of it is due 
not to the failures of nature and farmers, but to systems of distribution. 
Almost16m children 
<http://feedingamerica.org/hunger-in-america/hunger-facts/usda-hunger-numbers.aspx>
 in the United States now live with hunger, according to the US Department of 
Agriculture, and that is not because the vast, agriculturally rich United 
States cannot produce enough to feed all of us. We are a country whose 
distribution system is itself a kind of violence.

Climate change is not suddenly bringing about an era of equitable 
distribution. I suspect people will be revolting in the coming future against 
what they revolted against in the past: the injustices of the system. They 
should revolt, and we should be glad they do, if not so glad that they need to. 
(Though one can hope they'll recognize that violence is not necessarily where 
their power lies.) One of the events prompting the French Revolution was the
failure of the 1788 wheat crop 
<http://personal.lse.ac.uk/fleischh/Drought%20and%20the%20French%20Revolution.pdf>
, which made bread prices skyrocket and the poor go hungry. The insurance 
against such events is often thought to be more authoritarianism and more 
threats against the poor, but that's only an attempt to keep a lid on what's 
boiling over; the other way to go is to turn down the heat.

The same week during which I received that ill-thought-out press release about 
climate and violence, Exxon Mobil Corporation issued a policy report. It makes 
for boring reading, unless you can make the dry language of business into 
pictures of the consequences of those acts undertaken for profit.Exxon says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/03/exxon-mobil-climate-change-oil-gas-fossil-fuels>
:

We are confident that none of our hydrocarbon reserves are now or will become 
'stranded'. We believe producing these assets is essential to meeting growing 
energy demand worldwide.

Stranded assets that mean carbon assets – coal, oil, gas still underground – 
would become worthless if we decided they could not be extracted and burned in 
the near future. Because scientists say that we need to leave most of the 
world's known carbon reserves in the ground if we are to go for the milder 
rather than the more extreme versions of climate change. Under the milder 
version, countless more people – species, places – will survive. In the 
best-case scenario, we damage the Earth less. We are currently wrangling about 
how much to devastate the Earth.

In every arena, we need to look at industrial-scale and systemic violence, not 
just the hands-on violence of the less powerful. When it comes to climate 
change, this is particularly true. Exxon has decided to bet that we can't make 
the corporation keep its reserves in the ground, and the company is reassuring 
its investors that it will continue to profit off the rapid, violent and 
intentional destruction of the Earth.

That's a tired phrase, the destruction of the Earth, but translate it into the 
face of a starving child and a barren field – and then multiply that a few 
million times. Or just picture the tiny bivalves: scallops, oysters, Arctic sea 
snails that can't form shells in acidifying oceans right now. Or another 
superstorm tearing apart another city. Climate change is global-scale violence, 
against places and species as well as against human beings. Once we call it by 
name, we can start having a real conversation about our priorities and values. 
Because the revolt against brutality begins with a revolt against the language 
that hides that brutality.
 