
Superannuation has gone from the sleeper topic of the election to the 
all-out-brawl issue. AfterJulie Bishop stumbled on the details on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/superannuation-transition-to-retirement-julie-bishop-gotcha-moment>
, a little-known aspect of policy has dominated Wednesday – reforms to the 
“transition to retirement” taxation.

It may sound like bland politic speak but the transition to retirement changes 
are causing great disturbance in the Liberal party roomaccording to Sky News 
<http://www.skynews.com.au/news/top-stories/2016/06/01/internal-pressure-on-government-over-super.html>
, and donors are withdrawing funds in disgust.

Sky is also reporting that the changes did not go to the party room and Arthur 
Sinodinos did not seem able to clear that up in another excruciating interview 
of the campaign. Sinodinos said the budget was presented to the party room but 
some of the footnotes could have been missed. He added that there would be more 
consultation after the election.

So does all that mean voters could return the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> to government with a 
superannuation policy they will then change?

Sinodinos:

I’m not going to speculate on that.

Briefly, the transition to retirement changes mean that people withdrawing 
from their superannuation fund between the ages of 55 and 65 would in future 
pay 15% tax, rather than none.

Malcolm Turnbull used the strategy of telling the truth and admitting it was a 
tax increase.

So yes it is an increase in taxation but it is still a very concessional rate 
of tax and that is – it is very important – so super and transition to 
retirement still remains very concessional, but what we are doing is making the 
system fairer.

Government members have even put their names to their rumblings:
Eliza Borrello (@ElizaBorrello) 
.@IanGoodenoughMP <https://twitter.com/IanGoodenoughMP> re super: "I have 
received a volume of correspondence from constituents objecting to the 
changes.." 1/2@abcnews <https://twitter.com/abcnews> #ausvotes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ausvotes?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/ElizaBorrello/status/737841983847206913> June 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ElizaBorrello/status/737841983847206913> Eliza Borrello 
(@ElizaBorrello) 
"...it is a significant issue in this election, however the dilemma is to 
identify another area of revenue to target" given budget@abcnews 
<https://twitter.com/abcnews>
 <https://twitter.com/ElizaBorrello/status/737842201963597824> June 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ElizaBorrello/status/737842201963597824> 
The treasurer, Scott Morrison, said the number of people in the transition to 
retirement stream was 115,000 and so was standing by the government figure that 
96% of people were unaffected or better off.


So what did Bishop have to say about being stuck for details on Tuesday?

It’s certainly an opportunity for us to explain our superannuation changes.

Bishop is not the only politician not across the nitty gritty of her party’s 
superannuation policy.Sarah Hanson-Young was asked about taxing superannuation 
and saidthe Greens’ policy was to tax it like normal income 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-sorry-what-senator-sarah-hansonyoung-stumbles-on-superannuation-policy-20160601-gp8r7z.html>
. Her chief-of-staff sent her a text message to correct her and say the party 
wanted progressive tax rates but not at the same rate as income tax.

Asked again if it would be a tax on super contributions or earnings, 
Hanson-Young responded.

Sorry ... what?

Is this Bernardi’s dead cat?


Cory Bernardi has lobbed his own version of a dead cat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/any-election-involving-crosby-textor-will-include-dead-cats-and-weve-just-been-thrown-one>
 on Wednesday morning linking to the blog of neo-masculinist Roosh V. The 
piece, titled“What is a Social Justice Warrior?” 
<http://www.rooshv.com/what-is-a-social-justice-warrior-sjw>, takes on the 
“extreme leftwing” of “feminism, progressivism, and political correctness”. 
Roosh is out to find for that maligned class in our society – the white man. 
Roosh uses his platform to complain men have no platform and talk about the 
free speech being smothered.

“The idea of privilege is so essential to SJW ideology that a common debate 
tactic they use is to say ‘check your privilege’, which roughly translates to, 
‘you must immediately halt or change your speech because your ancestors may or 
may not have done bad things to women or minority races’.” It’s certainly set 
social media alight, although Bernardi’s intention was not clear.

‘Horseshit’

Peta “Helpful” Credlin said the government needed to ensure its members were 
across the details of superannuation policy. She also knocked backBarnaby Joyce
’s suggestions thatTony Abbott harboured ambitions of a comeback labelling it 
“horseshit” and saying Joyce needed to focus on the wombat trail (the 
traditional name for the Nationals’ campaign).

Water off a Barnaby’s back though:

Nor am I going to get into a debate on the equine minutiae of what’s happening 
on the trail. [I could] line up a whole range of people who’ve said worse 
things about me.

Joyce added he was not going to “commentate on commentators” the favoured line 
ofScott Morrison when asked about Credlin.

Now is as good a time as any to check in on the Abbott one-man campaign:
Frank Keany (@FJKeany) 
Tony Abbott has bought a lottery ticket at a newsagents during a street walk 
with a LNP candidate near Noosa@abcnews <https://twitter.com/abcnews>
 <https://twitter.com/FJKeany/status/737849234997817344> June 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/FJKeany/status/737849234997817344> 
It’s the economy, dummy

A rare reprieve in the campaign – economy figures came out today and they were 
actually good. Though those stormy clouds remain on the horizon.

Australia’s economy is growing at an annual rate of 3.1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/01/australias-gdp-growth-rises-by-11-in-march-quarter-taking-annual-rate-to-31>
, which is much higher than the forecasts and the strongest annual increase 
since September 2012.

But.

The figure is mainly propped up by exports and disposable income has continued 
to fall in real terms.

Best of Bowers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab1c87c6421bb57e6f077d91bce682d5395d620f%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20super%20changes%20snare%20Sinodinos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20super%20changes%20snare%20Sinodinos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab1c87c6421bb57e6f077d91bce682d5395d620f%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Linda Burney and Bill Shorten in Rockdale. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the 
Guardian 
Fancy seeing you here ... Mike Bowers captures Linda Burney and Bill Shorten 
doing a street walk in Burney’s Sydney electorate of Barton on Wednesday 
afternoon.

Further reading

• The third man: Greens leader Richard Di Natale campaigns his own way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/the-third-man-greens-leader-richard-di-natale-campaigns-his-own-way>
.Gareth Hutchens spent time with Di Natale who spoke about why it is beneficial 
to have both major parties complaining about them.


Election 2016: Behold, congregation of the Church of Innovation, here is 
Malcolm Turnbull 
<http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016-opinion/election-2016-behold-congregation-of-the-church-of-innovation-here-is-malcolm-20160601-gp8sl3.html?login_token=NmSGG3g6CwnzuFnOGYaMXx1aErSIoqCcCLBu8FsbiDRop-LbQ3LFK_ozWzGTL5weCjCTQj8xAmOcBkRbg5Xong&member_token=hR67VvxnNgiPJYGTFWrPjtyiMSSNY950xQpb8h3zIL-24mUn3oJCOjF7y-cDSutnBk2aaR1VpVZ1AqsclA-uBg&expiry=1496291675>
 (Fairfax Media). A great sketch fromAmy Remeikis on Turnbull’s visit to 
Queensland on Wednesday.

Meanwhile, in the rest of the world ...

It is either Mary Poppins fans rejoice, or Mary Poppins fan despair: Emily 
Blunt will step into Julie Andrews’ shoes for the sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/31/emily-blunt-confirmed-mary-poppins-sequel>
.

Never miss another catchup: If you’re reading this in the Guardian app, tap on 
‘Australian election briefing’ at the top or bottom of this page, then tap on 
‘Follow series’ to get an app notification as soon as the Campaign catchup 
publishes every afternoon.
 