
It took a long time for Barack Obama to woo African American voters, who were 
decidedly in the Hillary Clinton camp in the early weeks of the2008 race for 
the Democratic nomination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2009/mar/02/us-elections-2008>. The 
tide shifted after Obama won the Iowa caucuses, proving himself to be a viable 
candidate. Clinton’s strong black support began to ebb after a series of 
flippant remarks from Clinton herself and her biggest asset and liability, 
former president Bill Clinton, in advance of the primary in South Carolina – a 
state with a large black Democratic base – in late January.

Many voters were outraged by the Clintons’ disparaging language towards Obama 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2012/09/bill-clintons-8-digs-at-obama-080728>, 
and shifted their support to him – paving the way for his eventual historic win.

Sanders' sway over millennials is more of a 'dangerous moment' for Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-money-blog/2016/feb/07/bernie-sanders-millennial-voter-economy-hillary-clinton-goldman-sachs>
Bernie Sanders’ campaign, in some ways, taps into the desire for an 
alternative to Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/06/bernie-sanders-america-ready-for-socialist-president>
 that voters sought in 2008. And yet African Americans, the strongest, most 
consistent voting block, haven’t abandoned Clinton this time; many are 
unfamiliar or uncomfortable with the socialist democratic values Sanders 
proposes to bring to the White House. Clinton still holds many crucial 
endorsements from elected officials, unions, activist groups and black clergy. 
She now frequently invokes Obama in her remarks, a key signal to voters that 
she intends to be heir to his legacy.

But Erica Garner – the daughter of Eric Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2014/dec/04/i-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video>
, who was killed by a New York City police officer in 2014 in a banned 
chokehold for allegedly selling loose cigarettes – has endorsed Bernie Sanders. 
Inan opinion article she posed a series of questions 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/01/29/black-lives-like-my-fathers-should-matter-in-america-thats-why-im-endorsing-bernie-sanders/>
 that articulated Sanders’ platform: “Who understands that we’re experiencing 
an economic crisis made worse by structural barriers to jobs and education? Who 
will bring us closer to real safety, freedom and power? Who has clearly shown 
us where they stand?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-black-democratic-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0264f2a206a3e1960ed7d2cee8970f34a7891f51%2F204_277_2702_1621%2F2702.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Sanders%20win%20the%20black%20Democratic%20vote%3F%20He%E2%80%99s%20got%20a%20long%20way%20to%20go%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-black-democratic-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Sanders%20win%20the%20black%20Democratic%20vote%3F%20He%E2%80%99s%20got%20a%20long%20way%20to%20go%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-black-democratic-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0264f2a206a3e1960ed7d2cee8970f34a7891f51%2F204_277_2702_1621%2F2702.jpg>
 ‘Clinton still holds many crucial endorsements from elected officials, unions, 
activist groups and black clergy. She now invokes Obama in her remarks 
frequently, a key signalling to voters that she intends to be heir to his 
legacy.’ Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images 
The Sanders camp, however, appears to have only recently taken this 
relationship seriously, employing surrogates such as former Ohio state senator
Nina Turner 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2016/02/102352/nina-turner-bernie-sanders-supporter>
, scholar and Obama criticCornel West 
<http://www.cornelwest.com/press.html#.Vrd6y854X9I> and hip-hop artist Killer 
Mike <https://twitter.com/KillerMike/status/696009980256788480>, in an attempt 
to connect with black voters who are angry, alienated and outside the black 
Democratic establishment or disappointed with Obama’s record.

It is a strategy that should have been employed months ago. Sanders is a true 
believer in that he simply thinks people will support him without actually 
courting voters. In the earlier days of his campaign, rallies that swelled to 
20,000 were homogeneous, dominated by blue-collar white Americans. The turning 
point for Sanders among many African Americans was when the candidatefluffed 
his response to a Black Lives Matter protest 
<http://time.com/3989917/black-lives-matter-protest-bernie-sanders-seattle/> at 
his rally in Seattle last August, an incident that outraged his supporters.

Sanders on reparations has been lacklustre, showing a misunderstanding of how 
race and class intersect

Yet that incident only underscored a fraught history between the black 
community and the white left. The white left in America has often asked black 
America to subordinate the fight against racism for a collective struggle 
against class divisions. That demand ignores the fact that racism overlays and 
complicates every aspect of American life.

In addition, to some young black voters, Sanders’ answer to the question of 
reparations for the descendants of slavery had been disappointingly lacklustre, 
again showing a misunderstanding of how race and class intersect.

For others, Sanders’ words sound like idealism that isn’t rooted in a tangible 
plan. Job creation, single-payer healthcare and free college are great ideas 
but would require huge political capital to become reality. To the black 
Democratic establishment, Clinton seems more plausible.

If anything, these candidates highlight a generational divide within the 
African American community on how to address our issues. The older generation 
is pragmatic, and used to making slow progress towards equal rights and the 
promise of the American democracy. The younger generation is cynical yet 
optimistic, and knowledgeable, understanding the failures of the old methods 
that have not made significant gains for African Americans since the 1960s 
civil rights movement.

Rahm Emanuel faces wrath of Chicago's black community over police violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/20/rahm-emanuel-faces-wrath-chicago-black-community-over-police-violence>
The work of those black baby boomers has been slowly undone, even though some 
have moved into establishment positions. Decades after the end of official 
segregation, and after gaining the right to vote, African Americans are faced 
with a weakened and depleted middle class, many of whom suffered great losses 
from the last financial crisis and depression. And some of the baby boomers’ 
gains, such as protections within theVoting Rights Act 
<http://www.history.com/topics/black-history/voting-rights-act>, are even being 
rolled back.

Hillary Clinton’s roots with the black American Democratic establishment are 
deep – the relationship stretches back decades with the congressional black 
caucus and by extension, black clergy.

Given the track record of the last Clinton presidency, and its ties to 
embattled Chicago mayorRahm Emmanuel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rahm-emanuel> – whose police department 
faces amultitude of high-profile complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/20/rahm-emanuel-faces-wrath-chicago-black-community-over-police-violence>
 over abuses – her recent endorsements from mothers who lost loved ones to 
police and vigilante violence remain curious. But Sanders has many miles to go 
to convince black voters that he can fight for our interests and deliver. We’ll 
know more about whether he can break through after theSouth Carolina primary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/03/2016-us-presidential-election-calendar>
 at the end of this month.
 