
Queen Victoria was prescribed cannabis for period pains, and 19th-century 
American doctors used it for everything from anorexia to sexual problems. And 
now the US is embracing medicinal cannabis again – it’s legally available in 25 
states <http://medicalmarijuana.procon.org/view.resource.php?resourceID=000881> 
for conditions such as Aids, anorexia, arthritis, cachexia, cancer, chronic 
pain, glaucoma, migraine, muscle spasms from multiple sclerosis, seizures and 
severe nausea. The list is for comparison: in the UK, the only indication for 
medical cannabis is for painful, tightening muscle spasms (spasticity) in 
multiple sclerosis.Sativex <https://www.mstrust.org.uk/a-z/sativex-nabiximols>, 
an oral spray that uses two chemical extracts from the cannabis plant – delta-9 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) – was the first medicinal 
cannabis licensed in the UK. Medicinal cannabis, you see, does not mean 
treating yourself by smoking weed. Cannabis comes as a proper drug –Sativex 
costs too much for the health watchdog Nice to recommend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/08/drug-multiple-sclerosis-england-wales-nice>
 and only ahandful of specialist doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/may/30/ms-patients-denied-licensed-cannabis-drug>
 will prescribe it.

The solution


Last week’s report from the all-party parliamentary group for drug policy 
reform <http://www.drugpolicyreform.net> recommended medicinal cannabis for 
chronic pain, spasticity, nausea and vomiting after chemotherapy and for anxiety
 <https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B0c_8hkDJu0DUDZMUzhoY1RqMG8/view>. There is 
good evidence to use cannabis products or “natural” cannabis, they said, for 
all these conditions – and moderate evidence for use in sleep disorders, 
fibromyalgia and post-traumatic stress disorder. The evidence came from a 
review based on 20,000 references – although, in places, they were quite 
generous in their rating of the evidence.

A systematic review of the same question – the benefits and adverse effects of 
medicinal marijuana –was published in the Journal of the American Medical 
Association <http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2338251> (JAMA) 
last year with similar conclusions – but found the evidence overall to be 
weaker, and not there at all for anxiety.

The evidence shows that cannabis does relieve chronic pain, but the Home 
Office has already said in response to this latest report that cannabis “is a 
harmful drug which can damage people’s mental and physical health”. Yet Nice 
says it works in the treatment of MS. And the JAMA review, which had higher 
standards of evidence than the latest report, says that cannabis benefits 
people with chronic pain or spasticity due to MS. It adds that there is some 
evidence it helps to improve weight gain in HIV infection, and relieves 
insomnia, nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy. There is no data on 
long-term side-effects – psychosis is the most feared. Typical side-effects 
include drowsiness, nausea, paranoia, sweating and euphoria. There is no solid 
research comparing “natural” with “medicinal” cannabis, but the research 
suggests similar benefits for pain and spasticity. So it does work – but the 
law says you can’t take it.
 