
I’m still running a 12-year-old Sony LCD TV and fancy something a bit bigger, 
but I don’t want “smart” features that that will be dead before I buy another 
TV. I am a Virgin TV subscriber so my TiVo is smarter than most TVs, and I use 
an Amazon Prime TV Stick for streaming. I prefer to be able to upgrade these 
external devices as and when I please, rather than upgrade the whole TV when 
the smart part is no longer smart. Lloyd

As the co-owner of another old but good Sony LCD TV, I feel your pain. It 
seems obvious to us that the TV industry should offer some reasonably priced, 
high-quality TV displays with lots of HDMI inputs and – hello Sony – a simple 
way to switch between feeds using a remote control. But if it does, they are 
hard to find in the UK.

The TV industry understands the problem perfectly. Longtime TV and monitor 
expert Bob Raikes tells me that one of the standard sayings in the TV business 
is that “your smart TV is your stupid TV in two years time”.

He says: “The reality is that smart TV apps often start off looking slightly 
clunky compared to the latest tablet and smartphone apps. In two to three 
years, they will look even worse in comparison. Some TV makers have tried to 
fix this – well, Samsung, at least – by offering a modular upgrade for the 
smarts. I suspect almost nobody bought them, so they have stopped offering this 
feature.

“TV makers often claim that set-top boxes will be wiped out very soon. They 
won’t. The key reason is that the upgrade cycle for the ‘smarts’ is 2-3 years, 
but the replacement cycle for TVs is 8-10 years.

“The downside of buying a ‘dumb’ TV is that TV makers tend to put the best 
video processing and panels into their high-end sets. TVs with no smarts tend 
to be “entry level”, where everything is built down to a price. I have believed 
for years that there is an enthusiast market for really good TVs (in visual 
quality) with only HDMI, but nobody seems to want to make them.”

Dumb TVs

Fortunately, it is easy to find relatively dumb TVs. That is to say, TV sets 
that usually offer a Freeview tuner or two, but no WebOS, Android or other 
operating system running apps. It’s hard to complain about this. Free-to-air 
television is only available in the UK if you have a Freeview or Freesat tuner. 
A TV that didn’t include a tuner would not be a TV set.

In this case, Currys offers salvation. One of the product filters on its 
website is “Smart TV”. If you pick yes, you get a list of 167 TV sets. If you 
pick no, you get a choice of 40. This is more than I expected.

Argos also lets you filter “by Smart TV”. In this case, yes gets you 180 
options while no provides 80. The Argos offerings include its Alba and Bush 
brands, plus the odd set by Hisense, which is a giant supplier in the US. (By 
the way, John Lewis failed me for once. At least, I can’t see a dumb TV filter 
on its website.)

As you’d expect, most dumb TVs have relatively small screen sizes. The TV 
business wants to sell large and expensive super-smart 4K TV sets. But at 
Currys, you still have a choice of one 48in Samsung TV (£359), one 49in JVC TV 
(£269), two 50in TV sets from Seiki (£260 and £279), and two 55in sets from 
Seiki (£309) and JVC (£349). All the online stores offer plenty of dumb TVs 
with smaller screens.

You don’t say how big a screen you want, but 48in seems a good step up from 
32in.

The selection of 40 dumb TVs at Currys includes 10 models with three HDMI 
ports. There is one model with four HDMI ports: the42in Seiki SE42UA01UK LED TV 
<http://www.currys.co.uk/gbuk/tv-and-home-entertainment/televisions/televisions/seiki-se42ua01uk-4k-ultra-hd-42-led-tv-10147888-pdt.html>
 at £289. That looks like a good price for a 4K Ultra HD TV, but Argos has a 
top-brand model – a43in Philips 4K Ultra HD TV 
<http://www.argos.co.uk/static/Product/partNumber/4559430.htm> – for even less: 
£279.99.

If you fancy another Sony (which my wife usually does), then your best bet is 
the40in Bravia KDL40RD453BU 
<http://www.currys.co.uk/gbuk/tv-and-home-entertainment/televisions/televisions/sony-bravia-kdl40rd453bu-40-led-tv-10143389-pdt.html>
, which costs £299 at Currys. However, a 40in screen may not be a big enough 
jump on your 32in model, and it only has two HDMI ports.

Samsung fans might prefer the 48in UE48J5100 
<http://www.currys.co.uk/gbuk/tv-and-home-entertainment/televisions/televisions/samsung-ue48j5100-48-led-tv-10132577-pdt.html>
 (Full HD, 1080p), which currently costs £359 at Currys. There’sa 40in version 
<http://www.currys.co.uk/gbuk/tv-and-home-entertainment/televisions/televisions/samsung-ue40j5100-40-led-tv-10127112-pdt.html>
 of the same TV at £289. Argos has a similar 55inSamsung UE55K5100 
<http://www.argos.co.uk/static/Product/partNumber/5397639.htm> for £619.

Your next task is to visit a few shops and see what your fancied TVs look like 
in real life. Obviously, prices may vary, and they can go up (thanks to a 
decline in the value of sterling) as well as down.

Accessories

There are lots of accessories for today’s TV sets, including a plethora of 
stands, cables, loudspeakers and soundbars. Given that flat TV panels are not 
particularly conducive to high-quality sound, you might well consider including 
asoundbar 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Philips-HTL5140B-12-Soundbar-Subwoofer/dp/B00J2SBHQW/>
 in your budget. There are dozens, at a wide range of prices.

Many TV sets also include Scart, composite and component video inputs, but if 
you really need a lot of HDMI ports, you could add anHDMI Switcher 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_sb_noss_2?url=search-alias%3Daps&field-keywords=HDMI+switcher>
. The basic idea is that you feed from two to (usually) five HDMI signals into 
a small box that has one HDMI output port to connect to your TV set. You switch 
between the inputs using a knob or a remote control. TheAvantek 4×1 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/AVANTEK-High-Speed-Swither-Wireless-Supports/dp/B01ELFYSWK/>
 is fairly typical example at £22.99. You must check that it supports the 
resolutions you want, and is compatible with the streaming devices, disc 
players and games consoles you want to use.

How about a monitor?

You can buy display screens that don’t have built in Freeview tuners: they are 
called computer monitors.

Raikes points out that “TV viewing tends to need higher brightness, so it’s 
worth checking the brightness of the monitor. Quality TVs have a brightness of 
500cd/m2, but monitors are typically between 200 and 350cd/m2. If you watch TV 
in the daytime in brightish conditions, it’s worth looking for monitors with 
300 or 350cd/m2.”

However, people sit close to computer monitors so even the big ones are 
generally around 32in, like your current TV set. You can buy larger monitors, 
but they’re usually expensive. For example, Dell does a lovely55in Full HD 
monitor 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Dell-E5515H-55-Inch-Full-Monitor/dp/B00RC1063Q/> 
(350cd/m2) but it costs £792 or more.

The monitors designed for public displays can be even more expensive. A 55in 
Panasonic TH-55LF8W 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/TH-55LF8W-LCD-Display-Format-Brightness/dp/B01AXYFWYQ/>
 (500cd/m2) would set you back £1,390. I think I’d count this idea out ...

Raikes has been a specialist in the display business since “before IBM made a 
PC”. He publishes theDisplay Daily <http://www.displaydaily.com/> free 
newsletter and subscription-only “insider” newsletters.

Have you got a question? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com
 