
When I was a junior doctor, I dreaded the back pain clinic. You had a few 
minutes with each patient to talk through their months of debilitating pain. 
There was little to offer in terms of relief. Fast forward and back pain is 
only getting worse. A report from the University of Washington in Seattle found 
that while people live longer, they feel healthy for fewer years because of 
backache. So what can help relieve pain and reduce the annual10m days lost from 
work each year in the UK due to backache 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/583948/back-pain-experts>?

It depends on the cause, but exercise, spinal manipulation and painkillers 
such as codeine (a weak opiod) and paracetamol are often recommended. 
Taking opiods for years can make people dependent and invariably causes 
constipation. Guidance from Nice, which is being updated, alsorecommends 
cognitive behavioural therapy 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Back-pain/Pages/Treatment.aspx> (CBT) – training 
to change how people think and behave when they have pain, which is notoriously 
hard to come by.

Now mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) can be added to the mix, 
following thefirst trial comparing this treatment 
<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2504811> with usual care or 
cognitive behavioural therapy. In a study of 342 adults aged 20-70, randomly 
and equally allocated to each treatment group and having suffered with back 
pain for an average of 7.3 years, those given mindfulness training found it 
easier to get out of chairs, go upstairs and had less pain than those given 
usual care. In the MBSR group, 61% felt more able to move around without pain 
than the 44% who carried on with their usual care. CBT was equally as good as 
MBSR at reducing pain. The effects lasted for at least a year.

So what is MBSR, and is it worth trying if you have chronic back pain?

The solution


MBSR reduces the stress and negative impact of backache by changing how the 
mind processes pain. MBSR in this study involved two-hour group sessions once a 
week for eight weeks in which people were taught meditation, yoga and body 
awareness. An earlyexercise 
<http://mindfulnessforstudents.co.uk/resources/the-body-scan/> has people lie 
on a mat for 10-20 minutes, focusing on one part of the body at a time, 
becoming aware and “accepting of any sensations”. If you can try MBSR, you 
might as well: there are no side-effects and it seems to carry on working.

Dan Cherkin, of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine and the lead 
author of the research paper, believes that training the mind may have 
longer-lasting effects than manipulating the spine.Research 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD011518/full#CD011518-bbs2-0017>
 even suggests that MBSR may cause physical changes in regions of the brain 
that regulate emotion, memory and self-referential awareness. Cherkin 
acknowledges that MBSR may be as hard to come by as CBT, but says there are 
online courses and adds that MBSR-founder Dr Jon Kabat-Zinn’s classic bookFull 
Catastrophe Living 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/full-catastrophe-living.html> could help. Of 
course, none of this implies that back pain is in the mind. It is worth noting 
thatMBSR is also being looked at in breast cancer 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD011518/full#CD011518-bbs2-0017>
, to see if it not only reduces distress but improves survival.
 