
Pop videos have been pornified for decades, from Duran Duran’s Girls on Film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCjMZMxNr-0> mirroring soft-focus, poodle-perm 
80s porn, to the brazen, high-definition modern porn mimicked in Robin Thicke’s
Blurred Lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/13/blurred-lines-most-controversial-song-decade>
. Sex, as the music industry knows well, very much sells.

However, a new strand of this symbiosis has sprouted. Instead of the music 
industry co-opting the risque aesthetics of porn, the adult video industry is 
impinging on the pop world in a more direct way. Pornhub, a leading website, 
has made a number of moves in the last two years that suggest it is determined 
to move beyond the confines of private consumption.

Today, Mykki Blanco, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/mykki-blanco-i-didnt-want-to-be-a-rapper-i-wanted-to-be-yoko-ono>
 the revered performance artist turned rapper, premiered his latest video, a 
slick visual spectacle that was produced by the porn site in collaboration with 
the fashion brand Nicopanda. It follows Pornhub’s string of chequered 
partnerships with artists ranging fromCoolio 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/music/article/20959/1/coolio-set-to-release-new-music-through-pornhub>
 toWaka Flocka Flame <http://www.wakaflockabsm.com/wakaflockaforpresident> and 
Xiu Xiu <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xiu_Xiu>. The website set up its own 
label, Pornhub Records, in 2014 and has yet to have a real hit – or many 
releases for that matter. Its ambitions are nonetheless firmly set on reaching 
the mainstream.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIbPWe24jQ9A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIbPWe24jQ9A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIbPWe24jQ9A&media=>
For the uninitiated (or those wishing to appear so), Pornhub is a free, hugely 
popular, ad-supported streaming website, which allows its viewers to upload 
their own videos. It hosts 3m videos and has more than 60 million visitors a 
day. Its vast audience is a lure for some artists to get on board with the 
website alone. That said, it’s unlikely anyone visits Pornhub with the 
intention of furiously searching the words “hot new coolio track”.

Corey Price, vice president of Pornhub, believes however, that not only does 
its “unique platform” allow musicians to premiere music to a “diverse audience” 
but that there is a long-term societal benefit. “When artists premiere videos 
on our platform, they open up additional avenues through which they garner 
exposure and visibility,” he says. “However, maybe even more important than 
that, is that they are now a part of our family, and they become part of the 
evolving conversation surrounding sexuality and its presence in the mainstream.”

It’s a bit like going to Glastonbury and spending the whole weekend in your 
tent watching porn on your iPhone

Price says Pornhub plans to continue its foray into the industry. “As for an 
exact plan, we don’t want to divulge our secrets,” he says. But how much 
success can a porn site really have on the music industry? Visiting the Pornhub 
Records channel of the site for a quick – honest, Mum! – perusal reveals some 
confused below-the-line conversation but relatively impressive stats. Seven 
videos are featured, with an apparent brand obligation that most artists wear 
Pornhub merchandise (caps, T-shirts) throughout. Coolio’s comeback single Take 
It to the Hub stood at 929,036 views when I checked. “All music videos should 
be like this from now on,” exclaims one commenter.

A video by Hi Rez <http://freemusicarchive.org/music/Hi-Rez/>, a young 
Floridian rapper, is essentially boob-based porn and had 580,400 views. This is 
considerably more views than hisYouTube videos 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/HiRezTV> achieve but half the figure for most of 
the site’s actual porn videos (reportedly, that is. Hi mum!). Some commenters 
appear annoyed at the lack of sex in the videos, while others are keen to see 
their favourite porn stars appearing in a new context.

Most potent is the feeling of misplacement while visiting this somewhat 
stagnant section of the site however, especially when you know so much other 
madness exists beyond this page. It’s a bit like going to Glastonbury and 
spending the whole weekend in your tent watchingporn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/21/block-on-pornography-would-make-it-possible-to-enforce-current-law>
 on your iPhone.

Porn as sex education: a cultural influence we can no longer ignore | Maree 
Crabbe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/04/porn-as-sex-education-a-cultural-influence-we-can-no-longer-ignore>
Although Pornhub says it promotes “sex positivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/10/sex-positivity-sexuality-ambivalence-feminism>
” – the concept that all healthy, consensual sex should be celebrated – 
normalising porn is seen by some as problematic, as is the prospect of porn 
sites becoming a one-stop shop for all your cultural needs. Particularly for 
young music fans who might see an endorsement from an artist as a legitimate 
invitation into an adult world (According to studies, the average age most 
people are first exposed to pornography is11 years old 
<http://www.digitalkidsinitiative.com/files/2013/02/Parent_Primer_Internet_Pornography.pdf>
.) For most artists, however, finding the money to fund a music video is a 
struggle, and Pornhub could provide a solution.

“I get that, despite the ethical issues surrounding it, there is a massive 
audience there. When I first heard about Pornhub Records, I thought, ‘Bloody 
hell – that’s smart,’” says Sarah Boardman, head of music at film studio Pulse 
Films, a company that facilitates video-making by musicians and artists. “Then 
I instantly changed my mind because of who the audience is. Would they want to 
be consuming music and porn at the same time – and how that would affect an 
artist’s own brand perception.”

She believes it is a relationship that works only with certain acts. 
“Out-of-the-box artists like Mykki, or artists with perhaps dwindling careers 
like Coolio, are part of a very small number of artists that I believe would 
entertain the idea of putting out videos via Pornhub,” says Boardman. “It’s not 
a credible outlet in terms of music discovery and will never transform into 
that.”

Despite the reluctance many musicians would have to working with the company, 
Price says the “small team” that runs its music department receives many 
inquiries from artists across the world looking to work with them. They range 
in genre, from rap to rock to classical and “everything in between”.

Mykki Blanco: ‘I didn’t want to be a rapper. I wanted to be Yoko Ono’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/mykki-blanco-i-didnt-want-to-be-a-rapper-i-wanted-to-be-yoko-ono>
“You’d be surprised how diverse it is,” he says. While it’s hard to imagine 
Emeli Sandé queuing up for the Pornhub treatment, for a future-facing artist 
such as Mykki Blanco, the erotic, nightmarish qualities of the video – in which 
actors with virtual reality headsets caress themselves – chimes perfectly with 
his image and message. According to the rapper, the song is about 
misunderstanding – about a “universal feeling of not feeling worthy enough, not 
feeling good enough”.

Perhaps Pornhub, a website that is clearly attempting to break its stigma (a 
philanthropic division, Pornhub Cares, launched a clothing line to oppose 
domestic violence, and it also set up a breast cancer awareness campaign called
Save the Boobs <http://www.pornhub.com/event/save-the-boobs>) feels that, as a 
vast and ambitious tech company, it is misunderstood. “I don’t think a lot of 
people see us for what we truly are,” says Price. “We are absolutely an adult 
entertainment platform, there’s no denying that. But we have also ventured into 
a number of additional industries and are making our presence felt. Be it in 
the music industry, the apparel industry, the technology industry or with one 
of our many philanthropic campaigns, we are effecting change and improving 
people’s lives.”
 