
Hopes had been high for Europe as the 1985 Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> approached. After their heroic 
one-point defeat in 1983, momentum was growing behind their young stars and 
they had home advantage at The Belfry. The USA team had plenty of major winners 
in their ranks – but none as intimidating as Jack Nicklaus, Tom Watson, Arnold 
Palmer or Lee Trevino – while Tony Jacklin, who was captaining the Europe team 
for a second time, could call upon four-time major winner Seve Ballesteros, 
reigning US Masters champion Bernhard Langer and Open champion Sandy Lyle.

The British press were confident. “On Sunday night I believe we will be 
hailing 12 great champions – the heroes of Europe’s winning Ryder Cup force,” 
wrote Mark Wilson in the Express. Ron Wills of the Mirror was equally clear: 
“If Europe’s golfers don’t beat the Yanks at The Belfry this weekend, they may 
never beat them.” A continent expected.

So you can probably understand the general feeling of despondency after the 
first morning, as the sound of Europe’s bubble bursting could be heard 
throughout the golfing world. USA surged into a 3-1 lead after the foursomes, 
with only Ballesteros and Manuel Piñero providing any source of encouragement 
for the hosts. Worryingly for Jacklin, Lyle and Ken Brown seemed out of form, 
Nick Faldo asked to stand down until the Sunday due to issues with his 
remodelled swing, and the skipper was forced to ruthlessly drop the trio after 
what he later described as “a rude awakening”.

Luckily, Jacklin’s gamble paid off, as Europe won the four ball session 2½-1½, 
with wins for Ballesteros and Piñero, and the new partnership of Ian Woosnam 
and Paul Way. Although USA finished the first day with one-point lead, Europe 
had limited the damage and Jacklin was happy to be back in the contest: “The 
way we came back in the afternoon in the four balls gives me even greater hope 
for the all-deciding singles on Sunday. But I want to go into the singles with 
a lead.”

Jacklin may have been relieved but Lyle was not so pleased about being left 
out of the action on Friday afternoon. “Naturally I am sick about being 
dropped,” he said. “That’s the captain’s prerogative and I’ve got to accept it. 
Tony Jacklin gave me no explanation. He just said I wasn’t playing.” Jacklin’s 
decision was bold and calculated, and it paid off. Lyle soon had the chance to 
put the situation straight in the four balls on Saturday morning.

How Christy O’Connor Jr became Europe's hero at the 1989 Ryder Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2016/jan/06/christy-oconnor-jr-european-hero-1989-ryder-cup>
Europe’s recovery continued into the early stages of Saturday. Sam Torrance 
and Howard Clark – unlucky to be beaten twice the day before – won their first 
match, and when Way and Woosnam crushed Hubert Green and Fuzzy Zoeller 4&3, the 
scores were level. USA soon regained the advantage though, as Ballesteros and 
Piñero could not repeat their Friday performances, losing to Mark O’Meara and 
Lanny Wadkins. As the final match on the course drew to a conclusion, what had 
looked like a promising morning for Europe appeared to be drifting away.

Langer and Lyle found themselves dormie two down against Craig Stadler and 
Curtis Strange, and with the very birdieable par five 17th hole to come, 
realistically one of the home pair needed to find an eagle to take the match 
down the last. Two monster blows from Lyle gave him an outside chance of 
hitting the eagle but, with a putt of 25 feet and Stadler close in three, 
Europe’s chances looked slim. But Lyle rattled his putt home to rapturous 
applause and tok the match to the final hole.

Despite Lyle’s best efforts on the 17th, USA remained favourites to win the 
match and leave the scores equal at 6-6 at the end of the Saturday morning 
session. With Strange out of the hole, Stadler lagged his birdie putt to 18 
inches, and his inevitable par meant that either Lyle or Langer had to make 
their birdie putts to halve the match. Neither of the Europeans could find the 
bottom of the hole so just remained for Stadler to tap in his tiddler – which 
would surely have been conceded if it was not for the match – to keep American 
noses in front and quell the European uprising.

Back went the putter and ... no. That didn’t just happen, did it? Stadler 
stabbed at the ball, amazinglymissing the hole completely 
<http://www.itnsource.com/en/shotlist/ITN/1985/09/14/AS140985009/?s=golf> as 
the crowd reacted with a mixture of cheers and gasps at what they had just 
witnessed. Stadler turned back towards the lake, placing his hand down the back 
of his shirt, as dazed as everyone else. Jacklin looked on, genuinely stunned 
at what he had just seen, as Lyle and Langer gingerly approached Stadler to 
shake hands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fryder-cup-usa-craig-stadler-europe-golf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a3fa15defb15f19fbcffd8335671866a7da7484%2F323_473_3654_4565%2F3654.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20one%20shot%20change%20the%20course%20of%20Ryder%20Cup%20history%3F%20Don't%20ask%20Craig%20Stadler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fryder-cup-usa-craig-stadler-europe-golf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20one%20shot%20change%20the%20course%20of%20Ryder%20Cup%20history%3F%20Don%27t%20ask%20Craig%20Stadler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fryder-cup-usa-craig-stadler-europe-golf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a3fa15defb15f19fbcffd8335671866a7da7484%2F323_473_3654_4565%2F3654.jpg>
 Craig Stadler on the green. Photograph: Phil Sheldon/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
Half a point stolen, a turning point of the 1985 Ryder Cup and perhaps tipping 
point of the whole competition. That’s how big Stadler’s miss was. It was the 
start of autumn in England and it was the beginning of the fall for the US team 
at The Belfry. It was a staggering error from such a seasoned pro – major 
champions are just not expected to do things like that.

“There was bedlam in the European team room,” recalls Alistair Tait in his 
biography of Ballesteros 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Seve-Biography-Ballesteros-Alistair-Tait/dp/0753511339>
. “Seve leapt out of his chair when the ball missed the hole. The chair went 
tumbling and Seve came down with a bang and landed on his back. His team-mates 
were hammering on the wall to the American team dressing room. The dream was 
alive. The Europeans had halted the American juggernaut. It was game on.”

The Europeans swamped the Americans in the afternoon foursomes. José María 
Cañizares and José Rivero hammered Tom Kite and Calvin Peete 7&5. Ballesteros 
and Piñero got back to winning ways, defeating Hal Sutton and Stadler, the 
latter understandably prowling around the course with a face like thunder. And 
when Brown’s delicious approach to a few inches at 16 gave him and Langer a win 
over Ray Floyd and Lanny Wadkins, Europe had won the session 3-1 and took a 9-7 
lead into the singles on the final day.

Stadler had the consolation of winning his singles match against Woosnam, yet 
his point was only one of 4½ points the Americans scored on that famous Sunday, 
as USA surrendered the cup they had held since 1957.

Among the celebrations there were accusations from the Americans about the 
unsporting behaviour from some of the home supporters, Hal Sutton particularly 
critical of what he felt was a football ground mentality seeping into the 
event. This situation would worsen as the years passed, with Howard Clark 
claiming thatthe atmosphere changed from Stadler’s putt onwards 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/golf/from-polite-applause-to-wild-catcalls-how-ryder-cup-fans-have-changed-8168212.html>
. “There was a kind of dull cheer, but our fans weren’t cheering his miss, they 
were cheering Europe getting half a point. Unfortunately, it was misconstrued, 
and I think that led to Kiawah Island, where players were getting early-morning 
wake-up calls in their hotel rooms, and ultimately to Brookline.” Poor Stadler. 
Taking the blame for everything.

It is a little simplistic to blame Stadler for the loss of the 1985 Ryder Cup 
but there can be no debating that the momentum relentlessly shifted towards the 
European team after his miss. It was almost as if Stadler’s putt was the 
crucial last crack in the damn, which, once opened, could not stem the flow of 
blue European water behind. Of the 16 matches played after that putt, the score 
read: Europe 10½ USA 5½.

Think Stoke City are struggling now? You want to hear about their 1984-85 
season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2016/sep/16/stoke-city-premier-league-relegation>
“Every time the Ryder Cup comes round, I’ve got to watch that all over again,” 
said Stadler in 2002 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/golf/rydercup/3026795/Stadler-puts-Ryder-Cup-horror-in-perspective.html>
. “I’ll never understand the reaction – like I never three-putted before in my 
entire life? The putt that lost the Ryder Cup? Yeah, I’ve heard that a lot over 
the years, but I’ve never bought that particular story. What was it, the 
Saturday morning? There was still a lot of golf to be played.” Very true. But 
as Costantino Rocca, Curtis Strange, Hunter Mahan and Jim Furyk can attest, 
scapegoats and the Ryder Cup walk hand in hand, but normally on the final 
Sunday (or Monday in Mahan’s case).

Eighteen inches. Just eighteen inches. Such a short distance, yet if a journey 
of 1,000 miles starts with one step, then maybe we can say that the destination 
of the 1985 Ryder Cup can be traced back to this tiny putt.

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 