
If necessity is the mother of invention, then the aid industry should be 
frothing with ideas and gearing up to showcase new products and processes when 
humanitarians gather to start work on redesigning the overwhelmed and outdated 
system this month.

Innovation is a key theme for the world humanitarian summit 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> in Istanbul and it dovetails with 
the rather dispiriting rationale for this first-of-its-kind meeting: that the 
aid system is failing and needs to be reformed if it is to cope with protracted,
increasingly frequent, manmade and natural crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/24/world-heading-for-catastrophe-over-natural-disasters-risk-expert-warns>
.

The world's humanitarian burden is too big. How can we lessen it? | Robert 
Glasser and Stephen O'Brien
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/25/the-worlds-humanitarian-burden-is-too-big-how-can-we-lessen-it>
But while innovation is becoming a buzzword, and #ReShapeAid  
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/reshapeaid?lang=en-gb>and #TalkInnovation 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/talkinnovation?f=realtime&src=hash> are gaining 
traction on Twitter, anApril report 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiAiPuNm77MAhVKK8AKHeIVCMYQFggdMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.alnap.org%2Fpool%2Ffiles%2Falnap-hif-innovation-more-than-luck-summary.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGiF-7JJnEAOofSNqikqYw-52ZdkQ&sig2=Haa-F3DdjRkIVgB1SlY0qg>
 found that little is known about how to flick the innovation switch in 
organisations bound by red tape.

The report, More Than Just Luck <http://www.alnap.org/event/1056.aspx>, was 
produced by theHumanitarian Innovation Fund <http://www.elrha.org/hif/about/> 
(Hif) andAlnap <http://www.alnap.org/>, a humanitarian action learning network. 
Together, they analysed 11 case studies over two years to see which new ideas 
worked and why.

“Humanitarian innovation has never been so popular and yet, when we look at 
the amount of attention given, there seems to be a lack of clarity,” said Alice 
Obrecht, one of the co-authors.

Innovation has become more mainstream, according to Kim Scriven, manager of 
the Hif, because there is an ever greater need to do more with less, and a 
growing role for the private sector in development. But if processes do not 
speed up, enthusiasm could sour, and the innovation agenda could be hijacked.

“If the mainstream doesn’t act, more radical actors will step in. This will 
change the nature of the system,” Scriven said.

Dr Jemilah Mahmood, under secretary general for partnerships at the 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
<http://www.ifrc.org/>, said there has been an “explosion of discussion around 
innovation” in the past five years. But Mahmood,head of the world humanitarian 
summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/19/humanitarian-assistance-funding-record-levels-increase-resilience>
 secretariat until she stepped down last year, cautioned that there are still 
hurdles.

One stems from traditional antipathy towards the private sector. “Sometimes I 
can’t understand [this resistance], because it is like it is taboo,” she said. 
“It’s slowly changing … why not have a kind of Dragon’s Den for the 
humanitarian sector, where you pitch ideas?”

A catch-all term, innovation can range from using 3D printers in the field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/30/disaster-emergency-3d-printing-humanitarian-relief-nepal-earthquake>
 to reaching communities bytranslating information into local languages 
<http://translatorswithoutborders.org/>. Other innovations touched on in the 
report include employing technology to track aid in insecure environments, for 
instancethrough simulated field visits in central Somalia 
<http://resourcecentre.savethechildren.se/sites/default/files/documents/remote_monitoring_systems_-_a_case_of_sci_somalia.pdf>
 (pdf), and usingdisaster microinsurance for small businesses 
<http://www.elrha.org/project/innovating-disaster-micro-insurance-for-local-market-recovery/>
 in India.

“That’s really promising,” said Scriven of the last of these ideas, “because 
it will totally change the dynamics of the system. Instead of going to an 
international agency for a handout, you go to your insurance provider and say, 
‘This contract says you need to pay me in that event’ – and that’s what people 
will use to get back on their feet.”


In Istanbul, the UN hopes to launch a global alliance for humanitarian 
innovation 
<http://whsturkey.org/Contents/Upload/SS8%20Innovation_n3aygtgv.b3i.pdf> (pdf), 
which is meant to break down barriers by bringing people from different sectors 
together to tackle the main humanitarian challenges.

Scriven says coordination is fundamental, citing efforts to tackle drainage 
problems in refugee camps as an example.

“You get these huge puddles that are breeding grounds for mosquitoes and 
diseases, but nobody owns that problem. So we brought together people from 
business, the humanitarian sector and academia. We did research to see who is 
doing flood management in the UK, who is doing drainage in cities like 
Amsterdam, who has that real expertise and how can we get them to sit down with 
humanitarians to look at those specific questions. That’s where there is real 
scope for the private sector to get involved,” he said.


Fix the aid system or you will fail the poor, experts warn world leaders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/17/fix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders>
Using military knowledge in natural disasters has also long been taboo. 

Josiah Kaplan and Evan Easton-Calabria are researching what humanitarians can 
learn from the military 
<http://www.oxhip.org/research/military-humanitarian-innovation/> in fields 
such as ICT, drones and robotics. Kaplan, a research associate with the
University of Oxford humanitarian innovation project <http://www.oxhip.org/>, 
acknowledged that aid workers still fear they could be associated with military 
agendas.

“This isn’t to discount the very serious potential dangers posed by diffusion 
of military innovations into humanitarian practice … Nonetheless, we believe 
innovation is an important area for learning and a valuable space for 
constructive engagement and dialogue between two communities long known for 
their strong mutual distrust,” Kaplan said.

Sometimes, good ideas get locked in one organisation and are never shared. An 
institutional fear of failure, among donors and NGOs, can also hinder 
innovation.

Rebecca Petras, of Translators without Borders, which launched Words of Relief 
<http://translatorswithoutborders.org/node/112> – described as the first crisis 
relief translation network – in west Africa during the Ebola crisis, said 
funding flexibility was critical to allow her organisation to try ideas and 
accept failures. The Ebola emergency propelled their core message – that 
communication is key – into the mainstream.


“It was a transformative moment for us … It wasn’t until the Ebola crisis, and 
far into the Ebola crisis, that that message was resonating with responders,” 
she said.

For Mahmood, the Istanbul summit is just the beginning, a view echoed by many 
observers. “It’s what happens after the summit that is important. How do we 
keep the discussion on innovation going? I think we’ve got the ball rolling.”


Even those who advocate change warn that innovation is not a panacea and that 
addressing the aid industry’s systemic problems – bureaucracy, lack of 
accountability and inflexible funding – is still critical.

“It would be naive to think [technology and innovation] will deliver wider 
change in the humanitarian system,” said Scriven. “It is imperative [for us] 
not to gloss over that.”
 