
Is climate change still happening? You don’t hear so much about it, do you? 
It’s like theDoctor Who reboot – I presume it’s still going on, but it’s 
struggling to stay in the headlines. These days it’s allBake Off, Trump, Isis 
andPoldark.

It must still be happening, because if it had stopped we would definitely have 
heard – you don’t hear much about Sean Connery, but it’ll be all over the news 
when he dies. A sudden halt in global warming would be an unmissable 
opportunity for climate change deniers to crow, for dark-souled petrol salesmen 
to denounce the scientific community as a bunch of delusional tree-huggers, for 
the scum of the earth to lay into the Friends of the Earth. So, I think it’s 
safe to say climate change is still happening and the world’s scientists aren’t 
facing the spectre of being wrong instead of the more familiar spectre of being 
doomed. What a relief.

As I understand it, then, the situation remains that human activities, 
particularly those that emit carbon dioxide, are elevating the planet’s 
temperature in a way that, if unchecked, and maybe anyway, will render most of 
it uninhabitable by humans. That’s still on the cards. Suddenly I’m feeling a 
lot more relaxed about Brexit.

I'm not a very environmentally friendly person. I'd much rather turn a tree 
into a chair or a pizza box

But is it really, definitely happening? Well, again, as I understand it, the 
overwhelming scientific consensus is that it is. Manmade climate change is as 
certain as anything can be. Of course, there are people who say it isn’t, who 
have fuelled much discussion (fuel is often their business), but then there are 
people who will deny the hands in front of their faces: there’s a school of 
maverick historians that claims the years AD614 to AD911 never occurred; there 
are people who think Elvis or Hitler still live, or that they live with each 
other, or that they recently split up after a row about Jeremy Corbyn. There is 
no assertion, no matter how self-evident, that is completely safe from 
contradiction. If humans are to survive, it is imperative that “Is climate 
change a myth?” move from the same discussion category as “Should we introduce 
proportional representation?” to the same one as “Is the Queen a lizard?”

What brought all these Christopher Eccleston-era reflections to mind was 
Theresa May’s announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/19/theresa-may-accused-of-dither-and-delay-over-heathrow-airports-expansion>
 last week aboutHeathrow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/heathrow-airport> 
airport – or rather her announcement last week that she’s going to make an 
announcement next week. It’s all incredibly involved and tedious: next week the 
government will finally say, after decades of dithering, whether Heathrow will 
get another runway, or a longer runway, or whether, instead, Gatwick will get 
another runway. But it isn’t really finally, because under a “special 
derogation”, ministers who are pissed off with the choice (because, say, their 
constituencies are near Heathrow) will be allowed to openly moan about it and 
then it’ll probably be 2018 before MPs vote on the issue, in order to allow 
lots of time for a public debate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fcant-we-agree-to-just-not-have-heathrow-at-all-third-runway-expansion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c215a9044341f9ad2f8e80bb2247b24dc26f844%2F0_0_1884_1675%2F1884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%E2%80%99t%20we%20agree%20to%20just%20not%20have%20Heathrow%20at%20all%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fcant-we-agree-to-just-not-have-heathrow-at-all-third-runway-expansion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%E2%80%99t%20we%20agree%20to%20just%20not%20have%20Heathrow%20at%20all%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fcant-we-agree-to-just-not-have-heathrow-at-all-third-runway-expansion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c215a9044341f9ad2f8e80bb2247b24dc26f844%2F0_0_1884_1675%2F1884.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
It’s the nature of this debate that frightens me. There are plenty of people 
opposed to extending Heathrow:Zac Goldsmith says he’ll resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/zac-goldsmith-heathrow-third-runway-vows-quit-mp>
 as an MP if it gets the go-ahead, a promise considerably more likely to be 
kept thanBoris Johnson’s pledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/01/boris-johnson-heathrow-third-runway-davies-report>
 to “lie down in front of the bulldozers”.Philip Hammond and Justine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/14/heathrow-third-runway-what-does-the-tory-cabinet-think>
 have also previously declared against. For Labour, London mayorSadiq Khan 
opposes it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/15/london-mayor-sadiq-khan-gatwick-bosses-new-runway-heathrow>
 too and favours a new Gatwick runway. But all of this mainstream opposition 
seems to focus on the air and noise pollution (previously known as pollution 
and noise) it would cause in west London – hence the preference for the more 
rural Gatwick. Only the Greens and Lib Dems have even floated the notion of not 
extending an airport at all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fdecision-airport-expansion-tuesday-chris-grayling-heathrow-gatwick-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Decision%20on%20airport%20expansion%20to%20be%20made%20on%20Tuesday%2C%20says%20Grayling%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fdecision-airport-expansion-tuesday-chris-grayling-heathrow-gatwick-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Decision%20on%20airport%20expansion%20to%20be%20made%20on%20Tuesday%2C%20says%20Grayling%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fdecision-airport-expansion-tuesday-chris-grayling-heathrow-gatwick-video&media=>
Decision on airport expansion to be made on Tuesday, says Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/23/decision-airport-expansion-tuesday-chris-grayling-heathrow-gatwick-video>
This is bonkers. Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is definitely 
happening. Aviation contributes hugely to it. So global levels of aviation must 
be significantly reduced. Why is it, then, that everyone with a whisker of a 
chance of power agrees that London’s airport capacity should increase? It’s not 
one side saying “Let’s close an airport” and the other saying “Let’s not” – 
that would be a reasonable spread of opinion when the need to reduce air travel 
was accepted. Instead, it’s both sides saying “Let’s hugely extend an airport”. 
The only debate we’re having is over which one.

You may not believe this, but I am not a very environmentally friendly person. 
I would much rather turn a tree into a chair, a pizza box and a roaring fire 
than hug it. I don’t much care about endangered species. For me, the 
environment, the delicate global ecosystem, is somewhere for humans to live. 
It’s collectively ours and I think we can do what we like with it. But it’s got 
to remain livable in and livable from. That’s not leftwing, it’s just obvious. 
And I can’t believe all those scientists are lying, much as I would genuinely 
like to.

In this crisis, we’re suffering a potentially disastrous failure of 
leadership. WouldTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> 
deny climate change? I doubt it. Would Sadiq Khan? No way. So why on earth, 
specifically on earth, do they want to extend an airport? For the sake of 
London’s economy. Well, excuse the cliche, but you can’t take it with you.

Climate change means no airport expansion – at Heathrow or anywhere | George 
Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/18/climate-change-airport-expansion-heathrow>
I know I’m ignoring the political realities and the importance of seeming 
pro-business, but isn’t actual, physical reality a political reality too? Isn’t 
the habitability of the planet good for business? But politicians aren’t making 
these arguments. Instead, they’re acquiescing in a situation where there’s no 
overlap between the politically possible and the environmentally uncatastrophic.

It may be too late. In which case, hey, build the runway. We might as well die 
prosperous. If we despair of reducing our environmental impact, if we’re 
convinced the international agreements don’t go far enough and won’t be 
observed anyway, then let’s extend away. Maybe the anti-climate change lobby is 
going to switch to that argument – from “It’s not happening, so we don’t need 
to change our ways” to “Yeah, our bad, it was always happening, but it’s 
unstoppable now, so there’s no point in changing our ways”. It’s a logical 
approach, but, if accurate, it makes me feel a bit of a heel for fathering a 
child.

There is a ray of hope. We will undoubtedly spend billions extending one 
airport or another but, on Britain’s current form, that probably means global 
air travel actually will be reduced after all. Heathrow could be the reverse
Field of Dreams: build it and they won’t come. We can use sod’s law to save the 
world.
 