
I currently have Windows Vista. Can I upgrade to Windows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10>? If buying a new machine, 
for normal personal use for email and internet, what would you recommend? 
Laptop and desktop options would be useful. E&AB

Sadly, you can’t upgrade directly from Windows Vista to Windows 10: Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> only supports upgrades from 
Windows 7, Windows 8 and Windows 8.1. Vista was the current version of Windows 
from January 2007 until July 2009, so any surviving Vista PCs are presumably 
more than seven years old. If they are laptops, they are probably due for 
replacement. Even if they are desktops, they may not be worth the upgrade cost.

The problem is that Microsoft’s offer of a free upgrade to Windows 10 expired 
after one year, on 29 July. Vista users may now have to pay for two operating 
system upgrades: one to Windows 7 and one to Windows 10. Worse, you don’t know 
if the second upgrade will work. You can test your Vista PC with the Windows 7 
Upgrade Advisor, but you have to upgrade before you can test Windows 10 
compatibility. Even if your PC is nominally compatible with Windows 10, the 
upgrade may still fail due to alack of software drivers 
<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=20https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=20https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=20>
.

It really depends on your specific hardware. If your machine has a slow 
processor and 2GB or less memory, then it’s probably not worth upgrading. If it 
has a reasonably fast processor and you can upgrade to 4GB, then it might be 
worth upgrading but only if you can find a cheap upgrade toWindows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> 7 with a valid key for not 
much money. If the total cost of hardware and software is, say, £150-£200, it 
would probably be better to buy a new PC.

Windows 10 should improve the performance of almost any laptop that can run 
it, but your Vista laptop will still be old and probably slow.

Windows 10 still free?

At the moment, it appears that you may be able to upgrade to Windows 10 
without paying. Some writers say they have been able to install Windows 10 by 
entering valid Windows 7 or 8.x product keys. If you tried and failed to 
install Windows 10 earlier, it may be worth having another go.

Yes, Microsoft said its deadline was 29 July, and the company is removing its 
hated GWX (Get Windows 10) pop-ups. And if you go to download Windows 10, it’s 
not free. But still, Microsoft wants as many PCs as possible on Windows 10, and 
so far only around 365m have migrated. Microsoft may have left a bit of wriggle 
room for people with valid product keys, bearing in mind that the same product 
keys weren’t even supported when Windows 10 was launched.

Further, users who need “assistive technologies” – such as the screen reader 
provided for people with limited vision – can still upgrade. If you can answer 
the question “Yes, I use assistive technologies and I am ready for my free 
upgrade to Windows 10” 
<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/accessibility/windows10upgrade> then you can 
get one. But if you have problems, you may end up talking to theMicrosoft 
Disability Answer Desk 
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/answerdesk/accessibility> ...

Microsoft has not said when the free “assistive technologies” upgrade will 
end, but it may be tempted to pull the plug if the facility is widely abused.

Vista strategy

Microsoft publishes lifecycle information well in advance, and it says Windows 
Vista will be supported until11 April 2017 
<https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/lifecycle?C2=11732>. That gives you nine 
months to upgrade to Windows 7 with Service Pack 1 – which will be supported 
until14 January 2020 <https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/lifecycle?C2=14019> – 
or buy a new PC running Windows 10. One advantage of Windows 10 is that it will 
be supported forever, which means “until your PC no longer works”.

Take a hard look at your PC. Will you still want to use it next year? Will you 
still want to use it in 2020?

If it will survive until next April, you may as well stick with Vista. 
Internet Explorer 9 is a bit of a pain but you can use Firefox instead. Save up 
and buy a new machine just before the end of the tax year (it’s a deductible 
expense).

If you are confident that your PC will last until 2020 – when it will probably 
be 11 years old – then it might be worth upgrading to Windows 7. If so, you 
should kick yourself for not upgrading in 2009.

If your PC is slow and increasingly painful to use, buy a Windows 10 machine 
as soon as you can. A new version of Windows 10, the Anniversary Update, came 
out on 2 August, and it’s a significant improvement on the one that was 
launched last year. Regular readers will know that I was in favour of keeping 
my main desktop PC running Windows 7, but I upgraded and now think I’ll 
probably stick with it. Version 1607 is (touch wood) the best Windows yet.

Replacement PCs

You sent your email from a small business – a guest house – but only mentioned 
“normal personal use”.

If you use your PC for business, and need to print out orders, invoices and 
receipts, then I’d recommend buying a Dell desktop PC. Desktops take up more 
room, but they are more ergonomic than laptops, they perform better for the 
money, they are much easier to repair and upgrade, and they last longer.

You could get something like a small Dell Vostro 3250 
<http://www.dell.com/uk/business/p/vostro-3200-series-small-desktop/pd?oc=&model_id=vostro-3200-series-small-desktop&l=en&s=bsd>
 desktop PC with an Intel Core i3 processor for £328.80 including delivery and 
VAT (base price, £249), or a largerVostro 3650 
<http://www.dell.com/uk/business/p/vostro-3650-desktop/pd?oc=bdv605&model_id=vostro-3650-desktop&l=en&s=bsd>
 (base price, £259) for slightly more. Neither comes with a monitor, but you 
can add one from Dell or elsewhere.

The key point in either case is to add four years of Pro Support and next 
business day on-site service, which costs £100. If your PC goes wrong then, if 
necessary, a technician will come to your house and fix it. Even if you are not 
a business, this is a terrific deal for 50p a week.

Vostro is Dell’s SoHo (small office/home office) range, which also includes 
laptops 
<http://www.dell.com/uk/business/p/vostro-15-3558-laptop/pd?oc=bnv5825p&model_id=vostro-15-3558-laptop&l=en&s=bsd>
, but the four-year support costs almost twice as much (£192). You can also get 
much the same support on consumer laptops such as theDell Inspiron 15 3000 
<http://www.dell.com/uk/p/inspiron-15-3558-laptop/pd?oc=cn35810&l=en&s=dhs>, 
which has a Core i3 and a 15.6in screen for £319 including delivery and VAT. 
However, the four-year, on-site support deal costs even more (£199.20).

There are, of course, hundreds of alternative laptops – and even a few 
desktops – as you can see by visiting your local electronics retailer or 
department store. All of them will do email and internet, as will all the 
various smartphones, tablets, Windows 2-in-1s and convertibles, all-in-one 
desktop PCs and even Chromebooks. I can’t cover all of them.

It’s worth checking which software you actually use, including things such as 
Apple iTunes, QuickBooks, Microsoft Office, games, photo editors and so on. How 
many browser tabs do you open at once? You should also try to decide on things 
such as screen size, weight and battery life. Do you want a laptop that plays 
DVDs or one that also works as a tablet? Nowadays, there are half a dozen 
different types of laptop.

The line of least resistance is to list the features of your old PC, then buy 
something that’s much the same, only cheaper and much faster.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>

 