
When a South Africa Airways scheduled flight flew from Johannesburg to Cape 
Town last month, it carried nearly 300 passengers.

Neither the passengers or the pilots would have noticed any difference between 
that flight and any other.

But instead of the usual petroleum-based jet fuel, the plane was burning 
thousands of litres of a clear liquid derived from the oil of nicotine-free 
tobacco plants grown by farmers on acres of under-used land in the country’s 
Limpopo province.

Boeing, KLM, South African Airways, the Dutch government and others who 
partnered in the trial were cock-a-hoop with the results, which came as part of 
something calledProject Solaris <http://www.projectsolaris.co.za/>.

It appeared that the fuel was not only efficient, but it was also more or less 
“sustainable”, because it did not take up farmland needed to grow food or lead 
to deforestation or ecological problems.

“It showed that a low-carbon aviation biofuel could be be grown that will not 
affect the environment and could reward farmers,” said Joost Van Lier, a 
director of South African Sunchem biofuel development, one of the project’s 
partners.


The tobacco fuel used was much more expensive than regular jet fuel, but 
because many airlines have committed to reducing CO2 emissions and substituting 
biofuels for some of their jet fuel by 2020, Project Solaris hopes to ramp up 
the acreage of tobacco grown to eventually produce millions of litres of the 
fuel in other southern African countries such as Malawi.

So far, there have been around 2,500 successful flights fuelled by biofuels. 
In March, United Airlines became the first US airline to use biofuelfor 
regularly scheduled commercial flights from Los Angeles airport 
<http://newsroom.united.com/2016-03-11-United-Airlines-Makes-History-with-Launch-of-Regularly-Scheduled-Flights-Using-Sustainable-Biofuel>
, and in June Alaska Airlinesflew commercial flights using biofuel based on 
isobutanol produced from corn 
<https://blog.alaskaair.com/alaska-airlines/news/gevo-biofuel-flight/>.


“Oslo airport now supplies airlines with alternative fuels for regular daily 
flights. Los Angeles is following and we expect John F Kennedy and other New 
York airports to stream from 2019,” said Michael Gill, executive director of 
the Air Transport Action Group, a coalition of aviation industry companies.

But despite successful tests and trials with different crops and waste 
streams, is there any hope in the forseeable future of aviation biofuels taking 
off on the scale needed to make even the slightest dent in the300bn litres  
<http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/iedindex3.cfm?tid=5&pid=63&aid=2&cid=ww,US,&syid=1990&eyid=2012&unit=TBPD>
of jet fuel used worldwide every year? Worldwide, flights produced nearly 800m 
tonnes of CO2 in 2015, or up to 5% of all CO2 emissions.

“No credible scenarios exist for large-scale production of biofuels at 
present,” said Carlos Calvo Ambel, an energy analyst with Brussels-based 
watchdog group Transport & Environment. “So far, only a handful of companies 
produce renewable jet fuel on a commercial scale, and a single airport , Oslo, 
is set up to provide it.”


 International aviation and shipping werenot mentioned in the Paris agreement, 
so it is unclear how their rapidly growing emissions are to be addressed. But 
the need for the industry to adopt a global scheme is seen as urgent if there 
is any hope of meeting the Paris agreement’s aspiration of holding temperature 
rises to 1.5C. As it is,the current industry projections 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/explainer-aviations-battle-to-limit-rising-emissions>
 expect aviation emissions to quadruple, potentially to account for 22% of 
global emissions by 2050.

Instead of relying on biofuels, governments are pinning their hopes on a UN 
global carbon offset scheme. This is to be negotiated this week in Montreal 
when 191 governments meet for the UN’s International Civil Aviation 
Organisation (ICAO) summit. A draft scheme is backed by US, Canada, Mexico, EU 
countries including the UK, and Singapore.


According to Transport & Environment, the US wants the new deal to cover as 
many countries as possible. “Its strategy has been to weaken the agreement’s 
environmental effectiveness so as to attract more states. China is pursuing a 
similar strategy, and it has yet to commit itself to signing up,” it said.

But there are grave reservations among NGOs that an offset scheme, which could 
see other industrial sectors cutting emissions to allow aviation to continue 
growing, is not ambitious enough and may not even work.


The proposal in the draft text 
<http://www.icao.int/Meetings/a39/Documents/WP/wp_052_en.pdf> released earlier 
this month defines a voluntary “pilot and implementation” period from 2021-27 
after which countries would have to join in.


“One of the discussions in Montreal will be whether to include Redd [Reducing 
emissions from deforestation and forest degradation] offsets [offsets based on 
avoiding deforestation] in ICAO’s offsetting scheme. As a way of addressing 
climate change, offsetting flying against the carbon stored in forests would be 
insane,” says Chris Lang, editor ofRedd Monitor <http://www.redd-monitor.org/> 
which has analysedUN proposals to reduce forestry emissions with a similar 
offset scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/dec/19/what-is-redd-climate-change-deforestation>
.

“Not only would such a scheme allow the aviation sector to continue expanding 
and to continue burning fossil fuels, it would rely on carbon being stored in 
forests. Yet as climate change worsens, the risk of these forests burning and 
returning the carbon to the atmosphere is increasing,” he said.

 The offsetting scheme, which hopes to stabilise aviation emissions at 2020 
levels, is strongly defended by Michael Gill, director of the Aviation 
Transport Action Group (ATAG), an industry coalition.

 “Offsetting is not a new concept,” he says. “Indeed, a large number of 
airlines already offer offsetting to passengers on a voluntary basis. What the 
industry does need is certainty, with a clear set of metrics defined before the 
scheme commences and consistently applied throughout its lifetime.”

Alexandre de Juniac, director general of the International Air Transport 
Association (Iata), said: “I am optimistic that we are on the brink of a 
historic agreement—a first for an industry sector at the global level. The 
aviation industry would have preferred a more ambitious timeline than is 
currently outlined.”

Critics are not convinced. The International Coalition for Sustainable 
Aviation (ICSA), the only civil society body accredited to observe the aviation 
proceedings, has strong reservations about the proposed market-based scheme 
because it would rely on a system of “voluntary, unguaranteed participation 
with weak environmental safeguards”.

“The new proposed text would allow nations participating ... to opt out with 
only six months’ notice, raising serious concerns about the durability of the 
programme,” said the ICSA ina letter to EU commissioners 
<https://uploads.strikinglycdn.com/files/afc9650e-aaeb-4741-a329-ebcc983e7280/ISCA%20Statement%209.7%20(3).pdf>
.

The coalition also fears that if the offsets used to achieve the goal of the 
UN scheme are also credited to other climate goals, emissions will increase 
while countries and airlines appear to meet their pledges.

Instead they want to see ambitious states and regions allowed to go further in 
reducing their emissions and clear language introduced to avoid double counting.

The environmental coalition prefers an expansion of the EU emissions trading 
system (ETS), which controversiallyincluded aviation for 10 months in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/15/eu-airline-emissions-tax-success>
. The scheme involved the EU imposing a cap on carbon dioxide emissions for all 
planes arriving or departing from EU airports, while allowing airlines to buy 
and sell “pollution credits” , rewarding low carbon-emitting aviation.

But the EU froze the scheme in November 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/12/eu-airline-emissions-law> 
after the ICAO said it would take global action on emissions from planes.

“The EU stopped the clock on its own ETS to give ICAO time to develop an 
environmentally meaningful measure, not a voluntary scheme which postpones 
serious action for a decade or more. Europe should be proud of setting the 
global benchmark, and never replace it with something inferior that is open to 
bogus offset programmes,” said Andrew Murphy, aviation policy officer at 
Transport & Environment.



 