
Ahead of the 69th Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, police staged what they 
described as a “multi-terror” exercise. They ordered volunteers to play dead on 
the Croisette, detonated a series of car bombs outside the Palais and had a 
band of masked gunmen storm the dignitaries’ carpet. Here was a real-world 
simulation complete with disaster-flick bunting. All that was missing was the 
presence of an A-list action star to repel the invaders before the end credits 
rolled.

Ostensibly this bizarre charade was meant to test the authorities’ mettle in 
the event of a worst case scenario, an Isis attack at some packed premiere. But 
the ensuing theatrics (naturallyfilmed for posterity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1cEDfxyCsms>) were also of a piece with the 
festival itself, perfectly tuned to its upside-down logic. For better or worse, 
Cannes is a fantasy land. It’s full of celebrities and chancers, performers and 
posers, and overlooked at all times by 500 mounted cameras. Everybody’s on 
screen, everyone’s being watched. Small wonder that nothing feels real unless 
it is first framed as fiction.

These days Allen calls to mind one of those ageing tennis legends coaxed back 
on court for an exhibition match

On the opening day, even Mother Nature seemed intent on grabbing a role in the 
drama, dousing the town with such a storm overnight that one half-expected to 
find stranded fish flapping on the steps of the Palais. The damp, dizzy 
delegates needed a movie to warm them and it’s likely they found it in Woody 
Allen’sCafé Society <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cafe-society>, although 
personally I’d have preferred something more galvanic. Instead we got Jesse 
Eisenberg and Steve Carell playing kvetching New York Jews, each chasing the 
American dream out in 30s Hollywood and vying for the affections of a beautiful 
secretary (Kristen Stewart, doing her utmost with a sketchy role).

Café Society (given a constant honeyed glaze by cinematographer Vittorio 
Storaro) is not without its charms. It’s an elegant, melancholic affair and I 
liked the way Eisenberg’s hero – initially installed as a wide-eyed innocent – 
actually turns out to be more venal and less likable than Carell’s 
wheeler-dealer. But the tale feels rote, secondhand and a little soft in the 
middle and, as such, offers further evidence of a director who’s coasting. 
These days Allen calls to mind one of those ageing tennis legends coaxed back 
on court for an exhibition match. He still possesses the same easy swing, the 
same inimitable style. But there’s no force to his delivery. He has nothing to 
play for; nothing truly at stake.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bdf0ccd733c3f579669afd6ddbb470ead6aed38%2F0_301_4231_2539%2F4231.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202016%20week%20one%20report%3A%20surreal%20scenes%20at%20the%20Palais&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202016%20week%20one%20report%3A%20surreal%20scenes%20at%20the%20Palais&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bdf0ccd733c3f579669afd6ddbb470ead6aed38%2F0_301_4231_2539%2F4231.jpg>
 I, Daniel Blake’s Rebecca O’Brien, Dave Johns, director Ken Loach, Hayley 
Squires and writer Paul Laverty. Photograph: Graham Whitby Boot/Sportsphoto 
Ltd/Allstar 
At least Ken Loach <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach> (only one year 
Allen’s junior at 79) is still in the game, fighting the good fight. He’s one 
of two British directors in the main competition (alongside Andrea Arnold), 
back for a record-breaking 13th occasion with his finest film of this century.
I, Daniel Blake showcases a terrific, tragic performance from comic Dave Johns 
as a martyred Newcastle carpenter, felled by a heart attack yet ruled fit to 
work. First he’s told that he can’t appeal against the decision until the 
“decision maker” calls to confirm what’s already been said. Next he’s ordered 
to familiarise himself with the internet by completing a form that can only be 
accessed online. Loach tackles these hurdles like a social-realist Franz Kafka, 
painting the department of work and pensions as the tale’s hydra-headed villain 
and damning a deliberately obstructive system that leaves its victims no choice 
but to either lash out or give up. The director, I’m guessing, would advocate 
the first option. He’s tried retirement once and found that it didn’t suit him. 
He returns to the fray with the urgency and passion of a man born anew.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4deba4c7540ba13e3c8e1d99dd3a671f0cd44a66%2F1539_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202016%20week%20one%20report%3A%20surreal%20scenes%20at%20the%20Palais&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202016%20week%20one%20report%3A%20surreal%20scenes%20at%20the%20Palais&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4deba4c7540ba13e3c8e1d99dd3a671f0cd44a66%2F1539_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 ‘A wild, woolly beast of a movie’: Damien Bonnard in Staying Vertical by Alain 
Guiraudie. 
Elsewhere, early signs suggest this year’s competition could be a rich and 
strange brew. Romanian director Cristi Puiu came to town withSieranevada, an 
impressive piece of stage management, which shuts a bickering family inside a 
small flat and then turns up the heat over a three-hour running time. You won’t 
see this many exits and entrances outside of aFeydeau farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2007/mar/19/whereisthenewfeydeau>
. I was even more taken by Alain Guiraudie’sStaying Vertical, although be 
warned – this wild, woolly beast of a movie appeared to exasperate as many 
viewers as it beguiled. How to process a tale that clears space for libidinous 
rustics, ravening wolves and a new-age witch before bowing out with an ominous 
hanging ending?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4930ea392669cc5c4d586e67a2dd29ed459b6943%2F226_0_2401_3000%2F2401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202016%20week%20one%20report%3A%20surreal%20scenes%20at%20the%20Palais&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202016%20week%20one%20report%3A%20surreal%20scenes%20at%20the%20Palais&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcannes-film-festival-2016-report-cafe-society-i-daniel-blake-money-monster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4930ea392669cc5c4d586e67a2dd29ed459b6943%2F226_0_2401_3000%2F2401.jpg>
 George Clooney and Julia Roberts, stars of Jodie Foster’s Money Monster. 
Photograph: Samir Hussein/WireImage 
To confuse us still further, a cruel trick of the schedule meant the delegates 
staggered out ofStaying Vertical and pitched straight into Money Monster, a 
glossy Hollywood hostage caper that was like the cheese to its chalk. Directed 
by Jodie Foster (and playing out of competition),Money Monster features George 
Clooney as a TV pundit in peril and Julia Roberts as his harried studio 
director, demanding a more flattering angle on the furious gunman. Foster’s 
film is diverting enough and ensured someearly celebrity wattage on the red 
carpet outside <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UO7wPqz5xPE>. But it felt like 
thin, tacky fare after what had gone before. I sat in the back row still 
thinking of wolves.

Press further on through the Palais and the place turns wilder by degrees. 
Here there be dragons – or at least B-movies about dragons, because down in the 
bowels lies the Cannes marketplace. The official selection is just the tip of 
the iceberg. Hundreds of other, less feted titles are screened in small rooms 
at the back, while the stalls come draped with fabulous gaudy posters. It is 
all too easy to get lost in this maze, stumbling from audacious knock-offs like 
the superhero rompGod of Thunder <http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x2vn098> 
(not to be confused with the officialThor franchise), past Attack of the 
Lederhosen Zombies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YypoxunfX9s>, through a 
rash of cheap and cheerful creature features. Amphibians seem to be big news 
this year but which film is better,Mr Frog 
<http://www.filmfestivals.com/blog/cannes_market_dailies/attraction_presents_another_wonderful_family_film_mr_frog>
 orFrog Kingdom <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fef5o2vKyyo>?

Each market stall is staffed by a grinning, desperate sales agent who works 
the phone with one hand and the mouse with the other. By the end of the 
festival these agents – starved of sunlight, wired on coffee – rather start to 
resemble zombies themselves. But in these opening hours they are fresh-faced 
and perky, with everything to play for. Up ahead is a happy hunting ground of 
deals and discussions, masterpieces and schlock. So bolt the doors against the 
outside world. Seize the moment; embrace the dream. Or asWoody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> puts it in Café Society, “Live 
every day like it’s your last – and one day you’ll be right.”
 