
The government has handed out almost £30m to Shell and other companies for 
work on carbon capture and storage (CCS) despite scrapping their projects that 
could have played a role in beating climate change.

The payments, revealed in a written parliamentary answer, come as the UK 
government is about to host the internationalCarbon Sequestration Leadership 
Forum <http://www.cslforum.org/meetings/london2016/premeeting.html> even though 
it has just mothballed a £1bn CCS research programme.

It also means that more than £230m has been spent on CCS since 2011 but no 
working sequestration plants have been built.

About £26m of additional cash has been paid for early engineering work for the 
now abandoned White Rose scheme in Yorkshire originally led by the power company
Drax <https://www.theguardian.com/business/draxgroup>, and a further £3m for 
the scrapped scheme at Peterhead in north-east Scotland, in which Shell was 
involved.


Labour accused the Conservative government of pouring cash down the drain in 
what was described as a series of U-turns on energy policy since the Tories won 
the general election last year.


“The government has given nearly £30m to the companies who were bidding for 
the original CCS competition, without getting anything in return due to the 
chancellor’s decision to abruptly abandon the whole programme,” said the shadow 
energy minister Clive Lewis MP.

“Any technological advances that were made in the early stages are now set to 
benefit other countries that are investing in carbon capture and storage, and 
the taxpayer will have quite literally spent money for nothing.


“It simply makes no sense either economically or environmentally to abandon 
these projects that would have helped us both save jobs and save the planet.

“The government’s record of sudden and unjustified energy policy reversals is 
exactly why investors are now seeking a risk-premium for investing in the UK 
energy market, meaning higher bills for everyone.”

The National Audit Office is already investigating the way CCS has been handled
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/31/spending-watchdog-nao-george-osborne-carbon-capture-storage-scheme>
 but a spokesperson for the Department of Energy and Climate change said the 
latest tranche of cash to Shell and Drax was necessary and the knowledge could 
be put to good use.

“This is money that was already committed to these CCS projects through their 
respective contracts with government.

“We haven’t closed the door on CCS but we are clear that it needs to come down 
in cost. By sharing key knowledge now, we are supporting the long-term 
development of the industry and helping reduce the costs of CCS, which 
currently remain too high.”

The White Rose and Peterhead projects were competing to win a larger £1bn 
prize to build the first commercial CCS scheme in Britain.The money was pledged 
in the Conservatives’ 2015 election manifesto. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/25/uk-cancels-pioneering-1bn-carbon-capture-and-storage-competition>

But the UK has also considered earlier CCS schemes – now scrapped – proposed 
for capturing carbon at the now closed Longannet coal-fired power station 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-north-east-orkney-shetland-15371258> in 
Scotland andKingsnorth in Kent. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/oct/20/kingsnorth-coal>

John Allott, a national officer for construction with the Unite union, said it 
was a wasted opportunity as much as a waste of cash.


“Coal is a crucial bridge to a low-carbon economy. With commercially 
deployable CCS, coal can be, and should be, part of that low-carbon energy 
generation mix beyond 2025. The Treasury raid on the £1bn CCS R&D budget in 
November 2015 was unexpected and in our view extremely short-sighted.

“It would be a missed opportunity if the first industrialised country [the UK] 
is not the first country in the world to adopt commercial scale CCS. If we did, 
we would be able to demonstrate to the emerging economies that coal can play a 
part in their development but in a responsible and environmentally friendly 
way.”

 