
From the train window, it’s easy to rumble past the unassuming row of brick 
warehouses in Vauxhall, south London, and not look twice. Your eye will most 
likely be distracted by the cacophony of gaudy apartment blocks now clustered 
along the other side of the tracks. But Damien Hirst’s quietNewport Street 
gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/08/damien-hirst-newport-street-gallery-architecture-review-caruso-st-john>
, announced as the winner of this year’s Royal Institute of British Architects 
(Riba) Stirling Prize for the UK’s best new building, reveals its special 
qualities the closer you look.

The sawtooth roof-lights, so common in industrial buildings, are each 
differently angled, to give the subtle impression of the building unfolding 
like a concertina. The sharp metal balustrade of the Mussolini balcony, where 
Hirst might give a cheeky salute to passing trains, has been water-jet cut from 
a single slab of steel. The row of Victorian sheds is in fact a combination of 
old and new, a collage of brickwork with the variation that makes London’s 
streets so pleasing to wander.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fcaruso-st-john-win-stirling-prize-damien-hirst-newport-street-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7d364bf2d56852e23a42379157b70fc0e9b0c56%2F0_0_3790_3000%2F3790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caruso%20St%20John%20win%20Stirling%20prize%20for%20Damien%20Hirst's%20Newport%20Street%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fcaruso-st-john-win-stirling-prize-damien-hirst-newport-street-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caruso%20St%20John%20win%20Stirling%20prize%20for%20Damien%20Hirst%27s%20Newport%20Street%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fcaruso-st-john-win-stirling-prize-damien-hirst-newport-street-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7d364bf2d56852e23a42379157b70fc0e9b0c56%2F0_0_3790_3000%2F3790.jpg>
 ‘Extreme care and precision’ ... the exterior of the gallery. Photograph: 
Hélène Binet 
This subtle magic is the work of Caruso St John, arguably Britain’s leading 
architects of art gallery spaces, who first featured on the Stirling prize 
shortlist in 2000 for their breakthroughNew Art Gallery Walsall 
<http://www.carusostjohn.com/projects/new-art-gallery-walsall/>, since when 
they have honed their skills withNottingham Contemporary 
<http://www.carusostjohn.com/projects/nottingham-contemporary/> (2009), the 
Tate Britain revamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/18/tate-britain-redesign-victorian-glamour-classic>
 (2013) and a growing empire of galleries for Gagosian, most recentlyin 
Grosvenor Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/04/liverpool-philharmonic-renovation-newport-street-gallery-gagosian-review>
 (2015) in the heart of Mayfair. They were also Stirling-shortlisted for their 
beguilingBrick House <http://www.carusostjohn.com/projects/brick-house/> in 
2006, an atmospheric cave-like home in a landlocked plot, but this is the first 
time they have won the gong – and it is richly deserved.

Newport Street is one of their most reticent gallery projects, a far cry from 
the lace-embossed green concrete and golden fluting of Nottingham, or the 
oligarch-bling spiral staircase of Tate Britain, but it exemplifies the level 
of extreme care and precision that the architects bring to every project. For 
an artist who has made hisheadline-grabbing career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/30/damien-hirst-what-have-i-done-ive-created-a-monster>
 out of chopping up cows and ambushing people with his foreskin, Hirst’s 
building is notably grown-up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fcaruso-st-john-win-stirling-prize-damien-hirst-newport-street-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb75461d1b7cf59a644b66aacb22aaf774ef64137%2F0_0_2375_3000%2F2375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caruso%20St%20John%20win%20Stirling%20prize%20for%20Damien%20Hirst's%20Newport%20Street%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fcaruso-st-john-win-stirling-prize-damien-hirst-newport-street-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caruso%20St%20John%20win%20Stirling%20prize%20for%20Damien%20Hirst%27s%20Newport%20Street%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fcaruso-st-john-win-stirling-prize-damien-hirst-newport-street-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb75461d1b7cf59a644b66aacb22aaf774ef64137%2F0_0_2375_3000%2F2375.jpg>
 A staircase in the gallery. Photograph: Hélène Binet 
Hirst acquired the row of three Victorian scenery-painting workshops in 2002, 
attracted by the high, cathedral-like spaces within, which he briefly used as 
his own studio. Their great height has allowed a second floor to be deftly 
inserted, while new buildings have been added at either end, bookending the 
ensemble, with stripped windows that echo the proportions and rhythm of the 
existing workshops. The interiors are simple, white affairs, with exposed roof 
trusses to remind you of their past life, while the two levels are linked by 
oval spiral staircases of a special beauty – moments of warmth between the 
slightly clinical galleries. Built of buttery white brick, with recessed 
concrete handrails and sweeping digitally-milled wooden balustrades, they are 
crafted with a precision that makes architects go weak at the knees, and a 
robust quality rarely seen since the civic buildings of the 19th century.

In craftsmanship alone, the gallery is streets ahead of this year’s other 
contenders. Herzog & de Meuron’sBlavatnik School of Government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/25/blavatnik-school-of-government-a-corporate-temple-among-oxfords-dreaming-spires>
 in Oxford comes second, with its teetering stack of glass cylinders between 
wafer-thin concrete slabs, but whose glitzy shell encloses a grand gestural 
atrium of uncertain usefulness. Other contenders on the list were the admirable
new riverside campus 
<http://www.reiachandhall.co.uk/Project/Education_Research/glasgowcollege_river_01.html>
 for City of Glasgow College, the rebirth of the New Bodleian as theWeston 
Library <http://www.wilkinsoneyre.com/projects/weston-library> in Oxford, a 
stealthy modernist house 
<https://www.architecture.com/Awards/Awards2016/RegionalAwards/SouthWest/Outhouse.aspx>
 near Wales and thefirst phase 
<http://drmm.co.uk/projects/view.php?p=trafalgar-place> of the controversial 
Heygate Estate regeneration in London – a project that should never have made 
it on to the list, given that it representsthe trampling of a social housing 
estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/london-developers-viability-planning-affordable-social-housing-regeneration-oliver-wainwright>
 and its replacement with a scheme of mostly luxury flats.

The work of Tate Britain architects Peter St John and Adam Caruso – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/nov/17/tate-britain-caruso-st-john-in-pictures>
Recognition at home has been a long time coming for Adam Caruso and Peter St 
John, now in their mid-to-late 50s, and who, like many of the best British 
architects, enjoy their biggest commissions overseas. Much of their recent UK 
work has been frustratingly limited to subtle adjustments and internal 
reworkings. When you leave Newport Street, to be confronted full on with the 
car-crash of cheaply detailed junk nearby, you realise their skills are sorely 
needed at the bigger scale. May the fairy dust of the Stirling prize make such 
opportunities materialise.
 