
Fidel Castro obituary: revolutionary icon finally defeated by infirmity of old 
age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-obituary> 
To his critics, the late Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> was a totalitarian despot, an 
opponent of free speech and a man determined to preserve his hard-won 
revolution whatever the cost.

But to his defenders and admirers, he was a leader whose enlightened and 
practical approach to social care providedCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> with enviable health and education 
systems.

Figures from the UN children’s agency, Unicef, show that Cuba’s youth literacy 
rate <https://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/cuba_statistics.html> stands at 
100%, as does its adult literacy rate. InMexico 
<https://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/mexico_statistics.html>, youth literacy 
is around 98.5%, while adult literacy is at 93.5%. In theDominican Republic 
<https://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/domrepublic_statistics.html>, meanwhile, 
youth literacy is at 98.1% for females aged 15-24, 96.1% for males of the same 
age, and adult literacy is at 90%.

Many of the educational gains were made in the early years of the revolution, 
not least during the1961 literacy campaign 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/latin-lessons-what-can-we-learn-from-the-worldrsquos-most-ambitious-literacy-campaign-2124433.html>
 that saw hundreds of thousands of Cubans, including schoolchildren, mobilising 
to educate their compatriots.

The statistics, however, tend to mask today’s commonplace shortages of 
housing, food and transport and the high costs of such basic items as books, 
soap and clothes.

Fidel Castro: leader proves as divisive in death as he was in life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-dies-cuba-revolutionary-icon>
Perhaps even more vaunted are claims about the standard of Cuba’s healthcare. 
The island’s reputation for medical excellence – a boon long enjoyed by allied 
governments and countries struck by natural disaster and medical emergencies – 
was most recently boosted by the deployment of Cuban medical staff to parts of 
west Africa during the Ebola crisis.

In October 2014, 15,000 medical workers volunteered to participate in the 
relief effort.More than 450 specially trained Cuban doctors and nurses arrived 
in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone to combat the disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/12/cuba-leads-fights-against-ebola-africa>
, making them the largest single national medical force.

One doctor told Reuters at the time that he and his colleagues felt they had a 
responsibility to help: “We know what can happen. We know we’re going to a 
hostile environment. But it is our duty. That’s how we’ve been educated.”

Fidel Castro's dark legacy: abuses, draconian rule and 'ruthless suppression'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-dictator-legacy-abuses>
The country’s high ratio of doctors to patients and its proactive, 
community-centred approach to healthcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/sep/12/film.health> has long been the 
envy of many western countries – not least the UK, whichsent 100 GPs and a 
delegation from the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2000/oct/02/NHS.futureofthenhs> in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2000/oct/02/NHS.futureofthenhs> to 
discover how it managed to deliver care on a far smaller budget. Despite 
serious shortages of food and drugs, the country has consistently managed to 
keep its population of 11 million people healthy into old age.

Life expectancy in Cuba is 81 years for women and 77 for men 
<http://www.who.int/countries/cub/en/>. In the UK, it is 83 years and 79 
<http://www.who.int/countries/gbr/en/> respectively. And while the former 
spends $2,475 per capita on healthcare, the latter spends $3,337. Cuba 
dedicates 11.1% of its GDP to health; the UK 9.1%.

Some, however, argue that the success of Cuba’s social care owes as much to 
politics and pragmatism as to equality and governmental magnanimity.

As a senior western diplomat told the Guardian in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/sep/12/film.health>: “Health and 
education are the revolution’s pillars of legitimacy so the government has to 
make them work. If they don’t, it loses all its moral authority.”
 