
No street bears his name and there is not a single statue in his honour but 
Fidel Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> did not want or 
need that type of recognition. From tip to tip, he made Cuba his living, 
breathing creation.


Children in red neckerchiefs scampering to free schools, families rationing 
toilet paper in dilapidated houses, pensioners enjoying free medical treatment, 
newspapers filled with monotonous state propaganda: all in some way bear the 
stamp of one man.


Historians will debate Castro’s legacy for decades to come but his 
revolution’s accomplishments and failures are on open display in today’sCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>, which – even with the reforms of 
recent years – still bears the stamp of half a century of “Fidelismo”.


Fidel Castro: world reacts to death of Cuban leader – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-cuban-leader-live-updates>
The “maximum leader” was a workaholic micro-manager who turned the Caribbean 
island into an economic, political and social laboratory that has 
simultaneously intrigued, appalled and inspired the world.


“When Fidel took power in 1959 few would have predicted that he would be able 
to so completely transform Cuban society, upend US priorities in Latin America 
and create a following of global proportions,” said Dan Erikson, an analyst at 
the Inter-American Dialogue thinktank and author ofThe Cuba Wars 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Cuba-Wars-Castro-Revolution/dp/1608190129/ref=sr_1_fkmr0_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1373645384&sr=1-1-fkmr0&keywords=the+cuba+wars+dan+erikson>
.


The most apparent downside of his legacy is material scarcity. For ordinary 
Cubans things tend to be either in short supply, such as transport, housing and 
food, or prohibitively expensive, such as soap, books and clothes.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fa-revolutionary-icon-fidel-castro-dies-aged-90-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20revolutionary%20icon%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%20dies%20aged%2090%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fa-revolutionary-icon-fidel-castro-dies-aged-90-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20revolutionary%20icon%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%20dies%20aged%2090%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fa-revolutionary-icon-fidel-castro-dies-aged-90-video-obituary&media=>
A revolutionary icon: Fidel Castro dies aged 90 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/a-revolutionary-icon-fidel-castro-dies-aged-90-video-obituary>
These problems have persisted since Fidel handed the presidency to his brother 
Raúl in 2008 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/19/cuba>. Despite 
overtures to the United States and encouragement of micro businesses since 
then, the state still controls the lion’s share of the economy and pays an 
average monthly wage of less than £15. This has forced many to hustle extra 
income however they can, including prostitution and low-level corruption. The 
lucky ones earn hard currency through tourism jobs or receive dollars from 
relatives in Florida.


Cubans are canny improvisers and can live with dignity on a shoestring, but 
they yearn for conditions to ease. “We want to buy good stuff, nice stuff, like 
you do in your countries,” said Miguel, 20, gazing wistfully at Adidas runners 
on a store on Neptuno street.


Cubans deal out the cards in the new game of be your own boss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/17/cuba-economy-reforms-self-employed>
Castro blamed the hardship on the US embargo, a longstanding, vindictive 
stranglehold which cost the economy billions. However, most analysts and many 
Cubans say botched central planning and stifling controls were even more 
ruinous. “They pretend to pay us and we pretend to work,” goes the old joke.


Thanks to universal and free education and healthcare, however, Cuba boasts 
first-world levels of literacy and life expectancy. Thecomandante made sure the 
state reached the poorest, a commitment denied to many slum-dwellers across 
Latin America.


Idealism sparkles in places such as Havana’s institute for the blind where 
Lisbet, a young doctor, works marathon shifts. “We see every single one of the 
patients. It’s our job and how we contribute to the revolution and humankind.”


Castro continued to hold a place in people’s hearts and minds despite largely 
withdrawing from public life in the last decade of his life. Increasingly 
infirm, he mostly tended his garden in Zone Zero (the high security district of 
Havana),rebutted frequent premature rumours of his death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/22/fidel-castro-media-rumours-health>
 with photographs showing him holding the latest edition of the state-run 
newspaper Granma, and wrote the occasional column,including grumpy criticism of 
Cuba’s drift towards market economics and reconciliation with the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/28/fidel-castro-obama-cuba-trip>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda180211c6c7d8731dfc5b97dc83e3aca91eb4a0%2F0_27_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Castro%E2%80%99s%20legacy%3A%20how%20the%20revolutionary%20inspired%20and%20appalled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Castro%E2%80%99s%20legacy%3A%20how%20the%20revolutionary%20inspired%20and%20appalled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda180211c6c7d8731dfc5b97dc83e3aca91eb4a0%2F0_27_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Pope Francis meets Cuba’s Fidel Castro, as Castro’s wife Dalia Soto del Valle 
looks on, in Havana in 2015. Photograph: Alex Castro/AP 
But his influence was clearly on the wane. Although he met Pope Francis in 2015
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/20/pope-francis-meets-with-fidel-castro-cuba-visit>
, he spent a lot more time with his plants than with national and global power 
brokers. Even before his death, he had become more of a historical than a 
political figure.


“Fidel was the dominant figure for decades, but Raúl has been calling the 
shots,” observed a European diplomat based in Havana, who predicted the death 
would have more symbolic than political significance. “Has his presence been a 
block to reforms? Possibly. There could be an impact on young Cubans, but we 
won’t see a huge shift of Cuban politics after Fidel’s death. More significant 
would be if Raúl dies because he put his leadership on the line for reform.”


Cuba had already begun the move away from Fidel’s era in a similar series of 
gradual steps to that taken in China after the the death of Mao Zedong or 
Vietnam after the demise of Ho Chi Minh.

Under the Economic Modernisation Plan of 2010, the state shed 1m jobs, and 
opened opportunities for small private business, such aspaladares – family-run 
restaurants – andcasas particulares, or home hotels. Farmers have been given 
more autonomy and price incentives to produce more food. The government has 
eased overseas travel restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/16/cuba-foreign-travel-easier-citizens>
, loosened pay ceilings,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/18/cuba-baseball-players-pay-rise>
ended controls on car sales and 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/03/cuba-classic-car-streets-rule-change-new-purchase>
tied up with overseas partners to build anew free-trade zone  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/19/welcome-mariel-port-cuba-economic-liberalisation>
at the former submarine base in Mariel. The biggest changes have been in the 
diplomatic sphere, whereCuba strengthened ties with the Vatican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/19/pope-francis-cuba-us-reconciliation-havana>
 andsigned a historic accord with the United States to ease half a century of 
cold war tension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/us-cuba-diplomatic-relations-obama-raul-castro>
.


But this is still an island shaped more by Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> than any other man. Wander up 
the marble steps at the centre of Revolution Square and stand where Castro used 
to give his marathon orations to an audience of more than a million and you can 
still see just how much the revolution he led reshaped the country. On one side 
are the giant profiles – illuminated at night – of his two lieutenants: Che 
Guevara on the ministry of the interior and Camilo Cienfuegos across the facade 
of the communications ministry.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98He%20led%20a%20humble%20life%E2%80%99%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20biographer%20on%20the%20legacy%20of%20a%20revolutionary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98He%20led%20a%20humble%20life%E2%80%99%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20biographer%20on%20the%20legacy%20of%20a%20revolutionary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video&media=>
‘He led a humble life’: Fidel Castro’s biographer on the legacy of a 
revolutionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/he-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video>
In the distance, you can see the tower blocks that were formerly the 
headquarters of major US corporations such as ITT and General Electric but were 
nationalised under Castro, and hotels such as the Havana Libre, which were once 
owned by US mobsters but later turned over to the state.


Cuba for sale: ‘Havana is now the big cake – and everyone is trying to get a 
slice’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/01/cuba-for-sale-havana-is-now-the-big-cake-and-everyone-is-trying-to-get-a-slice>
Part of Cuba’s charm for tourists – and the curse for many locals – is that it 
is all too easy to remember what life here was like in the early days of the 
revolution because the city has barely move on in the subsequent half century. 
Thanks to the economic embargo imposed by the United States, Castro’s Cuba 
became a time capsule. Despite a partial facelift ahead of Pope Francis’s visit 
in 2015, many streets are still lined by crumbling colonial facades and potted 
by holes that look like they have been there for decades.

The former mafia hotels have had little more than a lick of paint since they 
were frequented by mobsters like Meyer Lansky and Charles “Lucky” Luciano. And, 
of course,classic cars from the 1950s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2011/sep/29/cubas-cars-in-pictures> 
– Buicks, Chryslers, Oldsmobiles and Chevrolets – still cruise theMalecón 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malec%C3%B3n,_Havana>.


Close to Revolution Square is the run-down La Timba neighbourhood, where a 
young Fidel Castro cut his teeth as a lawyer defending the local community of 
shanty-home dwellers against eviction by developers. Juvelio Chinea, an elderly 
resident, said the changes brought by the revolution in his own life had been 
modest, but his sons and grandsons had been able to attend university – the 
first generations in their family to be able to do so.


Chinea recalls hearing the comandante’s speeches from inside his home. The 
21-gun salute used to crack the walls and shake the cutlery. There would be 
singing and shouting from the crowd, then a hush as Castro started speaking. 
“Some speeches were better than others,” he remembers. “I wish he could have 
stayed in power longer.”


Not everyone is so sure about that. At the law department in Havana 
University, where Castro studied from 1945, there is admiration for the 
country’s former leader, but many believe he held back development.

“The best thing Fidel did for Cuba was to give us free healthcare at the level 
of a first world nation,” said one student. “The worst thing is that economic 
change has been delayed. If Fidel and Raúl had acted earlier, many of today’s 
problems would already have been solved.”

The student dreams of starting his own private law firm but that is not yet 
possible, he says, “because the government prefers to keep lawyers and courts 
under control” so he is thinking of joining his brother, who moved recently to 
the United States. Nonetheless, he is proud of his country’s and his 
university’s history. “It’s great that this school was where an icon like Fidel 
studied.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0ece84694ef5c758d1a5444208ee5c96a8068b9%2F0_5_2362_1418%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Castro%E2%80%99s%20legacy%3A%20how%20the%20revolutionary%20inspired%20and%20appalled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Castro%E2%80%99s%20legacy%3A%20how%20the%20revolutionary%20inspired%20and%20appalled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0ece84694ef5c758d1a5444208ee5c96a8068b9%2F0_5_2362_1418%2F2362.jpg>
 Members of the Cuban delegation wave flags beneath portraits of the South 
American libertor Simón Bolívar and the Cuban national hero José Martí at the 
World Social Forum in Caracas, Venezuela, in 2006. Photograph: Fernando Llano/AP
That many still feel affection for “El Jefe Máximo” despite his ruinous 
economic policies is because he is judged more for his nationalist triumphs 
than his communist failures. Castro’s main inspiration was not Karl Marx, but 
José Martí, the 19th-century Cuban independence hero. While the latter fought 
to eject Spanish colonisers, Castro ended US neo-imperialist rule by kicking 
out US corporations and gangsters. The former banana republic is now proudly 
sovereign.


Camilo Guevara, the son of Castro’s comrade-in-arms Ernesto “Che” Guevara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/che-guevaras-son-on-obama-in-cuba-maybe-we-can-influence-us-in-a-positive-way>
, said these achievements were secure despite the recent overtures from 
Washington.


“The revolutionaries changed the status quo and established a base for this 
nation that is independent, sovereign, progressive and economically 
sustainable. That’s how we got where we are,” he said at the Che Guevara 
Institute, which is dedicated to maintaining the ideological legacy of his 
father’s generation.


The message is driven home at the Museum of the Revolution, where the trophies 
of the early Castro era are prominently displayed outside the building that was 
once the presidential palace. Here you find the Granma yacht, on which Castro 
and 81 fellow revolutionaries sailed from Mexico in 1956 to begin the war 
against the US-backed dictatorship ofFulgencio Batista 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fulgencio_Batista>. Here too is the engine of 
the US U-2 spy plane that was shot down in 1962 duringthe Cuban missile crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/15/cuban-missile-crisis-russian-roulette>
. Inside, the exhibits and photographs ram home how this small island, under 
Castro’s leadership, defied the Yankee superpower despite the threat of nuclear 
annihilation.


For many elderly Cubans, that was a terrifying, thrilling time to be alive and 
they remain grateful to Castro for guiding them through it. Frank López, a 
retired teacher, speaks fondly of that early era under thecomandante. “It was 
frightening. The US jets would fly low and fast above the city, shattering the 
windows with their noise. We were all trained to use rifles and machine guns 
and would have to do drills every night. But in the end, nothing happened and 
we all went back to school. People should stand up to the US more often.”


But he is not dewy-eyed about Castro. Although he admires the early healthcare 
and education reforms, he also recalls the economic hardships and the 
intrusive, suspicious state security apparatus. At one point, he was placed 
under surveillance for six years because a friend had plotted against Castro. 
These days, a bigger problem is making ends meet in the face of shortages of 
basic foodstuffs. “We must all do other work to get by. It’s been like that for 
more than 20 years,” he says. “So while we say thank you to the revolution for 
the education and healthcare, we also ask how much longer we have to keep 
saying thank you.”


While Castro became a figurehead for revolutionary armed struggle throughout 
and beyond Latin America, the former guerrilla was far from universally popular 
in his home country once he turned his hand to government. Property 
appropriations, restrictions on religion and crackdowns on suspected enemies 
left many, particularly in the old middle class, hating him – a sentiment that 
has spanned the generations.


As a child, Antonio Rodiles said he rebelled after learning his mother’s 
property had been confiscated and a cousin executed as a suspected CIA agent. 
“They used to tell me ‘Fidel is your daddy’. I replied ‘No, he’s not’. I hated 
them for forcing me to do things. As I grew up I realised this kind of system 
is not natural,” he recalls. Today, he heads the opposition group Citizen 
Demand for Another Cuba and is often arrested and beaten. “Fidel has left a 
shadow over Cuba. His legacy is terrible. He destroyed families, individuals 
and the structure of society.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99e3e18de5d01ac3211d39f8f4d1178e6f34b5af%2F0_29_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Castro%E2%80%99s%20legacy%3A%20how%20the%20revolutionary%20inspired%20and%20appalled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Castro%E2%80%99s%20legacy%3A%20how%20the%20revolutionary%20inspired%20and%20appalled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-legacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99e3e18de5d01ac3211d39f8f4d1178e6f34b5af%2F0_29_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Rosa María Payá. Photograph: Claudio Santana/AFP/Getty Images 
Similarly, Rosa María Payá grew up watching her father fight against and 
suffer from a system that tolerated little dissent. Oswaldo Payá was a leading 
campaigner for free elections who was imprisoned first for his religious 
beliefs and then for his political campaigns. He died in a car accident in 2014.
Rosa María believes he was forced off the road by the government agents who 
were following him. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/23/oswaldo-paya-death-no-accident> 
She said the Castros have left a legacy of tyranny that is unchanged despite 
the cosmetic reforms and diplomatic deals of recent years.


“The Cuban people haven’t had a choice since the 1950s,” she says. “My father 
spent three years in a forced labour camp because he was Catholic. Others were 
imprisoned with him because they were homosexuals or dressed the ‘wrong’ way. 
The reality is that you can’t be alternative to the line of Fidel and Raúl.”


From the 1960s onwards, the Intelligence Directorate intrusively monitored 
opponents, many of whom were beaten by police or spent years in jail. Despite 
the release of dozens of political prisoners in the wake of the 2014 Cuba-US 
agreement,many activists were detained or harassed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/cuba-obama-visit-anti-castro-protesters-clash>
 ahead of visits by Barack Obama in 2016 and Pope Francis the previous year.


Yet, compared with the past, there is a little more scope for criticism, a lot 
more opportunity to travel, and slightly less of a sense of crisis. Cuba may 
still be more closely aligned to Venezuela than the United States, but it is 
clearly hedging its bets more than it used to do under Fidel. Today the country 
is different from the one that confidently erected a now-fading plaque on 
Avenida Salvador Allende with a quotation from Chile’s socialist leader: “To be 
young and not to be revolutionary is a contradiction, almost a biological one.”

Fidel Castro bids farewell to Cuba’s Communist party congress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/fidel-castro-farewell-speech-cuba-communist-congress>
Instead, on Avenida G, a bohemian hub of cafes and street corners for Havana’s 
teens, the talk is not of politics but iPods, fashion, films and Major League 
Baseball.


In a valedictory speech at the close of the 2016 Cuban Communist party 
congress, Castrourged his compatriots to stick to their socialist ideals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/fidel-castro-farewell-speech-cuba-communist-congress>
 despite the warming of ties with the US, but he recognised that his generation 
was passing.


“Soon I’ll be like all the others,” he said of his dead comrades. “The time 
will come for all of us, but the ideas of the Cuban communists will remain as 
proof on this planet that if they are worked at with fervour and dignity, they 
can produce the material and cultural goods that human beings need, and we need 
to fight without truce to obtain them.”


Despite the trembling voice and mournful tone, it was a typically combative 
call to arms. The last of many. It may have been several years since Castro’s 
thunderous, marathon orations, but Cuba will still feel strangely quiet without 
him.




 