
There was a time, far more recently than many Australians would care to admit, 
that this country’s policymakers and anthropologists believed they were 
witnessing the vanishment of the continent’s Indigenous people.

The Tasmanian Aboriginal people had already (wrongly) been declared extinct 
withthe passing of Truganini in 1876 
<http://www.2luxury2.com/sothebys-protest-highlights-cultural-grey-area-of-depicting-indigenous-dead/>
.

To describe as unedifying what happened elsewhere in the early to mid-20th 
century in the haste to document the assumed “passing of the race”, is a 
dramatic understatement.

Census 2016: Labor urges all Australians to include their names
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/census-2016-labor-urges-all-australians-to-include-their-names>
Anthropologists from Australia and elsewhere embarked on a race to document 
those that autodidact researcher, Charles Mountford, called the “last of the 
stone age men”. Little was off limits: the sexual habits of Indigenous people 
were charted in painstaking detail; hair and blood samples, and facial moulds, 
taken; their art – its value becoming apparent on the international market – 
was “traded” for pennies’ worth of tobacco while ancestral human remains were 
stolen by the crate-load and shipped to institutions here and abroad; secret 
and sacred rituals were intruded and trampled upon.

It was all largely justified in the name of scientific charting.

Well, as it turned out, the philosophy (assimilation) and premise 
(“extinction”) behind this extraordinary intrusion, was fallacious.

As today’s census will once again eventually illustrate, after a dramatic 
post-1788 invasion decline in Australia’s Indigenous population that was most 
pronounced in the early to mid-20th century, this country is now experiencing a 
significant resurgence in the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
people.

After the last census in 2011, the Australian National University’s Centre for 
Aboriginal Economic Policy Research determined thatthe number of people who 
identified as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander had increased by 20% 
<http://caepr.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/cck_indigenous_outcomes/2013/11/2011CensusPaper_14_Population_Projections.pdf>
 since 2006. The national census is taken every five years.

The centre based its projection on Australian Bureau of Statistics and other 
valid data, to conclude that by 2031 Indigenous people will comprise 3.8% of 
the population compared with 3% in 2011.

The centre’s Nicholas Biddle wrote: 

... if rates of fertility, paternity and mortality continue as they have been, 
then the Indigenous population is projected to grow from around 670,000 in 2011 
to around 1,060,000 by 2031. While this population growth isn’t as fast as was 
observed between 2006 and 2011 (because no identification or enumeration change 
was incorporated into the projections), it is still projected that the 
Indigenous population will grow from around 3.0 per cent of the total 
population in 2011 to 3.8 per cent by 2031.

Among the possible reasons for such a dramatic five-year increase, Biddle said 
Indigenous population was concentrated in the main childbearing years; 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women tended to have more children; there 
is a high partnering rate in urban Australia between Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander males and non-Indigenous females, with their children tending 
to be identified as Indigenous; and there “may have been a non-negligible 
number of people who previously did not identify as being Indigenous in the 
census but now feel more comfortable in doing so”.

The statistics also show that Australia’s Indigenous population is ageing and 
becoming increasingly concentrated in urban centres on the eastern coastal 
plains.

The perception, here and abroad, is that Indigenous people live largely in 
deserts and other remote areas. Indeed, reflecting in part the necessity of 
maintaining strong physical links with traditional lands to retain native 
title, about four in 10 still live in traditional country, often remote from 
urban settlements.

But there is another equally compelling dimension: more than half of 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people now dwell in the cities of the 
eastern seaboard. Long regarded as Australia’s Indigenous capital,Sydney has 
been surpassed by Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/29/which-worlds-most-indigenous-city>
 as host to the greatest number of Indigenous Australians. As of 2011, there 
were 64,993 in Brisbane to Sydney’s 64,184. Fifteen years from now, Biddle 
predicts Brisbane’s Indigenous population will reach 133,189 compared with 
Sydney’s 88,371.

The resurgence of Australia’s Indigenous population is testimony to the 
physical and political resilience of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
people, perhaps the most established civilisation on earth with estimates of an 
Australian continental presence dating 40,000 to 60,000 years.

2016 is census year! But you can stick your census in your ear, you won't get 
any data here | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/mar/30/2016-is-census-year-but-you-can-stick-your-census-in-your-ear-you-wont-get-any-data-here>
After first east coast European contact in 1770 and invasion on 26 January, 
1788,Indigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> were almost 
decimated by massacres and widespread poisoning, imprisonment, the forced 
removal of children and programs of assimilation and racial “dilution”.

Of course, Indigenous Australians still comprise the highest proportion of the 
most economically and socially disadvantaged people in the country (and the 
world), with much higher mortality and imprisonment rates.

The Australian Museum estimates 
<http://australianmuseum.net.au/indigenous-australia-introduction> that 
pre-1788 some 750,000 Indigenous people, speaking close to 700 languages, 
inhabited the continent that would become Australia.According to the Creative 
Spirits Indigenous resource 
<https://www.creativespirits.info/aboriginalculture/people/aboriginal-population-in-australia#toc0>
, by 1901 the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population had diminished 
to some 117,000.

This alludes to a remarkable story – one that demands considerable observance 
– of endurance, survival and resurgence.

But despite the demographic revival of Indigenous Australia with a projected 
population that will soon be far greater than at invasion, in 2014 the federal 
government cut $534m from programs for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders.

And that’s no way to celebrate.
 