
The 62-year-old Italian conductor Riccardo Chailly 
<http://www.lucernefestival.ch/en/lucerne_festival_orchestra/Riccardo_Chailly_Chefdirigent/>
 is to be Music Director of theLucerne Festival Orchestra 
<http://www.lucernefestival.ch/en/ensembles/lucerne_festival_orchestra/> – a 
five-year contract will commence next year. The appointment announced earlier 
this week seems to secure the longer-term future of an orchestra that was 
synonymous with its founder,Claudio Abbado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/jan/20/claudio-abbado-lucerne-festival-orchestra-tom-service>
, who died in 2014, and with whom the orchestra reached extraordinary levels of 
vision and sheer transcendence for large-scale symphonic music, especially in 
the symphonies of Mahler and Bruckner. After Abbado’s death, there was always 
going to be the issue of how the orchestra would survive, given the strength of 
their mutual relationship. 

Andris Nelsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/13/claudio-abbado-memorial-concert-review-lucerne-festival-orchestra>
 conducted last summer’s concerts as well as the memorial concert for Abbado, 
and he looked to be the most likely candidate for the Music Director role since 
he had quickly managed to gain the respect and trust of the musicians. But it’s 
likely that Nelsons’ commitments as Music Director of theBoston Symphony 
Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/aug/05/andris-nelsons-boston-symphony-2022-proms>
proved impossible to plan around. (Nelsons conducts the LFO again inMahler’s 
5th Symphony 
<http://www.lucernefestival.ch/en/lucerne_festival_orchestra/lfo_program_2015/> 
in their second concert of the season;Bernard Haitink 
<http://www.lucernefestival.ch/en/festivals/festival_in_summer_2015/events/lucerne_festival_orchestra_haitink_richter_2/>
 opens the festival with them on Friday 14 August in Mahler’s 4th.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4XbHLFkg_Mw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4XbHLFkg_Mw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4XbHLFkg_Mw&media=>
But Chailly feels to me like the best possible appointment for Lucerne. Like 
Abbado, he shares a questioning, explorative approach to musicthat you think 
you know <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oyHq9upuy84>; he too is an advocate of
new music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C4yOE9lwtj8>; and he is also at the 
stage of his conducting life where musicians will want to play for him – and, 
importantly, will be happy to give up their summers to work with him, as they 
must do to be part of the Lucerne orchestra. 

Chailly will begin his relationship with Lucerne with Mahler’s 8th Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQh_bPZWh8k> in 2016, an appropriate choice 
since the 8th was the only work missing from Abbado’s Lucerne Mahler cycle 
– planned performances of Mahler’s galactically ambitious symphony were aborted 
in 2012 and replaced withMozart’s Requiem 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mhYCaQkbkyw>. 

Ahead of Chailly is one of the biggest but most exciting challenges of his 
career – to live up to and develop Abbado’s Lucerne legacy. But Chailly knows 
what it’s like to be inspired by Abbado, and to have to follow him. He’s in 
charge of theLa Scala opera house in Milan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wvr-whg3hIs>, where Abbado also had a famous 
tenure. As Chailly says, “ever since I was 18, when he appointed me to be his 
assistant at La Scala, Abbado was my model and then my point of reference and 
lifelong friend, with deep affection up to the very end”. Chailly’s energy and 
openness  means that he can afford to be even more adventurous than Abbado in 
his repertoire and his interpretative approach. Chailly’s Lucerne orchestra 
will be very different from Abbado’s, but it could prove to be equally 
revelatory.



 