
Atlético Madrid 


Why City should be worried

Atlético Madrid’s Antoine Griezmann sends Barcelona crashing out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/13/atletico-madrid-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
When it comes to budget Atlético may be the smallest team in the semi-final, 
and by some distance, but they are not there by chance. This is absolutely 
deserved and they are a genuinely good side. One of the reasons given for 
City’s failure to progress previously was the draw; they kept getting teams 
such as Barcelona. Well, Atlético have got them twice, andeliminated them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/13/atletico-madrid-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
 twice. “We never lose belief; we never break from our ideas,” the coach, Diego 
Simeone, says. No team have the organisation, clarity or effort that they do 
and no other team know how to suffer like they do either. City would not find 
it easy to play and they certainly would not find it easy to score. Just look 
at the goals conceded in the past 16 home Champions League games Atlético have 
played under Simeone (most recent first): 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 
1, 0, 0, 1.

Why there is hope for City

Barcelona’s recent collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/11/barcelona-la-liga-atletico-real-madrid>
 – they have picked up only one point from their past three league matches as 
well as failing to defend their Champions League title – means that, 
unexpectedly, Atlético have a league title to play for after all. That includes 
a full round of midweek games next week in the buildup to the semi-final. Given 
that opportunity, they will be reluctant to rotate, even though no team have 
won more points from the bench than them, and fatigue may play a part. It is 
also true that Atlético are probably the opponents least equipped to end the 
tie with an inspired half an hour of football or a sudden attacking storm. 
There is still a small uncertainty about their best attacking pair and they 
rarely score enough goals to give themselves a margin of error. Which is fine 
when you do not commit (m)any errors but it does mean that the game is almost 
always alive.Sid Lowe
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f785c27c1cad3329867061fdc2ca2b5f1493ebd%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20semi-final%20draw%3A%20hopes%20and%20fears%20for%20Manchester%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20semi-final%20draw%3A%20hopes%20and%20fears%20for%20Manchester%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f785c27c1cad3329867061fdc2ca2b5f1493ebd%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Atlético Madrid have conceded four goal in 16 Champions League games under 
Diego Simeone. Photograph: Francisco Seco/AP 
Bayern Munich



Why City should be worried

Thomas Müller seals semi-final place as Bayern Munich see off Benfica
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/13/benfica-bayern-munich-champions-league-match-report>
Bayern may not have an out-and-out superstar in their ranks but the depth of 
their squad and tactical versatility are unparalleled in Europe. Injuries to 
the key defensive player Jérôme Boateng and the winger Arjen Robben have not 
stopped them reaching their sixth semi-final in seven seasons, as their game 
has progressed beyond the possession template. They no longer rely on killing 
their opponents with a thousand cuts but are just as happy to cross the ball 
into the box quickly – Douglas Costa has been a revelation on either flank – or 
utilise the running of the Chilean Arturo Vidal, who has added a sense of 
battle-hardness that was perhaps missing in recent years. Bayern’s formation is 
constantly in flux, adapting to the opposition. “The manager works incredibly 
hard at coming with game plans,” says Thomas Müller. “But if the plan doesn’t 
work after 10 minutes, he simply changes it.” The World Cup winner’s intuitive 
partnership with Robert Lewandowski has yielded 67 goals so far. The 
treble-chasing Bavarian club will be confident that they can add to that tally, 
irrespective of the opposition.

Why there is hope for City

Four games played, six goals conceded: Bayern’s “against” column from the four 
knockout matches does not look like semi-finalist material. Boateng may not 
recover from a muscle injury in time to shore up a defence that struggled to 
contain Kevin De Bruyne in the Bundesliga. The last time the Belgian forward 
came up against Bayern he scored two to helpWolfsburg defeat them 4-1 in 
January 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/30/wolfsburg-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
. For all of Bayern’s development into a total-football machine under 
City-bound Guardiola, the sheer amount of stylistic and personnel options at 
the Catalan’s disposal has sometimes disrupted their attacking rhythm. They are 
not quite as mesmerising as when theydestroyed Manuel Pellegrini’s side 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/02/manchester-city-bayern-munich-champions-league>
 in the group stage at the Etihad in 2013. On top of that, City can take heart 
from their very respectable record against the German champions: in six prior 
meetings they have beaten them three times and scored nine goals.Raphael 
Honigstein
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a945cfc93133495815c52da63a22edfaf78b90%2F0_46_3857_2315%2F3857.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20semi-final%20draw%3A%20hopes%20and%20fears%20for%20Manchester%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20semi-final%20draw%3A%20hopes%20and%20fears%20for%20Manchester%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a945cfc93133495815c52da63a22edfaf78b90%2F0_46_3857_2315%2F3857.jpg>
 Pep Guardiola, who is leaving Bayern at the end of the season to coach 
Manchester City, is continually making tactical changes. Photograph: Rafael 
Marchante/Reuters 
Real Madrid



Why City should be worried

Cristiano Ronaldo hat-trick takes Real Madrid into Champions League semis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/real-madrid-wolfsburg-champions-league-match-report>
Cristiano Ronaldo, Gareth Bale, Karim Benzema ... there are three good reasons 
to be worried about Madrid and there are more too, from Luka Modric to Toni 
Kroos, from one full-back to the other: Marcelo and Dani Carvajal are defenders 
who have been vital in attack. Speaking of which, few men are as dangerous from 
set plays as the centre-back Sergio Ramos. It is obvious, sure, but how can you 
not be worried about a team as loaded with talent as this one? A team that can, 
and will, leave James Rodríguez on the bench. Isco, too: the man that 
Pellegrini desperately wanted to sign when he took over at City. This is also a 
team in their best physical shape of the season, with a clearer idea now of how 
to play , discovering a certain unity that was absent before and gathering 
momentum at just the right time.

Why there is hope for City

For all the talent, Real Madrid give you chances. Casemiro has been presented 
as the defensive midfield solution and there is a better balance now but that 
protection is not complete and teams still do find passageways to run at 
Madrid. They find space, too, beyond the full-backs, particularly Marcelo. 
Carvajal, who will surely replace Danilo, is harder to overcome. Roma,but for 
awful finishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/08/real-madrid-roma-champions-league-match-report>
, would have caused them enormous problems at the Bernabéu (and in Rome). 
Wolfsburg beatthem 2-0 in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/06/wolfsburg-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
 and although Madriddominated the second leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/real-madrid-wolfsburg-champions-league-match-report>
 at the Bernabéu, Bruno Henrique wasted a wonderful opportunity to register and 
Dante failed to score a close-range header. Madrid have had “easier” opponents 
so far and although they are perhaps better suited to stronger opposition, 
their performances against them may be cause for optimism at the Etihad.SL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbaae68de09868ef5a6a02fcd01d21fa798b93315%2F0_269_2410_1446%2F2410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20semi-final%20draw%3A%20hopes%20and%20fears%20for%20Manchester%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20semi-final%20draw%3A%20hopes%20and%20fears%20for%20Manchester%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fchampions-league-semi-final-draw-manchester-city-atletico-bayern-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbaae68de09868ef5a6a02fcd01d21fa798b93315%2F0_269_2410_1446%2F2410.jpg>
 Manchester City could expect to find space behind the Real Madrid full-back 
Marcelo, pictured here against Wolfsburg. Photograph: Gonzalo Arroyo 
Moreno/Getty Images  