
The only time I changed energy supplier was an extremely dispiriting 
experience. I was at home in my flat, during the daytime, enjoying that opium 
of the freelancer, daytime TV. The doorbell rang and someone wearing an npower 
zip-up jacket and carrying an npower laminated pass, to indicate that, if he 
were a robber, he was at least diligent, said hello. He showed few other signs 
of diligence so I thought it safe to let him in.

It turned out he was indeed from npower, one of the big six energy suppliers 
who, according to entirely unsurprising analysis released by the energy 
regulatorOfgem <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ofgem> last week, are 
between them overcharging about 19 million customers. Npower first invaded my 
consciousness when its multicoloured logo was a sudden and unwelcome 
replacement for the more tasteful Cornhill Insurance letterhead on the grass at 
Test matches. How unexpected that it should be the actions of the Conservative 
party, I reflected at the time, that have ruined Lord’s.

Npower, in case you wondered where it sprang from, is a product of the 
demerger of National Power into Innogy (later renamed npower) and International 
Power. International Power isn’t as mighty as it sounds as it’s now wholly 
owned by the French electricity conglomerate Engie, formerly GDF Suez. Npower 
meanwhile belongs to the German company RWE. National Power, just to complete 
npower’s episode ofWho Do You Think You Are?, was one of the three companies to 
which the assets of the Central Electricity Generating Board were gifted in 
1990, along with National Grid Company, now National Grid plc, and Powergen, 
now E.ON UK (its shouty capitals, not mine).

The privatised sector has always seemed like it was playing at capitalism – 
like a child who pretends to serve you tea

So I invited this employee of the product of a privatisation, a demerger and a 
foreign acquisition to sit down. I didn’t offer him tea, but then I didn’t want 
to come across as lonely. He gave me his spiel which, as you will have guessed, 
was that whoever I was buying my electricity from was charging too much and 
npower could offer a better deal. He brandished various boring pieces of paper 
in support of this contention.

I was sure he was right. I’d never “shopped around” like I was supposed to, 
like I’d been exhorted to do by politicians and the media. Smartly dressed 
Tories, and then smartly dressed New Labour, as well as countless consumer 
advice segments on TV, radio and in newspapers, had been pushing the merit of 
this “shopping around” for years, as if it meant a relaxed perusal of 
intriguing stalls in an antiques market.

We were all supposed to do our bit to make the privatised utilities, this 
beleaguered outpost of capitalism, work – to guide its tremulous and arthritic 
invisible hand. Well, I hadn’t and I felt guilty. My fear of effort, my 
perverse desire not to fill in forms, had turned my electricity direct debit 
into a monthly self-imposed comeuppance. I thought I should change supplier.

“Will it be a lot of hassle?” I asked. That’s when the lying started. His 
claim was that, if I signed where he showed me, he’d leave and all would be 
well. My bills would be smaller and have a different company name on them. One 
direct debit would cease and another would begin. And, crucially, I wouldn’t 
have to do anything else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchange-power-supplier-havent-the-energy-life-too-short-for-shopping-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c7aec8ccfb027de30c45b74819eea64e945c616%2F0_0_1946_2143%2F1946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Change%20my%20power%20supplier%3F%20I%20haven%E2%80%99t%20got%20the%20energy%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchange-power-supplier-havent-the-energy-life-too-short-for-shopping-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Change%20my%20power%20supplier%3F%20I%20haven%E2%80%99t%20got%20the%20energy%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchange-power-supplier-havent-the-energy-life-too-short-for-shopping-around%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c7aec8ccfb027de30c45b74819eea64e945c616%2F0_0_1946_2143%2F1946.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
A blizzard of hassle ensued. My former supplier wasn’t taking it lying down. 
“Do you really want to change?” “How can we persuade you not to change?” 
“Please confirm that you insist on changing.” Meanwhile npower started sending 
welcome packs and bills, while its predecessor continued sending bills. I felt 
very angry with npower, but also determined never to change supplier again, so 
I remained an npower customer until I sold the flat. Take that, invisible hand!

Thousands of experiences like this must lie behind Ofgem’s findings. Sixty-six 
per cent of us are on “standard variable tariffs 
<https://www.ft.com/content/9551f67c-d8e8-3d19-8f10-069c85179a54>”, which is 
what you end up with if you don’t keep checking your deal. You sign up, you get 
a good deal for a fixed period, after which it reverts to an open-ended crap 
deal. British customers are handing shareholders around the world over a 
billion pounds a year more than necessary.

Ofgem sees its role as stopping this somehow. So does Greg Clark, the business 
and energy secretary, who wants “to help more people benefit from increased 
choice and competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/ofgem-energy-league-table-price-comparison>
”; and Lawrence Slade, the chief executive of Energy UK, which “is committed to 
making the energy market work for everyone. That is why we urge all customers 
to make sure they are taking advantage of all the deals on offer from over 40 
active suppliers in the market.”

There they go again: nagging us to shop around. Come on, there are over 40 
suppliers to look at! They each have several different tariffs! You need to be 
checking them all out several times a year, working out what they would each 
mean for your specific home and energy consumption, making a decision and then 
embarking on the administrative process of changing supplier. If you don’t, the 
privatisation of the utilities will look like it doesn’t work! Get on with it – 
you’re making Margaret Thatcher look stupid!

EDF to cut gas prices but hike electricity tariffs in 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/16/edf-cut-gas-prices-hike-electricity-tariffs>
The privatised electricity and gas sector has always seemed like it was 
playing at capitalism – like a small child who pretends to serve you afternoon 
tea. Suddenly, in the 1990s, all these snazzy-sounding companies leapt into 
existence. They commissioned TV ads and hoardings and sponsored sport and 
generally presented themselves as if they’d founded and made a go of their 
businesses rather than just been handed them by the state. They’re the business 
equivalent of a kid with a trust fund who calls himself a film director.

I’m all for capitalism. There’s a power and elegance to a free market that 
it’s foolish to suppress and can be potently harnessed. But sometimes it 
doesn’t work – because it’s too brutal, the business is too marginal or, as in 
this case, it doesn’t make practical sense. Where the market makes sense, it 
doesn’t need constant advocacy. Politicians don’t need to say: “If you think 
the bread is pricey at Sainsbury’s, try Tesco or Asda!” People do that 
automatically.

But people don’t want to shop around for their electricity and gas. They want 
the lights and heating to work and then to pay a reasonable bill. Choosing 
which foreign-owned corporation’s livery appears on that bill is a privilege 
most of us don’t value. For 26 years successive governments have persevered 
with this annoying, time-consuming, guilt-generating, unpopular system for no 
better reason I can think of than Thatcherite ideological completism.
 