
Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>, the state-owned 
broadcaster whose future is under review, has accused the government of “a 
worrying and unprecedented level of interference” after the appointment of four 
white men to its board.

The government confirmed the appointment of four board members this week but 
rejected a fifth candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/29/bme-woman-blocked-from-channel-4-board-as-four-white-men-join>
 put forward by the media regulator Ofcom, who happened to be the only woman 
and black or minority ethnic candidate on the list.

In a sharply worded note to all staff, the Channel 4 chief executive, David 
Abraham <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-abraham>, was highly critical 
not just of this decision but of the government failing to announce its verdict 
on the broadcaster’s ownership status and future.

“Set against the backdrop of over a year of government-induced uncertainty at 
Channel 4, to say that this latest sequence of events is dispiriting would be 
an understatement,” he wrote.

“When combined with the many detailed issues they have raised with us over 
more than a year, this amounts to a worrying and unprecedented level of 
government interference. The editorial and institutional independence of 
Channel 4 remains paramount and I do not want it to be compromised.”

In September 2015, a leaked memo revealed that the then culture secretary, 
John Whittingdale, was considering the possible privatisation of Channel 4. 
After the departure of Whittingdale along with David Cameron, the incoming 
culture secretary, Karen Bradley, indicated that her department would still 
consider the future of the commercially funded broadcaster. This review is 
ongoing.

Abraham said he had written to staff after “concerns have been raised 
internally” about the appointments process “and what this means more broadly in 
terms of the relationship between Channel 4 and the government”.

He argued that Ofcom had experienced “extraordinarily lengthy delays in 
securing government approval”.

“While it would not be appropriate for the confidentiality of the process to 
be breached, in the circumstances neither do we believe it makes any sense for 
Channel 4 to publicly defend a decision which we find hard to understand.

“Not only do we share Ofcom’s view that the fifth candidate is highly 
qualified, but she would also have added to the diversity of our board. 
Furthermore, improving board diversity is something that the government says it 
wishes to support.”


The decision to reject the only minority candidate has been criticised by the 
Labour MP David Lammy, who asked about the issue in this week’s prime 
minister’s questions. Theresa May said sheintended to look into the matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/30/theresa-may-defends-process-four-white-men-join-channel-4-board>
.
 