
Antonio Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> praised the 
impact Victor Moses had in his new-look Chelsea side and said he could be a 
good fit for a right-wing-back position this season.

Moses started a Premier League game for Chelsea for the first time since May 
2013, a total of 1,239 days,in the 2-0 victory against Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/hull-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 and proved a dangerous outlet going forward and equally comfortable when 
defending.

The 25-year-old was bought by Chelsea from Wigan Athletic in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/aug/23/victor-moses-chelsea-wigan> 
but loans at Liverpool, Stoke City and West Ham United posed questions about 
his long‑term future at Stamford Bridge.

Victor Moses: they should be proud of me, looking down being proud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/sep/14/victor-moses-interview-chelsea>
Moses will be assessed by Chelsea’s medical staff after “feeling his 
hamstring” after his side’s victory at Hull, but Conte believes he could 
operate out wide when three players are selected in defence.

“For me, Moses played an incredible game in a defensive situation and 
offensive situation. It’s fantastic because he’s working very hard and that’s 
why he deserved to play. He showed me that my choice was right,” said Conte, 
who has often utilised a three-man defence during his managerial career.

“If he can play this way it’s fantastic. I also think Pedro can play in this 
way. To have wingers able to do this role is a great option. [Marcos] Alonso 
played there [on the left] often for Fiorentina. Like all the players, he must 
work.”

The victory was Chelsea’s first in the league since August and also their 
first clean sheet. David Luiz, Gary Cahill and César Azpilicueta played in a 
back three that were rarely troubled against a tame Hull attack and Conte was 
pleased the new formation proved effective after disappointing resultsagainst 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 andArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
. “In the past we played with four, but the facts speak. When you concede many 
goals and you are not compact the manager and players must find a solution. For 
this reason it’s important to go the other way,” he said.

“Now we have another solution and tactical system. We can play with three at 
the back or four, it depends on the game but I think this is a good way. Today 
I’m very happy because we finished with a clean sheet after conceding two and 
three goals in our last games. It’s important to find more confidence.

“The principles are for the team to remain short and narrow, to try to win the 
ball back really quickly and maintain good balance. These are the principles, 
if we play with three back or four back.”
 