
Chelsea Manning <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning> has made 
a last-ditch appeal to Barack Obama to commute her sentence for leaking state 
secrets to time served, calling on him to release her from military prison so 
that she can have her “first chance to live a real, meaningful life”.


With the clock running down on the current presidency, the US soldier is 
making her last, and what her supporters hope will be the most promising, stab 
at persuading Obama to set her free aftermore than six years in custody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/24/chelsea-manning-christmas-prison-whistleblower-wikileaks>
. Their assumption is that the prospects of incoming president Donald Trump 
showing her leniency rank as slim, to none.

Barack Obama commutes majority of Chelsea Manning's prison sentence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-sentence-commuted-barack-obama>
Manning has already served considerably more time behind bars than any other 
official leaker in recent US history.In a letter 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3217536-Chelsea-Manning-Commutation-Application.html>
 that accompanies the petition, her lawyers, Nancy Hollander and Vincent Ward, 
liken the soldier’s plight to the many other criminal offenders that have 
already been given a second chance by Obama through his clemency powers.

The lawyers remind the sitting president that Manning carried out her massive 
leak of state secrets in 2010, that included hundreds of thousands of US 
diplomatic cables and warlogs from Afghanistan and Iraq, at a time when she was 
under huge psychological stress as a result of being a transgender woman. They 
also emphasise the prisoner’s harsh treatment when she was first brought from 
Iraq to the US including a prolonged spell in solitary confinement – an issue 
that Obama has embraced in recent moves torestrict the use of solitary 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/obama-bans-solitary-confinement-for-juveniles-in-federal-prisons/2016/01/25/056e14b2-c3a2-11e5-9693-933a4d31bcc8_story.html>
 in federal penal institutions.

“Since Ms Manning’s arrest she has been subjected to torturous conditions 
while in military confinement. For nearly a year Ms Manning was held in 
solitary confinement while awaiting trial, and since her conviction, has been 
placed in solitary confinement for an attempted suicide,” they write.

The new petition, which was first reported by the New York Times, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/14/us/politics/chelsea-manning-asks-obama-to-cut-sentence-to-time-served.html?rref=collection%2Ftimestopic%2FManning%2C%20Bradley%20E.&action=click&contentCollection=timestopics&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1&pgtype=collection>
 comes on top of a previous clemency request and anongoing appeal against her 
35-year military sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/19/chelsea-manning-files-appeal-against-conviction>
. In supporting material, Daniel Ellsberg, the source of the legendary Pentagon 
Papers that revealed secrets about the Vietnam war, tells Obama: “It is my firm 
belief that Ms Manning disclosed this material for the purpose of informing the 
American people of serious human rights abuses, including the killing of 
innocent people by the United States troops in Iraq.”
 