
A first league win since August and finally some satisfaction for Antonio 
Conte. TheChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> manager 
tinkered with his team and, although the performance was not a vintage one, his 
side eased to a comfortable victory here after goals from Willian and Diego 
Costa.

Conte was visited by Roman Abramovich three times in the week leading up to 
this match, when they discussed how to revive a flagging team, and although 
this result may not indicate a complete turnaround, at least it was a start.

Conte dropped Branislav Ivanovic and played with a three-man defence that 
started shakily, but grew into the game. Hull, however, faded badly and Costa 
capitalised. Both his and Willian’s goals were fine strikes into the top corner 
in the second half, to ensure Chelsea eased to a much-needed win after recent 
defeats by Arsenal and Liverpool.

“We played with the right intensity and pressure,” said Conte. “For me, we 
played a good game and also kept the clean sheet for the second time.

“After two defeats, it’s never easy. You need to work very hard, but I am 
happy with the commitment of the players.

“It [a three-man defence] can be a big change on the tactical aspect, but I 
think more than the system it’s the principles that are important. This week we 
worked on it a lot. We must find the right solution to be more compact. We were 
able to defend very high and this is very important.”

In the end, Chelsea cantered home, but they were evidently learning the 
nuances of their new formation on the job. David Luiz was flanked by Gary 
Cahill and César Azpilicueta at the back, and it was Thibaut Courtois who was 
forced into the two significant saves of the opening half.

The first came in the third minute, when he acrobatically tipped over a Robert 
Snodgrass free-kick that deflected off the wall, David Luiz having pulled down 
Dieumerci Mbokani on the edge of the penalty area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fhull-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1eb7758f843d96c460f8788c74e58931d955853b%2F87_3_4521_2712%2F4521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%20get%20back%20on%20track%20as%20Willian%20and%20Diego%20Costa%20seal%20routine%20win%20at%20Hull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fhull-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%20get%20back%20on%20track%20as%20Willian%20and%20Diego%20Costa%20seal%20routine%20win%20at%20Hull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fhull-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1eb7758f843d96c460f8788c74e58931d955853b%2F87_3_4521_2712%2F4521.jpg>
 Thibaut Courtois saves Robert Snodgrass’ free kick in the first half. 
Photograph: Greig Cowie/BPI/REX/Shutterstock 
Eden Hazard and Willian played just off Costa, but while there were a few 
scuffed efforts here and there, fluidity was limited early on.

Hazard appeared the greatest threat and, in the 40th minute, Curtis Davies had 
to be alert to produce a precise sliding tackle to deny the Belgian a shot 
at the goalkeeper David Marshall inside the area.

Chelsea restarted with renewed impetus and Hazard, in particular, lifted his 
game. Marshall was forced into a fine stop after the Blues player turned 
brilliantly in midfield before jinking past his marker and curling a powerful 
shot towards the top corner of the goal.

Sunderland’s Patrick van Aanholt grabs late equaliser to deny West Brom win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/sunderland-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
It was the spark that Chelsea needed to begin a concerted period of 
pressure. Hull’s only creative outlet was Snodgrass and passes soon began to go 
awry for Mike Phelan’s side. Indeed, it was one such miscue that almost gave 
Chelsea the lead.

Davies played the ball straight to N’Golo Kanté and the former Leicester City 
midfielder slipped in Costa, who rounded the onrushing Marshall and shot on to 
the post, with Jake Livermore getting the faintest of touches as he desperately 
slid in front of his own goal. Kanté then had a glorious opportunity to score 
from the rebound, but he fired over.

In the 61st minute, however, Chelsea did have their lead. Hull again gave away 
possession in midfield and the blue shirts swarmed forward, Costa feeding 
Willian out left and the Brazilian cutting into the penalty area to curl the 
ball exquisitely into the top corner.

Cue more pressure, as Hull’s confidence crumbled. Soon afterwards it was 2-0, 
as Costa added his sixth goal of the season after Matic, driving forward, had a 
shot blocked that fell to the striker, who finished coolly.

Phelan, the Hull caretaker manager, said: “I was encouraged after the first 
half; I thought we took Chelsea to certain limits and created a few chances. 
But, at this level, you need to take them to be in the game.

“We did not treat the ball with the care and attention it deserved, and when 
you do that you get punished.

“I’m looking forward to a break. My future will take care of itself. I’m not 
in a position of panic. I’m not shying away from the challenge; it’s hard this 
division and we’re a newly promoted team.”

Dimitri Payet magic earns West Ham a point against Middlesbrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/west-ham-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report> 