
Stories about the declining bee population and its effects on the environment 
trickle through the news cycle nearly every day. To keep track of the latest 
bee news and make sense of the issues,we're highlighting the major bee stories 
each week, with analysis from the Guardian's Alison Benjamin, co-author of A 
World Without Bees 
<http://www.amazon.com/World-Without-Bees-Allison-Benjamin/dp/B006CDGQKW>, Bees 
in the City: The Urban Beekeepers' Handbook 
<http://www.amazon.com/Bees-City-Urban-Beekeepers-Handbook/dp/0852652313> and 
Keeping Bees and Making Honey 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Keeping-Bees-Making-Honey-2nd/dp/1446303551/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1375193993&sr=1-2>
.

Q&A

We've recently launched a Buzzfeeds Q&A 
<http://q-and-a.theguardian.com/qanda/1507001>. Alison Benjamin will pop in 
every week and answer your questions, but you're also invited to use the tool 
to suggest stories for us to include in our weekly round up, and discuss the 
latest bee-related news with other Guardian readers.

Syngenta challenges EU ban on neonicotinoids 
<http://www.beyondpesticides.org/dailynewsblog/?p=11739>

What happened: Chemical giant Syngenta challenges the European Commission's 
ban on the neonicotinoid pesticide thiamethoxam.The European Commission ruled 
in April <http://www.beyondpesticides.org/dailynewsblog/?p=10368> to ban the 
pesticide across the continent for two years, along with the neonicotinoids 
clothianidin and imidacloprid, because of a report by the European Food Safety 
Authority (EFSA) that determined certain pesticides pose a "high acute risk" to 
honey bees.

Syngenta says the decision to ban the pesticides was "on the basis of a flawed 
process, an inaccurate and incomplete assessment by the European Food Safety 
Authority and without the full support of EU Member States."

Key quote:

Syngenta Chief Operating Officer, John Atkin, said 
<http://www.syngenta.com/global/corporate/en/news-center/news-releases/Pages/130827.aspx>
: 'We would prefer not to take legal action but have no other choice given our 
firm belief that the commission wrongly linked thiamethoxam to the decline in 
bee health. In suspending the product, it breached EU pesticide legislation and 
incorrectly applied the precautionary principle.'

Why it matters: Syngenta's action follows chemical giant Bayer, which last 
month filed a legal challenge against the European Commission's two year ban on 
its neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and imidacloprid. They claim that 
according to EU guidelines approved products can only be banned if there is new 
evidence of their negative effects.

Given the billions of dollars these companies are set to lose when the ban 
goes into effect – and the knock-on effect it could have on their global 
business – it's hardly surprising that they're mounting legal challenges. Yet 
much new research has been done since these three neonicitinoids were approved 
for registration some years ago. And it shows very low levels of exposure to 
these pesticides compromises bees' immune systems, making them more susceptible 
to disease and viruses, and reducing their foraging and navigational behaviour.

Even if Syngenta and Bayer don't win their case, they could delay the ban for 
months in court, keeping it from coming into force later this year, as planned. 
The EPA will be looking on with interest; it's facing legal challenge in the US 
from environmental groups and beekeepers over the registration of clothianidin 
and imidacloprid, and a new neonicitinoid pesticide, sulfoxaflor.

The stakes involved are huge. Ideally, these legal challenges will raise more 
awareness to the harm these chemicals do to bees, and in turn, the chemical 
giants will lose their cases. Then it would make it much harder for the EPA to 
justify these pesticides' registration, and they would likely be withdrawn from 
the US.

Florida citrus grower that killed millions of bees with pesticide gets $1,500 
fine 
<http://blogs.miaminewtimes.com/riptide/2013/08/florida_citrus_grower_that_kil.php>

What happened:  Earlier this year, the state of Florida found citrus giant Ben 
Hill Griffin Inc. 
<http://www.palmbeachpost.com/news/business/state-fines-ben-hill-griffin-inc-groves-for-pestic/nZc4z/>
 guilty of breaking pesticide laws twice, causing the deaths of millions of 
bees. The ruling may have been a victory for beekeepers and environmentalists, 
but the punishment is nothing short of laughable: a $1,500 fine.

Key quote:

Every four days, they were spraying seven or eight different types of 
chemicals," Crystal River beekeeper Randall Foti tells the Palm Beach Post. "A 
$1,500 fine is not much of a deterrent."

That fine pales in comparison to Foti's losses, which he says include $240,000 
in honey, not to mention the cost to local ecosystems.

Why it matters: This paltry fine sends the wrong message to farmers who flaunt 
pesticide laws. Illegally spraying pesticides should incur a financial penalty 
that deters irresponsible behaviour which kills bees and threatens local 
ecosystems. And the law should change to fit that kind of deterrence. The 
farmer should also be made to compensate the beekeepers for the loss of bees, 
pollination services and honey sales. And what about putting a value on 
ecosystems and making the farmer pay for that as well?

Bees are vital for pollinating fruits, vegetables and other crops; it's 
estimated that commercial beekeeping adds up to almost $16bn in value to US 
agriculture every year. Pesticides should not be sprayed at certain times of 
the year, when they can affect bees. Labelling makes this clear, but farmers 
often ignore it to destroy a particular pest, in this case theAsian citrus 
psyllid insect <http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/r107304411.html>. But bees are 
also insects, and what kills the pest kills the bee if sprayed at the wrong 
time.

Bee health: background and issues for Congress 
<http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43191.pdf>

What happened: The Congressional Research Service released a 24-page report on 
bee health. The report is an amalgamation of previous studies on what is 
responsible for the decimation of the bee population, as well as everything 
from the basics of bee species to the economic implication of a declining 
population. While the report is a primer for Congress, it is also a clear, 
comprehensive and data-heavy read that shows what the government is being told 
about bees and what policy areas are most-involved with bee health.

Key quote:

Reasons cited for honey bee population losses include a wide range of possible 
factors thought to be negatively affecting pollinator species. Potential 
identified causes include bee pests and disease, diet and nutrition, genetics, 
habitat loss and other environmental stressors, agricultural pesticides, and 
beekeeping management issues, as well as the possibility that bees are being 
negatively affected by cumulative, multiple exposures and/or the interactive 
effects of several of these factors



Why it matters: Congressmen Earl Blumenauer 
<http://blumenauer.house.gov/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2233> 
andJohn Conyers Jr 
<http://conyers.house.gov/index.cfm/2013/7/conyers-and-blumenauer-introduce-legislation-protecting-pollinators-and-america-s-food-system>
 have introduced a Saving America's Pollinators Act, which directs the EPA to 
suspend the use of bee-toxic pesticides until it can prove they will not cause 
"unreasonable adverse effects" on pollinators. The bill also requires the 
Department of the Interior to co-ordinate with the EPA to monitor the health 
and population of native bees and to annually report to Congress on its 
findings. The report on bee health has been released by the Congressional 
Research Service to provide latest information on bee research to members of 
Congress to help them make an informed decision about whether or not to back 
this potentially groundbreaking law.

Bonus: 

If you haven't already, check out these incredible photos 
<http://newswatch.nationalgeographic.com/2013/08/28/giant-carpenter-bees-in-tanzania/>
 of giant carpenter bees in Tanzania on National Geographic.
 