
Zariff can remember cutting Barack Obama’s hair for his breakthrough speech at 
the Democratic national convention address in 2004. “I cut it real short for 
that one,” the barber said. “He went from medium to short. I thought it should 
be different.”

On Tuesday, Obama will again sit calmly as Zariff, his personal hairdresser 
for more than two decades, prepares him to walk out before an ecstatic, 
expectant crowd. This time it will be to deliver his last address as US 
president. He will reflect on what he got done, what went undone, and what a 
Donald Trump futureportends for America and the world. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/barack-obama-legacy-donald-trump-healthcare-climate-change>

'He'll take a chainsaw to it': is Obama's legacy strong enough to survive 
Trump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/barack-obama-legacy-donald-trump-healthcare-climate-change>
Hopes are high that he has one more great speech left in him.

Unlike Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton or George W Bush, Obama has opted to give 
his farewell address notin the White House 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/national-news/articles/2017-01-09/what-obamas-predecessors-said-in-their-presidential-farewell-addresses-to-the-american-public>
 but in his adopted home. Chicago, America’s third biggest city, is guaranteed 
to give the president an adoring, raucous, never-let-me-go sendoff.

Such is the strength of feeling for Obama here – “he will always be Chicago’s 
president,” 
<http://chicago.suntimes.com/politics/sweet-obamas-legacy-he-will-always-be-chicagos-president>
 a city newspaper headline declared last week – that competition for seats at 
the primetime event rivalled that for the Broadway musical Hamilton. Swaddled 
in heavy winter coats, hats and gloves, people queued in the freezing cold from 
4.30am on Saturday for one of the 7,000 free tickets – some of which are now 
being sold for thousands of dollars online.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fchicago-farewell-speech-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e995834b67d800aec6ac1ed7bf250161e5c81cc%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicago%20cheers%20adopted%20son%20Obama%20as%20he%20returns%20for%20farewell%20speech%20as%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fchicago-farewell-speech-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicago%20cheers%20adopted%20son%20Obama%20as%20he%20returns%20for%20farewell%20speech%20as%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fchicago-farewell-speech-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e995834b67d800aec6ac1ed7bf250161e5c81cc%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 People wait in line for tickets to Barack Obama’s farewell address in Chicago, 
most for two or more hours in subzero wind chill temperatures. Photograph: 
Scott Olson/Getty Images 
One man certain to be in attendance is Zariff – who declined to give his full 
name or age – who works at theHyde Park Hair Salon 
<http://hydeparkhairsalon.com/> in Obama’s home neighbourhood. Although the 
shop changed premises a few years ago, it has its most famous patron’s regular 
chair on prominent display, autographed and behind protective glass, along with 
photos, newspaper cuttings and even a painting, almost like a shrine.

Zariff said he can recall “very vividly” the first time the young lawyer and 
community organiser walked in. He never dreamed Obama could be president. But 
then came the convention in Boston in 2004. “That’s when I knew it was 
possible,” he reflected. “A very bright, very sharp, very focused individual 
outside the guy who told jokes all the time.”

Zariff, who is African American, cut Obama’s hair again before his acceptance 
speech in Grant Park, Chicago, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/05/obama-victory-chicago-new-era> 
on the night in 2008 he became the first black president in US history. “He had 
to look his best. It was a very special feeling of watching something come to 
fruition from the beginning.”

Since then Zariff has made regular trips to the White House to ensure Obama 
does not have a hair out of place. “When you find a good barber, you hang with 
him,” he explained cheerfully. “It’s important for a world leader to keep his 
look consistent.”

When you find a good barber, you hang with him … It’s important for a world 
leader to keep his look consistent.
Zariff, Barack Obama's hairdresser 
Tuesday night’s speech will evoke a heap of memories, Zariff added. “I will go 
back all the way to the first time he walked in the door, to the time of 
Illinois senator, to the time of senator, to the time of president: all this I 
will think about. He’s still standing upright, confident, and looking to the 
future.”

•••

Chicago is booming by some measures but grappling with a soaring murder rate, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/20/murder-rate-chicago-brennan-center>
 persistent racial segregation and, last week,a shocking Facebook Live broadcast
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-beating-anti-donald-trump>
 that apparently showed a person with disabilities being bound, gagged and 
beaten.

Tim Samuelson, the city’s official cultural historian, said: “So much of 
Barack Obama’s formative years were in doing public activism here inChicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago>. The challenge of urban life in 
the city became an environment that shaped him.

“Chicago is the newcomer city in the US and grew up almost overnight. It’s 
always been concerned about how people regarded it. It’s made its mark in many 
ways, including culturally and artistically, but certainly the presidency of
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> is going to be 
the most lasting and memorable achievement.”

More than 'mom-in-chief': Michelle Obama bows out as dynamic first lady
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/michelle-obama-legacy-first-lady>
Obama was born in Hawaii and spent part of his childhood in Indonesia but 
later moved to Chicago’s south side, whichhe regards as home. 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/obamalibrary/ct-obamas-chicago-a-guided-tour-to-meaningful-sites-to-the-president-20150512-htmlstory.html>
 It is where he met his future wife, Michelle Robinson, taught at university, 
started as a community organiser and has chosen for his presidential library. 
Today in the Hyde Park neighbourhood there are signs of affection, physical and 
emotional, for the local hero.

Outside a mundane strip mall, a 3,000lb lump of granite sits in a flower bed, 
embedded with a plaque. “On this site, President Barack Obama first kissed 
Michelle Obama,” it proclaims. For good measure, it includes a quote from Obama:

On our first date, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/28/obama-legacy-biopic-film-southside-with-you>
 I treated her to the finest ice cream Baskin-Robbins had to offer, our dinner 
table doubling as the curb. I kissed her, and it tasted like chocolate.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fchicago-farewell-speech-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff74cf116dfb628fb88f1fffee7a442320c899f37%2F0_185_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicago%20cheers%20adopted%20son%20Obama%20as%20he%20returns%20for%20farewell%20speech%20as%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fchicago-farewell-speech-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicago%20cheers%20adopted%20son%20Obama%20as%20he%20returns%20for%20farewell%20speech%20as%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fchicago-farewell-speech-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff74cf116dfb628fb88f1fffee7a442320c899f37%2F0_185_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A plaque marking the location where Barack and Michelle Obama shared their 
first kiss in 1989 in Hyde Park, Chicago. Photograph: Scott Olson/Getty Images 
Baskin-Robbins has moved to a new location a few doors away. Standing behind a 
bank of ice cream on a cold day, cashier Bianca Smith, 29, expressed a 
sentiment true for many here: sorrow at Obama’s departure and trepidation at 
what is to come. “I wish he could run again for president. Trump just don’t 
have any experience, especially campaign experience. He can’t run his own 
damned hotel and now he’s going to run the world? I’m kind of nervous.”

Down the street is Valois, <http://www.valoisrestaurant.com/> a restaurant 
that opened in 1921, another favourite Obama haunt. Today it has a menu poster 
that proclaims, “President Obama’s favorites”, including NY steak and eggs for 
$9.95 and two pancakes for $6.25. More photos adorn the walls. Sitting at the 
window on Monday was Herb Robinson, a property investor, wearing a shirt that 
combined four Chicago sports teams.

Robinson, 65, who worked on Obama’s first campaign and was among the 240,000 
people in Grant Park on election night, met the president at Valois. “He has an 
excellent memory and he remembered me from when I was campaigning for him,” he 
said. “People here wish he could stay, but he served two terms and that’s the 
most a president can serve.”

But Robinson, too, is wary of the next president. “I don’t think very highly 
of him. He’s a big liar, an exaggerator. America is definitely going to make a 
change for the worse. I don’t trust him. I don’t believe a word he says. Full 
of shit. It amazed me how he got in.”

Obama's legacy: the promises, shortcomings and fights to come
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/barack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights>
Below street level, the low-ceilinged 57th Street Books, 
<https://57th.semcoop.com/> meanwhile, is where Obama launched his two books. 
For the first, Dreams from My Father (1995), only about half a dozen people 
turned up, according to urban legend. For the second, The Audacity of Hope, the 
crowd was more substantial.

The shop is part of Seminary Co-op Bookstores, of which Obama has been a 
member since the 1980s. Its director, Jeff Deutsch, will be at the speech on 
Tuesday night. “There are a couple of different Chicagos,” he said. “What Obama 
means to history is the best of the south side: a wonderfully diverse community 
that has deep roots and cares about ideas, justice, empathy, compassion. He’s 
been incredibly inclusive and that’s been part of this community as well.”

At Medici, <http://www.medici57.com/> a restaurant with faux medieval decor 
that encourages customers to write graffiti, one section of wall has been 
framed behind glass: it is signed, “Malia Obama” with a heart. The family used 
to dine here but not all today’s patrons are fans. Diner Joel Smith, 65, a 
retired engineer, will not be watching the farewell address. “I’m glad he’s 
gone,” he said. “It was eight years of nothing.

“Jobs have gone abroad, the country’s in a sad state militarily and he’s 
promulgated all sorts of antisemitic policies. Why do you think Trump got 
elected? Now Obama’s going to build a library in the park, so he can still rule 
and people will kiss his ring.”

Strictly speaking, however, Obama will go back to what he was: a citizen. 

Jon Arnold, 57, a journalist and historian, recalled a sighting in Hyde Park 
long before the world had heard the name Barack Obama. “He was standing with a 
clipboard petitioning to be state senator. I said, ‘There goes another sleazy 
politician who’ll never get anywhere.’”
 