
In a neatly maintained archive of papers held in the library at Brunel 
University, the pioneering campaigner for action to prevent sexual abuse in 
sport Prof Celia Brackenridge compiled a catalogue of horrific cases that came 
to court in the 1990s. Included in the files is a note on the Channel 4 
Dispatches programme that in 1997 exposed several instances of abuse in 
football.

Tragically the Brackenridge archive comprises reports of convictions for 
serious and sustained sexual abuse across many sports at a time, so recent, 
when there was no dedicated child protection safeguarding, nor even basic 
checking of coaches for criminal records, as British sports have in place 
today. Some abusers who were finally convicted, usually after victims came 
forward years later as adults, had committed crimes for decades. Convictions in 
football included Jim Torbett of the Celtic boys club where Alan Brazil, later 
a Scotland international and now a radio presenter, was one of the victims and 
witnesses. There were cases of abuse, reported here and in Canada, the US, 
Australia and Germany, in athletics, gymnastics, sailing, karate, squash, 
diving and – most notoriously at the time – swimming.

Football sexual abuse victims may have been as young as four years old – police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/football-sexual-abuse-young-victims>
It was the 1995 conviction and 17-year prison sentence for offences including 
rape and indecent assault handed down to Paul Hickson, who had been coach to 
the GB swimming team at the 1984 and 1988 Olympics, which generated most media 
coverage and finally prompted sports to make child protection a priority. It is 
shocking now, after the harrowing experiences recalled by former footballers in 
recent weeks, with the Metropolitan police becoming the 22nd force to launch an 
investigation into historical allegations, to look back at how little was in 
place. The lawyer Malcolm Johnson of the firm BL Claims, a specialist in abuse 
cases, explains that sport was not included in child welfare laws that applied 
to local authority education and care settings, and says of the decades up to 
reforms of the late 1990s: “In short, anyone could have unrestricted access to 
young people in intimate settings; systems to identify potential abusers were 
rudimentary.”

In that vast sporting landscape, which was in hindsight terrifyingly open to 
abusers, theFA’s own inquiry, led by Clive Sheldon QC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/football-association-appoint-clive-sheldon-qc-child-sex-abuse-review>
, will examine how the FA itself, and professional and amateur football clubs 
who owed the primary duty of care to their young players, behaved and responded 
to concerns. Given that Chelsearequired a confidentiality clause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/gary-johnson-says-chelsea-paid-him-50000-for-silence-about-abuse>
 to prevent their former player Gary Johnson from talking about the abuse he 
suffered, as part of the £50,000 settlement agreed only last year, it seems 
highly probable that the authorities will be found to have been deficient. The 
lament of the former Charlton Athletic player Russell Davy, that he did not 
receive even an acknowledgment from the FA of a letter he wrote to its 
Lancaster Gate HQ,addressed “to whom it may concern”, warning about the abuser 
Eddie Heath 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/warned-fa-football-paedophile-30-9388930>
, grimly replicates the FA’s inaction over letters from supporters in the 1980s 
warning of crushing at Hillsborough. This was a governing body that hosted an 
FA Cup semi-final in 1989, after prior crushes and warnings, at which 96 people 
were killed.

Brackenridge, who is seriously ill with leukaemia, has written extensively 
about a culture of ignorance, denial, ridicule of complainants, “minimisation 
and obfuscation” which too often characterised the response to allegations of 
sexual abuse from sporting authorities who believed they were providing a 
virtuous service to society. Yet over recent weeks, as the former players have 
come forward, historical abusers and scandals have been serially exposed and 
the victims’ suffering heard as never before, Brackenridge has found herself 
frustrated that the scale of progress since the 1990s has not been sufficiently 
acknowledged.

“In the 1990s awareness of child protection needs was low, political will was 
lacking and expertise related to sport was virtually zero, but it was not just 
football; these cases will be found in every sport,” Brackenridge told the 
Guardian. “In 2001 the NSPCC formed the Child Protection in Sport Unit (CPSU), 
and excellent work has been done, although we can never say the problem has 
been eradicated. I am definitely not an apologist for the FA but I would argue 
that for the child protection work they do now, they are the leading sports 
governing body in the world.”

When you put safeguarding in place, the number of cases goes up and I see that 
as reassuring
Daniel Rhind 
Even the experience in 2003, when her review of the early years of the FA’s 
child protection work was stopped because of cuts at the organisation, was not 
the failure it has been painted, she says. In her book, Spoilsports, she said 
there had been “demonstrable improvement in the impact of child protection in 
the game” and that two years from the end of the research project, child 
protection was growing, 53,000 people had been Criminal Record Bureau-checked 
and more than 140,000 attended child protection training.

The foundation of the CPSU, which developed mandatory safeguarding structures 
for all the UK’s main sports, was a reaction to the scandals and convictions of 
the 1990s. After Hickson’s conviction in January 1996, the governing bodies of 
swimming, diving, athletics and gymnastics met at the then Sports Council, 
since renamed Sport England, with the NSPCC and the National Coaching 
Foundation (NCF), to discuss the need for regulatory child protection in sport.

Sue Ravenlaw, who worked for the NCF, moved to the FA in 2000 to work on 
implementing child protection procedures and is now head of equality and 
safeguarding at the organisation, which is responsible overall for millions of 
people who play football. The Premier and Football Leagues have their own 
safeguarding policies and procedures for their academies and centres of 
excellence, working to similar agreed standards developed at the same time.

In response to the revelations by so many former footballers at all levels of 
the game alleging historical abuse, the FA said last week that 99% of its 7,814 
grassroots clubs, covering 62,238 teams, had responded to a deadline to renew 
their safeguarding policies and commitment. Those that had failed to do so, 
which did not mean they were failing to abide by their policies, were 
nevertheless suspended from football until they comply.

Ravenlaw says that Tony Pickerin, the former head of the FA’s national school 
at Lilleshall, became “alarmed” in the 1990s at the criminal cases of abuse 
being exposed in the courts and initiated the development of proper procedures. 
Pickerin was made head of child protection and equity at the FA largely because 
as a teacher and head of the school, he had experience of legally required 
safeguarding.

“People realised that sport was providing massive access to children with no 
safeguarding structure in place,” Ravenlaw explained. “Everybody was shocked 
and realised this abusive behaviour had to be addressed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffa-child-protection-work-celia-brackenridge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f0ea74aea098eebc584acabb9184d19d3978cc7%2F0_293_2848_1708%2F2848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Child%20abuse%20in%20sport%20and%20the%20progress%20made%20towards%20eradicating%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffa-child-protection-work-celia-brackenridge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Child%20abuse%20in%20sport%20and%20the%20progress%20made%20towards%20eradicating%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffa-child-protection-work-celia-brackenridge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f0ea74aea098eebc584acabb9184d19d3978cc7%2F0_293_2848_1708%2F2848.jpg>
 The case of Gary Johnson, who was prevented from talking about the abuse he 
suffered as part of a £50,000 settlement from Chelsea, has flagged up areas of 
continued concern. Photograph: S Meddle/ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
While the media can fairly be accused of largely under-reporting the stream of 
cases including those raised by Dispatches, and not campaigning coherently for 
child protection in sport until a few weeks ago, in fact governing bodies, the 
NSPCC and Sport England did respond to the 1990s scandals and for 15 years have 
been radically improving their approach. The CPSU, formed after a taskforce led 
by the NSPCC and Sport England, requires all sports that qualify for grant 
funding to adhere to national child protection standards. Brackenridge says 
that this “financial lever” was, perhaps sadly, “a major turning point in 
securing compliance”.

One of the most gaping flaws in the legal framework previously, that criminal 
record checks were not widely available except for schools and other 
local-authority-run institutions, did not fully change until late 2003, when 
the FA had to apply for eligibility to run checks, Ravenlaw said. 
Brackenridge’s research team was given access to analyse 132 cases of 
investigations run by Pickerin’s department at Lilleshall between April 1999 
and August 2002 and found that 16 involved people operating in youth football 
who had, or were alleged to have, a record of sex or violent offending. The 
cases included 14 of alleged sexual abuse, only 10.6% of the total; alleged 
physical, emotional abuse and bullying accounted for the largest proportion, 
almost 60% of cases. The research found that of the 132 cases 38 led to a 
criminal or social services investigation, with seven resulting in criminal 
convictions, while six led to dismissal from football.

Ravenlaw cautions against any idea that a criminal records check constitutes 
child protection, explaining that it is now a basic first requirement and 
safeguards only against people who have previously offended.

“If you understand child sexual offending and abuse of power, the number of 
people with a conviction is tiny compared to those who pose a risk of harm,” 
she explained. “The most important element for us is the education programme, 
building a culture about safeguarding, making football more child-centred, 
listening to children, being more aware of signs and indicators that might mean 
there is a problem.”

She points to the nationwide upgrading of youth football from the free-for-all 
that existed up to the 1990s; all FA-affiliated clubs are now required to have 
criminal records checks run on their coaches and adopt the recommended 
safeguarding policies. At charter standard clubs, in which 80% of youth 
football is now played, coaches have to be qualified to at least level one, 
which includes safeguarding and ongoing education. Every county FA has a 
designated safeguarding officer to be responsible for education and overseeing 
the implementation and working of child protection across a region.

The Premier League has been emphasising that it has embedded safeguarding in 
its academy structures, which take large numbers of children in for training 
from the age of seven, a system that followed the FA’s charter for quality 
report in 1997. Although concerns are regularly raised that the academy system 
professionalises football far too young and that the rejection rate and 
aftercare for young people from academies is unacceptable, in terms of child 
protection, the Premier League clubs have followed the CPSU standards for more 
than a decade. Clubs must employ a full-time head of safeguarding, an academy 
safeguarding officer and community safeguarding officer, and a board member 
must also be responsible. The Football League’s policies and practices are 
similar, including ongoing education and training.

“Training for clubs identifies that all disclosures of abuse or concerns about 
people who may pose a risk of harm to children must be referred to the 
appropriate statutory agencies and to the FA,” aFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> spokesman said. “Clubs 
have a responsibility to deal with low-level, poor-practice issues brought to 
their attention.”

The leagues and FA acknowledge this cannot mean they have excluded sexual or 
other abuse from a sportplayed by 1.8m people every week 
<https://www.sportengland.org/research/who-plays-sport/by-sport/> but they 
have, undeniably, overhauled child protection since 2001 and do take it very 
seriously. In 2011 the NSPCC ran a major survey of young people’s experience in 
sport which found that, although the majority found it a positive experience, 
75% had suffered emotional abuse, 29% sexual harassment, 24% physical abuse and 
3% sexual abuse. Brackenridge’s colleague at Brunel, Daniel Rhind, led a team 
that researched 652 safeguarding cases being run by 41 sports in 2011. It found 
that 134 of the cases, almost 21%, involved alleged physical abuse, while 124 
cases, 19%, concerned accusations of sexual abuse, defined as “enticing or 
forcing a child to engage in sexual activity”. Almost half the cases concerned 
behaviour by people outside sport, which led Rhind to conclude that sport can 
be a healthy environment in which young people may confide in adults about 
issues they are confronting in their daily lives. Rhind did, though, highlight 
difficulties governing bodies have in pursuing cases, with some lacking the 
resources and expertise, and said there was “a significant training need”.

He and Brackenridge emphasise that the fact there are cases being pursued is 
an encouraging sign and they caution against sports believing they can 
eradicate abuse or abusers.

“When you put safeguarding in place, the number of cases goes up and I see 
that as reassuring,” Rhind said. “There are paedophiles in society, they are 
often very manipulative; they have to win the trust and almost groom the sport 
itself, the club, parents, before they can get to children. No system is 
perfect but the aim is to catch people early in the process and deal with it.”

Worldwide, Rhind said, the FA is seen as a leading sports governing body for 
child protection and the system put in place since the CPSU was formed in 2001 
as a “gold standard” model other countries can follow. International standards 
for safeguarding in sport, developed for Unicef, largely follow this English 
model, Rhind said, for many countries in the world that still have nothing in 
place. That prompts the terrifying thought that the horrendous experiences of 
the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s now being recalled by traumatised former footballers 
in England are being suffered by young people in sport right now, in many 
countries all over the world.
 