
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has called on the Australian 
government to consider Japan’s wartime history when deciding whether to grant 
it a multibillion-dollar contract to build a new fleet of submarines.

China’s foreign affairs minister, Wang Yi, pointedly said that Japan– one of 
three bidders for the contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/30/australia-submarines-evaluation-begins-three-contenders>
 due to be awarded later this year – was defeated in the second world war and 
Australia should take into account “the feelings of the people of Asian 
countries because of that part of history”.

Wang was speaking in Beijing on Wednesday alongside the Australian foreign 
affairs minister,Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, after annual 
strategic talks between the two countries.


Beijing places missile launchers on disputed South China Sea island
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/china-places-missiles-woody-south-china-sea-islands>
The post-meeting media conference was dominated by China’s apparent decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/china-places-missiles-woody-south-china-sea-islands>
 to deploy surface-to-air missile launchers to a disputed island in the South 
China Sea – with Wang defending Beijing’s “limited and necessary self-defence 
facilities”.

Bishop said the pair had exchanged “forthright, candid” views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/australia-to-challenge-china-over-south-china-sea-activities>
 about the South China Sea and she had urged all countries to act with 
restraint and settle their disputes peacefully.

The ministers were also asked by reporters about the strategic dimensions of 
Australia’s forthcoming decision on the replacement for the Collins-class 
submarine fleet, for which the government sought Japanese, German and French 
construction proposals.

Wang flatly dismissed the notion that an Australian decision to buy submarines 
fromJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> would constitute an effort 
to contain China’s rise.

“I don’t think that is the intention of Australia’s policy and I actually 
don’t think that any country or force in the world can stop that rise,” he said.

The minister referred to the second world war in explaining historical limits 
on Japan’s military posture.

“Japan was the country that was defeated,” he said.

“That is why for decades it has been asked to follow very strict constraints 
under a pacifist constitution and its domestic laws in terms of exporting 
weapons to other countries and cooperation in this regard.

Beijing's missile move in South China Sea could make US think twice about 
getting too close
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/beijings-missile-move-in-south-china-sea-could-make-us-think-twice-about-getting-too-close>
“We do hope that, in this military cooperation with Japan, Australia will take 
into full account this historical context and take into consideration also the 
feelings of the people of Asian countries because of that part of history and 
we hope that Australia will use its concrete actions to support the peaceful 
development of Japan and the Japanese efforts to uphold this pacifist 
constitution, not otherwise.”


Bishop, who visited Tokyo earlier in the week before heading to Beijing, said 
Australia was deepening its strategic and defence relationships with a number 
of countries in the region, including China.

“Our interests are in obtaining a new submarine fleet that meets our 
capability requirements, our technological requirements in terms of range and 
capacity, and that’s what will drive the competitive evaluation process that is 
currently under way,” she said.


Australia faces a delicate balancing act responding to the rise of China, 
which is its biggest trading partner, and maintaining its long-standing 
alliance with the US, a strategic rival to China.

Australia supported the passage of Japan’s controversial security legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/18/japanese-soldiers-could-fight-abroad-again-after-security-bill-passed>
 to reinterpret the country’s pacifist constitution. The legislation, passed 
last year, allows Japan to exercise collective self-defence, or coming to the 
aid of an ally, even if Japan is not directly threatened.


In their remarks on Wednesday, both Wang and Bishop welcomed the 
implementation of theChina-Australia free trade agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/21/labor-and-coalition-reach-agreement-on-china-australia-free-trade-deal>
, which took effect in December.
 