
Online sales are forecast to hit £5bn this Christmas, an increase of almost 
20% on last year, while total sales over the festive season will top £40bn, a 
rise of 3.5% on 2012, according to forecasts from Deloitte. It says flexible 
delivery for shoppers could prove to be this year'sChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> battlefield. Retailers are 
preparing themselves for the online rush with an estimated 20,000 
click-and-collect points across Britain.

Ian Geddes, UK head of retail at Deloitte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deloitte>, said: "The forecast will 
provide some Christmas cheer for retailers. Shoppers are expected to loosen 
purse strings off the back of rising consumer confidence and improving economic 
conditions. After last year's click-and-collect Christmas, consumers' 
expectations around flexible delivery over the coming festive period are higher 
than ever before. Store collection is now seen as a basic offering and those 
retailers without this capability will struggle to convert online sales and 
lose resulting footfall in-store."

Meanwhile, the Royal Mail is predicting that this Saturday will be the busiest 
day for online sales this Christmas. In a survey of 500 small- and medium-sized 
online retailers, just 23% said they regarded traditional retailers as their 
main challengers. The survey predicts that price promotions will be crucial for 
online retailers, and shows that a third have invested in apps and other IT 
upgrades to make it easier for shoppers to buy through their smartphones this 
Christmas.
 