
The final two episodes of Miranda Hart’s sitcom, Dame Judi Dench and Dustin 
Hoffman in an adaptation of Roald Dahl’s Esio Trot, and a tribute to the late 
Rik Mayall all feature in the BBC’s TV lineup for theChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> and New Year holiday 
period.

Miranda <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/miranda> bows out after 
three series with the show’s eponymous star facing the dilemma of two marriage 
proposals, and Hart also features in a Call the Midwife festive special, in 
which her character Chummy helps to organise a Sunday school Christmas concert.

Harry Hill makes his acting debut in the family drama The Incredible 
Adventures of Professor Branestawm, created by the children’s book writer 
Norman Hunter and adapted by Charlie Higson. Dench and Hoffman star as Mrs 
Silver and Mr Hoppy in Esio Trot, a 90-minute special written by Richard Curtis.

David Walliams features in a TV version of his own book The Boy in the Dress, 
along with Jennifer Saunders, Tim McInnerny, Meera Syal and a cameo by Kate 
Moss.BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> will also screen On Angel 
Wings, an animation based on the War Horse author Michael Morpurgo’s reworking 
of the nativity, with voices provided by a cast including Michael Gambon, 
Juliet Stevenson and Dominic Cooper.

Appealing to a more grownup audience will be a new TV version of EF Benson’s 
Mapp and Lucia novels revolving around the cultural snobbery and one-upmanship 
of a group of upper middle class characters in the interwar years.

BBC2’s Christmas lineup includes That Day We Sang, a musical written and 
directed by Victoria Wood. Set in Manchester in 1969, it stars Michael Ball and 
Imelda Staunton as two lonely middle-aged people at a reunion of the Manchester 
children’s choir, which made a famous recording of Henry Purcell’s Nymphs and 
Shepherds 40 years earlier.

Wood will feature in a BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> 
documentary celebrating the career of her regular on-screen collaborator Julie 
Walters, and the channel will also air Rik Mayall: Lord of Misrule, narrated by 
Simon Callow, which the BBC says will feature rare and unseen archive footage 
of the comedian who died in June, along with contributions from actors and 
comedians including Simon Pegg, Lenny Henry, Ben Elton and Alexei Sayle.

Factual specials over the Christmas period include Attenborough’s Paradise 
Birds, a one-off BBC2 natural history documentary about the veteran presenter’s 
adventures in the jungles of New Guinea and Indonesia over more than 40 years.

BBC2 will also screen Kiss Me, Kate Prom and War Horse Prom, the latter 
featuring a new suite by Adrian Sutton from his score for the hugely successful 
stage version of Morpurgo’s novel.

BBC4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4> is offering the Storyville 
documentary Pantomime, following the cast of a Nottingham amateur production of 
Puss in Boots. The channel will also screen Al Murray’s Great British Spy 
Movies, The Joy of Bee Gees and Len Goodman’s Big Band Bonanza.

There will be the traditional Christmas special outings for various BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> series, including Peter Capaldi’s first 
festive outing as the Time Lord in a Doctor Who episode featuring Nick Frost as 
Father Christmas.

Other shows to get the Christmas special treatment include Citizen Khan, Mrs 
Brown’s Boys, Strictly Come Dancing, Pointless Celebrities and Mock the Week.
 