
The government has unveiled plans for a fully privatised railway line, with 
track and trains operated by the same company.

A new line linking Oxford and Cambridge will not be developed by Network Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail>, the owner of Britain’s 
rail infrastructure. Instead, a new entity will be responsible for track and 
infrastructure, as well as operating train services, under proposals drawn up 
by the transport secretary, Chris Grayling.

Scotland's rail network vulnerable as problems mount, regulator warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/scotland-rail-network-vulnerable-as-problems-mount-regulator-warns>
“What we are doing is taking this line out of Network Rail’s control,” 
Grayling told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “Network Rail has got a huge 
number of projects to deliver at the moment … I want it to happen quicker. This 
is an essential corridor for this country. On that route we are going to bring 
in private finance, in a form to be decided.”

In a keynote speech later on Tuesday, Grayling will outline further how the 
government plans to reunite the operation of tracks and trains, which are 
currently the respective responsibility of publicly owned Network Rail and 
private train operating companies (TOCs). He will also outline how future rail 
franchises will have to create integrated operating teams between TOCs and 
Network Rail.

The RMT union said Grayling’s rail plans would recreate privatisation chaos 
that it claims he introduced in the prison system as justice secretary.


On Tuesday morning, Grayling told parliament in a written statement: “I am 
going to establish East West Rail as a new and separate organisation, to 
accelerate the permissions needed to reopen the route, and to secure 
private-sector involvement to design, build and operate the route as an 
integrated organisation.”


He said he intended to build on two major reports into the rail industry, the 
2011 McNulty report and the 2015 Shaw report, that advocated cost-cutting, 
devolution and bringing in private finance. He added: “But there is much more 
to do.”

While officials at the Department for Transport have disputed reports that 
Grayling is seekingmore immediate challenges to Network Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/03/private-firms-to-take-over-rail-maintenance-work-of-network-rail>
, unions pledged to fight the proposed changes.


The RMT general secretary, Mick Cash, said: “This is a politician who doesn’t 
believe in the public sector, who spent five years at the justice department 
and left a prison system in chaos and now wants to do the same on the railways. 
And we are not going to stand idly by and watch that happen.

“This is a slippery slope to privatisation and the breakup of Network Rail and 
we are deeply concerned about it.”

Grayling denied he was intent on privatisation. “I don’t intend to sell off 
the existing rail network. I don’t intend to privatise Network Rail again,” he 
told Today. He said theOxford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oxford> and 
Cambridge rail link would be developed by a separate company outside Network 
Rail in the same way that the Crossrail link had been developed in London.

Rail privatisation has consistently polled as deeply unpopular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/10/report-abolition-network-rail-privatisation>
 with supporters of all parties, and privately owned Railtrack’s management of 
the track and infrastructure from 1994 to 2002 remains associated withfatal 
train crashes including Potters Bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/mar/27/network-rail-potters-bar-crash>
 and Hatfield, in Hertfordshire.


UK rail fares to rise by 1.9%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/16/uk-rail-fares-to-rise-by-19> 
Despite this, Grayling hopes the restored Oxford to Cambridge line, axed 
following theBeeching cuts in the 1960s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/02/beeching-wrong-about-britains-railways>
, will be the first integrated rail operation in Britain since privatisation in 
the 1990s. Funding towards restoring the rail link between the cities, on a 
route that will have a branch to Milton Keynes, and eventually extend to 
Norwich and Ipswich, wasannounced in the autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/hammond-seeks-productivity-boost-with-26bn-for-transport>
 last month.

A new organisation, East West Rail,  <http://www.eastwestrail.org.uk/>will be 
created early in 2017 to secure investment and build the line, eventually 
becoming a private company that will operate train services.

In the meantime, Grayling will demand that Network Rail and TOCs work more 
closely together in the interests of passengers, with proposals for more 
“vertical integration” to be built into the upcomingSouth Eastern and East 
Midlands franchises 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/523791/may-2016-rail-franchise-schedule.pdf>
 (pdf).

 Grayling will say: “I believe it will mean they run better on a day-to-day 
basis … Our railway is much better run by one joined-up team of people. They 
don’t have to work for the same company. They do have to work in the same team.”

A lack of communication and shared incentives between track and train 
operators has been identified as one factor in thelong-running problems at 
Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/southern-train-drivers-vote-overwhelmingly-favour-strike-action-rail-uk>
, the commuter network to the south of London, which has beenplagued by delays 
and cancelled services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/southern-railway-to-restore-full-timetable-from-31-october>
.

In September, Grayling appointed Chris Gibb to run a board with a £20m fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/01/southern-rail-crisis-20m-fund-announced-to-tackle-problems>
 to ensure rail maintenance worked in tandem with Southern’s train operations.

Cash said the government was “dragging the railways back to the failed and 
lethal Railtrack model”.

“The idea that what Britain’s railways need is more privatisation is 
ludicrous,” he said. “The introduction of the profit motive into infrastructure 
raises again the spectre of Hatfield and Potters Bar and the other grotesque 
failures that led to the creation of Network Rail.”


The general secretary of the train drivers’ union Aslef, Mick Whelan, said: 
“The failures and tragedies of the Railtrack era remind us that infrastructure 
should never be run for profit. I’m concerned that in 2016, [Grayling] is 
seriously considering a return to one of the darkest times in the history of 
Britain’s railways.”

The idea of alliances between TOCs and Network Rail had been tried recently 
without success, Whelan said. “What he is proposing is a desperate, half-baked 
reform that will only add another layer of unnecessary complexity to the rail 
industry.”
 