
It is rather gratifying, when meeting a band who have sold 80m albums and are 
about to headline the world’s biggest music festival for the fourth time, in 
front of a global audience of millions, to find out that things were not always 
like this. Chris Martin, sitting backstage at a Zurich stadium on Coldplay’s 
world tour in mid June, tells me that he never got to go toGlastonbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury> before performing there, 
because of school terms and university exams.

“The closest I got was in 1997. I was on a train; I’d just been to Devon to 
get braces fitted. I felt so self-conscious, I was like: ‘Shit, what am I going 
to do? I’m 19 and I’ve got braces.’ Then the train stopped at Castle Cary, and 
everybody from Glastonbury got on. And I just melted in the corner.” He laughs. 
Did they all seem cool? “They seemedso cool! I was just like: ‘Shit, how do you 
get that cool?’ So that was my closest experience to Glastonbury; being on a 
train and feeling like the nerdiest of nerds, because my mum had told me to get 
my wonky teeth fixed.”

Coldplay’s drummer, Will Champion, meanwhile, had a mum who was an 
archaeologist by day but DJed at parties by night and went to Glastonbury with 
her mates every year, always bringing him back a poster. “I had them all up in 
my room. Wincanton Town Band on the Pyramid – I still remember that name. It 
sounded so exciting. I thought, ‘OK, that would be cool to go there.’” Then he 
finally did, aged about 17, had a great time, got sunburned, “and then, before 
the Sunday-night headliners, me and my friends drove off home. We thought that 
was what you did.”

But then, of course, that’s the point with Coldplay – they were always not 
like this, and they’re still not like this – not otherworldly, not starry. When
Chris Martin and Gwyneth Paltrow consciously uncoupled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2014/mar/26/conscious-uncoupling-gwyneth-paltrow-chris-martin-separation>
, it felt like Britain thought he could now go back to being just some English 
bloke and eating chips.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F378a0e8e2ad9fbfcc8d5c29dd9519188a736bb7f%2F0_59_4841_2904%2F4841.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F378a0e8e2ad9fbfcc8d5c29dd9519188a736bb7f%2F0_59_4841_2904%2F4841.jpg>
 Coldplay(left to right): Jonny Buckland, Will Champion, Chris Martin and Guy 
Berryman. Photograph: James Marcus Haney 
It turns out this notion is utterly wrong, because when Martin walks into a 
room, I am rather startled to find that a stellar quality enters with him. His 
energy hits you from across the room: the intense stare, the piercing blue 
eyes, the feet that are usually barefoot nowadays. I understand now why his 
T-shirts are constantly riding up his chest on stage – his muscles are so big, 
in the flesh, that his shoulders look like two Tonka trucks battling it out. He 
lives in LA now – well, the nearby beach town Malibu – and speaks about the 
Sufi guy he worked with “to kind of look at life a bit differently, four years 
ago, when lots of things were changing in my life”. He talks about gratitude;
Viktor Frankl <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viktor_Frankl>’s theories of 
finding the meaning in life;Rumi’s poetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2001/dec/01/weekend7.weekend8>. 
Clearly, this is not a man whose divorce liberated him to sit round watching 
Soccer AM in his underpants and cursing the existence ofGoop <http://goop.com>.

And though he is not here to talk about relationships, he also has a new 
girlfriend, the British actorAnnabelle Wallis 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1834115/>, who is currently shooting a remake of 
The Mummy with Tom Cruise. He seems happy – is he? “Well, it’s a state of mind. 
If you want to be depressed every day, there’s plenty of material. The world is 
crazy. Even today, I’m like, why has some guy walked into a nightclub in 
Orlando and – what is the possible meaning of that? Like I’m preaching to 
myself, trust in the universe, and then that happens …” That night, he will 
dedicate Coldplay’s show to the victims of the shooting.

In fact, he seems prone to melancholy, and says he has been working on his 
state of mind, because he got to the point of thinking: “I don’t want to go 
through the whole of my life feeling shitty about myself. Because it’s not 
making anyone happy.” He explains that “my philosophy at the moment is that I’m 
great – and so is everybody else. You have to fit your own oxygen mask. That’s 
really my philosophy now: our band is the best band in the world. And so are 
all the other bands.” We laugh a bit – he knows it sounds faintly silly. But if 
he sticks to that frame of mind, “then I don’t have to feel threatened by any 
other bands. I enjoy it a lot more”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvOxfNxzBGBU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvOxfNxzBGBU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvOxfNxzBGBU&media=>
 Watch Coldplay performing Viva La Vida at Glastonbury in 2011 
And so he studies songs by other artists, to work out why they are so great, 
his current favourite being one by Mike Posner that goes “I took a pill in 
Ibiza, just to show Avicii I was cool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/11/this-weeks-new-tracks>”, which I 
am certain is the worst song ever written. Surely he’s joking. “I’m not! The 
Seeb remix of it. I want to write a song as good as that.” But your songs are 
all better than that. “Yeah, but you guys, music journalists, your job is to 
think in the cerebral all the time, you have to analyse. It’s very hard for you 
to say, ‘This song makes mefeel a certain way.’”

Oh, but I can do that, Chris. That Ibiza song makes me feel horrible.

“That song, or One Dance, that new Drake song, they just get me. In my body … 
sometimes it’s that indefinable quality – it always fascinated me.” He looks a 
bit wild-eyed now. “This person loves tangerines, this person loves 
raspberries, and my son won’t even look at berries. Isn’t that amazing? And so 
I have to apply that to music, otherwise I would always hide in a hole, because 
of all the people that don’t likeColdplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/coldplay>.”

Do they get to you?

“No, I really don’t mind it,” he insists, smiling joyfully.

How long did it take not to mind it?

“It took a while. Yeah. Because when you first make music, you’re not making 
it to annoy anybody. You’re not saying, let’s write a really catchy song so 
that this guy will only give us one star in whatever newspaper. No one is 
motivated by that. Then you become successful and suddenly there’s this volley 
of arrows coming back at you, and you go: ‘What? I thought we were giving 
sweets out, we weren’t trying to hurt anybody.’ So, for everybody, there’s a 
period of how to cope with that … especially in the internet era.” He says it 
must be the same for journalists. I agree that the comments under articles can 
get us down. “You should never read them,” he says. I promise not to. I must 
admit, I am feeling quite uplifted by the Tao of Chris.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe6797d375562f65ed6fe73f3107858f35dcefd8%2F0_84_4312_2588%2F4312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe6797d375562f65ed6fe73f3107858f35dcefd8%2F0_84_4312_2588%2F4312.jpg>
 Will Champion(front) with bassist Guy Berryman. Photograph: Alamy 
Sitting down for a separate chat with Will Champion, he explains that his life 
in Coldplay is very different from Martin’s. He is avuncular, a very friendly 
sort, who instantly puts you at ease, and tells me that he loves being able to 
disappear back to his three children, who are all studying Suzuki-method 
violin, and his wife, who sings in Brian Eno’s private choir. When things get 
very intense with fans or paparazzi, such as on their recent South American 
tour leg – and he is quick to stress how wonderful their fans are – Champion 
says that “I do find myself thinking, gosh, I’m glad I’m not Chris. He has to 
deal with all that. It makes general logistical, practical stuff quite 
difficult, and that would, I think, drive me crazy. And he’s much better 
equipped to deal with it, he’s used to it. So I feel I’m incredibly lucky in 
that respect. That I get to do my absolute dream job, and be with my best 
friends and play these amazing stadiums all over the world, and then go back to 
London where my family can have space …”

And go to the chip shop.

“Absolutely. Actually, the guy in the chip shop does know who I am. But just 
that guy. About once a month, a stranger will say something to me. I was 
walking down near where I live and I just heard someone on a building site go: 
‘Oi, drummer of Coldplay!’ I loved that. I felt like saying: ‘Hello, builder of 
houses!’”

Champion and his wife dance a lot in their house, “because we like the 
children to see us enjoying ourselves. Bedroom disco, kitchen disco, as many 
discos as we can. For the kids’ birthdays, lots of their friends go to these 
amazing hosted parties in all these places there are in London. Our kids just 
want to have a disco. So we black out the living room with binbags, get the 
disco ball up …”

And crank up A Rush of Blood to the Head 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-h9EMKBGRy0>?

“Yeah, that’s the one all the kids want to dance to,” he chuckles. “They are 
very sweet – I don’t want to feel like we’ve indoctrinated them in any way, but 
I genuinely feel like they might quite like our band, which is very … well, for 
young kids to be into a band of some guys who are 40 – it’s quite gratifying.” 
It is also bittersweet for him, as his own beloved mum, who got him into music 
in the first place and even employed him as a nine-year-old roadie when she 
DJed at his school discos, only got to see Coldplay perform once. The reasonthe 
video for their first big hit, Yellow 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKNxeF4KMsY>, released in 2000, is so stark – 
just Chris walking down the cold beach, looking sad – is because it had to be 
shot on the day of her funeral.

I ask Champion if those early songs still take him back to that time. He says 
they do, and that the band have recently revived a song calledSee You Soon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oA1ezm6gfkg>, which is from before Parachutes, 
when they were all students at UCL. “It reminds me of the first few practices 
where we were all together. Chris and Jon [Buckland] had been writing together 
for a while, and then Guy [Berryman] joined, and we were always hanging out 
together and they needed a drummer, so I said I would give it a try. I remember 
being in Jon’s bedroom and those first songs – I’ve always been drawn to folk 
music, because my mum also sang in Irish folk bands, and I love acoustic songs 
where you can just get a sense of melody and a song. I just remember listening 
to Chris play those quiet songs and thinking, ‘These arereally good. They’re 
not just – ’” he laughs, “‘ – classic student stuff.’ I felt a great connection 
with them from the word go.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUQ2yzMZzgSs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUQ2yzMZzgSs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUQ2yzMZzgSs&media=>
 Watch Coldplay perform The Scientist at Glastonbury in 2011 
He knows not everybody agrees; that some men come to their shows only to 
appease their girlfriends. “But I like the feeling of winning people over, and 
then looking at people who, initially you think they’re not gonna like us, the 
guy who’s looking at his phone. And then, by the end of the show, he’s jumping 
up and down and singing, even crying.” We talk about what it’s like being 
surrounded by people having an emotional experience, and how it spreads back to 
the stage. He has burst into tears at the drumkit “once or twice”.

The band also feel emotional about what has happened to Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>, a charity to which they 
donated millions of pounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/dec/02/coldplay-childrens-charity-kids-company>
 before the organisation’s downfall. “I understand all of the things that 
happened, but, ultimately, you just feel sorry for the kids, for whom those 
centres were lifelines. It has overshadowed all the good work that was 
happening there. It’s dreadfully sad,” says Champion. He says Coldplay are
working to stay in a “relationship” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/09/coldplay-kids-company-treehouse-funding-talks>
 with the particular north London centre they sponsored, Treehouse, but he 
doesn’t give details. “She only ever wanted to do good things,” he adds 
quietly, referring to its founder Camila Batmanghelidjh.

As for Glastonbury, Martin says it will be “magical – even if it rains. We’ve 
played it in all weathers. We’re in a time when a lot of things separate and 
divide us – Brexit, walls – so hopefully our concerts are saying the opposite 
at the moment. Everyone in our band comes from disparate places, but 
Glastonbury is the one place we all feel we come from.” I think he’s about to 
launch into a political speech, but no – “I’m really talking about how we’re 
playing to a lot of hungover people who are a bit muddy. Where we’re at in our 
minds at the moment, it feels a little freer, and I think we’re really excited 
about singing together. I don’t think it’s the time to be debuting our noodly 
B-sides.” (He also admits that, playing at 10:30 on Sunday night, “we could 
just be soundtracking the exit”.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a4ac1129396b846e85723947389ddd59a10bf5%2F851_0_1601_2002%2F1601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a4ac1129396b846e85723947389ddd59a10bf5%2F851_0_1601_2002%2F1601.jpg>
 Jonny Buckland and Chris Martin performing in London in February. Photograph: 
Nick Pickles/Getty Images 
I ask them how they write their hit songs. What’s the secret of the hook – 
that catchy bit that keeps so many people going back to Coldplay’s music? 
Martin stresses that most of their songs end up left as unreleased demos for 
ever, “because theydon’t have a little bit like that”, even though he sometimes 
gets up in the night to record sudden ideas on to his phone. Champion says the 
band get together in the morning to do “musical gym” for two hours, where they 
just play and see what happens. Thousands of songs get abandoned to an audio 
archive, sometimes pillaged for spare parts later – the song title “42” was 
used on many different songs before finding its home on theViva la Vida album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/jun/06/popandrock.shopping>, because, 
“well, I’m not sure we’re numerologists, per se,” says Champion, “but a whole 
lot of things have been 42 in this band”.

Martin believes everyone can make up songs. “I did this with someone the other 
day. They said: ‘Oh, I can’t write music.’ I sat them at the piano and said: 
‘Well, you’ve got these four notes, I’m gonna play some chords, just see what 
happens.’ You restrict them at first and, after about 10 minutes, you hear them 
start to repeat things, because the human ear wants to hear something 
repetitive and pleasing. Brian Eno was an amazing guide for that; he’ll make 
you just play the same thing around and around until it becomes super 
comfortable, the same chord sequence for three hours, so that everything you do 
on top of it is just natural.

“But in terms of writing, I think it’s about not judging what comes through. 
And that’s how the catchy bits happen. The hooks – I haven’t really tried to 
explain this before. And I hear other people’s hooks that I think are way 
catchier than ours, and I think, ‘I wonderhow they got there?’ Ha ha.”

He says that the age of ringtones has something to do with it, as do emojis. 
“Someone said that if you send a text with emojis I can’t be friends with you, 
and I thought, there are some things that I can’t saywithout emojis. So I hope 
they don’t go away. Today I was texting someone and I thought, there’s only one 
emoji that can express what I’m feeling.”

The single tear? Fireworks? A turd?

“No, what was it today? It was a princess and a heart. I was like, I couldn’t 
express that in words. So, basically, what I’m trying to say is that I need 
emojis in interviews, because there are some things I have no words for. How do 
I write a hook? I’ll tell you. With a musical note, a thumbs up, happy face, 
and then people clapping. That’s basically it.”

Chris Martin on Rihanna …

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41e366e2ba9e0ab3974b5da9a855d95d10a7e4bf%2F0_248_5042_3025%2F5042.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41e366e2ba9e0ab3974b5da9a855d95d10a7e4bf%2F0_248_5042_3025%2F5042.jpg>
 Martin performing with Rihanna at the London Paralympics, 2012. Photograph: 
Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
“She is the Frank Sinatra of our generation. She can turn anything into gold 
with that voice. Here’s the thing: if you speak to a good singing teacher about 
great opera singers, they will talk about consistency of tone. Or there’s abook 
by Alfred Tomatis 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Ear-Voice-Alfred-Tomatis/dp/0810851377/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1466603548&sr=1-1&keywords=alfred+tomatis+ear+and+the+voice>
 about why some people like certain people’s voices and other people hate them, 
like Bob Dylan or me or whoever, some people say, ‘Oh, Ihate that voice’, so 
there’s a thing about people’s frequency responses – what they are pleased by. 
Rihanna has this thick tone, so it’s very hard to annoy anybody. It’s like a 
beautifully squeezed tube of toothpaste. When you think of Rihanna’s voice you 
think of this whole, rich thing, solid like a tree trunk, and. Drake is pretty 
similar. But Rihanna’s voice is just delicious for your ear. Sinatra had the 
same thing; anything he sang sounded pleasing to most people.”

… and the Super Bowl 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc562fc5f41a3c13a22b28e45f2fcc8136dd502b6%2F0_172_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98Coldplay%20are%20saying%20the%20opposite%20of%20walls%20and%20Brexit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fchris-martin-coldplay-glastonbury-opposite-of-walls-and-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc562fc5f41a3c13a22b28e45f2fcc8136dd502b6%2F0_172_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Dance off: Beyoncé, Chris Martin and Bruno Mars play the Super Bowl in 
February. Photograph: Streeter Lecka/Getty Images 
Coldplay played the Super Bowl with Beyoncé and Bruno Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/beyonce-coldplay-super-bowl-50-halftime-show-review>
 in February “to present something of togetherness,” says Martin. “We thought – 
this is not going to read so well, but it’s the truth, so I’m going to tell you 
– we thought: ‘Let’s embrace as much of our world, the musical world, as 
possible.’ The kids on strings were all from Gustavo Dudamel’s Sistema 
orchestra in inner-city LA, a programme invented in Venezuela. Bruno is from 
Hawaii, Beyoncé is from Texas, and she’s the greatest dancer in the world, and 
the greatest artist, and Bruno’s pretty close. So, really, the idea was to 
present something of togetherness.”

Of different cultures? “Yeah, yeah. And a lot of people focused on the bit 
you’re talking about with me in the middle, two brilliant dancers and a 
not-so-good one. But that was deliberate, because I was there to represent 
everybody who can’t dance. I’m not a great dancer. I’m a great advertisement 
for freedom of expression. I don’t care what you think, I’m having a great 
time.”
 