
Christopher Guest jets into London to unveil his new film about mascots. He 
says he’s fascinated by mascots and by what makes them tick. Showbusiness, he 
explains, involves recognition, celebrity, that whole narcissistic trip, 
whereas the mascot can dance on the sidelines disguised as a lion or storm the 
pitch as a monkey and nobody knows who the hell they are. “So they’re 
performing,” he says. “But they’re hidden.” The more he talks about mascots, 
the more wistful he becomes.

It is the fate of comedians to be forever cast as the clown, as though there’s 
little distinction between their work and their life. In person, Guest is an 
exacting, cerebral, 68-year-old film-maker. He’s lively company; he has a 
great, bone-dry wit. But he is emphatically notNigel Tufnel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/nov/11/spinal-tap-nigel-tufnel-day>
, the gormless guitarist he played inThis Is Spinal Tap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/this-is-spinal-tap>, or any of the other 
alter-egos he has embodied down the years. Moreover, he resents people 
expecting him to behave like a buffoon. When he directedBest in Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/mar/09/1>, 2000’s uproarious comedy 
about pedigree pooches, one journalist arrived to interview him dressed up as a 
dog. “Maybe I’m too sensitive,” he says. “But I feel that’s not appropriate 
behaviour when someone – meaning me – has just spent two years working on a 
project. How about we take it more seriously, please?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fchristopher-guest-on-life-as-a-baron-and-how-wife-jamie-lee-curtis-picked-him-out-of-a-magazine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8c0b7a73fece6339f439b1472a4f1c0a9880b0f%2F506_0_4216_2530%2F4216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christopher%20Guest%20on%20life%20as%20a%20baron%20and%20how%20wife%20Jamie%20Lee%20Curtis%20picked%20him%20out%20of%20a%20magazine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fchristopher-guest-on-life-as-a-baron-and-how-wife-jamie-lee-curtis-picked-him-out-of-a-magazine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christopher%20Guest%20on%20life%20as%20a%20baron%20and%20how%20wife%20Jamie%20Lee%20Curtis%20picked%20him%20out%20of%20a%20magazine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fchristopher-guest-on-life-as-a-baron-and-how-wife-jamie-lee-curtis-picked-him-out-of-a-magazine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8c0b7a73fece6339f439b1472a4f1c0a9880b0f%2F506_0_4216_2530%2F4216.jpg>
 Up to 11 … Spinal Tap, with Guest on right. Photograph: Tony Mottram/Getty 
We meet just after Guest has introduced a screening of Mascots at the London 
film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival>. Anyone who 
has seen the director’s previous work will know what to expect: a warm, funny 
salute to life’s underdogs, framed as a faux documentary and largely improvised 
by a mix of regular collaborators (Fred Willard, Parker Posey) together with a 
few new arrivals (Chris O’Dowd, Tom Bennett). Guest corrals his contestants to 
compete for the “fluffy” award at the World Mascot Championships. On stage, in 
front of the judges, Sid the Hedgehog performs a Keatonesque slapstick aboard a 
wobbling ladder. Elsewhere, Jack the Plumber’s piece-de-resistance involves 
unblocking a toilet and dancing with a turd.

“My son was a mascot at school,” Guest says abruptly, as if just remembering. 
“Small school. American football team. They didn’t even have enough students to 
get people on the field. My son was a hawk. The first day he said: ‘Dad, I look 
like a chicken’. Amazing costume. The heads had electric fans in them. The fan 
broke on the first day. And it was never fixed.” The memory seems to trouble 
him. “I don’t know why he did it. There was one picture of him standing 
alongside these cheerleaders. And I thought, ‘Did he just want to be surrounded 
by girls?’ But dressed as a hawk? Looking like a chicken? I really don’t know.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DswTWozTxQ-E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DswTWozTxQ-E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DswTWozTxQ-E&media=>
Guest’s films are typically described as mockumentaries – a label he detests 
because it suggests that they are somehow mean-spirited, poking fun at their 
subjects. But while movies such as A Mighty Wind might initially set up its 
characters as deluded eccentrics, the treatment is affectionate, even weirdly 
respectful. By the end, against all the odds, we find ourselves rooting for 
them.

Besides, he adds, subcultures only appear bizarre when viewed from the 
outside. The closer you get, the more sense they make. “I once found a website 
that was obsessed with shoelaces. Now, on the surface, that might sound stupid 
or boring. But it’s not boring. And it’s probably not stupid. And, actually, I 
do one of these activities myself, which is tying fly-fishes, so who am I to 
judge? I sit in a chair with a magnifying glass with feathers and wool, trying 
to make something that looks like an insect to a fish. And I’m very happy doing 
it. Put some classical music on. Sit in a chair for hours at a time.”

This Is Spinal Tap: No 15 best comedy film of all time
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/spinal-tap-comedy> 
Guest was raised as a child of privilege. His aristocratic, English-born dad 
was editorial director at the United Nations; his American mum an executive at 
CBS. So Guest grew up between the US and UK, plucking from both cultures, 
mimicking every accent he heard. It was a skill that served him well when he 
joined the ensemble teams of National Lampoon and Saturday Night Live. His 
breakthrough came in 1984, playing Tufnel, whoseamp goes all the way up to 11 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g7-5io1muSQ>. In recent years, Spinal Tap have 
reformed to play concerts at Carnegie Hall and Glastonbury. “So Nigel is an 
alter ego I can slip back into,” he explains. “There’s a comfort in playing 
somebody that dumb.”

He has been married for 30 years to the Hollywood actor turned author Jamie 
Lee Curtis <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamie_Lee_Curtis>. I once read that 
Curtis fell in love with him after seeing a photo of him as Nigel. But that, 
surely, is too good to be true? “Well,” he says. “There were pictures in 
Rolling Stone magazine in 1984. One of me as Nigel Tufnel and one of me as me. 
And that was the one where she said to her friend, ‘I’m going to marry that 
guy.’ So no, it was not Nigel. That would be disturbing. I mean, it’s crazy 
enough as it is.” He gives a wintry smile. “We still have that original photo 
hanging up at the house.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fchristopher-guest-on-life-as-a-baron-and-how-wife-jamie-lee-curtis-picked-him-out-of-a-magazine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6acbe3ddb7fb5e54e7b7456bdb15cf341ac64e8a%2F0_123_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christopher%20Guest%20on%20life%20as%20a%20baron%20and%20how%20wife%20Jamie%20Lee%20Curtis%20picked%20him%20out%20of%20a%20magazine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fchristopher-guest-on-life-as-a-baron-and-how-wife-jamie-lee-curtis-picked-him-out-of-a-magazine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christopher%20Guest%20on%20life%20as%20a%20baron%20and%20how%20wife%20Jamie%20Lee%20Curtis%20picked%20him%20out%20of%20a%20magazine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fchristopher-guest-on-life-as-a-baron-and-how-wife-jamie-lee-curtis-picked-him-out-of-a-magazine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6acbe3ddb7fb5e54e7b7456bdb15cf341ac64e8a%2F0_123_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 ‘A subculture might sound stupid or boring. But it’s not’ … Mascots. 
Photograph: Scott Garfield 
Actually, I’m more interested in his other alter ego: Guest holds a hereditary 
British peerage. “I’m a baron,” he explains. “I’m Lord Haden-Guest. And yes, 
that’s a novelty. Born into it by accident, obviously. And then your dad dies 
and you’re the next one.”

For a few years he sat in the House of Lords. He loved it; it upended his 
preconceptions. “It wasn’t the cartoon of old men with ear trumpets. Although 
yes, there was an old man with an ear trumpet. But it wasn’t Downton Abbey and 
the Roller, none of that. Most of these people had no money. They didn’t have 
the country houses. They were regular people who had regular jobs. They were 
well informed, and lending their expertise. And the speeches were amazing, so 
I’m glad that I went.”

Directors come up to me and say: 'I ripped you off.' I wouldn't walk up to 
somebody and say that

What about now? Does it have any bearing on his life? He shrugs. “Well, it has 
meaning for anglophiles who think it’s cool. Maybe there’s still a vestige of 
that. I was staying at an English hotel about five years ago and I ordered 
breakfast and the waiter who brought it was shaking like a leaf.” He dips into 
a perfect English accent. “‘Brought you your breakfast, your Lordship. I do 
hope it’s satisfactory. Oh God, oh God … ’, and then he spilled the breakfast 
all over me. And it hit me that for 800 years people were conditioned to think 
that way and behave that way and not make eye contact and be completely 
intimidated. What a horrible thought – that by an accident of birth you’re here 
and they’re there, bowing and scraping and spilling my breakfast on me.”

His professional life, too, has its share of bowers and scrapers. In the years 
sinceSpinal Tap <https://www.theguardian.com/music/spinal-tap>, the style that 
he helped patent bloomed into a standalone genre. Ricky Gervais refers to Guest 
as “the biggest single influence on my work”, which he says is fine; Gervais is 
a friend. As for the rest, he’s not convinced. “I have directors come up and 
say: ‘I ripped you off.’ Now, personally, I wouldn’t want to walk up to someone 
and say that. Find your own thing, don’t copy someone else.”

Mascots review: latest from Spinal Tap's Christopher Guest does not go up to 11
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/mascots-review-latest-from-spinal-taps-christopher-guest-does-not-go-up-to-11>
Earlier that morning, Guest was a guest on the BBC Today programme 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04bkjvv>. He was his usual dry, acerbic self; 
Nick Robinson’s questions did not seem to his liking. In the wake of the 
interview, his name briefly trended on Twitter. This inevitably led some people 
to believe he had died. I mention this to Guest and he is perplexed at the 
news. He has never used Twitter; he shuns all social media. The internet speaks 
a language he can’t begin to understand.

He asks, “Does that ever get cleared up? The announcement of my death?”

Oh yes, I assure him. It was a five-minute confusion. It’s all sorted now.

Guest nods shortly. “Well OK, fair enough. I was dead for five minutes and I 
never even knew.” And there it is again, that wide-eyed look of wistfulness.

• Mascots <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mascots> is on Netflix from 13 
October
 