
Christian Slater is in love with the Pope, he says. He is sitting in a hotel 
room in London, fighting off the jet lag that means he’s been up since 2am. “I 
can’t help it. I was watchinghis trip to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/sep/25/pope-francis-in-new-york-pontiff-addresses-un-and-visits-911-memorial-live-updates>
 on the news, when he met those kids in school and did such a beautiful job. I 
was like, ‘Aaah, that’s what we need – an infusion of love from a powerful man, 
wielding it nicely.’” Slater’s also in love with the woman he married two years 
ago, Brittany, who works for an auction house, whom he misses, sitting here in 
his handsome suit, a bit stubbly and with eyelids so pale, you want to put 
makeup on them. “We chatted on the phone when I couldn’t sleep,” he says, 
smiling. “She has such a good sense of humour.”

Recently, Slater took on a new job as a full-time father, his 16-year-old son 
Jaden having just moved in with him and Brittany in New York for the first 
time. His 14-year-old daughter lives with her mother. “I’m doing everything I 
possibly can to make him feel comfortable and safe,” the actor says proudly. 
“Making him breakfast every morning, figuring out different ways to cook bacon 
so he likes it.”

The thing about all this love, though, is that it’s new to Slater, and he’s 
terrified of losing it. Later, he will tell me that he is a 46-year-old liar 
who is desperate to go straight. Right now, though, he even has feelings for 
the moon: last week, he was in another hotel room in another country, watching
the lunar eclipse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/ng-interactive/2015/sep/28/blood-moon-photographs-from-around-the-world-your-guardianwitness-contributions>
 on CNN – until he realised it was live, so he went out on to his balcony to 
stare at the sky and wonder if something bigger was at work out there. 
“Something going on,” he suggests, “a force.”

He likens it to the force that brought all the elements together for his new 
TV show,Mr Robot <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4158110/>, already a critical hit 
in the US and soon to be streamed on Amazon Prime in the UK. It is a genuinely 
startling show, driven by timely ideas about wealth inequality, corporate evil 
andthe 1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/14/richest-1percent-half-global-wealth-credit-suisse-report>
, with echoes ofAnonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> 
and theOccupy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy> movement, as well as 
elements of magic realism; you never quite know what is real and what is 
delusion. The writer,Sam Esmail <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1322753/>, has said 
he was inspired by his Egyptian family’s experiences during theArab spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2011/mar/22/middle-east-protest-interactive-timeline>
. Slater plays Mr Robot, an anarchist ringleader of computer hackers who 
operate from the rickety old fairground on Coney Island, and who seek to bring 
down the world’s biggest conglomerate, Evil Corp.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6HGuJC--rk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6HGuJC--rk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6HGuJC--rk&media=>
 The trailer for Mr Robot. 
“After having so many experiences that didn’t come together the way I might 
have liked them to, I know how rare it is for all the elements to unite,” 
Slater says, referring to his recent run of cancelled TV shows and films that 
bombed (his 2012 filmPlayback <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1682940/> grossed 
just $264; before that, there were plenty of straight-to-DVDs). “It’s always a 
leap of faith, and you don’t want to get too close to anybody, because you 
don’t know how long you’re going to be working together. But of course you end 
up getting emotionally invested, because you’re a human being and you can’t cut 
yourself off. So when the show does fall into the zeitgeist, and the issues 
being discussed are particularly relevant, it’s just great.”

Slater has been pretending to be other people since he was nine. His father 
was an actor, too, his mother an agent; their son played a kid in a soap opera, 
then worked on Broadway and soon stopped going to school altogether. “I had 
tutors,” he says, “but education was just not a priority.” Which is why he went 
back to get his school-leaver’s qualification when he was 30, in a classroom in 
Los Angeles, “having sat down and written a list of all the things I felt 
insecure about”.

His father was a depressive schizophrenic, and family life was complicated. 
Nine is also the age at which Slater started drinking champagne and found what 
he has previously described as “a warm rush of centredness that came over me”. 
By 15, he was starring inThe Name Of The Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/feb/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview8>
, opposite Sean Connery. Then followed the cult classic high-school movie
Heathers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/heathers>, with Winona Ryder, 
Interview With The Vampire <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0110148/> and True 
Romance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/02/christian-slater-true-romance-geek-role-model>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444212265364%2Ffb8880bf-f4be-4246-95fe-8194eddd062b-1020x701.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christian%20Slater%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you're%20drinking%20and%20doing%20drugs%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20be%20lying%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christian%20Slater%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you%27re%20drinking%20and%20doing%20drugs%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20be%20lying%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444212265364%2Ffb8880bf-f4be-4246-95fe-8194eddd062b-1020x701.jpeg>
 With Winona Ryder in Heathers. Photograph: Snap Stills/Rex 
There was more fame, and trouble: drunk-driving car chases with the cops, a 
gun found in his luggage at JFK airport. In August 1997, he allegedly got high 
on tequila and cocaine, repeatedly punched a woman he was with, bit a man on 
the chest and attacked the police officers who came to arrest him. He said 
afterwards that he didn’t remember anything, but he did remember wanting to 
kill himself. “I remember walking out on the balcony on the fourteenth floor 
and having the thought go through my head,”he told Rolling Stone magazine 
<http://www.maryellenmark.com/text/magazines/rolling%20stone/920S-000-028.html> 
the following year. He was sentenced to 90 days in prison for assault. In 2005, 
he was arrested again, for harassing a woman in the street, though charges were 
later dropped. (I have been warned by his publicist that Slater doesn’t want to 
talk about any of this: he has been sober for years. But it turns out later 
that he kind of does.)

Now that his son has moved in with him (because he feels “ready for some more 
independence, or maybe privacy”), he spends his afternoons helping with 
homework, because “he’s started at a new school a few blocks from where we 
live, and it’s a priority for me, and we want it to be a priority for him. I 
work on the English, history type stuff with him. And then, when my wife comes 
home from work, she can work with him for a considerable period of time on his 
math, because she has a real aptitude for it and I do not. But what’s funny is 
that my son – unless he’s totally fooling me – is completely the opposite of 
me, and I’m really grateful for that.”

So you don’t have to watch a replay of yourself?

“Yeah, that would be really difficult.”

I say something hypothetical about his son going out boozing and he shudders. 
“I certainly have to give credit to my ex-wife, in that she has done a 
phenomenal job, in creating a really sweet and lovely human being. I was just a
walking hormone. That’s where my head was at and all I ever thought about. I 
had more theHoward Stern <https://www.howardstern.com/> mentality.”

Did I tell Winona Ryder I had a crush on her? Sure I did! I was 17, just 
hormones and ego. And a sense of invincibility

I ask about the rumour that he was too shy, during the making of Heathers, to 
letWinona Ryder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jun/07/winona-ryder-five-best-moments>
 know he had a crush on her. He looks at me as if I’ve missed a memo somewhere, 
and his hand starts to cover his mouth. “I mean, I definitely…let her know. 
Sure I did! I was 17, just hormones and ego. And the sense of invincibility 
that comes with that.

“Look,” he says, removing his hand, “you know, I used to be crazy in one way, 
now I’m crazy in another. The pendulum swung in a whole other direction. When 
I’m in the kitchen, I don’t want anybody else in the kitchen. I have a system – 
and the system, it’s another form of insanity that has grabbed me. A healthier 
form of insanity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444212823282%2F84120811-39f5-45d0-b0b7-36d772e1f4d4-730x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christian%20Slater%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you're%20drinking%20and%20doing%20drugs%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20be%20lying%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christian%20Slater%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you%27re%20drinking%20and%20doing%20drugs%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20be%20lying%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444212823282%2F84120811-39f5-45d0-b0b7-36d772e1f4d4-730x1020.jpeg>
 With wife Brittany Lopez. Photograph: Zuma/Photoshot 
What he means is, he goes on YouTube to find the best way to cook bacon, and 
has discovered you can put it in the oven. “And my wife comes in saying, ‘What 
are youdoing? You cook bacon on the stove’ and I go, ‘Yeah, but I saw this on 
the internet.’ I set it all up with foil in the tray the night before – I like 
to be prepared.”

He also walks the dogs around the block four or five times a day; he finds it 
helps him collect his thoughts. Still, he admits that all this stuff “is so not 
me. It’s funny that I’ve been doing these things. But I’m giving it a shot. 
It’s my real job now.” He reckons his wife is much smarter than he is. “I
Forrest Gump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/23/forrest-gump-film-makes-me-cry>ed 
my way into it. But it does come down to the people you surround yourself with, 
and the suggestions that they make. And the suggestion might be, ‘We should go 
to that party!’ Or it might be, ‘Maybe you should try and read this book.’ It’s 
nice when you’re with the person who suggests the book, because it’s more 
relaxing, and it’s better for you than maybe going to hang out in some club or 
bar. There might have been a time in my life when I was like, ‘Yeurgh, the book 
is a horrible idea.’ And truthfully, it’s not always my first choice. But I try 
to go against my first instinct a lot of the time.”

So sobriety doesn’t change everything, just the one thing?

“Well,” he says, sighing, trying to answer with exactitude, “a person can get 
sober and definitely still be irresponsible and reckless. Drama can be an 
addiction. It’s so, so sneaky. Jealousy – all of those things can really send 
you in a lot of different crazy directions.” He sounds like a man who went for 
a walk up a hill one day only to find out it was a mountain range, and he’s 
still climbing it.

“So, I think I have set aside alcohol, but I haven’t set aside certain 
characteristics. Which might be… lying.”

He’s still lying?

“You know, trying to manipulate things. Acting like a baby at times. Catching 
yourself in those moments where it really does come down to those two roads. Do 
I want to go down the road that has led me to this one ending? Or try this 
other road, where I actually do just tell the truth? And be honest, and be 
brave in that particular moment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444212715980%2Fc593c70d-833d-474e-9371-674760fb8ea4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christian%20Slater%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you're%20drinking%20and%20doing%20drugs%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20be%20lying%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christian%20Slater%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you%27re%20drinking%20and%20doing%20drugs%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20be%20lying%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444212715980%2Fc593c70d-833d-474e-9371-674760fb8ea4-1020x612.jpeg>
 Police mug shot, 1994: a gun was found in his luggage at JFK airport. 
Photograph: Sipa Press/Rex 
So that’s the kind of lying we’re talking about. “Not being true to yourself, 
yes. And all the other kinds of lying, too, if I’m going to be honest with you.”

Slater sounds his most authentic when he says this. “When you are drinking,” 
he continues, “and if you are, hypothetically, doing drugs, then I think lying 
is a natural extension of that. Because if you’re doing those things, there’s a 
possibility that you’re going to feel shame. You’re going to want to cover up 
and deny the things that happened the night before. So you’re certainly going 
to be lying to your parents, and then it becomes a habit.”

Was it a shock for him to find out that sobriety wasn’t the hardest bit of 
recovery?

“Yeah. Yeah! Because it can be very painful when emotions begin to surface 
that you’ve been stuffing down. Oh my God,” he says, more quietly, “it’s like, 
what? This doesn’t feelgood. You don’t want to feel pain. You want to try to 
avoid pain as much as possible. And some people can avoid pain to the point 
where they end up not feeling anything any more – and they’re gone. I’ve 
certainly had friends, and people that I’ve been very close with, who weren’t 
necessarily able to handle it.” Slater was close toRiver Phoenix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/river-phoenix>, who died of a drugs overdose 
in 1993.

“And it’s challenging, too, like when you’re travelling…” He looks around; I 
think he means right now, on this European press trip. “Wow,” he says, putting 
down his drink, “this coffee is really making me just spout a bunch of stuff. 
I’m just catching myself. But yeah! It can be very, very challenging.”

It can be very painful when emotions begin to surface that you’ve been 
stuffing down

There is a certain tradition, among celebrities whose lives have gone in that 
direction, to say, “Yes, I used to be a drunken asshole, but now I’m sober.” 
What’s different, and likable, about Slater is that he’s only really saying 
that he used to be drunk, and now he’s working on not being an asshole.

I mention reading a rather tender conversation between him and Lars von Trier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier>, who cast him in Nymphomaniac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nymphomaniac>. Von Trier urged Slater to 
contact his father, after many years of not speaking. Did he? “Yeah, I 
communicated with my father and he’s all good. He’s very proud of me, and he 
loves me.” Slater nods, as if he feels compelled to say something positive. “I 
certainly appreciated Lars’s advice, absolutely. You know, before we did 
Nymphomaniac, I think his mother passed away, and he was dealing with a lot of 
emotional stuff that she sort of revealed on her deathbed.” He says he was 
immensely grateful that Von Trier cast him as the girl’s father in 
Nymphomaniac. “Not a part that anybody would have typically thought of me for. 
I don’t know, maybe people just thought… the bad boy aspect of it all, the 
reputation, all of that stuff. He gave me an opportunity to play someone who 
was not the reason for his daughter being fucked up. I was her safe haven, not 
the cause of her insanity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444212370848%2F861e9702-654d-4727-9add-757baf9838e0-1020x701.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christian%20Slater%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you're%20drinking%20and%20doing%20drugs%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20be%20lying%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christian%20Slater%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you%27re%20drinking%20and%20doing%20drugs%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20be%20lying%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fchristian-slater-interview-heathers-mr-robot-sophie-heawood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444212370848%2F861e9702-654d-4727-9add-757baf9838e0-1020x701.jpeg>
 With Patricia Arquette in True Romance. Photograph: Everett/Rex 
I ask if, having been a walking hormone, and described by Gawker in 2005 as 
“serial groper Christian Slater” 
<http://gawker.com/105444/serial-groper-christian-slater-arrested-for-sexual-abuse>
, he is more of a feminist now. “Total feminist,” he says, laughing awkwardly. 
He brings up the equal pay issue his former co-starPatricia Arquette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/patricia-arquette> raised at the Academy 
Awards earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/patricia-arquette-oscars-speech-equal-pay-women>
. “That is obviously of vital importance,” Slater says. “It’s just frustrating 
that we live in a society that is slow to change. It’s like a big ship – it 
takes a long time for it to turn.”

He points out that even back in True Romance, a film full of guns and dealers, 
Arquette’s character “was certainly the instigator of a lot of the things that 
propelled the story along. There’s a scene where Patricia takes outJames 
Gandolfini <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-gandolfini>. And it 
wasn’t like I swooped in and saved the day. That was pretty far ahead of its 
time, forQuentin Tarantino <https://www.theguardian.com/film/quentintarantino> 
to create a female character who was capable and didn’t need to be rescued.”

Why I'd like to be … Christian Slater in True Romance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/02/christian-slater-true-romance-geek-role-model>
Speaking of slow ships, I ask how annoying it is to speak to people like me, 
who still want to hear about True Romance andHeathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/heathers>, because I recently rewatched them 
both and they’re still utterly brilliant. Slater laughs a dry laugh. “Look, it 
was great, certainly, at the time. All the things that came along with it: 
good, bad, confusing. I’m certainly grateful that there were projects that I 
did that people responded to. It would be a nightmare if it were the other way 
around. But it’s sometimes a little disheartening.” He laughs again. “It’s like 
you kind of want to go, ‘God, that wasso long ago.’ You’re not thinking about 
it, unless somebody brings it up. Or they come along and” – he does a comically 
fawning fan voice – “‘Oh, you were great in that show, I miss that show so 
much!’ and I go” – he adopts a sarcastic, gritted-teeth voice – “‘Thanks for 
bringing it up! I miss it, too.’”

The tide is turning now, though. “Instead of people yelling out, ‘Hey, 
Clarence Worley <http://www.imdb.com/character/ch0006551/>!’ they’re yelling 
out, ‘Hey, Mr Robot!’ So that’s nice. It’s extraordinarily difficult to find 
that, like I said.” Slater is enjoying his first taste of success in a long 
time, and doing his best to hold it together – choosing the right path, telling 
the truth. Not that it gets any easier. “We’re always going through a lot,” he 
says. “I can be going through nothing, but within me, in my head, oh my God! It 
can be a circus.”

• Mr Robot <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot> is on Amazon 
Prime from 16 October.
 