
Ministers have been accused of launching an “unlawful” consultation on the 
second part of theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> meant to investigate 
corrupt dealings between the press and police, as well as new legal costs 
provisions.

Two victims of press intrusion and an investigative website have filed a claim 
for a judicial review of the decision toconsult on two remaining aspects of the 
Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/01/government-to-launch-new-press-regulation-consultation>
, set up in the wake of the phone-hacking scandal.

Former Crimewatch presenter Jacqui Hames, online news publisher Byline Media, 
and an anonymous phone-hacking victim have jointly filed the claim against the 
lawfulness of the consultation exercise, claiming to be “particularly affected 
by any decision to resile from the promises made”.

The claim against the culture, media and sport department and the Home Office 
states that the 10-week consultation seeking the public’s views is “misleading 
and unbalanced in fundamental ways, which render it plainly unfair”.

It argues that the consultation launched by the culture secretary, Karen 
Bradley, is unlawful because both Leveson part two and the controversial 
section 40 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 concerning legal costs were 
previously promised, and because the consultation document itself is biased.

Leveson: Bradley raises doubts about press-police relations inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/01/leveson-bradley-questions-value-of-press-police-relations-inquiry>
Bradley launched the 10-week consultation exercise in November, arguing that 
the government needed to decide whether a further inquiry four years after the 
Leveson inquiry was “still appropriate, proportionate and in the public interest
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/01/leveson-bradley-questions-value-of-press-police-relations-inquiry>
”.

The announcement came after several reports suggested that the government was 
preparing to shelve both remaining aspects.

Evan Harris, joint executive director of Hacked Off, said: “This legal 
challenge is no surprise, given the shameless conduct of the government in 
breaking its promises to victims, intervening to frustrate the will of 
parliament, and issuing a consultation paper so biased that it could have been 
written by the Daily Mail or the Sun.”

He said any cancellation of Leveson part two was “even more outrageous” given 
its remit to consider corporate governance at News International, then managed 
by James Murdoch, the current head of21st Century Fox which is bidding to take 
full control of Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-tv-leveson>
.

“Given that Ofcom will need to investigate whether those behind the Sky 
takeover bid are ‘fit and proper’, cancellation by the government of the second 
phase of theLeveson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> 
would be even more outrageous,” he said.

Murdoch’s dominance is insidious. He must not be allowed to buy Sky | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-tv-leveson>
The costs provisions involve the implementation of section 40 of the Crime and 
Courts Act, which though enacted by parliament, needs to be commenced by the 
culture secretary. Widely condemned by the newspaper industry, under section 40 
there would be a presumption that newspapers outside a recognised 
self-regulator would pay their own and their opponents’ legal costs, even if 
they won a court case.

The consultation exercise was welcomed by the Society of Editors. Bob 
Satchwell, executive director, said at the time: “It would be dangerous to open 
up local and regional papers, particularly with threats of legal action, to 
costs which they would have to pay even if they won a case, and which could put 
them out of business.

“A detailed look by government at the realities of regulation is the best way 
to ensure that individuals are properly protected without losing valuable 
watchdogs that expose corruption, wrongdoing and hypocrisy in the public 
interest.”

The government may end up responding to the claim for judicial review just 
before the January deadline for the consultation exercise.

A DCMS spokesperson said: “We can confirm that an application has been made to 
judicially review the consultation. The government is considering its response.”
 