
Dame Clara Furse <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dame-clara-furse>, the 
former chief executive of the London Stock Exchange, is to be named as the 
chair of HSBC UK, the bank’s domestic retail arm which is being ringfenced from 
its other operations following new regulations in the wake of the financial 
crisis.

The move, first reported by Sky News, is set to be confirmed as early as 
Tuesday.

The lender is relocating its UK high street operations to Birmingham as part 
of its effort to comply with new rules that require banks to insulate their 
high street customers from their investment banking arms.

Major UK banks sign charter pledging to tackle gender gap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/22/major-uk-banks-sign-charter-pledging-tackle-gender-gap>
Furse is a high-profile appointment as HSBC attempts to address the lack of 
gender equality at the top of its operations by setting a target forequal 
numbers of women and men in senior roles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/hsbc-sets-gender-parity-deadline-2020-uk-business>
 in its UK arm.


The new head office for its high street operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/24/hsbc-to-base-ringfenced-retail-banking-operation-in-birmingham>
 is due to be opened by 2019. HSBC UK alsoaims to achieve gender parity  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/hsbc-sets-gender-parity-deadline-2020-uk-business>
in the most senior of about 550 roles by 2020.

The appointment is likely to lead to Furse stepping down from the Bank of 
England’s financial policy committee (FPC), which was set up to look for 
potential problems in the financial system. Furse was the first female member 
of the committee and has served for the past three years.

Her appointment to the FPC proved controversial because of her previous role  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2013/mar/26/dame-clara-furse-financial-policy-committee>
on the board of the bailed-out bank and insurance group Fortis, where she was a 
non-executive director and on the risk and capital committees when the 
Dutch-Belgian firm was involved in taking over ABN Amro – as part of a 
consortium with Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) and Santander – during the 2007 
credit crunch.

Fortis ended up needing a state bailout, as did RBS. Furse said she deeply 
regretted the losses to shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/04/clara-furse-warned-bank-england-fpc-role>
, but that taxpayers in the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg had not done 
too badly from the rescue.

Mark Carney has had the last laugh at amateurish Theresa May | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-theresa-may-bank-of-england-tory-conference>
She insisted the deal had floundered because of execution risk and not because 
of the quality of the assets, and that legal advice taken by Fortis had 
prevented the firm from pulling out of the deal.

Even so, the Canadian-born Furse is perhaps best known in the City for her 
eight years as chief executive of the London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/feb/13/clara-furse-london-stock-exchange>
. During that spell she fended off a number of hostile takeover bids for the UK 
stock market, including advances from rivals includingNasdaq 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2007/jan/27/nasdaq.stockmarkets> and 
Deutsche Börse <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2004/dec/14/germany>.
 