
She’s a self-righteous, self-centred hypocrite who bullies everyone around 
her. Her lack of self-awareness has made her the butt of thousands of jokes 
over the past two decades and made her the most famous social worker in 
Britain. Creator Harry Venning says whenClare in the Community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/series/clareinthecommunity> first appeared 
in the Guardian’s Society section in 1995, he thought she would only last a few 
weeks. But the cartoon has outlasted Society editors, three prime ministers and 
countless social care ministers. Clare has gone on to star in her own 
award-winningBBC Radio 4 sitcom <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qprs>, 
played by Sally Phillips. The inspiration for Clare was Venning’s then 
girlfriend, a social worker.

He sent her to Society’s founding editor, Malcolm Dean. “I thought they were 
brilliant,” Dean recalls. “It just so happened I had a wife called Clare who 
was a social worker, so people thought I’d chosen the name, but I hadn’t.” Over 
the years, her appearance has altered, but not her personality. “When I first 
drew Clare her head was three times the size of her body, she has changed shape 
wildly and her nose kept changing,” explains Venning. “But she is the same 
selfish, insensitive person she was at the start,” says Venning. He still sits 
down every week with watercolours, ink and a pen and paper to draw the cartoon 
strip. Nowadays, he scans the artwork onto a computer to make the final tweaks 
to the image and the punchline.

“It’s a great mental discipline having to come up with a joke week in, week 
out,” says Venning.

Many of the cartoons reference political and social upheaval (from the fag-end 
of a Tory administration that had run down public services, to New Labour’s 
policy reforms and investment, back to public spending cuts under another 
Conservative government, and the image of social workers taking a battering 
along the way), while other jokes are timeless. “She’s obviously a lefty, but 
she’s never been a political satirical strip,” Venning explains. “This week’s 
strip has as much to do with office status as cuts.” And that’s her enduring 
appeal. It’s much wider than social work. “It’s about office politics, and 
domestic misery – something most of us can associate with,” says Venning, who 
appears in the strip as Clare’s long-suffering partner, Brian.

Dean says: “Even the most hard-boiled night subeditors on the paper would turn 
to Society because of Clare,” he recalls of her early days. “She appealed to 
people who weren’t interested in social policy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fclare-in-the-community-20-years-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53d3b906319ade05ee6d780890f3b985ea6e1318%2F0_0_5048_1415%2F5048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clare%20in%20the%20community%3A%20the%20first%2020%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fclare-in-the-community-20-years-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clare%20in%20the%20community%3A%20the%20first%2020%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fclare-in-the-community-20-years-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53d3b906319ade05ee6d780890f3b985ea6e1318%2F0_0_5048_1415%2F5048.jpg>
 The first-ever Clare in the Community cartoon, published in the Guardian’s 
Society section in 1995. Illustration: Harry Venning 
While the Society section has undergone many changes in her lifetime – from a 
standalone supplement to four pages in the main paper and a growing online 
presence – Clare has stood her ground. As editor, I have only rejected a couple 
of strips where I felt Clare was too offensive (albeit unwittingly) to her 
vulnerable clients. But I heard them when they were recycled for the radio show.

Today, she has a worldwide online following and provides a much-needed guffaw 
for people working in difficult conditions across the public services (some of 
whom may see part of themselves in her).

After 20 years at the coalface, is Clare thinking of retiring? Most 
importantly, will she ever change her stripy shirt? “She’s frozen in time,” 
says Venning. “If you think of each cartoon as one day in her life, then she’s 
only about three years older.” Clare has spawned a range of merchandise from 
wallcalendars <http://www.clareinthecommunity.co.uk/calendar.php> to mugs 
<https://entertainment.guardianoffers.co.uk/i-dd-gt000029-nah/clare-in-the-community-claires-needs-mug/>
. And she may shortly be gracing the stage. Venning and his radio co-writer, 
David Ramsden, are developing Clare in the Community – the play. “There is 
still a rich seam of humour to mine,” he adds.

Clare in the Community: 20 years at the Guardian, a free exhibition by Harry 
Venning, is in the Guardian foyer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1, 24 
Nov–3 Jan
 