
When classical music covers go wrong 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=classical+music+covers+worst&sa=X&es_sm=91&biw=1286&bih=921&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&ved=0CCwQsARqFQoTCPH2_fSRg8cCFUoRLAodhscDDg>
 they really go wrong. There are some corkers out there, from the unfortunate
Derek Bell Plays With Himself 
<http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/51TvcolTh8L._SX355_.jpg> to Red Priest’s 
hair metal-styleHandel in the Wind 
<http://assets3.classicfm.com/2015/10/red-priest---handel-in-the-wind-1426262207-view-0.jpg>
, with Julian Lloyd Webber’sTravels With My Cello 
<http://cps-static.rovicorp.com/3/JPG_400/MI0001/145/MI0001145284.jpg?partner=allrovi.com>
 and much else in between … so it’s gratifying to come across the rare 
instances when genuine creative thought has gone into the relationship between 
cover art and the music inside, whatever that might even mean in our ever-more 
post-product era of music consumption.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fwhat-happens-when-classical-covers-right-wrong-denise-burt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438341325352%2F3e011f70-0e14-4b0d-9e5c-ad3938db7753-1020x1011.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classical%20cover%20art%3A%20the%20good%2C%20the%20bad%20and%20the%20ugly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fwhat-happens-when-classical-covers-right-wrong-denise-burt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classical%20cover%20art%3A%20the%20good%2C%20the%20bad%20and%20the%20ugly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fwhat-happens-when-classical-covers-right-wrong-denise-burt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438341325352%2F3e011f70-0e14-4b0d-9e5c-ad3938db7753-1020x1011.jpeg>
 Cover art by Denise Burt for Gudmunsen-Holmgreen’s Mixed Company Photograph: 
Public Domain 
As a general rule, new music has fared better than most when it comes to the 
graphic and photographic inventiveness of sleeve designers – think ofECM  
<https://ecmreviews.files.wordpress.com/2012/02/exodus2.jpg>or NMC 
<http://www.nmcrec.co.uk/sites/default/files/styles/recording-cover-image/public/recording/NMC%20D195%20Foskett.jpg?itok=Wtf3M9tf>
 covers, for example. Inthis feature at NPR 
<http://apps.npr.org/lookatthis/posts/album-art/>, Denise Burt reveals her 
thinking behind eight of the 300 covers she has made. Aswe have discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/jul/09/national-gallery-soundscapes-exhibition-pair-classical-music-art>
 thanks to theNational Gallery’s much derided Soundscapes exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/06/soundscapes-national-gallery-review-pointless-soundtracks-jamie-xx>
, the business of relating image to music and vice versa is a subtle art. And 
when it comes to creating the image that accompanies the first recording of 
recent music, the risks and opportunities are at their most delicately balanced.

It’s no trivial fact that our memories seem hardwired to imprint the 
association of image with music, for me these cover images ofMozart symphonies 
<http://cdn.discogs.com/re7PSmRlqfQDpuTbL2FA0Jwu_ow=/fit-in/300x300/filters:strip_icc():format(jpeg):mode_rgb()/discogs-images/R-5943190-1407693126-8419.jpeg.jpg>
 orFerneyhough string quartets 
<http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/51eJQI08u%2BL._SX300_.jpg> became part 
of the experience of the music in some indelible way. But that’s not always a 
good thing – check out this recording ofOrff’s Carmina Burana 
<http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/61j4PPBY0rL._SL500_AA300_.jpg>). 

Burt’s thoughtfulness, imagination and visual variety is an insight into what 
can happen when label, composer and artist are working in creative synergy. I 
especially like what she came up with forPer Nørgard and Pelle 
Gundmundsen-Holmgreen <http://apps.npr.org/lookatthis/posts/album-art/>, images 
that satisfy on their own terms but which intrigue and entice you to hear the 
music, the subtle balance that classical cover art should always try to achieve.
 Die Walkure CD cover art Photograph: Public Domain 
Here’s another reminder of what happens when it goes wrong: Die Walküre 
distilled, obviously, byjudiciously placed VolksWagner hubcaps 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/84/63/dd/8463dd92b5439e7c89a41b6f4147d5ce.jpg>
, an image that could and should rightly inspire a whole thesis of 
new-musicology post-feminist discourse. What did the music, the model, and even 
the hubcaps, do to deserve that?
 