
We've been digging out videos for our weekly Classic YouTube series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/youtubearchive> for almost five years 
now, from the widely seen to the blossoming viral, via random moments of 
nostalgia. And, barring certain rights restrictions, thanks to video-sharing 
sites it has never been easier to (re)discover great/awful/random sporting 
stories from history. But what to do when a brilliant one that you are yearning 
for isn't there?

Here are just three that I've yet to stumble across, yet would dearly enjoy to 
be uploaded:AS Adema's hard-fought 149-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/nov/01/newsstory.sport5> against 
Stade Olympique L'Emyrne,the Battle of Goodison Park 
<http://www.dixies60.com/2011/05/22/60-games-that-shook-goodison-7-everton-vs-leeds-the-battle-of-goodison/>
, and any recorded instance ofa condor in golf 
<http://www.golftoday.co.uk/golf_a_z/articles/condor.html>. There are many more.

Perhaps I am simply looking in the wrong places. Perhaps someone recalls 
seeing one of the aforementioned clips somewhere else. Perhaps someone has said 
video in their possession. Or perhaps said moment wasn't captured or simply 
doesn't exist on film. Either way, the plan for this blog is to attempt to 
uncover any videos that our readers would appreciate being uploaded.

A brief poll on Twitter produced the following pleas:

the 1954-55 Ashes series; 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/blank/engine/series/60363.html> Jim Leighton's 
save from Alan McInally duringthe 1989 0-0 draw 
<http://www.aboutmanutd.com/man-u-matches/12-03-1989-aston-villa.html> between 
Manchester United and Aston Villa;Paul Davis breaking Glenn Cockerill's jaw 
<http://www.sabotagetimes.com/football-sport/the-greatest-goal-i-ever-saw-arsenals-paul-davis-against-charlton-athletic/>
 in 1988; any fight footage of American boxerHarry Greb 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Greb>; Seve Ballesteros's three-wood from a 
bunker <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/07/seve-ballesteros-obituary>
 at the 1983 Ryder Cup; the fullTim Flowers 'bottle' interview 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dYWr-n87EmQ> in 1995; a proper version of the 
Derek Jeter 'flip' play 
<http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/espn25/story?page=moments/45> for the New York 
Yankees against Oakland in 2001; and an interview withLiverpool's Armani 
suit-clad players 
<http://www.inthestands.co.uk/news/liverpool-reveal-suits-for-cup-final-at-wembley-its-white-armani.html/attachment/whitesuits>
 at the 1996 FA Cup players.

So, if you have happened upon any of these, or possess video that could be 
potentially uploaded online that would make a reader's day, then please do so. 
And if there are any clips from down the years that you would love to see, then 
post your requests below the line; one of our readers may be able to assist. 
(And as a particularly sad individual, if someone has video of Plymouth beating 
Darlington at Wembley in 1996 that they could upload, I would be forever in 
their debt).
 