
Tuesday’s mammoth Proms concert saw all five of Prokofiev’s performed in a 
single night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/29/prom-14-lso-gergiev-prokofiev-trifonov-royal-albert-hall-london-review>
. The London Symphony Orchestra’s three-soloist, five-work, single-evening 
marathon has made me wonder about the other stamina-testing and 
virtuosity-pushing live box-sets we could dream up and put on at the Royal 
Albert Hall. The obvious ones areBeethoven’s nine symphonies in a single day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2010/jul/13/brabbins-beethoven-nine-symphonies>
, andWagner’s Ring Cycle 
<http://www.tiroler-festspiele.at/sonstige-seiten/sommer/news-detail-seite/article/der-hph-24-stunden-ring/>
 in 24 hours, but those have both been done (although never at the Proms in 
such a short space of time) and are mere foothills compared to the mountain 
ranges of potential musical cycles out there. Classical music completists of 
the world, unite!

Karlheinz Stockhausen: Klang 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klang_(Stockhausen)>

Stockhausen’s Klang – Sound – cycle would have been a sequence of 24 pieces 
representing each hour of the day. He died with only three “hours” missing (the 
vast majority of the piece are shorter than a clock-hour). A performance of 
Stockhausen’s almost-complete day of sound would be one of the most compelling 
and all-encompassing musical journeys you could experience, from electronic 
music to works for two harps, from solo piano music to vocal works, from the 
first hour,Ascension <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GhUPRjiZNcU> to the 21st, 
Paradise <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KNO1Zskscso>.

Arnold Bax: seven symphonies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TdIyF7anFeM>

Bax’s symphonies are some of the most distinctive, craggy, hyper-Romantic gems 
of early 20th-century music. Both theRoyal Scottish National Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/oct/31/classicalmusicandopera.shopping3>
 and theBBC Philharmonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/oct/31/classicalmusicandopera.shopping3>
 have recorded complete cycles on disc: what we need is a double-orchestra 
Baxathon, which would take us on an epically exciting symphonic odyssey that 
would open our collective imaginations and resurrect Bax’s symphonic reputation.

Nikolai Myaskovsky: complete symphonies – all 27 of them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/feb/18/symphony-guide-myaskovskys-tenth-tom-service>

Some 20 hours of music, so easily doable in a day, and surely Valery Gergiev  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/29/prom-14-lso-gergiev-prokofiev-trifonov-royal-albert-hall-london-review>
would be up to the challenge of performing them all back-to-back, in what would 
be an immersive revelation of one of the 20th century’s most significant, and 
most underrated, symphonists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fclassical-music-completists-cycles-proms-stockhausen-scriabin-bax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438251369903%2F7dc33938-700e-44a1-9e0b-02deee0d446b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classical%20music%20completists%2C%20unite!%20What%20mighty%20cycles%20shall%20we%20stage%20at%20the%20Proms%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fclassical-music-completists-cycles-proms-stockhausen-scriabin-bax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classical%20music%20completists%2C%20unite%21%20What%20mighty%20cycles%20shall%20we%20stage%20at%20the%20Proms%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fclassical-music-completists-cycles-proms-stockhausen-scriabin-bax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438251369903%2F7dc33938-700e-44a1-9e0b-02deee0d446b-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sibelius in situ … the composer in later life. Photograph: Eliot Elisofon/Time 
& Life Pictures/Getty Image 
Jean Sibelius: the complete tone-poems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/oct/26/classicalmusicandopera.shopping1>

It’s not just about symphonies: in the year of the 150th anniversary of his 
birth, what we need is Sibelius’s complete tone-poems in a single concert. It’s 
a mere six-and-a-half hours of music, which would create a dark world of myth, 
magic, and mystery as a single Finnish orchestra – let’s go for theLahti 
Symphony Orchestra <http://www.sinfonialahti.fi/en_GB/>, and a stellar line-up 
of Finnish conductors such as Osmo Vänskä, Esa-Pekka Salonen, Sakari Oramo and
Susanna Mälkki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/27/facing-the-music-conductor-susanna-malkki>
 – could push themselves to their Sibelian limits.

Alexander Scriabin: complete symphonies, orchestral works, and Preparation for 
the Final Mystery 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Scriabin-Nemtin-Preparation-Final-Mystery-CDs/dp/B005K1MDFE/ref=sr_1_5?ie=UTF8&qid=1438185279&sr=8-5&keywords=scriabin+ashkenazy>

This project is simultaneously easier to realise, because it’s a mere few 
hours long, and the most ambitious of the lot. The centenary of Scriabin’s 
death has been scandalously neglected by many of classical music’s 
institutions, IMHO; and the best way to rectify that situation would be to go 
through a day of all of his symphonic music, as well as the surreally powerful
Preparation for the Final Mystery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/friday_review/story/0,3605,355528,00.html>, which 
the composer Alexander Nemtin made from Scriabin’s sketches for the musical 
apocalypse project he dreamed of at the end of his life (it’s around three 
hours of music, and this is only the prologue). That really would be an 
experience that might just change the world; or at least turn the Royal Albert 
Hall into an awe-inspiring crucible of apocalyptic imagination.
 