
The split in the Climate Change Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/climate-change-authority-splits-over-ets-report-commissioned-by-coalition>
 is a rerun of the climate policy fight Australia has been having for the past 
10 years – the clash between what is undeniably necessary and what is 
politically possible.

The CCA report, to be released on Wednesday, lands exactly on the spot where 
the major parties might, just might, be able to reach a compromise and finally 
end the barren years of climate policy “war”, policy reversal and time-wasting 
gridlock.

Climate Change Authority splits over ETS report commissioned by Coalition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/climate-change-authority-splits-over-ets-report-commissioned-by-coalition>
Guardian Australia understands the report recommends a type of emissions 
trading scheme for the electricity sector where generators are penalised for 
polluting above an emissions-intensity baseline.

It’s the policy Labor took to the last election and exactly what most 
observers assumed the Coalition’s Direct Action would morph into after next 
year’s review shows what everyone already knows, that it isn’t fit for purpose 
in its current form.

The CCA is also understood to recommend a strengthening of the current 
“safeguards mechanism” for other big polluters.

The dissenters argue the authority is supposed to make recommendations based 
on what is scientifically necessary and leave it up to the politicians to make 
the political compromises – and that the recommended policy cannot meet the 
increasingly ambitious greenhouse gas reductions that Australia agreed to in 
Paris last year.

They are probably right.

But over the past decade the undeniably necessary task of doing our part to 
avert global warming has become ever-bigger and the politically-possible 
solutions seem to have shrivelled. We’ve actually done very little.

Coalition's policies go around in circles instead of finding the sensible 
centre | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/27/coalitions-policies-go-around-in-circles-instead-of-finding-the-sensible-centre>
The new energy and environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, started out in his 
new job saying Direct Actionneeded no change at all because it was “very 
successful” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/josh-frydenberg-australias-use-of-coal-is-falling-and-that-is-not-a-bad-thing>
. An authority report pushing for change – backed by board members mostly 
appointed by the Coalition – could help make the case that that starting point 
was never tenable.

The last time a politically possible policy was defeated because it wouldn’t 
achieve the scientifically-necessary greenhouse gas cuts was when the 
parliament voted down Kevin Rudd’s emissions trading scheme. And that started 
the long and sorry story that led us here.
 