
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> has 
accused the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, of personally directing a 
cyberattack against her as revenge for a five-year-old slight.

US intelligence agencies blame Russian hackers for targeting the Democratic 
National Committee and Clinton campaign chairman,John Podesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/the-podesta-emails-show-who-runs-america-and-how-they-do-it>
. The emails were published by WikiLeaks and widely reported by media during 
the US presidential election.

The CIA has reportedly concluded that the Russians were trying to swing the 
election for Donald Trump. On Friday afternoonthe Washington Post reported 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/fbi-backs-cia-view-that-russia-intervened-to-help-trump-win-election/2016/12/16/05b42c0e-c3bf-11e6-9a51-cd56ea1c2bb7_story.html?utm_term=.bd1c3e7ed23d>
 that the FBI now agreed with this assessment, citing a message to staff from 
CIA director John Brennan reported to them by unnamed officials.


“Earlier this week, I met separately with FBI [director] James Comey and DNI 
[director of national intelligence] Jim Clapper, and there is strong consensus 
among us on the scope, nature, and intent of Russian interference in our 
presidential election,” the paper quoted Brennan as saying.

White House says Vladimir Putin had direct role in hacking US election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/white-house-putin-russia-hacking-us-election-trump>
The hacking sprang from Putin’s “personal beef” against her, Clinton told 
donors in Manhattan on Thursday,according to a report in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/16/us/politics/hillary-clinton-russia-fbi-comey.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
. She cited criticism she made as secretary of state that Russia’s 2011 
parliamentary elections were rigged as the motive.

“Putin publicly blamed me for the outpouring of outrage by his own people, and 
that is the direct line between what he said back then and what he did in this 
election,” Clinton was quoted as saying.

Podesta and other aides have criticised the media for underplaying Russian 
involvement. Addressing donors who poured millions into her campaign and are 
still reeling from the outcome, Clinton said: “Make no mistake, as the press is 
finally catching up to the facts, which we desperately tried to present to them 
during the last months of the campaign.

“This is not just an attack on me and my campaign, although that may have 
added fuel to it. This is an attack against our country. We are well beyond 
normal political concerns here. This is about the integrity of our democracy 
and the security of our nation.”

According to the New York Times report, Clinton said her stunning defeat by 
Donald Trump could be explained by two “unprecedented” events: Putin’s effort 
to “undermine our democracy” and the ill-timedrelease of a letter by James Comey
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
, director of the FBI, which said fresh emails had come to light in its 
investigation into her private server.

“Swing-state voters made their decisions in the final days breaking against me 
because of the FBI letter from Director Comey,” said the Democrat, who won the 
popular vote by 2.8m votes but effectively lost the electoral college by 77,000 
ballots in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.

US elections 2016 results: track who won, county by county
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-results-live-clinton-trump>
In an interview with National Public Radio on Friday, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> warned that the US would 
retaliate for the Russian cyber-attacks during the presidential election.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20will%20retaliate%20against%20Russia%20over%20election%20hacking%2C%20vows%20Barack%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20will%20retaliate%20against%20Russia%20over%20election%20hacking%2C%20vows%20Barack%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio&media=>
US will retaliate against Russia over election hacking, vows Barack Obama – 
audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/16/us-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio>
The US president said he was waiting for a final report he has ordered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/us-election-hacking-russia-barack-obama-review>
 into a range of Russian hacking attacks, but promised there would be a 
response.

“I think there is no doubt that when any foreign government tries to impact 
the integrity of our elections … we need to take action,” Obama said. “And we 
will – at a time and place of our own choosing.

“Some of it may be explicit and publicised; some of it may not be.”

The CIA has judged that the Russian cyber-attacks, including the hacking of 
emails from the Democratic National Committee, were intended to influence the 
electionin Trump’s favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
, according to reports.

Senators from both parties have called for a congressional inquiry, while 
Trump himself hasrejected the reports 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/trump-rejects-cia-russia-hacking-report/> and 
his office has derided the CIA.

Trump weighed in on Twitter to ask if it was the “same cyberattack where it 
was revealed that head of the DNC illegally gave Hillary the questions to the 
debate?” One of the hacked emails, from the interim DNC head, Donna Brazile, 
said that a woman from Flint, Michigan,would ask at a primary debate with 
Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/donna-brazile-hillary-clinton-debate-question-podesta-emails-cnn>
 what Clinton would do as president to help people in the town suffering from a 
lead-contaminated water supply.

He earlier tweeted: 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/809403760099422208> “If Russia, or 
some other entity, was hacking, why did the White House wait so long to act? 
Why did they only complain after Hillary lost?”

In fact, the intelligence community had issued its statement on 7 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
, a full month before polling day.

Obama said he would reserve judgment on Moscow’s intentions pending a final 
report but he said the impact of the intervention was clear. The debate over 
motivation, he said “does not in any way, I think, detract from the basic point 
that everyone during the election perceived accurately – that in fact what the 
Russian hack had done was create more problems for the Clinton campaign than it 
had for the Trump campaign”.

He added: “There’s no doubt that it contributed to an atmosphere in which the 
only focus for weeks at a time, months at a time wereHillary’s emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-latest-emails-explained>
, theClinton Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/25/clinton-foundation-bill-hillary-us-election-state-department>
, political gossipsurrounding the DNC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/dnc-hillary-clinton-emails-hacked-russia-aide-typo-investigation-finds>
.”

The president did not attempt to gauge the full impact of the intervention, 
but insisted it had had an effect.

“Elections can always turn out differently,” he said. “You never know which 
factors are going to make a difference. But I have no doubt that it had some 
impact, just based on the coverage.”

In the NPR interview, Obama expressed incredulity at Republican party support 
for Trump’s foreign policy positions, which have been uniformly supportive of
Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>.

“This is somebody, the former head of the KGB, who is responsible for crushing 
democracy in Russia, muzzling the press, throwing political dissidents in jail, 
countering American efforts to expand freedom at every turn; is currentlymaking 
decisions that’s leading to a slaughter in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/uk-and-us-ramp-up-criticism-of-russia-and-iran-over-aleppo-crisis>
,” the outgoing president said.

“And a big chunk of the Republican party, which prided itself during the 
Reagan era and for decades that followed as being the bulwark against Russian 
influence, now suddenly is embracing him.”
 