
Victoria and Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>
 have launched a concerted push to convince all jurisdictions, state, territory 
and federal, to agree on concrete measures to help victims of family violence.


The two states will urge leaders gathering in Canberra for the Council of 
Australian Governments meeting on Friday to introduce family violence leave as 
a workplace entitlement.

Victoria is also pushing for a new Medicare item for family violence 
counselling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/sussan-ley-rejects-royal-commissions-call-for-medicare-subsidy-for-family-violence-victims>
 and changes to the family court to improve information sharing between 
jurisdictions.

The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, told Guardian Australia on Thursday all 
leaders needed to seriously consider a Victorian submission to Coag on national 
recommendations from the Victorian royal commission into family violence.

On White Ribbon Day let Emma Husar and not Mark Latham show the way | Phil 
Cleary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/on-white-ribbon-day-let-emma-husar-and-not-mark-latham-show-the-way>
“Women experiencing family violence should not be disadvantaged in the 
workplace – and their employers should be able to provide support when it’s 
most needed,” Andrews said Thursday. “I can think of no good reason why we 
could not all agree on that.”

In addition to the conversation about domestic violence, a copy of the Coag 
agenda obtained by Guardian Australia says the leaders will discuss:

 * economic reform, including competition policy, housing and homelessness;

 * the national energy market and the Finkel review into energy security and 
Australia’s climate change commitments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/finkel-review-criticises-climate-policy-chaos-and-points-to-need-for-emissions-trading>
; 
 * health and hospitals funding – with the key issue being what happens to 
funding after 2020;

 * several agenda items on Indigenous affairs;

 * the national firearms agreement and the regulation of the Adler shotgun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/adler-shotgun-restrictions-come-from-the-smashed-avocado-curtain-say-nationals>
;

 * water allocations in the Murray-Darling Basin. 
The Coag meeting will be preceded by a meeting between Malcolm Turnbull and 
leaders representing northern Australia – the premiers of Queensland and 
Western Australia and the chief minister of the Northern Territory.

Before the domestic violence discussion, an alliance of welfare organisations 
have penned a joint letter to the leaders calling on them to commit to the 
“urgent implementation” of recommendations from the Victorian royal commission 
into family violence.

Those recommendations include introducing family violence leave into the 
national employment standards, restoring funding the legal aid, overhauling 
elements of the family law regime, protecting people with disabilities, who are 
at high risk of family violence, and introducing the Medicare counselling item.
 