
The Turnbull government has moved to amend its electoral legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/malcolm-turnbull-moves-to-overhaul-senate-voting-system-before-election>
 two days after it was introduced to parliament, after concerns preliminary 
Senate results would no longer be available on election night.

The Labor frontbencher Anthony Albanese said the legislation had been rushed 
and the amendments “exposed how bad this dirty deal is”.

The bill introduced to the lower house on Monday included new procedures for 
the scrutiny of Senate votes, with the assistant returning officer being 
required to count the number of ballot papers without inspecting them.

Senate voting changes: Gary Gray laments Labor split on bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/24/senate-voting-changes-gary-gray-laments-labor-split-on-bill>
“There will no longer be requirements to reject informal Senate ballot papers 
or count first preference votes prior to transmission to the Australian 
electoral officer,” the government’s originalexplanatory memorandum 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/legislation/ems/r5626_ems_4aea5cae-8ce1-478b-ab54-74c95ece5377/upload_pdf/504697.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf>
 said.

But the government moved a one-page set of amendments 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/legislation/amend/r5626_amend_07911711-e5f3-4076-a060-a98d0b5af50f/upload_pdf/JP106.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf>
 on Wednesday to add a requirement to count the number of above-the-line 
first-preference votes. This preliminary count would have to be communicated to 
the divisional returning officers “as soon as practicable”.

The ABC election analyst, Antony Green, highlighted the issue in a blogpost on 
Monday 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2016/02/senate-electoral-reform-bill-abandons-election-night-senate-counting.html>
, saying the original bill would end Senate results being published on election 
night in what looked like a cost-saving measure.

It is understood the Greens, who are supporting the overarching electoral 
reforms, also raised its concerns with the government.

The Senate voting legislation – which is also supported by the independent 
senator Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/senate-voting-changes-coalition-wins-over-nick-xenophon-and-greens>
 – aims to abolish group voting tickets, the party-submitted mechanism to 
decide how preferences flow for supporters who simply vote “above the line” 
rather than filling in all the candidate squares “below the line”.

It would also enshrine an optional preferential system above the line. Instead 
of just voting 1, people would be advised to fill in at least six boxes in 
order of preference. The ballots would still be valid if people just voted 1: 
if their preferred choice did not win, the ballot would “exhaust” and not be 
reallocated to others.

Labor decided to oppose the legislation, even though its shadow special 
minister of state, Gary Gray, renewed his call for reforms to “uphold the 
integrity of the constitution” and ensure results reflected the will of voters.

Gray, who is retiring at the next election, told parliament earlier on 
Wednesday he was “sad” that he had lost the argument in theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> room.

The government welcomed Gray’s comments. The special minister of state, 
Mathias Cormann, said people should be concerned that the Labor leader, Bill 
Shorten, had “decided to dismiss and act against the considered advice from his 
highly regarded shadow minister”.

But Shorten argued the legislation would “potentially entrench” the 
Coalition’s influence in the Senate.

The amended bill passed the House of Representatives on Wednesday and is due 
for Senate debate next month after a quick inquiry by the joint standing 
committee on electoral matters.

Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, and deputy leader, Stephen Conroy, said the 
committee had set aside just four and a half hours for a public hearing about 
the current bill.

“The … hearing will be a show trial designed to justify the planned 
Greens-Liberal purge of cross-benchers from the Senate,” they said in a 
statement.
 