
Perhaps it was just an opening gambit, a shouty curtain-raiser to get 
everyone’s attention. But by reworking Joe Hockey’s “lifters and leaners” lines 
in defence of the same old budget cutsScott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> looks like he’s 
starting the 45th parliament oblivious to the lessons of the 44th.

It sets up the same old, same old – the government blaming the opposition 
parties and the Senate crossbench if the cuts are blocked again, or the blindly 
complacent voters who just won’t face up to the need for “tough choices” on the 
economy. Or it might be the media’s fault, or all due to the Business Council 
of Australianot cheering sufficiently loudly. 
<http://www.afr.com/opinion/columnists/business-under-attack-as-bcas-catherine-livingstone-speaks-out-postelection-20160814-gqs0ts>

Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>
, by contrast, is asking the new parliament to meet him in the “sensible 
centre”, which is exactly what voters want it to do, but until those words are 
put into practice it’s hard to know what they mean.

Scott Morrison hits out at 'taxed-nots' and warns of recession risk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/scott-morrison-hits-out-at-taxed-nots-and-warns-of-recession-risk>
And the treasurer’s economic speech suggests the government is still missing a 
big part of what went wrong in the last parliament, and in the unexpectedly 
close election. That it’s not just their opponents fault, it’s their own.

By picking up where Joe Hockey left off, tweaking the script to replace 
“lifters and leaners”with the “taxed and taxed nots”, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/scott-morrison-hits-out-at-taxed-nots-and-warns-of-recession-risk>
 Morrison is ignoring the fact that we’ve been through this umpteen times since 
the 2014 budget and gotten pretty much nowhere, and that it’s his job to find a 
way around that.

Here’s a shorter version of what has passed for Australia’s economic “debate” 
in recent times, just to recap:

1. Government explains that we need to reduce the budget deficit. Which, of 
course, we do.

2. Government calls their own solution “reform”, because that suggests it is 
unquestionably worthy and good, and then insists this is, in fact, the only 
possible solution to the problem.

3. Government ignores alternative ideas to solve the same problem and berates 
opposition parties for “sabotaging” the budget and jeopardising the future if 
they don’t support the government’s proposed spending cuts.

4. Government chastises the voting public for enjoying now unaffordable 
benefits and for failing to comprehend the problem and for not backing the 
government’s policies to fix it.

5. Policies don’t pass the Senate. Nothing happens.

6. Repeat.

Bill Shorten offers Malcolm Turnbull compromise on superannuation changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/24/bill-shorten-offers-malcolm-turnbull-compromise-on-superannuation-changes>
We’ve been around this same circuit so many times no-one is listening any 
more. We all know some of the savings about to be presented have been rejected 
by the electorate as inequitable and will almost certainly continue to be. We 
all know there are alternatives and compromises to be had, with broad support, 
if this was really just about finding solutions.Business and civil society have 
already had summits to pave the way. 
<http://www.acoss.org.au/media_release/summit-makes-for-diverse-allies-to-reform-economy/>
 Think tanks have written reports. We’ve been talking about it for years.

There’s every sign the voting public is prepared to consider alternatives and 
would almost certainly reward a government that tried to tackle budget “repair” 
in a cooperative or bipartisan way. There was no great voter backlash against 
the winding back of negative gearing proposed by Labor, for example, despite 
the Coalition’s best efforts, nor a groundswell of opposition against reduced 
superannuation tax breaks. That was more a problem in the Liberal’s own 
branches.

There was certainly plenty of self-serving political tactics in Bill Shorten’s 
National Press Club offer of a superannuation compromise last week, but as 
Liberal backbencher Russell Broadbentwas brave enough to say to my colleague 
Katharine Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/liberal-mp-criticises-scott-morrison-should-reach-out-to-labor-on-superannuation>
, there were also a lot of good reasons for the Coalition to consider it. 
Morrison, battling internal dissent on the issue, ruled it out immediately, 
preferring the simplistic rhetorical binary of spending cuts versus higher 
taxes, to the possibility of an outcome.

So the policy debate continues to do donuts. Lots of screeching about looming 
trillion dollar deficits. Lots of blowing smoke. Little progress. And budget 
repair isn’t the only policy going around in circles.

Again it’s possibly pre-positioning, or expectations management, but the new 
environment ministerJosh Frydenberg’s first pronouncement in his new portfolio  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/josh-frydenberg-australias-use-of-coal-is-falling-and-that-is-not-a-bad-thing>
was that there would be no substantive changes to Direct Action. Once again, 
we’ve been through thisso very many times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/election-2016-greg-hunt-coalition-emissions-trading-scheme>
 before. Without substantive changes the policy cannot meet Australia’s 
promised emission reduction targets. Insisting that it can, over and over, does 
not change this fact. Not even if you change the minister. Labor’s 2016 
election policy held out the prospect of a bipartisan compromise, based on the 
Direct Action model. It’s just unclear whether there can be a sufficiently long 
cease fire in the climate wars for the government to take it.

Similarly the terrible dilemma posed by offshore detention of asylum seekers 
requires the government and the opposition to be slightly flexible with 
solutions.

These political stand-offs are major practical problems in themselves, but 
they also have a broader impact on the system as voters tune out of “debates” 
that have no obvious conclusion. Who can blame them?

There’s been much written about the low primary votes for both major parties 
in 2016 and the fact that nearly a quarter of the electorate opted for minor 
parties or independents – the populist offerings of some of those parties, the 
economic anxieties in parts of the electorate.

Even before the election a survey 
<https://theconversation.com/now-for-the-big-question-who-do-you-trust-to-run-the-country-58723>
 by the theMuseum of Australian Democracy <http://moadoph.gov.au/> and the 
institute for governance and policy analysis 
<http://www.governanceinstitute.edu.au/> at the University of Canberra showed 
levels of trust in government and politicians were at their lowest levels since 
1993 and that 74% of the electorate thought people in government would look 
after their own political interests, rather than do the right thing.

Perhaps the election result was also a simple reaction to the inability of the 
parliament to get things done, to enunciate a problem and then make the 
compromises necessary to get on and fix it. To do its job. To find the 
“sensible centre” instead of just talking about it. Reciting the same economic 
arguments with slightly reworked catchphrases will probably mean the policies 
hit the same walls as last time. That would only exacerbate the disillusionment 
spiral.
 