
The Turnbull government has backed away from previously dire warnings about 
the impact of bracket creep, the phenomenon pushing people into higher tax 
brackets as inflation lifts their wages.

The finance minister, Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, said wage 
inflation was low so the problem was “not there to the same extent as it might 
have been in the past”, allowing the government to scale back its ambition for 
big income tax cuts.

Scott Morrison says Labor 'selling a unicorn' with negative gearing savings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
The Coalition had been building the case for action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/24/joe-hockey-lays-ground-personal-income-tax-cuts-at-next-election>
 to tackle bracket creep for months, but now that it hasruled out an increase 
in the goods and services tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/turnbull-says-labors-negative-gearing-plan-harms-average-earners-as-gst-ruled-out>
 it is seeking todampen community expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/17/four-things-we-learnt-from-scott-morrisons-first-speech-to-the-national-press-club>
 about its forthcoming tax reform package.

Economic ministers have previously said the government must address bracket 
creep because it was a stealthy “inflation tax” that would detract from 
economic growth and workforce participation.

Cormann said on Thursday the government would do “as much as we can sensibly 
afford”, adding that the dumped option of raising the GST to fund income tax 
cuts would have allowed the government “to be a bit more ambitious”.


“Given that wage inflation is comparatively low, inflation generally is 
comparatively low, while the problem is there, it is not there to the same 
extent as it might have been in the past, as what it might have been if we 
weren’t in a changed environment,” Cormann told ABC Radio National.

“Our instinct is to deliver lower taxes to deliver personal income tax cuts to 
address bracket creep, but we will have to make judgments on what is 
affordable.”

Four things we learnt from Scott Morrison's first speech to the National Press 
Club | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/17/four-things-we-learnt-from-scott-morrisons-first-speech-to-the-national-press-club>
Pressed on the Coalition’s previous warnings about bracket creep, Cormann 
reaffirmed the phenomenon was “a drag on growth” but low inflation rates gave 
the government “a little bit of room to recalibrate in a more affordable 
fashion our ambition in this area”.


Australian Bureau of Statistics figures show the wage price index 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6345.0> rose by 2.3% overall in the 
year to the September 2015 quarter, while the 2.1% rate in the private sector 
wasthe lowest since the data series began 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/6345.0Media%20Release1Sep%202015?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=6345.0&issue=Sep%202015&num=&view=>
 in 1998. The consumer price index was running at 1.7% in the year to December.

Labor’s finance spokesman, Tony Burke, said the government was “directionless” 
and had no economic plan.

“This is a government that’s all at sea,” Burke said.

“Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison promised that there would be something 
different to Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey when they came in. The only difference 
is we have had no action, and more waffle.”

Record low wage growth is a blow to the government's case for tax reform | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2015/nov/19/record-low-wage-growth-is-a-blow-to-the-governments-case-for-tax-reform>
Morrison, the treasurer, said in January he was passionate about addressing 
bracket creep as it was “one of the things that is holding theAustralian economy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy> back”.

In November, Morrison described it as “a growing problem that impacts on 
workforce participation”. He said 300,000 Australians were expected to enter 
the second-highest tax bracket over the next two years, and a failure to cut 
income taxes would result in half of all taxpayers reaching the top two 
brackets in 10 years.

The assistant treasurer, Kelly O’Dwyer, also said it was unfair and “really 
shocking” that the average income earner would soon reach the second-highest 
tax bracket.

Hockey, the former treasurer, described bracket creep as a “stealth tax” that 
could detract from economic growth and lead to “negative financial and economic 
outcomes, for individuals and the nation”.

In May last year, Hockey said the phenomenon could cause “a downward spiral 
for the economy” and “untold problems in the future” unless it was properly 
addressed.

But in the past couple of weeks, the government has definitively killed off 
changes to the GST,citing modelling that showed such a move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/treasurys-gst-modelling-shows-rise-to-15-would-not-improve-growth>
 combined with income tax cuts and associated compensation payments would not 
generate much or any increase in economic growth.

Last week, the government also published a Treasury briefing paper showing the 
average personal income tax rate was forecast to rise from 24.4% in 2016-17 to 
26.6% in 2020-21.

Reducing the deficit by allowing an increase in the average tax rate could 
lead to a 0.35% contraction in gross domestic product in the long term, 
according to Treasury modelling. This impact is measured against a scenario 
whereby the government cut spending in order to a maintain constant average tax 
rate.

Addressing the National Press Club on Wednesday, Morrison said the 
government’s had “rescaled and rescoped” its options to address bracket creep 
after the decision not to increase the GST.

Treasury's GST modelling shows rise to 15% would not improve growth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/treasurys-gst-modelling-shows-rise-to-15-would-not-improve-growth>
The treasurer said the government had previously looked at “$30bn worth of 
income tax cuts [which] would have delivered one of the biggest changes to 
income tax rates and schedules that we’d seen in 30 years or more”.

“If you’re not dealing with that scope and scale, you’re obviously looking at 
far more modest measures,” he said.

Morrison added that he and the prime minister remained “deeply troubled” by 
the prospect of the average wage earner moving into the second-highest tax 
bracket.


“We may be able to prevent that outcome going forward,” he said, hinting at a 
potential tweak to the threshold in the forthcoming package.

During a post-speech media blitz on Thursday morning, Morrison defended the 
government’s handling of the tax debate andlikened Labor’s tax plans to “a 
unicorn” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
.

The government has indicated it is looking at tax options including reining in 
the “excesses” of negative gearing, superannuation tax concessions and 
workplace tax deductions.

Morrison said that there was a “strong case” for reviewing superannuation 
concessions and that the government was close to a “landing point” on decisions 
on the details of the reforms, during a speech to the self-managed 
superannuation industry on Thursday evening.

He acknowledged that the concessions were used predominantly by high income 
earners.

“High income earners generally have more capacity and inclination to save for 
retirement. This is a good thing,” Morrison said. “It’s not something that 
should be demonised or seen as some sort of nefarious practice, which is often 
I think a point that is implied when people make criticisms of these things.”

“I think it’s great that people are out there saving for their future. I think 
it’s tremendous. They do it in superannuation and they do it in many other 
things, including amazingly, negative gearing, which I don’t think is a 
necessarily a bad thing that people would take those opportunities to provide 
for their future,” the treasurer said. “But I believe they raise questions 
about the purpose of the concessions particularly as it relates to 
superannuation.”

He ruled out making “effective retrospective” changes to super by taxing in 
the retirement phase.

“If they’re going to change the rules at the other end when you’re going to be 
living off it, then it’s understandable that people might get spooked.”
 