
Confronted with a report  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/16/welfare-mentality-must-end-coalition-responds-to-report-on-rising-poverty>
showing2.99 million Australians live below the poverty line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/16/a-national-shame-acoss-report-reveals-worsening-poverty-in-australia>
, more than half of them on social security payments, the assistant social 
security minister, Zed Seselja, blamed “a welfare mentality” that had been 
“pushed” by “the left”.

The weirdest thing about that statement is not the fact that, for the vast 
majority of unemployed people, the problem is not their “mentality” but a 
simple absence of jobs (there are currently five unemployed people for each job 
vacancy by a conservative calculation).

Nor is it that this basic problem is often exacerbated by the fact that the 
person has the wrong skills, or is considered to be of the wrong age, or has an 
episodic illness that no longer qualifies them for a disability support pension 
but makes finding a job more difficult, or also has to balance being a carer or 
a single parent.

Neither is the most perplexing thing about the assistant minister’s 
victim-blaming statement the fact that, despite the alleged insidious 
left-propagated “welfare mentality”,unemployment among working-age Australians 
is actually lower than it was a decade ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/25/cutting-welfare-means-hitting-those-who-are-already-among-the-poorest-greg-jericho>
, or that we spend less on social security than the OECD average.

A 'national shame': Acoss report reveals worsening poverty in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/16/a-national-shame-acoss-report-reveals-worsening-poverty-in-australia>
No, the strangest thing is that, at the same time as blaming the “mentality” 
of the unemployed, the government is introducing policies that supposedly seek 
to address some of the real underlying factors contributing to long-term 
unemployment.

The social security minister Christian Porter’s “priority investment approach” 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/BudgetReview201516/Welfare>
 is couched in actuarial figures but the aim is to target groups like young 
parents, single parents and carers at greatest risk of a life on the dole.

There are legitimate implementation questions but it could be a productive 
approach.

But if a government is prepared to address the actual underlying reasons for 
unemployment in the real world, where a taxpayer can suddenly find themselves 
as a welfare recipient before clawing their way back to being a taxpayer again, 
why would it simultaneously continue with the same old false and divisive 
binary that the world is actually populated by discrete groups of hardworking 
taxpayers and dole bludgers with a layabout “mentality”?

And why would it persist with policies that make climbing out of unemployment 
more difficult?

Porter’s early intervention ideas aim to help people escape unemployment but 
budget savings still before the parliament penalise the very same people – for 
example, the one-month wait for the dole for under 25s.

And despite even the Business Council of Australia saying the very low level 
of unemployment payments acts as an impediment to people getting a job, the 
government remains determined to resist any increase in benefits.

The study to which Seselja was responding, for the Australian Council of 
Social Service, found that 731,000 children are living below the poverty line, 
many of them children in single-parent families where that parent is unemployed.

This raises some obvious questions. 

The most obvious is whether this is really the society we want to be. Are we 
comfortable that this is what our social security “safety net” now amounts to?

And even if the plight of these people doesn’t sway the argument, there’s an 
economic question as well. Why leave benefits at a level that hinders their 
search for a job?

By all means the government should crack down on the minority of people 
rorting the unemployment benefit system.

But if it is really serious about addressing the causes of long-term 
unemployment – the real-life complicated ones that can’t be dismissed with an 
easy television soundbite – it needs to shelve the “welfare mentality” script 
designed to justify below-poverty line payments and budget cuts that push 
people in the opposite direction.

Because it really makes no sense to claim to be devising policies to help 
people while blaming and punishing them at the same time.
 