
Soon, the Labour leadership result will be announced, and it’s looking likely 
that, contrary to what I’d hoped,Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> will win again. In a 
bizarre way, I’m almost looking forward to it – rip the plaster off, let it 
smart, get it over with. It could almost be viewed as “freeing”, as the hippies 
used to trill. I’ve voted for the Labour party my entire life, and never even 
considered voting any other way, but all that changes the moment that Corbyn 
gets back in, and, like many other previously lifelong Labour supporters, I 
become instantly politically homeless.

Of course, it might be easier just to continue obsessing – how did we fall 
into this stinking, slippery well? TheLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party is a 116-year-old political 
entity conceived to provide parliamentary representation (and therefore 
protection) for the most overlooked, vulnerable people in society. How did it 
turn into a hot-desking playpen for conceited, clueless backbench-lifers, 
peddling everything from pungent whiffs of antisemitism, sexism and other forms 
of bullying and discrimination to meaningless “neo-hipster” drivel, delivered 
with sub-zero political acumen?

Indeed, until now, I have been obsessing: raving, ranting, doing my best to 
oust Corbyn (rejoining the Labour party to vote; supporting “Saving Labour”, 
all that palaver). However, enough is enough. Now that it’s the eleventh hour, 
a different mood has landed. A new, tentative: “So, what else is out there?”

Which may surprise some people. From what I can make out, Corbyn and his 
supporters seem to arrogantly presume that more centrist/moderate Labour voters 
would always be there – whingeing, arguing, getting in the way… but still 
always there. However, if many people I know are anything to go by, this is 
simply not going to be the case. Put bluntly: as soon as Corbyn wins again, 
we’re off, and we’re taking our votes with us. For me, this feeling is totally 
new and unexpected, even rather liberating. It’s one thing to leave the Labour 
party, quite another not to even vote for Labour. Is this what the 
Corbyn-effect has unleashed: a brand new political force – what could be termed 
the “post-Labour free range voter”? People, like myself, who have not only 
spent their lives voting for Labour but have done so automatically, “tribally”, 
not seriously considering other options. The kind of people who’ve been 
completely disenfranchised by the Corbyn-effect – cast adrift, to wander, 
blinking, confused, into the wider political terrain.

The new left: don’t call them Corbynistas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/momentum-activists-labour-jeremy-corbyn-feature>
“Confused” being the operative word. At first anyway, it felt akin to a bird 
being released back into the wild, but just sitting on the ground, flapping its 
wings pathetically. However, that passes, and it becomes quite interesting to 
ask: If not Labour, who? The Tories? Behave! Ukip? Vomit. However, certain 
Labour politicians still seem to be plotting to form a breakaway party. 
(Perhaps against the odds something viable could emerge there?) Then there’s 
canny Tim Farron, brazenly easing the Liberal Democrats into position as the 
most feasible anti-Tory/anti-Brexit option. The Greens? Oh dear, now I’m 
feeling hopeless again – do I really have to trawl through their manifesto 
chuntering on about solar panels? And so on.

The point is that it matters less who I vote for than the fact that, for the 
first time, people like me are considering voting for anyone other than Labour. 
It’s as if a lifelong spell has been broken; the proverbial Rubicon crossed. 
Instead of automatically voting for Labour, the not inconsiderable numbers of 
“free range homeless” Labour voters are going to be out there, actively 
hunting, willing to be “wooed”, and, where the Brexit mess is concerned, more 
than prepared to get a little tactical. Considering there’s an awful lot of us, 
things could start looking very interesting, revolutionary and dangerous. 
Perhaps the Corbyn-faithful might have been right all along and changeis coming 
– just not in the way they intended.

Doh! There’s more to life than cake
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fim-taking-my-vote-elsewhere-if-corbyn-wins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83673bf92e28679eeadc83fc4a2312626e940830%2F9_9_3436_2062%2F3436.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20victory%3F%20It%E2%80%99s%20a%20strangely%20liberating%20feeling%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fim-taking-my-vote-elsewhere-if-corbyn-wins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn%20victory%3F%20It%E2%80%99s%20a%20strangely%20liberating%20feeling%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fim-taking-my-vote-elsewhere-if-corbyn-wins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83673bf92e28679eeadc83fc4a2312626e940830%2F9_9_3436_2062%2F3436.jpg>
 Bake Off judges Paul Hollywood and ‘anti-feminist’ Mary Berry. Photograph: 
Mark Bourdillon/PA 
I’ve just checked, and I’m still not remotely bothered that The Great British 
Bake Offis moving from the BBC to Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/bbc-loses-great-british-bake-off>
. May I respectfully suggest to those who’re troubled by this light 
entertainment development that they urgently need to get one of those things 
that starts with a birth, ends with a death, and has lots of stuff happening in 
the middle – as in, a life.

I’m not a television snob, but Bake Off really takes the, erm, biscuit. Even 
with Mel and Sue as presenters, and a Muslim winner (who suffered racist abuse 
– nice), the cake-baking extravaganza has always come across as Brexit TV, 
beamed straight from the Men’s Association in Stepford.

On top of that, Mary Berry seems to suffer from some bizarre “anti-feminist 
Tourette’s”, once saying that feminism was a “dirty word”, just “shouting at 
men”, when you should “persuade them gently to do things”.

In Mel and Sue, the true spirit of punk lives on | Stewart Lee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/18/bake-off-mel-sue-bbc-punk-rock-stewart-lee>
Perhaps Ms Berry could be “gently persuaded” to stop speaking about things she 
clearly knows nothing about.

So I don’t care which channel Bake Off is on, because I won’t be watching 
anyway. However, just to prove that I’m not totally heartless, if anybody 
“can’t wait” for Channel 4 to provide their twee kitchen-bound pinny-clad 
domestication-fix, I’d be willing to set up one of those podcast thingies 
(subscription-only/satisfaction guaranteed) showing me making a cup of tea, 
squashing the teabag against the sides of the cup and everything.

If that’s not Bake Off enough, I could be persuaded to eat (shop-bought) 
biscuits and/or a folded-over Marmite sandwich, but that would cost extra.

Alternatively, perhaps this would be as good a time as any for Britain to 
awaken from its risible sub-Cath Kidston televised food-prep trance and realise 
that they can live without it after all.

Bowie would have voted for Skepta
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fim-taking-my-vote-elsewhere-if-corbyn-wins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F270b00deb2a84a194aedd1dfd8e77a6a8ea30292%2F57_0_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20victory%3F%20It%E2%80%99s%20a%20strangely%20liberating%20feeling%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fim-taking-my-vote-elsewhere-if-corbyn-wins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn%20victory%3F%20It%E2%80%99s%20a%20strangely%20liberating%20feeling%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fim-taking-my-vote-elsewhere-if-corbyn-wins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F270b00deb2a84a194aedd1dfd8e77a6a8ea30292%2F57_0_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
 ‘Deserving’: Skepta accepts his Mercury prize. Photograph: Nils 
Jorgensen/Rex/Shutterstock 
How strange to see people getting upset that David Bowie’s Blackstar lost out 
toSkepta’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/skepta-konnichiwa-a-mercury-winner-few-can-argue-with>
Konnichiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/skepta-konnichiwa-a-mercury-winner-few-can-argue-with>
for the Mercury prize. Not only is this offensive to Skepta (whose win deserves
allof the attention), it’s also insulting to Bowie.

An artist of Bowie’s stature is beyond awards. It isn’t that the Mercury isn’t 
worth winning, but it’s definitely not worth griping about on Bowie’s behalf. 
Moreover, just because he died, it doesn’t mean thatBlackstar should be awarded 
every gong going. Now that really would be insulting – awards relentlessly, 
mawkishly handed out to “dear departed David”.

This wasn’t what Bowie was about. He was a restless innovator, sometimes to 
his artistic detriment (some of us endured the drum’n’bass experiments). He 
would probably have been intrigued by Skepta’s victory and checked his album 
out – if he hadn’t done so already. This says far more about Bowie than 
posthumously patronising him with every award there is. Before it failed to win 
the Mercury prize,Blackstar was already an outstanding, absorbing work, and a 
unique talent’s final gift – to borrow a phrase from a Bowie compilation. 
Nothing has changed.
 