
Controversial conservative politicians Cory Bernardi and George Christensen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-christensen> have agreed to 
help an anti-Islam organisation raise funds to defend a defamation case brought 
by a halal certifier.

The South Australian senator and Queensland MP, who are both outspoken critics 
of Islam and halal certification, are on the bill for a series of events by the 
Q Society,the Australian reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/immigration/bernardi-christensen-fight-for-antiislam-society/news-story/8a6690ff9483b1cb2f90275c18fe730b>
.

Last year Mohamed El-Mouelhy, the director of Halal Certification Australia, 
launched legal action against the organisation and three of its members over 
two videos posted on YouTube in 2013 and 2014.

Cory Bernardi warns One Nation will rise if migration not halved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/03/cory-bernardi-warns-one-nation-will-rise-if-migration-not-halved>
The defendants include Kirralie Smith, a NSW Senate candidate for the 
Australian Liberty Alliance who narrated the videos, and Debbie Robinson, 
national president of the Q Society.

Christensen told Guardian Australia he had been asked to appear “to assist my 
good friend Kirralie”.

“I will be speaking in support of free speech and against political 
correctness.”

Bernardi, who has made accusations against El-Mouelhy under parliamentary 
privilege, told the Australian he was helping Smith as a “true friend”, and was 
“more than happy to ­assist in raising money to fund the legal defence of a 
friend against Mohamed El-Mouelhy”.

The Australian Liberty Alliance (ALA) launched in 2015 as a far-right 
political party campaigning on an anti-Islam and anti-immigration stance. Smith 
has previously joked that president-elect Donald Trump had “stolen” the ALA’s 
ideas.

Its rise reportedly drew members from disaffected Coalition supporters, 
Christensentelling Fairfax in April 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/australian-liberty-alliance-the-antiislam-donald-trumpstyle-party-claims-major-growth-20160406-go08lq.html>
 the ALA was “definitely taking rank and file LNP supporters”. He didn’t fear 
the ALA would become a threat to the party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcory-bernardi-and-george-christensen-to-raise-funds-for-anti-islam-group%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22496e05d4a6538795078a43c6f49f833237e984%2F0_136_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cory%20Bernardi%20and%20George%20Christensen%20to%20raise%20funds%20for%20anti-Islam%20group&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcory-bernardi-and-george-christensen-to-raise-funds-for-anti-islam-group%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cory%20Bernardi%20and%20George%20Christensen%20to%20raise%20funds%20for%20anti-Islam%20group&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcory-bernardi-and-george-christensen-to-raise-funds-for-anti-islam-group%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22496e05d4a6538795078a43c6f49f833237e984%2F0_136_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 George Christensen attended a previous Q Society event when the Dutch 
far-right anti-immigration campaigner Geert Wilder visited Australia. 
Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
Robinson told Guardian Australia the guests would be addressing the crowd at 
the events. Bernardi had been invited by Smith, who knew the senator from his 
inquiry into halal certification, she said.

Christensen had attended a previous Q Society event when the Dutch far-right 
anti-immigration campaigner Geert Wilder visited Australia.

Q Society describes itself as Australia’s “leading Islam-critical movement”, 
and has called for a 10-year moratorium on immigration from Organisation of 
Islamic Cooperation countries, and for Australia to withdraw from the 
“hijacked” UN refugee convention.

It has also heavily campaigned against halal certification and section 18C of 
the Racial Discrimination Act.

Next year’s events seek to raise funds for the group’s legal defence against 
El-Mouehly’s suit. In a letter appealing for donations, Robinson said: “It is 
vital that those who speak the truth about Islamic halal certification and 
other Islamic impositions are not silenced by time-consuming and expensive 
court action.”

According to a statement of claim filed in the action, the videos posted by 
the defendants made several defamatory imputations about El-Mouelhy, including 
that he sought to mislead and deceive the general public, was pushing for 
sharia law in Australia, and was promoting “a global push for Islamisation 
calculated to destroy Australia values of freedom and tolerance”.

It also allegedly suggested he was “un-Australian” and “reasonably suspected” 
of financially supporting terrorism, and the second video contained imputations 
including that El-Mouelhy was part of a conspiracy to destroy western 
civilisation from within.

El-Mouelhy was seeking damages, aggravated damages, interest and injunctions 
against further publication of the imputations.

A trial has been set down for four to five weeks in the NSW supreme court next 
year.

Angry Anderson, cartoonist Larry Pickering and Sky News presenter Ross Cameron 
are also on the bill.

In a video spruiking the events, Smith described the lineup as “a dream come 
true”, and praised Christensen and Bernardi for their outspoken brand of 
conservatism.

She suggested people buy themselves a ticket “for Christmas or Hanukah”.

Bernardi’s office has been contacted for comment.
 