
In two days, Jill Stein raised more than enough money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
, more than $5m, to file for recounts in Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania, 
though her campaign is still seeking about $2m more to cover the associated 
legal fees.

Jill Stein to formally file for Wisconsin recount as fundraising effort passes 
$5m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
Results in these battleground states were narrow, with Trump winning by just 
0.3% in Michigan, 1.2% in Pennsylvania, and 0.7% in Wisconsin. If Clinton had 
won all of these states’ 46 electoral college votes, it have would been enough 
for her to win the presidency.

But the recount process is intensive, expensive and unlikely to change the 
outcome of the election unless widespread voter fraud is proven. Experts have 
been skeptical that is the case.

In Wisconsin – where her team was due to file a recount motion by Friday 
afternoon – election officials would have to examine millions of paper ballots 
and the paper trails of the 5% of votes cast on electronic touch-screen 
machines.

Wisconsin election commission director Michael Haas told local news that the 
commission was preparing for a recount, though it had not seen evidence of 
interference in the state’s voting system. “We don’t have any reason to suspect 
that any voting equipment has been tampered with,” Haas said.

Unofficial results showed Trump won Wisconsin by more than 27,000 votes. The 
state has never conducted a presidential recount, but Stein’s campaign said it 
would file a motion for a recount on Friday before the deadline to do so in the 
state.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jill%20Stein%20calls%20for%20recount%20in%20order%20to%20verify%20US%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jill%20Stein%20calls%20for%20recount%20in%20order%20to%20verify%20US%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video&media=>
Jill Stein calls for recount in order to verify US election result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video>
In Pennsylvania, there is no paper trail – a problem election observers 
anticipated ahead of the 8 November race. “The nightmare scenario would be if 
Pennsylvania decides the election and it is very close. You would have no paper 
records to do a recount,” Lawrence Norden, the co-author of a report on voting 
machines,told the Los Angeles Times in late October 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-pennsylvania-voting-paperless-20161020-snap-story.html>
.

But because machines there are not connected to the internet, like those in 
Michigan, officials said they couldn’t be hacked.

Across the whole of the US, about three-quarters of voters mark paper ballots 
that are counted electronically by an optical scanner, according to the 
nonpartisan group Verified Voting, which examines how new technology affects 
voting integrity. But some states, including Pennsylvania, rely almost entirely 
on touchscreen computer voting that does not produce a paper trail. The punch 
card ballots that resulted in the disputed hanging chads during the Florida 
recount in 2000 are no longer used.

Trump was declared the winner in Michigan on Thursday by 10,704 votes, and the 
election director there insists there was no evidence of hacking. “It’s just 
conjecture, and I don’t think that serves anyone’s good purpose,” said Chris 
Thomas, the longtime director of Michigan’s Bureau of Elections.
 