
A British company has been found liable for the first time for victims of 
modern slavery in a landmark high court judgment.

The judge, Justice Supperstone, found in favour of six Lithuanian men who were 
trafficked to the UK and brought a civil case claiming compensation for being 
severely exploited by the Kent-based gangmaster firm that employed them, DJ 
Houghton Chicken Catching Services.

The men were sent by the company, run by the British couple Darrell Houghton 
and Jacqueline Judge, to catch chickens on farms around the country. They 
worked frequently on farms producing eggs for the leading supplier to major 
supermarkets.

 The judge ruled that the men were owed compensation for the firm’s failure to 
pay the agricultural minimum wage, for the charging of prohibited work-finding 
fees, for unlawfully withholding wages, and for depriving the workers of 
facilities to wash, rest, eat and drink.

 The workers have described living and working in inhuman and degrading 
conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/10/fear-hunger-dirt-lithuanian-migrants-chicken-catchers-dj-houghton>
. They say they were forced to work back-to-back eight-hour shifts for days at 
a time, and were denied sleep and toilet breaks, forcing them to urinate in 
bottles and defecate in carrier bags in their minibuses as they travelled 
between jobs.


They also alleged that their pay was repeatedly withheld, while Lithuanian 
supervisors working with the couple abused and assaulted them, intimidated them 
with fighting dogs and threatened them with instant eviction if they 
complained. The accommodation provided was dirty, overcrowded and unsafe and 
infested with bed bugs and fleas, they claimed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fmigrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20migrants%20were%20trafficked%20to%20work%20on%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20free-range%20egg%20farms%20%E2%80%94%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fmigrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20migrants%20were%20trafficked%20to%20work%20on%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20free-range%20egg%20farms%20%E2%80%94%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fmigrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video&media=>
How migrants were trafficked to work on Britain’s free range egg farms – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/aug/10/migrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video>
Laurynas Kelpsa, one of the victims, said he was pleased with the judgment but 
still shocked by what had happened to him. “It means at last that some justice 
has happened. We’ve waited four years and it’s been really hard being forced to 
remember [the experience] all the time to prove they did wrong.”

The amount of compensation will be assessed at a future date but is expected 
to run to hundreds of thousands of pounds for unpaid wages alone. A claim for 
personal injury is still to be heard.

 Ten other Lithuanian men who were employed by the couple over the same period 
in similar conditions have now also brought a claim.

 A Guardian investigation in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/oct/29/workers-chickens-allegedly-trafficked-beaten>
 revealed that the trafficked Lithuanians were working in supply chains 
producing premium free range eggs for McDonald’s, Tesco, Asda, M&S and the 
Sainsbury’s Woodland brand. Thefarm sheds they cleared of chickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/10/lithuanian-migrants-chicken-catchers-trafficked-uk-egg-farms-sue-worst-gangmaster-ever>
 also produced eggs under the Freedom Food brand, and included some sites 
producing for Noble Foods, the company that owns the Happy Egg brand.

Noble Foods is the UK’s largest egg company and both the firm and its 
chairman, Peter Dean, have been major donors to the Conservative party. The 
company helicopter has occasionally been loaned to David Cameron for election 
campaigning.

 Police raided houses controlled by Houghton and Judge in 2012 and freed 
several suspected victims of human trafficking.

 The Gangmaster Licensing Authority described the company at the time as “the 
worst gangmaster ever” and revoked its licence. The Lithuanian men were taken 
into the care of the national referral mechanism for victims of human 
trafficking, but no criminal charges have been brought.


The couple blamed a Lithuanian supervisor, Edikas Mankevicius, who has since 
returned toLithuania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/lithuania>, for the 
situation, but in the high court on Friday, Supperstone ruled that he was 
integral to the business’s operation and the company could not therefore simply 
escape its responsibilities in this way.

 The Lithuanians’ claims were brought in a civil case by the law firm Leigh 
Day and mark a significant breakthrough in attempts for victims of modern 
slavery to get justice.


Their lawyer at the firm, Shanta Martin, said: “This is the first time a 
British company has been found liable for victims of trafficking and it is 
going to make a world of difference to our clients. It should be seen as a 
warning shot to businesses that they need to make sure modern slavery is 
eradicated from their supply chains.”


The anti-slavery commissioner, Kevin Hyland, said: “It is a disgrace that any 
British employer in the 21st century would exploit their workers in such 
conditions. There is a dark irony that a business producing free range eggs did 
so using slave labour.

“This case shows that employers who exploit their workers can and should be 
pursued through the courts for lost earnings. And while it will not make up for 
the suffering, the decision of the court to award compensation will act as some 
form of justice.”

 