
Court of appeal <https://www.theguardian.com/law/court-of-appeal> judges have 
backed a decision to take a four-year-old girl into care on the grounds that 
her long-term emotional health and life chances were threatened by her mother’s 
inability to control her child’s behaviour.


The girl, known as “Child B”, was placed for adoption in August after a ruling 
by a judge at a private family court hearing inOxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oxford> found that her mother was incapable of 
providing adequate parenting or setting boundaries.

The court of appeal heard that Child B showed extremely challenging behaviour, 
was at times aggressive and disrespectful towards her mother, did not trust 
her, failed to respond to her attempts to control her, and used inappropriate 
language.

Social workers had at one stage carried out a parenting assessment which 
recorded eight examples of “worrying behaviour” by the girl, then three, during 
a five-week period. In one instance she had moved around car parks in an 
“uncontrolled way” and had once run across a road, causing a car to brake 
suddenly.


Although the mother accepted that she had failed to set boundaries and protect 
her daughter from emotional harm in the past, her lawyers argued that her 
parenting had improved and that the girl was no longer at risk of suffering 
significant harm in her care.

Her lawyer, Frances Judd QC, argued that a child failing to follow boundaries 
set by the parent was “a common or garden matter”, making a care order 
disproportionate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fcourt-of-appeal-upholds-decision-to-keep-oxford-mothers-child-in-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F953f8b795a2257efc8f3d235c31e8663f7841cf4%2F0_0_5468_3280%2F5468.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Court%20of%20appeal%20upholds%20decision%20to%20keep%20Oxford%20mother's%20child%20in%20care&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fcourt-of-appeal-upholds-decision-to-keep-oxford-mothers-child-in-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Court%20of%20appeal%20upholds%20decision%20to%20keep%20Oxford%20mother%27s%20child%20in%20care&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fcourt-of-appeal-upholds-decision-to-keep-oxford-mothers-child-in-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F953f8b795a2257efc8f3d235c31e8663f7841cf4%2F0_0_5468_3280%2F5468.jpg>
 The case was heard at the court of appeal, inside the royal courts of justice 
in London. Photograph: Alamy 
But the court of appeal ruled that the order was justified. Lord Justice 
McFarlane stated in awritten judgment 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2016/1090.html> it was essential that 
Child B was taken into care in order to repair the emotional harm she had 
suffered.

He said: “I do not accept Miss Judd’s submission that a child failing to 
follow boundaries set by a parent is part of the ordinary stuff of parental 
experience or, as she put it, a common or garden matter.

“While it is indeed the case that every parent at some time or other may fail 
in this regard, the present case is totally outside the norm in that, most 
sadly, this mother as a parent largely lacks the ability to be in tune with her 
children’s needs from day to day or minute to minute to the extent that she 
wholly fails, across the board, to establish a safe structure to regulate their 
behaviour.”

The court of appeal heard that the mother had suffered from domestic violence 
at the hands of the father of Child B, and both Child B and her elder brother 
Child A had been monitored by social services since 2011.

Both children had at times since then been made subject to a child protection 
plan, and Child A, who had been placed in foster care for six months in 2013, 
was placed in foster care full-time this year with the agreement of his mother.

The court heard statements from social workers and guardians made in the 
original hearing which described the mother’s inconsistent responses to her 
children’s “extremely challenging” behaviour. A social worker concluded that 
“the children behave when they want to and are the ones largely in control”.

The children’s guardian reported concerns about the impact on the children of 
their mother’s “inability to provide the children with a calm, consistent and 
predictable environment; to manage their behaviour and routines and to provide 
appropriate and consistent emotional responses to them”.

The mother retained the care of her eight-month-old baby boy from a different 
father, known as Child C. The original ruling accepted that C had not in his 
short life experienced trauma, and it was hoped that with just one child to 
focus on the mother would be able to give “good enough” parenting.
 