
A hijab-wearing beauty blogger has joined the ranks of supermodels and pop 
stars as the latest person to be named as a brand ambassador for Cover Girl 
cosmetics.

Nura Afia, a practicing Muslim, will appear in commercials and on a billboard 
in New York City’s Times Square wearing a hijab while promoting one of the 
largest cosmetics companies in the US.


Afia is one of the only women to appear in an advertising campaign for a major 
cosmetics or fashion brand in the US while wearing a hijab. “I grew up being 
insecure about wearing the hijab, and I never thought I would see Muslim women 
represented on such a large scale,”Afia told Refinery29. 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2016/11/128370/covergirl-new-ambassador-muslim-beauty-blogger>

But Afia on her own has increased representation by acquiring more than 
200,000 subscribers to her YouTubechannel <https://www.youtube.com/babylailalov>
, which is filled with videos that showcase her makeup techniques using 
drugstore and high-end products.

“I hope [this campaign] will show Muslim women that brands care about us as 
consumers and we’re important, especially hijabis,” Afia said. “We can be 
featured on TV, can be featured on billboards in Times Square, can be 
represented.”

Her appointment comes as more brands increase diversity in advertising 
campaigns – weeks before Afia was announced as a brand ambassadorCover Girl 
hired its first cover boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/11/covergirl-james-charles-first-cover-boy-makeup-artist>
, 17-year-old makeup artist James Charles.

 The hijab has become more visible in the US and Europe in the past two years. 
Designer Anniesa Hasibuan held the first runway show where every model wore a 
hijabin September 
<http://mashable.com/2016/09/16/models-hijabs-history-fashion-week/#LNcGnfzKHkq5>
, and in 2015 model Mariah Idrissi wore a hijab in a video campaign for H&M.

Afia is part of a wave of Muslim beauty bloggers who have large followings on 
Instagram and YouTube.

🍊🍑🍅 Hijab: @hautehijab Makeup Deets Coming soon! 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BHJf6RgA06k/>

A photo posted by Nura Afia (@nuralailalov) on Jun 26, 2016 at 11:48pm PDT

Her video posts routinely get tens of thousands of views, including a soft 
smoky eye tutorial <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_VWU9zXklL4> with more than 
320,000 views and a guide tohow she gets ready for date night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FYhh1bCEsxg>, which has more than 300,800 
views.


She also posts video blogs from vacations and from events with her family. 

Afia started watching YouTube videos while trying to pass the time while 
breastfeeding her daughter. She started making her own videos because she was 
disappointed that few of the videos featured women in hijabs. Afiatold 
Refinery29 in December 2015 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2015/12/99693/nura-afia-muslim-beauty-blogger>: “I 
wanted to show people that I can still be married and a mom and do whatever the 
hell I want – my scarf isn’t going to stop me.”
 