
“In all of this there was a comforting sense of the ridiculous.” So wrote 
Peter Fleming in Brazilian Adventure, which – eight decades after it was 
published – is still the sharpest piece of travel writing in English about 
South America’s biggest nation.

He was lampooning a hare-brained expedition of foreigners that set off from 
Rio de Janeiro in 1932 but his words could just as easily describe the cricket 
match that took place last Saturday in the city’s remote suburb of Itaguaí.

The last game of the 2016 season for the Carioca Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club (CCC) proved an occasion of 
high drama, rich entertainment and rank incompetence – even by the standards of 
a team who have rarely had reason to disturb the trophy cabinet.

Formed five years ago in the Pavão Azul (Blue Peacock) bar, the CCC – who have 
as their logo an image ofChrist the Redeemer in an umpire’s jacket signalling a 
wide <https://cariocacricket.files.wordpress.com/2012/07/ccc-logo3.jpg> – is an 
anachronism wrapped in an anomaly inside an expat bubble that has doggedly 
found a niche in the most unpromising of circumstances.

Outside the Caribbean Latin America has always been considered a cricketing 
desert. Countless reasons are given for the sport’s failure to grip the popular 
imagination here: the colonial history is Spanish and Portuguese, rather than 
English; the geography – dominated by Amazonian forest and Andean mountains – 
is uninviting; the climate – ranging from the humid tropics to Antarctic 
Patagonia – is insufficiently temperate; megacities such as São Paulo and 
Mexico City are too crowded and chaotic to allow hectares to be set aside for 
pitches; and football is too dominant to allow any other sport to prosper (as
the many empty seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/rio-2016-empty-seats-olympic-stadium-bad-weather>
 at this year’s Rio Olympics appeared to affirm). The old Rio Cricket Club – 
founded in 1872 – now exist in name only, with all of their playing area taken 
by football pitches.

But through a mix of eccentricity, real-world denial and a passion for the 
game the CCC chairman and president – the long-term English residents Tobias 
Hanbury and Craig Allison – have overcome these excuses to build a set of 
cricket facilities that would do an English village club proud.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcricket-brazilian-outpost-ccc-itaguai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e805e4bbbec408a884c0ecf6740cdf9df54cc46%2F371_0_3545_2128%2F3545.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cricket%E2%80%99s%20Brazilian%20outpost%3A%20how%20CCC%20thrive%20in%20the%20%E2%80%98corridor%20of%20sun%20certainty%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcricket-brazilian-outpost-ccc-itaguai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cricket%E2%80%99s%20Brazilian%20outpost%3A%20how%20CCC%20thrive%20in%20the%20%E2%80%98corridor%20of%20sun%20certainty%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcricket-brazilian-outpost-ccc-itaguai%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e805e4bbbec408a884c0ecf6740cdf9df54cc46%2F371_0_3545_2128%2F3545.jpg>
 The pavilion roof at the Carioca Cricket Club is pockmarked with holes. 
Photograph: Picasa/Carioca Cricket Club 
With sponsorship from a beauty-care products firm, the CCC now have a 
clubhouse with a corrugated roof (already punctured in several places after 
being struck by lofty sixes). There is a small tiered stand for spectators, a 
training net with a bowling machine, and a tennis court for visiting family 
members who need a diversion.

The location is in Itaguaí, a rural backwater with a tradition of imported 
esoteric activities. This is home to Rio’s only two Japanese Buddhist shrines 
and a polo club. It is in the latter that the CCC have set up base 
<https://www.facebook.com/CariocaCricketClub/>, hiring space for up to four 
ovals. The biggest drawback is that the venue is a 90-minute drive from where 
the players live, but an early-morning bus – complete with a bacon-butty 
service – is chartered on match days.

Despite the distant mountains and unusual flora and fauna, the set-up is 
comfortably familiar to the players, who are a mix of English teachers, 
diplomats, businessmen and logistics managers from Britain, India, Pakistan, 
Sri Lanka, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. Only one regular, Felipe 
Lima de Melo, is Brazilian and the host nation’s team is largely comprised of 
foreigners (thanks to a rule that allows expats to represent the country of 
residence).

Itaguaí is now the headquarters of cricket in Brazil. In October it hosted the 
four-day South American cricket championship, an ICC-recognised event with 10 
national teams. The trophy was won by Chile, after victory against the 
long-time Latin American force, Argentina. In the women’s finalBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> beat Argentina by 44 runs.

Fidel Castro, cricket, and a crackpot Foreign Office plan for Cuba | The Spin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/fidel-castro-cricket-foreign-office-the-spin>
In April the Rio club staged the Brazilian national tournament, which was 
contested by teams from São Paulo (champions for seven of the past eight 
years), Curitiba, Brasilia and Minas Gerais, where the former Kent Cricket 
Board batsmanand current Brazil captain, Matthew Featherstone, 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/england/content/player/12819.html> has set up a 
training programme in local schools.

The quality of the matches may be patchy (though there have been some 
remarkable individual performances, such asthe double hat-trick by Asanka 
Bandara 
<http://riotimesonline.com/brazil-news/rio-sports/rios-carioca-cricket-club-sees-double-hat-trick-sponsored/>
 this year), but the CCC did win the national championship once, in 2013. More 
importantly, though, in true Rio style, these annual events are an excuse for a 
world-class party with gaucho style barbecues, horse-riding, giant bonfires, 
DJs and live bands until late into the night, when players and their partners 
retire to the nearby hotel or tents set up outside the boundary ropes.

Last Saturday’s game was a one-day, inter-club 20-over affair that looked 
doomed in the morning when play was so delayed by a tropical rainstorm that 
several players entertained themselves with catching practice using fruit 
knocked off the branches of a mango tree. But true to Itaguaí’s reputation as 
the “Corridor of Sun Certainty”, the clouds cleared, leaving only a waterlogged 
outfield and soggy run-ups.

It made for some abject cricket with the rare exceptions Asanka Bandara (three 
wickets), Charles Morphett (three wickets) and Freddie Brunt (a streaky 38 
runs).

Extras were the second-highest scorer for both teams and the third best knock 
for Hamsters was by Nikolay Tchorbadjiysky, a Bulgarian who had batted only a 
couple of times in his life but was able to use tennis strokes to great effect.

In a field of puddles there were fumbles, tumbles and dropped catches, 
allowing the runs to tick along despite the slow outfield and the distraction 
of the Brazilian parachute regiment descending into a nearby field. Although 
the play was second-rate, the teams were perfectly matched, leaving a final 
over in which six runs or one wicket would have won it. Instead the bowlers 
failed to remove the tailenders and the batsmen failed to get the runs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcricket-brazilian-outpost-ccc-itaguai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F378450e87119670ed84106cfc5338fd17d6c4796%2F47_12_3770_2263%2F3770.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cricket%E2%80%99s%20Brazilian%20outpost%3A%20how%20CCC%20thrive%20in%20the%20%E2%80%98corridor%20of%20sun%20certainty%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcricket-brazilian-outpost-ccc-itaguai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cricket%E2%80%99s%20Brazilian%20outpost%3A%20how%20CCC%20thrive%20in%20the%20%E2%80%98corridor%20of%20sun%20certainty%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcricket-brazilian-outpost-ccc-itaguai%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F378450e87119670ed84106cfc5338fd17d6c4796%2F47_12_3770_2263%2F3770.jpg>
 Tea in Brazil is a different beast than at Lord’s. Photograph: Picasa/Carioca 
Cricket Club 
Faced by a scoreboard that read 99 all out versus 99 for 9, the captains and 
club directors were unsure how to proceed, Finally they decided to settle the 
match in a bowl-off. Every player on each team would have one attempt to hit 
the stumps. Whichever side scored the most hits would be declared winner.

Despite more than five centuries of combined experience, the 22 players could 
hit the stumps only once, Hamish McInnes’s singular display of accuracy winning 
the game for the Hamsters.

In the post-match churrasco and pool party the losing captain, Oliver 
Ballhatchet, lamented a missed opportunity. “We got some early wickets, then I 
had a rum-and-coke and I don’t remember the rest.”

Like many he is planning to leave Rio now the Olympics have been and gone. The 
exodus could make 2017 the toughest year yet for the Carioca club. But the 
adventure goes on. New players are being canvassed. And even if a coveted 
second national championship remains elusive, the club can perhaps find a 
little solace in another of Fleming’s aphorisms: “Even when hope was gone there 
were always the irony rations to fall back on.”
 