
Malcolm Turnbull could be in for an awkward evening on Thursday when he has 
invited all the crossbench senators for dinner at the Lodge, just a few days
after unveiling legislation that is likely to ensure they will not be 
re-elected. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/malcolm-turnbull-moves-to-overhaul-senate-voting-system-before-election>


Family First senator Bob Day <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bob-day> told 
Guardian Australia it would be “an interesting evening” because he was “in 
shock” after being effectively “sacked” and “dumped” by the government despite 
having supported more than 80% of its legislation.

Malcolm Turnbull moves to overhaul Senate voting system before election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/malcolm-turnbull-moves-to-overhaul-senate-voting-system-before-election>
“We’ve been told we’re dumped, no correspondence to be entered into,” he said. 
“I’ve been the government’s biggest supporter, I’ve done everything I can to 
help them, but I’ve been dumped because the government has done a deal with the 
Greens, who support them less than 20% of the time.”

Day said he couldn’t even think about supporting government legislation at the 
moment, including the legislation to set up the Building and Construction 
Commission, which could become a double dissolution trigger and for which Day 
was the government’s only locked-in Senate crossbench vote.

“I’m not in a frame of mind to even talk to them at the moment,” he said. “I 
don’t want briefings on anything. I don’t care about their agenda. I’m just in 
shock.”

Leyonhjelm described the agreement between the government, the Greens and the 
independent senatorNick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> to move to a system 
of optional preferential voting and abolish group voting tickets that allowed 
for backroom preference deals as a “dirty little deal”. He said an alliance of 
minor parties could target 15 Coalition marginal lower house seats.

The Palmer United party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/palmer-united-party> senator, Dio 
Wang, said he would continue to assess all legislation on its merits.

The prime minister said the legislation 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Bills_Legislation/Bills_Search_Results/Result?bId=r5626>
 – introduced to parliament on Monday with thebacking of the Greens and Xenophon
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/senate-voting-changes-coalition-wins-over-nick-xenophon-and-greens>
 – would empower voters to decide how their preferences flowed in upper house 
elections, rather than allowing preferences to be distributed according to 
deals.

Senate voting reform stirs up hornet's nest between likely winners and losers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/senate-voting-reform-stirs-up-hornets-nest-between-likely-winners-and-losers>
The bill has been referred to the joint standing committee on electoral 
matters with a reporting deadline of 2 March, paving the way for a debate and 
decision in the Senate before parliament rises for the pre-budget break.

The moves – seen as an attempt to curb the influence of micro-parties – 
immediately triggered anger from Senate crossbenchers who have been crucial to 
the fate of contentious legislation.

Ricky Muir <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ricky-muir>, the 
Australian Motoring Enthusiast party senator who was elected with just 0.51% of 
Victorian primary votes at the 2013 election, accused the prime minister of a 
“power grab” and said he would “return the favour in the chamber”.

The Victorian independent senator John Madigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-madigan> denounced what he saw 
as “political trickery of the highest order”.

The shadow cabinet was meeting on Monday night to try to determine Labor’s 
position on the laws after deep divisions between the Senate leadership team, 
which opposes them, and the former shadow minister Gary Gray, who is firmly in 
favour.

Labor appeared to be preparing to oppose the move.

A spokesman for Bill Shorten said it would go through normal shadow cabinet 
processes, but said: “Labor is concerned this looks very much like Malcolm 
Turnbull’s Greens party preference deal.

“It is not in the nation’s interest or our economic future to give the Greens 
party the balance of power in the Senate,” he said.
 