
The crown estate has waded into the battle over Hinkley Point 
<https://www.edfenergy.com/energy/nuclear-new-build-projects/hinkley-point-c>, 
pointing out that offshore windfarms are already being built at cheaper prices 
than the proposed atomic reactors for Somerset.

While not arguing the £18.5bn nuclear project should be scrapped, the 
organisation – still legally owned by the Queen – said that the government’s 
current Hinkley review makes it a good time to consider the advantages of other 
low carbon technologies.

Hinkley C's future is in doubt. Let's turn our sights to offshore wind | Huub 
den Rooijen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/14/hinkley-cs-future-is-in-doubt-lets-turn-our-sights-to-offshore-wind>
The crown estate said that windfarms at sea will be on course to meet 10% of 
the country’s electricity by 2020 whileHinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> is not expected to be 
constructed till the mid 2020s, to produce 7%.

“The [wind] sector has undergone a sea change over the last few years, driven 
by rapid advances in technology, cost and the industry’s ability to deliver on 
time and to budget,” said Huub den Rooijen, the director of energy, minerals 
and infrastructure at the crown estate.

“In the Netherlands, there has been an even bigger step change. In the busy 
time aroundthe EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, many people will have 
missed the publication of their most recent offshore wind tender.

“Although there are differences in terms of regulation, most would agree that 
the Dutch are now going to be paying the equivalent of about £80/MWh for their 
700 megawatt windfarm. That is significantly lower than Hinkley Point at 
£92.50/MWh.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fcrown-estate-hinkley-point-nuclear-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5a3bf06cc90039e76266ce34d1768670d3ecc10%2F190_357_2435_1461%2F2435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crown%20estate%20wades%20into%20Hinkley%20Point%20nuclear%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fcrown-estate-hinkley-point-nuclear-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crown%20estate%20wades%20into%20Hinkley%20Point%20nuclear%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fcrown-estate-hinkley-point-nuclear-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5a3bf06cc90039e76266ce34d1768670d3ecc10%2F190_357_2435_1461%2F2435.jpg>
 A CGI model of Hinkley Point C. Photograph: EDF Energy/PA 
The comments come after an unpublished report by the energy department shows 
that it expects onshore wind power and large-scale solarto cost about £50-£75 
per megawatt hour of power generated in 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/11/solar-and-wind-cheaper-than-new-nuclear-by-the-time-hinkley-is-built>
. New nuclear is anticipated to be around £85-£125/MWh, in line with the 
guaranteed price of £92.50/MWh that the government has offered Hinkley’s 
developer, EDF.

Government data published last Thursday 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/energy-trends-section-6-renewables> 
showed that renewables generated a quarter of the UK’s electricity in the first 
quarter of this year. About half of that came from on and offshore wind 
combined.

The Hinkley project has been hit by controversies since it was first raised as 
a possibility by EDF more than nine years ago. There have been delays and 
concerns about the costs of the £18.5bn project.In recent days a new row has 
blown up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/energy-specialists-raise-concerns-on-chinese-hinkley-involvement>
 about the wisdom of allowing EDF’s proposed Chinese partner access to the UK 
energy infrastructure for national security reasons.

Greener alternatives to Hinkley Point C | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/16/greener-alternatives-to-hinkley-point-c>
Den Rooijen said the government’s committee on climate change has urged 
ministers to consider alternatives if there are delays to renewing our nuclear 
fleet. “We should remember our seabed is a powerful energy asset. At present, 
we have 2,200 wind turbines in operation and under construction taking up less 
than 1% of our total seabed,” he said.

“National Grid estimates that nearly half of all power could be generated from 
our seabed by 2030 through offshore wind, combined with tidal power lagoons and 
strong electrical connections to our neighbouring countries.

“We have an inexhaustible supply of reliable and clean power right on our 
doorstep, and competitively priced offshore wind now offers a mature part of 
the solution for the UK’s energy mix.”
 