
From Austria to Hungary and the Netherlands to Norway, Europeans are backing 
populist,far-right parties 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/europes-populist-politicians-win-voters-hearts-1463689360?mod=djem10point>
 and ideas. The so-calledDonald Trumps of the continent 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2016/05/19/meet-the-donald-trumps-of-europe/>
. Austria’s leader Norbert Hoferpledged 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/austrias-right-wing-populism-reflects-anti-migrant-anti-muslim-platform-of-donald-trump/2016/05/19/73368bbe-1c26-11e6-82c2-a7dcb313287d_story.html>
 to “stop the invasion of Muslims” by building a fence on his nation’s southern 
border . Antisemitism and Islamophobia are rampant – recent polling in Hungary 
found at least one third of the populationdisliked Jews 
<http://hungarianfreepress.com/2016/04/19/one-third-of-hungarians-are-anti-semitic-according-to-new-median-poll/>
 – and attacks against migrants in Germanyecho 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-35633318> a dark past. Making matters 
worse, the European Union is working with some of the most despotic African 
regimes tostop people leaving 
<https://martinplaut.wordpress.com/2016/05/19/europes-secret-deal-with-africas-dictators/>
 in the first place.

It’s why recent comments 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/peter-duttons-provocation-cuts-through-an-otherwise-sluggish-election-campaign-20160520-gozurp.html>
 by Australian immigration minister Peter Dutton, questioning the language, 
suitability and adaptability of new arrivals, were so tame compared to the 
reckless and inflammatory outbursts by countless international counterparts. 
But Dutton’s comments aren’t the main issue here – it’s what successive 
Australian governments have imposed on refugees over the last two decades and a 
general public who are willing to support it.

Fact check: was Peter Dutton right about 'illiterate' refugees 'taking jobs'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/fact-check-was-peter-dutton-right-about-illiterate-refugees-taking-jobs>
This is not to defend Dutton’s statements but they were hardly extreme or even 
unusual when compared to current global trends. Outrage over Dutton obscures 
the fact that Australia is now aninspiration globally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/18/australias-refugee-policies-a-global-inspiration-for-all-the-wrong-reasons>
 over its refugee policies. Dismissing Dutton won’t change this grim reality. 
That’s the scandal that bedevils 21st Australia: cruelty against asylum seekers 
dressed up as compassion and deterrence.

Dutton was savaged for his comments and I don’t have any sympathy for his 
stance but it’s worth asking why anybody takes seriously Labor partyposturing 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/bill-shorten-blasts-peter-dutton-over-illiterate-refugee-comments-says-pauline-hanson-would-be-proud-20160518-goxrli.html>
 over his rhetoric. After all, it was on their watch that the most extreme form 
of offshore processing of asylum seekers, on Nauru and Manus Island, was 
re-introduced.

Labor’s immigration spokesman Richard Marles recently said that there was an 
“absolute guarantee” his party nowmarched in unison 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/a/31654352/pm-warns-against-labor-refugee-stance/> 
with Liberal party policy over refugees. This means indefinite detention on 
remote Pacific islands and trying to strike deals with autocratic regimes in 
the region to take desperate peoplelanguishing for years 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/101east/2016/03/cambodia-home-160329113447092.html>
 without hope.

Australia is a lucky nation if Dutton and his dog-whistling is the worst 
speech it needs to endure. A recent Amnesty survey found Australia was one of 
themost welcoming nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australians-government-more-help-refugees-amnesty>
 in the world towards refugees once they were living in the community and yet 
this is incongruous with a lack of public outcry towardsabuses by private 
operators 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/for-everyones-sake-ferrovial-must-withdraw-from-manus-island-and-nauru-detention-contract-20160518-goy4rn.html#ixzz49AJKF8BQ>
 against asylum seekers on Nauru and Manus Island.

If murder and rape doesn’t generate genuine outrage, then sympathy is clearly 
in short supply. Words matter but actions are far more damaging to both 
Australia’s reputation and moral core. Australia remains deeply unsure of its 
identity, still unhealthily tied to Britain and the US, while being a 
geographical, if not ideological, part of Asia.

Australia has spent more than two decades finding new and ingenious ways to 
isolate, punish and attack boat arrivals and Dutton is simply the latest in a 
long list of advocates for the cause. Recall Phillip Ruddock as immigration 
minister in the late 1990s unleashing draconian conditions for asylum seekers. 
Today he’scute clickbait 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/markdistefano/philips-thirsty-snaps?utm_term=.jllAY7Wbd#.tc8vy8GMx>
 for Buzzfeed.

Buildings walls and fences, both literally and rhetorically, is the curse of 
this age and Australia has beenleading the way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/18/australias-refugee-policies-a-global-inspiration-for-all-the-wrong-reasons>
 for years. Chastising Dutton is necessary but it will have little effect on 
ingrained Australian attitudes towards people arriving by boat who look, sound 
and think differently (most of whom are Muslims).

An Australian media with few non-white faces doesn’t help. To bring change 
will require a thorough examination of why Australia, as a relatively young, 
post-colonial nation, has never had proper accounting of its dark past and an 
honest assessment of how it treats the most vulnerable in its society and the 
world.

Dutton needs to lift his game if he wants to compete with the master of the 
genre, Donald Trump (nowback-tracking 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/donald-trump-claims-proposed-us-muslim-ban-was-only-a-suggestion-a7025336.html>
 on his earlier call to ban all Muslims entering the US despite it havinghuge 
public support 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/03/30/majority-of-americans-now-support-trumps-proposed-muslim-ban-poll-shows/>
). Trump is surging across America, and is areal possibility 
<http://www.mediaite.com/online/polls-now-firmly-on-trumps-side-as-candidate-masterfully-adopts-hillarys-greatest-strength/>
 to win the general election in November, because white populations are feeling
angry and disillusioned 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/05/donald-trump-and-the-twilight-of-white-america/482655/>
.

We have an old saying in the dog-whistle business ... | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/we-have-an-old-saying-in-the-dog-whistle-business>
Much of the mainstream media has given Trump huge amounts of free publicity and
airtime 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/16/upshot/measuring-donald-trumps-mammoth-advantage-in-free-media.html?_r=0>
. CBS head Les Moonves says the Republican candidate is “damn good 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/les-moonves-donald-trump_us_56d52ce8e4b03260bf780275>
” for business. The corporate press is a cosy club who know Trump well and have 
indulged his attitudes for decades. When Trump, his fellow Republicans and 
media attack dogs damn Syrian refugees and Islam the result issurging 
Islamophobia 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/largest-us-muslim-center-targets-spike-in-islamophobia/>
.

Living away from Australia has given me a different take on Dutton and the 
surrounding furore. I’ve been writing, investigating and campaigning on asylum 
seekers for over a decade and Dutton’s comments were just business as usual for 
a country that long ago lost any moral high-ground on refugees.

After an outburst such as Dutton’s, I regularly hear asylum seeker supporters 
say that Australia is “better than this”. How so? There are few times in 
Australia’s history when Canberra wasn’t targeting one minority or the other. 
Although Australia is a remarkably successful multicultural nation (in some of 
the main cities, at least), it’ll never sleep and dream easily until it finds 
its own independent path.

It has a long way to go. 
 