
When the river Eden swept into Angela and Ian Burrow’s house uninvited one 
night last December, they resigned themselves to spending the festive period in 
a rented flat paid for by the insurance company. But not in their wildest, 
darkest fears did they ever anticipate a second Christmas Day away from their 
smallholding outside Crosby-on-Eden, five miles from Carlisle.

Yet that is their miserable reality, along with at least 700 other families 
across Cumbria, whose homes are still uninhabitable a year after being battered 
by thebrutal triumvirate 
<http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/barometer/uk-storm-centre/2015-16> of Storms 
Desmond, Eva and Frank last December, which flooded16,000 properties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/05/floods-hit-16000-properties-wettest-december-century>
 across the UK.

Record volumes of rain fell on land already saturated from a soggy autumn, 
causing rivers to swell so much that the Burrows founda pregnant cow 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3353257/Miracle-cow-swept-away-Storm-Desmond-floods-safe.htm>
 at the golf course at the bottom of their garden which had been carried 20 
miles down the Eden from her farm near the village of Great Salkeld.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbac3a259f809a50b6b260d693758315edd02bf3%2F0_130_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbac3a259f809a50b6b260d693758315edd02bf3%2F0_130_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 The Burrows’ still uninhabitable home in Crosby-on-Eden. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The family had only moved to their dream home three years before Desmond 
destroyed the ground floor, wiped out their large vegetable patch and killed 
seven bee colonies in the garden.

On Thursday yet another surveyor had come to inspect the ravaged interior, the 
walls of the 19th century red stone house only recently replastered, bare 
lightbulbs strung in a rudimentary circuit. The latest set of builders say they 
will be done in three weeks. The Burrows do not believe it, but know that come 
mid-January the insurers will stop paying the rent at the two-bedroom flat they 
have been crammed into with their teenagers for the past year.

They were insured for flooding, but like many victims have been deeply unhappy 
with the work the insurer’s contractors have carried out. “I ended up on 
antidepressants because of the stress of it all,” said Angie, a bookkeeper. The 
couple’s 13-year-old son has also suffered anxiety and depression, she added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95c303a20236a1f7f3d2594d6bd8bcfe0b89ac6d%2F0_30_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95c303a20236a1f7f3d2594d6bd8bcfe0b89ac6d%2F0_30_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 A carpet shop relying on humour after moving its business upstairs in Warwick 
Avenue. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
He is not alone. On Monday, the first anniversary of Storm Desmond, a 
children’s book about the floodswill be launched 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/409802702538086/> at the newly rebuilt village 
hall in Crosby to alleviate the fears and uncertainties felt by those affected 
by flooding. Susan Fox, the author of Joe and Storm Desmond, wrote the book in 
the wreckage of her home in Crosby as she struggled to clear up after her 
fourth flood.

The cost to Cumbria of Storm Desmond, the first and worst of last year’s 
winter storms as far as that county was concerned, is estimated at £500m or 
more. But as a report fromthe Carlisle Flood Action Group 
<http://www.carlislefloodaction.org.uk/>, a local pressure group, points out, 
the damage is not just financial: “The human cost of the storm and its 
aftermath is similarly incalculable. The effect of evacuation and displacement 
on physical and mental health, with lives put on hold, was significant and 
remains so for many.”

Getting around Cumbria remains a trial for many. Across the county three 
bridges were washed away, with 554 more damaged. So far just 130 have been 
mended, with eight still closed to traffic a year on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde43a3614eae9af87e16f620b370367c52907a83%2F0_224_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde43a3614eae9af87e16f620b370367c52907a83%2F0_224_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Blue ribbons tied to the trees to mark the highest flood mark in Warwick 
Avenue in Carlisle. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Warwick Road in Carlisle, which turned into a river when Desmond hit on 5 
December, is open but still some way from back to normal.

Blue ribbons tied to trees and lamp-posts commemorate the high water mark of 2 
metres from when the river Petteril topped nearby Botcherby Bridge, causing 
water to back up on the wrong side of the flood defences.

Billy Bone, who has owned the Foreways Convenience Store for 29 years, says 
his takings are two-thirds down, year on year. He lost all of his stock when 
floodwaters invaded, reaching the top shelf of the magazine rack at the storm’s 
peak.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2286abbc9abef55f3c84d22baac5fc0470655920%2F0_94_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2286abbc9abef55f3c84d22baac5fc0470655920%2F0_94_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 A man wades through flood water on Warwick Road in Carlisle in the wake of 
Storm Desmond in 2015. Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA 
Claire’s Bakery is still squatting in a caravan in front of the flooded shop, 
the carpet store has moved all its non-ruined stock upstairs and dozens of 
houses are either still empty, midway through renovation or up for auction. 
According to Keith Little, a Cumbria county councillor, some people can’t face 
moving back and so are cutting their losses. Others have in effect decided to 
live upstairs in case another flood hits.

Before the recent flood, the handsome Victorian three-beds, with their high 
ceilings and bay windows, would have gone for £165,000. Recently the house next 
to Angela and Wilson Watson sold for £75,000, the owners willing to take a 
stinging hit if it meant they never again faced inundation by flood waters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa07d2c598a3687ef5cc532dca605637b6ed3b079%2F0_224_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa07d2c598a3687ef5cc532dca605637b6ed3b079%2F0_224_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Angela Watson, who managed to move back to her home in Warwick Avenue in May. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The Watsons are among the luckier residents of Warwick Road, having managed to 
move back in May. They hit the headlines last year when they were rescued on a 
life raft along with their waterphobic border collie cross, Brunn. Angela noted 
at the time that they had managed to save her most prized possession –season 
tickets for Carlisle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/08/flood-water-rising-grabbed-carlisle-united-season-tickets>
 – when the waters started to lap up their stairs, eventually reaching 1.4 
metres up the walls.

The couple take a philosophical approach to their tragedy, with Angela even 
creating a hardback photo book to show visitors what the now immaculate house 
looked like filled with dirty water. “We don’t really blame anybody for what 
happened. It was a series of circumstances that all came together. To have 
stopped our house flooding they’d have to build flood barriers 10 feet higher. 
It’s just not practical,” said Angela, 68, a retired special needs teacher.

Others are less sanguine. David Sowden is a retired policeman who until last 
week was living in a mobile home in his front drive in Crosby-on-Eden. He is 
furious to find himself flooded out again, following an inundation in 2005. 
“They should have built higher and better flood defences,” he insisted, asking 
why the council spent £38m on defences in Carlisle which didn’t hold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F681d18288521d0a4ffd2d03968abd5bb01255515%2F0_219_6570_3942%2F6570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cumbria%20residents%20still%20counting%20cost%20of%20Storm%20Desmond%20a%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fcumbria-residents-still-counting-cost-of-storm-desmond-a-year-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F681d18288521d0a4ffd2d03968abd5bb01255515%2F0_219_6570_3942%2F6570.jpg>
 David Sowden, who has just moved back into his home in Crosby-on-Eden a year 
after Storm Desmond hit Cumbria. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
But Little, the council’s lead on infrastructure, insists that “at least 1,000 
homes were saved because of those defences. It would have been a lot worse 
without them.”

The Carlisle Flood Action Group argues that Storm Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/storm-desmond> proved localised works of 
river defence are “an action of last resort”.

Instead, the group’s latest report, released on Friday, blames poor river 
management. “Contrary to government reporting on Desmond the flooding of 
Carlisle was not principally caused by a storm blown in by climate change but 
as a direct result of long-term lack of river maintenance and poor management 
causing the build-up of accumulated gravels and thereby forcing rivers to flow 
higher in their channels than they used to,” the authors argue, adding: “As 
conditions currently stand the city and catchment does not appear to be in a 
fundamentally better place than 12 months ago.”

Little insists that the council is better prepared now should the heavens open 
again to the same devastating degree. River height and flow is being monitored 
much better and 12,000 drains have been cleared, he said. This year1,200 
soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/theresa-may-soldiers-army-standby-winter-floods-uk>
 from three battalions are on standby to help clear-up in the event of further 
flooding. And the Met Office has agreed to improve weather forecasting for the 
Carlisle region: Little and colleagues only discovered last winter that the 
nearest meteorological monitoring stations are either in the east of Ireland or 
over the border in Northumberland.

But ultimately Little knows that if the county experiences the same levels of 
rainfall after a damp month again, parts of Cumbria could be in trouble: 
“Fingers crossed for a dry and cold winter like we used to have.”
 