
The First Night of the Proms  <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms>starts – well, after 
the rip-roaring high spirits of Carl Nielsen’sMaskarade Overture 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/r89mxj/by/date/2015/07/13#2015-07-17> – with the 
first performance of a new piece by Gary Carpenter,Dadaville 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/ernst-dadaville-t03707>, named after the 
sculptural painting by Max Ernst.Carpenter 
<http://www.garycarpenter.net/about/index.htm> is one of the most winningly and 
thrillingly versatile composers: he’s worked on the score forThe Wicker Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcWhtI6Nlyg>, has written musicals 
<http://www.warwickmusic.com/Main-Catalogue/Composers/A---C/Gary-Carpenter> 
admired by Stephen Sondheim, and has composed an impressive catalogue of 
orchestral, chamber, and vocal works. Having had a sneak preview of it, his 
Proms commission seems like a teemingly imaginative and ebullient score, shot 
through with moments of satisfying strangeness and surreal changes of pace, 
texture and tune, all within just a few minutes. According to Carpenter, the 
piece imagines what might lie behind the weird and oppressive gates of Ernst’s 
picture (Ernst used cork to make them, but they give an impression of iron-hewn 
solidity). He reveals a musical clue just before the end of the piece about 
what lurks on the other side of Dadaville, but we’ll have to wait until Friday 
night to discover what that might be.

In the spirit of this First Night novelty, and honouring the long tradition of 
new music at theProms <https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> (which is bound 
into their creative raison d’être, as espoused by Henry Wood, who confidently 
introduced “novelties” alongside the wider classical repertoires to his 
audiences) here are some personal highlights from the history of the Proms’ 
relationship with new music, in six pieces which were all premiered at the 
festival.

Arnold Schoenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2010/jan/29/schoenberg-daniel-barenboim>
 - 5 Orchesterstücke op 16
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPgAdYjKR46c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPgAdYjKR46c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPgAdYjKR46c&media=>
Schoenberg’s expressionist masterpiece was given its first ever performance by 
Henry Wood in 1912, who told his uncomprehending players: “This is nothing to 
what you’ll have to play in 25 years’ time.” But Wood proved the strength of 
his advocacy of Schoenberg’s piece by playing it again in the 1934 season – 22 
years later.

Peter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/19/peter-maxwell-davies-at-80-interview>
 - Piano Concerto & Worldes Blis
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgf2yf6Df-Qg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgf2yf6Df-Qg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgf2yf6Df-Qg&media=>
Music that shocked and appalled some of its audience at its premiere in 1969 
(some of whom walked out in protest) but whose large-scale expressivity now 
seems utterly compelling.

John Tavener 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/feb/19/contemporary-music-guide-john-tavener>
 - The Protecting Veil
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxT0MF4XNjkA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxT0MF4XNjkA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxT0MF4XNjkA&media=>
In 1989, John Tavener’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/01/john-tavener-manchester-international-festival>
s cello concerto was a seismic moment in the composer’s life, and marked a 
moment when new music achieved a rare and justified popularity with a wider 
audience duringSteven Isserlis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stevenisserlis>’s performance.

Harrison Birtwistle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/14/contemporary-composers-guide-harrison-birtwistle>
 - Panic
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D25j1wcO7yfY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D25j1wcO7yfY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D25j1wcO7yfY&media=>
The controversy of Harrison Birtwistle’s work for saxophone, drumkit, winds 
and brass has become something of a myth in Proms history. Nonetheless, this 
music of uncompromising wildness and violence amid the celebrations and 
traditions of the second half of the Last Night of the Proms in 1995 showed the 
Proms’ power to disturb and upset in creatively positive ways.

Judith Weir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/28/judith-weir-contemporary-composers-guide>
 - Moon and Star
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEwqxyHcmepA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEwqxyHcmepA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEwqxyHcmepA&media=>
Judith Weir’s choral cantata, setting a poem by Emily Dickinson and premiered 
in 1995, is one of her masterpieces, managing to say more in its 15 minutes 
than more grandiloquent choral works say in a couple of hours. Music of 
haunting yet utterly direct poetic power.

James Dillon: Violin Concerto 
<https://www.edition-peters.de/cms/front_content.php?composer_id=81&changelang=2&lang=2&idcatart=102>

In 2000, violinist Thomas Zehetmair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2002/oct/04/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures1>
 unveiled Dillon’s concerto, and it’s a performance I won’t forget. It’s a 
piece that creates a world of violent yet lyrical modernism in which the 
gestures of folk fiddling and melodies are transformed into something 
elementally powerful.
 