
Danny Willett’s 2016 will forever be defined by the donning of the Green Jacket
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-masterrs-2016-jordan-spieth-lee-westood>
. There remains scope for the Yorkshireman to end the year with the European 
Order of Merit prize which so narrowly eluded him 12 months ago, though by 
Willett’s own admission the scaling of heights even close to what transpired at 
Augusta National in April is proving tricky.

Jordan Spieth ‘slump’ says as much about rivals’ strength as his own woes | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/02/jordan-spieth-slump-ewan-murray>
A third at the BMW PGA Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/chris-wood-danny-willett-pga-championship-wentworth>
 and his runners-up finish at the Italian Open stand out as Willett’s only 
strong results since The Masters. Last week at the WGC-HSBC Champions, he 
closed at an aggregate of 14-over par. His Ryder Cup, in his own words and 
partly linked tothe unhelpful antics of his brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/darren-clarke-pj-willett-ryder-cup-article-us-fans>
, was “shit”.

Somehow, Willett is seeking to summon the spirit of Augusta. The Turkish 
Airlines Open, starting on Thursday, is the second of four tournaments in 
succession for Willett to conclude the season. For now he lies second in the 
Race to Dubai behindHenrik Stenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/henrik-stenson>, who is not in this week’s 
field.

“The last couple of months have been poor, to be honest, in a lot of aspects,” 
Willett admitted on Wednesday. “Last year I missed outin the Race to Dubai to 
Rory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/rory-mcilroy-world-tour-championship-race-to-dubai>
. He played great in Dubai, the final one. I think I had to just beat him and 
it would have been mine but he finished first and I finished fourth.

“This year I’d been leading it for a long, long time. Unfortunately last week 
I had probably my worst event on tour for all the years I’ve been on, and 
Henrik finished second, so jumped me. For me, this is a pretty big week. Henrik 
is not here – he was never scheduled to play anyway. So it gives me a chance to 
either close that gap, or hopefully leapfrog again and make it really 
interesting coming down to the last two [events].

“We’re doing all we can. The game is average; it has been average for a couple 
of months, so we’re working hard and we’re trying to do the right things. 
Unfortunately you have highs and lows in golf and the last couple of months 
have been a bit of a low. Before that was a massive high. You just keep working 
hard, and if you do that, then it’s only around the corner.”

If the fresh levels of attention and time constraints that came with being a 
major champion were the most problematic aspects for Willett, that would be 
perfectly understandable. Yet that does not actually seem to be the case. 
Rather, the 29-year-old’s desire to further his game after winning that first 
major is the key factor.

“You’re trying to get better and better,” Willett said. “For me, April has 
been a pretty magical month but you still try and push your game forward and 
push your game on. At times that leads to taking a few steps backwards in 
trying to change things that you’re doing and unfortunately it’s just been a 
bit of a stale run. It’s happened at a really bad time of year.

“The focus isn’t on the short-term goal – it’s a long-term goal, and you’ve 
got to start making changes eventually and doing something different if you 
want to get better. Everyone’s getting better every week. Just because I won in 
April doesn’t mean that’s going to continue for ever. You’ve got to make sure 
you keep on top of things and that you keep trying to get better. Just at the 
minute it’s just a little bit stale.

“We’re working incredibly hard in the gym, off the golf course, doing 
everything right and practising hard. It’s just not quite going the way that I 
would have envisioned it going these last couple of months. I’m pretty sure 
that I work with two of the best coaches in the world in Mike Walker and Pete 
Cowen. I’ve got a very good team around me and we’re trying to do everything 
correct and I’m pretty sure that everything we’re doing is correct.”

Willett was joined for pre-tournament duties here by Lee Westwood, who became 
the latest player to shrug off security concerns relating to an event in 
Turkey. Several have opted to skip this tournament with such fears in mind. 
Westwood answered “yes, a little bit” when asked whether he had been 
disappointed by withdrawal levels. “I think the world we live in right now, 
anything can happen anywhere,” he added. “I think Turkey is no different to 
anywhere else.

“I think everybody has to be very vigilant about these things but I certainly 
have no security worries about coming to Turkey. You [the media] are here, so 
you obviously aren’t going to do it if you have fears and I’m no different to 
you. I value my life as much as you value yours. I’m here looking forward to 
playing golf this week and in a big tournament, and we’re focusing on that. I 
don’t feel uncomfortable.”

Ewan Murray travelled courtesy of Turkish Airlines
 