
Danny Willett had publicly apologised no fewer than three times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/darren-clarke-pj-willett-ryder-cup-article-us-fans>
 for the midweek screed written by his brother that branded American fans as 
“fat, stupid, greedy and classless” and “a braying mob of imbeciles” but the 
chorus of lusty boos that greeted the Masters champion as he walked on to the 
1st tee for Fridayafternoon’s four-ball match suggested a crowd  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-2016-usa-v-europe-day-one-foursomes-live>
not particularly interested in moving on.

Chants of “Where’s your brother?” rang from the grandstands at Hazeltine as 
Willett prepared for his opening drive, hardly the backdrop the 28-year-old 
must have imagined for hisRyder Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup>
 debut as a junior player growing up in Sheffield. But after he split the 
fairway with a perfect tee shot and drained a 25ft birdie putt to halve the 
opener, the steely game face indicated a man ready to block out the hostilities 
outside the ropes.

Rory McIlroy brings Europe’s stirring Ryder Cup comeback against USA to life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-europe-usa-5-3-rory-mcilroy>
The cold-blooded Willett did most of the heavy lifting as his team-mate Martin 
Kaymer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/martin-kaymer> failed to register a 
score on the first nine holes but it would not be enough as the red-hot 
American pair of Brooks Koepka and Brandt Snedeker surged to a 5&4 victory that 
represented Team USA’s lone point of the afternoon session.

More than a few American fans did their best to live down to the elder 
Willett’s characterisation and it got worse as the round progressed. The 
ribbing came from all angles: “I’m hungry, can you get me a hot dog?” ... “Hit 
it in the bunker, Danny!” … “Need more cookie dough?” … “I fill my fat, jelly 
face with hot dogs! Don’t let it bother you!”

Surely it must have been an education for Willett’s parents, wife and other 
brother, who watched the match amid crowds teeming with fans clad in their 
star-spangled best and with patriotism to burn.

When he missed a putt on the 4th green, the American vice-captain Bubba Watson 
tried to pacify one group of hecklers who had grown particularly rowdy: “Come 
on, guys, we don’t need this.”

“Fucking grow a pair, Bubba!”

A rare spell of applause for Willett after he sank a lengthy birdie putt on 
the 9th green was punctuated with an acerbic barb: “We still hate you, Danny!”

Maybe Pete Willett was right. At least about the classless bit.

Darren Clarke’s fury as Willett’s brother blasts US Ryder Cup fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/darren-clarke-pj-willett-ryder-cup-article-us-fans>
Afterwards Willett, who had expressed fears on Thursday over becoming a 
“target” at his first Ryder Cup, said the treatment he weathered was “expected” 
and did not compromise his focus. “It was anticipated,” he said. “It was one of 
those things, like I said before, coming to America is a tough one. Just like 
when the Americans come to Europe; you know, they gave me a little bit more.

“And yeah, I think it was exactly what we thought it was going to be. There 
was a few little shouts in there, and bits and bobs, but hopefully they are all 
following me around so the rest of the lads can do their business. But yeah, by 
and large it was probably what we expected.

“You’re playing against the 24 best guys in the world pretty much here – if 
they have a day like that and we have a bit of a stale one, that’s going to 
happen. It’s unfortunate.”

Willett said there was no sense of relief in getting the first match out of 
the way and that he was looking forward to helping Europe continue their 
fightback into the weekend after overcoming the initial shock of Friday morning.

“You want to play as much as you can and, like Martin said, contribute as many 
points as possible. Unfortunately we weren’t able to do that this afternoon but 
it is not about any one person. It’s 12 guys and there’s eight guys playing at 
any one time until Sunday, and this afternoon, looking at the scoreboard, the 
guys are doing a really good job.”

Willett was not the only member of Team Europe to be targeted by the 
overflowing galleries on a day when 51,000 spectators made their way about the 
grounds.

As Justin Rose attempted a three-foot putt on the 15th green that would have 
closed the margin to a single hole in his foursomes match with Henrik Stenson, 
an American fan shouted out: “You’re gonna miss!”

Rose complied and Jordan Spieth and Patrick Reed went on to win 3&2, the 
Americans’ first point of the morning session.

Later Rory McIlroy, playing with Thomas Pieters, sank a 20ft eagle putt on the 
16th hole with the final swing of the day to seal a 3&2 victory over Dustin 
Johnson and Matt Kuchar, taunting the crowd with a pair of deadpan bows – and 
expressed what had already become readily apparent.

“It’s hostile out there,” he said.
 