
Danny Willett fears he has become a “target” for American fans at his maiden 
Ryder Cup with the Masters champion also conceding his experience has been 
tarnished and his focus hard to maintain. A midweek magazine column by 
Willett’s brotherincluded a string of offensive comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/danny-willett-ryder-cup-harder-brother-foolish-words>
 towards American golf fans.

Ryder Cup 2016: Danny Willett left out of Europe’s opening foursomes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/ryder-cup-2016-danny-willett-out-opening-foursomes>
In the wake of a high-profile controversy Willett has been omitted from the 
European side for the opening set of matches on Friday morning. He had been 
expected to partner Lee Westwood in the foursomes with another rookie, Thomas 
Pieters, instead given that place in opposition to Dustin Johnson and Matt 
Kuchar in the final match of four.

Peter Willett has apologised to his younger brother with Danny insisting their 
long-term relationship is not at risk. Peter Willett’s article triggered 
immediate anger from Darren Clarke, Europe’s captain, and forcedDanny Willett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-willett> to offer his remorse in 
person to Davis Love III, who is the USA captain.

“I was disappointed in what he wrote and obviously it put a bit of a downer on 
my firstRyder Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> for the last 
couple of days,” said Danny Willett on Thursday.

“It’s not been too bad with the fans. The fans have still been great. There’s 
a few shouts out there but you can expect that. Obviously coming to America, 
you’re already a bit of a target, the European team, the 12 guys. And yeah, it 
kind of centred the attention a bit more upon myself. You don’t mind the odd 
bit of heckling but hope it doesn’t go too far.

“What was said was said and there’s no going back on anything like that. I 
spoke to Davis and spoke to the guys and hopefully we can draw a line. But it’s 
been pretty tricky for me to get back on and fully focus these last few hours, 
especially this morning.

Darren Clarke’s fury as Willett’s brother blasts US Ryder Cup fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/darren-clarke-pj-willett-ryder-cup-article-us-fans>
“It’s an unfortunate one as a rookie. It’s supposed to be a special week. It’s 
the first one hopefully of many and we’re all here to try and have a great time 
and try to be in and around what is a dream come true, in slipping on a 
European Ryder Cup shirt.

“Pete’s apologised to me. On the phone he apologised for the things that have 
been thrown up from this and obviously how it’s been taken over here.”

When asked in a tongue-in-cheek way as to whether Peter’s next Christmas gift 
may have been adversely affected, Danny replied: “Family’s family. He is still 
my brother. What he said was wrong and incredibly ill-timed but he is still my 
brother.”

Willett’s parents are at Hazeltine for his Ryder Cup bow. “They were upset 
with the whole thing and how it came about and obviously what’s been said,” 
said the world No10. “They spoke to Pete last night and obviously had a good 
chat with him. I don’t exactly know what about. I’ve not fully spoken to them 
about it, so I’m not quite sure. But they were there again today walking inside 
the ropes with me and showing their support and that’s all I can ask.”

Scintillating Ryder Cup can pull golf clear from unfavourable swirl of gloom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/ryder-cup-hazeltine-united-states>
Willett was circumspect as to whether or not he will ask his sibling, a 
teacher by trade, to stop writing columns. “We’ll have a good chat when I get 
home next week,” he added.

Westwood, playing in his 10th Ryder Cup, fired a broadside at the home team by 
publicly questioning what would happen in the event of a fourth European winin 
succession. After defeat at Gleneagles two years ago the Americans set up a 
task force with a view to halting Ryder Cup woes.

“You form a task force and it doesn’t go right this week, where do you go from 
there?” asked Westwood. “You’ve done pretty much all you can do. So we’ll see 
how that goes.”

The opening match of the 41st Ryder Cup will see Jordan Spieth and Patrick 
Reed take on the formidable European partnership of Henrik Stenson and Justin 
Rose. Rory McIlroy will partner Andy Sullivan against Phil Mickelson and Rickie 
Fowler in game two. Martin Kaymer and Sergio Garcia will face Jimmy Walker and 
Zach Johnson in game three.
 