
The recently released Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
 reveal an inventory of horrors unleashed by Australia on brown and black 
bodies away from public or media scrutiny. These people now have a voice, 
albeit in oftenbanal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/offshore-detention-australia-secret-exposed-nauru-files>
 descriptions of sexual abuse, rape, violence and psychological breakdown.

After more than two decades of brutalising asylum seekers on the Australian 
mainland and offshore, this is what Australia represents. This is who we are. 
These are our “values” and it’s now absurd for anybody to claim otherwise.

In 2004, I interviewed 
<http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2004/04/01/1080544608721.html> the last 
remaining refugee trapped on Manus Island in Papua New Guinea. Aladdin Sisalem, 
born in Kuwait in 1979, lived on Manus Island while Australian authorities
thwarted <http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2004/02/25/1077676833186.html> his 
attempts to reach the Australian mainland. “I need to belong to a country that 
can protect me and where I can live a normal, dignified and productive life,” 
he told me.

The Nauru files: cache of 2,000 leaked reports reveal scale of abuse of 
children in Australian offshore detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
His treatment at the hands of Australia, filled with deception, obfuscation 
and lack of sympathy, was an ominous warning of 21st century Australian 
officialdom and its brutal handling of those arriving by boat while fleeing the 
world’s conflicts.

Sisalem was eventually allowed to settle in Australia, after an extended 
period of time on Manus Island, 10 months of which was alone at anexorbitant 
and futile cost <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/feb/12/australia.israel>
 to the Australian taxpayer. He became the last refugee to suffer in the 
makeshift facility during its first incarnation as an Australian refugee camp.

I often think of Sisalem’s story because so little has changed in Australia’s 
posture towards asylum seekers. I read over my 2004 Sydney Morning Herald online
interview with him and analysis 
<http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2004/04/01/1080544608721.html> of Australia’s 
refugee policies, and all that’s altered are the names of ministers, prime 
ministers along with invisible and unaccountable immigration officials. Public 
opinion has ebbed and flowed in the interim, between outright hostility towards 
asylum seekers andfar more compassion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/29/majority-of-australians-say-refugees-who-arrive-by-boat-should-be-let-in-poll-finds>
, and yet Australia now finds itself as aglobal leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/27/cruelty-to-asylum-seekers-dressed-up-as-compassion-is-the-scandal-that-bedevils-australia>
 in new and innovative ways to punish powerless people.

The recent report by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch about 
Australia deliberately ignoring abuses on the Pacific island of Nauru, where 
hundreds of men, women and children live in unsafe, indefinite detention, 
receivedlarge global 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/08/australia-deliberately-ignores-refugee-abuse-report-160803035220923.html>
coverage 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/04/world/australia/nauru-refugees-abuse-conditions.html?_r=0>
. It contributes to radically shifting the international image still enjoyed by 
Australia; a sleepy nation with beautiful beaches and welcoming smiles. It’s a 
cliché still believed by countless people I have met when working in Palestine, 
Honduras, Africa and the United States.


I’m now constantly asked why Australia, an island state, needs to further 
traumatise refugees fleeing Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria and elsewhere. Instead of 
being a global pariah for this behaviour, Canberra is increasinglyadmired and 
envied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/18/australias-refugee-policies-a-global-inspiration-for-all-the-wrong-reasons>
 by European countries desperately trying to keep out Muslims from the Middle 
East and Africa. The Nauru filesprove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/11/nauru-security-guard-grabbed-boy-by-throat-and-banged-head-against-ground>
 that privatised security is willing to use violence, intimidation and mockery 
to quash adult and child complaints.


It’s not just the ways in which asylum seekers are isolated that brings 
admiration for Australia globally butoutsourcing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/08/detention-centre-operators-contract-extended-despite-owners-objection>
 the tasks of imprisonment tofailing private companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/11/serco-is-failing-but-is-maintained-afloat-thanks-to-australias-refugee-policy>
. Australia began this process in the 1990s, anearly adopter 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/stopping-the-boats-is-bad-for-business-20130802-2r4vy.html>
, and now countless European states areenthusiastically 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/25/opinion/private-prisons-are-cashing-in-on-refugees-desperation.html?_r=2>
mimicking 
<http://www.thenational.ae/opinion/comment/who-profits-as-the-eu-militarises-its-borders>
 the trend. Militarising borders has never been so profitable.

A new report by Dutch NGOs Stop Wapenhandel and Transnational Institute, 
Border Wars <https://www.tni.org/en/publication/border-wars>, outlines the 
defence firms selling weapons to Middle Eastern dictatorships and the US as 
well as equipment to European governments desperate to build walls and 
surveillance networks to monitor and stop new arrivals. The same multinationals 
are selling weapons that fuel the wars and helping Europe keep out its victims. 
The almost weekly terror attacks in Europe are empowering this business model 
and it will only get worse.

The prospects for Australia’s immigration stance to change is slim. The new 
Senate featuresIslam-fearing politicians 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2016/07/australia-pauline-hanson-wins-anti-islam-ticket-160710095439162.html>
 unlikely to show any interest or sympathy for Muslim refugees stranded on 
Manus Island or Nauru. Surgingsupport 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/identity-politics-keeps-feeding-europes-far-right-jerome-boateng-immigration-refugees-afd-austria-norbert-hofer-populism/>
 in Europe for anti-refugee policies, along with Donald Trump’sremarkably 
successful 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/07/07/donald-trump-backs-off-muslim-ban-but-its-already-way-more-popular-than-he-is/>
 insurgent campaign against Muslims, foreigners and Mexicans, shows that large 
numbers of the public in Western democracies want to massively slow down, if 
not stop, immigration. Civilians caught in the middle of wars in the Middle 
East and Africa will just have to suffer in silence.

There’s a lesson in this for Australia and it’s not pretty. Australia was well 
ahead of the global curve in its treatment of asylum seekers and rather than 
being a pariah, as Iargued in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/20/its-time-for-un-sanctions-on-australia-our-government-deserves-nothing-less>
 when calling for sanctions against Canberra, it’s become an inspiration.

Why I'll be rewarding the latest attempt to make a citizen's arrest on Tony 
Blair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2014/jan/21/reward-attempt-citizens-arrest-tony-blair>
 But not for all. In 2014, Tasmanian MP Andrew Wilkie wrote to the 
International Criminal Court asking the body toinvestigate 
<http://theconversation.com/will-the-international-criminal-court-prosecute-australia-for-crimes-against-humanity-33363>
 Australia’s mistreatment of refugees. The Refugee Action Collective Victoria
followed suit <https://www.greenleft.org.au/node/60486> in 2015. Could 
enterprising lawyers pursue any number of other international legal bodies and 
hold successive Australian politicians and officials to account (ideally 
legally but also morally)?

In an age where prosecuting Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/iraq-war-inquiry-chilcot-tony-blair-prosecute>
 and George W. Bush for war crimes in Iraq is now plausible, why not include 
Australian prime ministers John Howard, Kevin Rudd, Julia Gillard, Tony Abbott 
and Malcolm Turnbull forcrimes against humanity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/ferrovial-staff-risk-prosecution-for-managing-australian-detention-camps>
 for their detention regime? It’s far-fetched but not impossible.A citizen’s 
arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/25/could-john-howard-be-citizen-arrested-for-his-role-in-the-iraq-war>
 of any of these individuals would be a great start.

Tourism Australia will soon need to design new advertisements to attract 
white, anti-immigration activists from around the world. These people will find 
a receptive audience when arriving by plane, perhaps less so by boat.
 