
Even when broken, don’t fix it. That is the message from Europe’s Ryder Cup 
contingent as they assess the heavy defeat to the USA at Hazeltine, thehosts’ 
17-11 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
 their biggest since 1981.

Europe had earlier implemented what was widely regarded as a successful Ryder 
Cup framework, withDarren Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-clarke> amongst those insisting that 
should not be changed now – mainly because in leading a team with six debutants 
Clarke has been spared some of the heavy criticism afforded to some of his 
predecessors.

“Why would you have a knee-jerk reaction when the whole system has been doing 
well?” the defeated captain asked. “Absolutely leave it as it is. They have 
been successful thus far. We came up against a very strong team and captain. 
They’ve played better than we have. There is no other answer.

Ryder Cup review: USA get wildcards right and is McIlroy the new Poulter?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/03/ryder-cup-review-usa-wildcards-right-rory-mcilroy>
“They were a brilliant European team, sensational. Everyone pulled for each 
other. One of my big things coming in was that ‘shoulder to shoulder’ thing 
taken from our wonderful Irish rugby team. The guys showed that in a different 
sport. Those guys would have jumped through burning hoops for each other.

“The scoreline never lies. The US team played exceptionally well. Give them a 
massive amount of credit. The Americans played better. In quite a few recent 
Ryder Cups, the Europeans won their share of the greens. This week the 
Americans played better and holed more putts. That’s the nature of theRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup>.”

Clarke will form part of the group who decide upon his successor, with 
suggestions that an announcement could be made before Christmas.

Thomas Bjorn is the favourite to lead the European team into the 2018 Ryder 
Cup in France with Padraig Harrington also part of that discussion. In Bjorn’s 
favour is the sense that a continental captain is required to break with the 
mould of those from Britain or Ireland. Harrington, however, has by far the 
more stellar playing career.

Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> has claimed that 
the “culture” of the European Tour means the captaincy choice is not absolutely 
crucial. “We obviously need a captain, need a leader, but it could be any one 
of a number of guys,” McIlroy said. “It goes in cycles but this being the first 
time with as many rookies since 2010, I think you will see a lot of these 
rookies come back and play the next time.”

The world No3’s support for Clarke, whom he described as “fantastic”, was 
echoed by Ian Poulter. The Englishman, something of a Ryder Cup icon, was a 
vice‑captain to Clarke at Hazeltine.

The deepest questioning of Clarke will inevitably surround the wildcard 
selection of Lee Westwood, who failed to return a single point at Hazeltine and
his missed putt late on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/danny-willett-lee-westwood-ryder-cup-jb-holmes-ryan-moore>
 was an unfortunate turning point for Europe.

“Darren has tried his bollocks off,” Poulter said. “I know what’s going to 
happen; Lee is going to come under fire and Darren is going to be criticised 
for picking Lee but that’s unfair. You cannot expect to take seven or eight 
rookies, it’s just not possible. Unfortunately Lee missed some putts and he 
might not have played his best golf. Because of that it’s going to be tough for 
Darren.

“The template doesn’t need to change. We probably have a transitional team 
with a lot of young blood. If you look at where the young blood is going to be 
in two years from now you would expect them to be stronger. I don’t believe 
there needs to be a new template. The template is there. Unfortunately a couple 
of guys didn’t earn any points this week and that was clearly damaging. The 
overall scoreline was 17-11 but I think it was a little closer than that.”
 