



Let’s not forget, while we’re picking over the remains of 2015, that this was 
the year of the shark; the year the price of red dirt hit the floor, and the 
hard right hit the wall; the year Australia got away with it again.

Years don’t begin with fireworks exploding over the harbour. The great 
unravelling of politics had already begun on an afternoon in November, when
Bronwyn Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bronwyn-bishop>, in 
a moment of high spirits, took a helicopter from Tullamarine to Geelong.


In the defence: her destination was everything. She might still be Speaker 
today if she were flying to a Liberal fundraiser in, say, swank Mt Macedon. 
Choppers to that hill station are everyday. The rich, in ways that earn little 
sympathy from the rest of us, are terribly time-poor.

But Geelong, Bronwyn, Geelong …


She was gone in August and Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> followed in September. 
By that time, 2015 was entering the record books as a testing year for the 
ultra-conservatives who, after waiting since the 1960s, had briefly seemed on 
top of the heap at last.


Despite a big fresh majority, a woman with a crazy name on the other side of 
the argument, and the absolute backing of News Corp, Campbell Newman was swept 
from power in Queensland in January.


Something is shifting here.


Only weeks earlier, the Murdoch papers had failed to shore up Denis Napthine 
in Victoria. They failed again, after some fine, tough criticism of Abbott 
along the way, to save their preferred prime minister in the Aussie spring of 
2015.


Human rights commissioner Gillian Triggs emerged unscathed this year from the 
mincing knives of News Corp. Despite all that’s been written in the Australian 
over many years, royal commissioner Dyson Heydon AC QC acquitted Julia Gillard 
of collusion in the crimes of her boyfriend.


It’s not a small question as an election year looms: is the Murdoch political 
machine losing its terrors?


The planet shrugged off newspaper rhetoric to turn in another stellar 
performance. Records fell everywhere: 2015 was the warmest year the globe has 
ever known. So was 2014. This year’s record is expected not to survive 2016.


It’s not a small question as an election year looms: is the Murdoch political 
machine losing its terrors?

We’re now having tornadoes. Those vicious little storms we used to think were 
so American are now turning our suburbs to chipboard.


The Melbourne tornado of November and the Sydney tornado of December were only 
a whisker away from – but left untouched – Tullamarine and Mascot airports. 
Perhaps the twisters must be seen as a warning to those power-guzzling cities: 
“Mend your ways, or next time … ”


Unequivocally Australian was the return of the shark in 2015.


Michael Fanning’s encounter in South Africa in July (22.5m views on YouTube) 
began a media frenzy that lasted all year back home. Attacks certainly rose 
strongly, from 23 last year to 33 this. Limbs lost, thighs and buttocks mauled, 
arteries cut, leg ropes slashed and boards nipped.


But deaths were down from five to two. In February, a monster tore the legs 
off a Japanese surfer at Shelly beach in Ballina on the north coast of New 
South Wales. In July, a scallop fisherman was killed by a great white in the 
cold waters of Tasmania’s Lachlan Island.


But scientists at Taronga Park urge calm. “Compared to injuries and fatalities 
from other forms of water-related activities the number of shark attacks in 
Australia is very low.”


Average number killed each year by sharks over the past 10 years: one.


 Average number of swimmers and fishers who drown: 297. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe201dd3e6a4656100db919d9c0c521713c1e7941%2F0_1284_3725_2236%2F3725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Marr's%20review%20of%202015%3A%20terror%20fears%20and%20shark%20scares%2C%20but%20Australia%20carried%20on%20regardless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Marr%27s%20review%20of%202015%3A%20terror%20fears%20and%20shark%20scares%2C%20but%20Australia%20carried%20on%20regardless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe201dd3e6a4656100db919d9c0c521713c1e7941%2F0_1284_3725_2236%2F3725.jpg>
 2015 was not a good year for bacon lovers with the news that the World Health 
Organisation had classed it as a Group 1 carcinogen. Photograph: James 
Worrel/Corbis 
It’s been a great year for finding fresh ways to die. In February, Cambridge 
scientists declared sleep a killer. Apparently snoozing more than eight hours a 
night doubles the danger of stroke.


Scientists don’t know why.


In October, the World Health Organisation declared processed meats a Group 1 
carcinogen. Butchers dismissed the bad news about bacon. Barnaby Joyce was 
reassuring: “I don’t think that we should get too excited that if you have a 
sausage you’re going to die of bowel cancer, because you’re not.”


And at year’s end, the Lancet declared smiling won’t save us. “We’re not 
saying that being happy isn’t important,” explained Bette Liu of the University 
of NSW. “But once you account for the poor health of people who are unhappy, 
happiness in itself doesn’t change their risk of death.”

I don’t think that we should get too excited that if you have a sausage you’re 
going to die of bowel cancer, you’re not
Barnaby Joyce 
Once again in 2015, Australia showed its love of anniversaries. We can never 
get enough of them. But the crop this year mattered, for 2015 marked a century 
since Gallipoli, the eighth century of Magna Carta; and 40 years since the coup 
that toppled Gough Whitlam.

This year will be commemorated, in turn, as the year of the Paris slaughters: 
11 shot dead by Muslim fanatics at the Charlie Hebdo office in January, and 130 
more across the city in November.

Though, touch wood, there were no attacks on Australian soil, nothing shaped 
the politics, laws and fears of the nation in 2015 as powerfully as terrorism. 
It’s clear as the year ends that the rearguard action in defence of Abbott will 
be fought in the name of defending the nation against terrorism.


After years of timid bipartisanship on the issue, a political divide has 
appeared at last – not between Labor and the government but within the media 
and the Coalition. In the uncertain political melee this promises in 2016, the 
Opposition might start, at last, thinking for itself.


Meanwhile, in the shadow of random annihilation, the following trends emerged 
in 2015:


Food and drink
Cooking with fire. Expect menus soon to give the provenance of the logs. Pork 
is still pulled. Ditto lamb. Dude food is dropping away. Everything is “house 
made” these days. While craft beer sells more strongly than ever, whisky is the 
drink of 2015. Tequila is gaining.

Reading
Total immersion in huge novels – Elena Ferrante’s four volumes on Naples and 
Hanya Yanagihara’s A Little Life, 700 pages chasing friendship and fame in New 
York. I don’t get them myself, but also on the list must be the six volumes and 
3,500 pages of Karl Ove Knausgard’s My Struggle.

Film
Australian movies are bigger than ever. Box office takings for local films in 
2015 are heading for a record $70m or more. Holding the Man broke all hearts 
but Mad Max Fury Road scooped up the cash. (Can someone please explain the plot 
of The Dressmaker?)

Theatre and concerts 
Shows are getting shorter. The interval is becoming a thing of the past. 
Theatre companies totter as bar takings fall across the country.

The year saw the Medici moment of George Brandis. From May, when he was given 
$104.7m to dole out to artists and performers, until the money and the title of 
minister for the arts were taken from him in November, Brandis was courted in 
foyers across the nation.


Nothing like it had been seen for a generation. Commentators spoke of scenes 
fit for the Renaissance courts of central Europe. Brandis now cuts a lonely if 
dignified figure at the opera.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fb7577ce3fd1441883ccaecdd256d0ce8355161%2F0_0_4371_2624%2F4371.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Marr's%20review%20of%202015%3A%20terror%20fears%20and%20shark%20scares%2C%20but%20Australia%20carried%20on%20regardless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Marr%27s%20review%20of%202015%3A%20terror%20fears%20and%20shark%20scares%2C%20but%20Australia%20carried%20on%20regardless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fb7577ce3fd1441883ccaecdd256d0ce8355161%2F0_0_4371_2624%2F4371.jpg>
 Melbourne Cup winning jockey Michelle Payne kisses the cup – she is the first 
woman to win the race since it was first run in 1861. Photograph: Tracey 
Nearmy/AAP 
Sport 
This year will always be remembered as the year a woman rode the winner of the 
Melbourne Cup.

Self-improvement
Pilates is edging out yoga. Mindfulness is on the rise. Women are acquiring 
the pointless domestic skills of their grandmothers. Crochet is back. Knitting 
can be seen on trams. Retired judges and doctors aren’t learning Latin as much 
these days. The fashion in 2015 is carpentry.

Fashion
The hipster beard is spreading to non hipsters so will soon die. Shirts are 
tucked in less than ever in 2015. Young men are strangling themselves in tight 
suits. The message is: under here there’s a gym-trim body.

Language
Everyone, it seems, is “on the spectrum” now. Nothing can be done to stop the 
spread of “learnings”: even the horrible “takeouts” has been replaced with “key 
learnings”. The words of the new regime are, obviously, all synonyms of 
“agile”. More than ever we are expected to use “disruption” as praise, as in 
wrecking for profit.

More than ever we are expected to use 'disruption' as praise, as in wrecking 
for profit

On the money front in 2015, nothing mattered more than a single figure: the 
price of iron ore at year’s end hovering around US$40 a tonne.


The map of Australian money is easy to read: the right-hand side, from far 
north Queensland all the way down to Victoria, is one huge seam of coal. The 
left-hand side of the continent is a lump of iron ore.


Both performed poorly in 2015. In March, Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest called for a 
world cartel to prop up prices. There was much laughter from BHP and Rio and 
sniffy talk in Australia of legal complications.


Iron baroness Gina Reinhart saw her fortune slashed. The BRW Rich List in 2016 
may reveal she’s ceded her title as Australia’s richest to the Pratt family. 
It’s the future of the country in a nutshell: iron gives way to cardboard.


Battered Twiggy Forrest also lost the Pope’s support for his Walk Free 
campaign to end slavery on earth by 2020. “We do not want to be used,” a 
spokesman for His Holiness told La Stampa in July. “A businessman has the right 
to make money, but not by using the Pope.”


Walk Free denied any base motive: “At absolutely no point in time was this a 
business initiative.” Critics of Forrest’s strategy of calling on world leaders 
to end the curse of slavery suggest it might be eradicated sooner by campaigns 
for higher wages in the Third World.


Meanwhile, senior Catholic clergy were afflicted with staggering failures of 
recollection when called to the royal commission into institutional responses 
to child sexual abuse to explain why so little was done for so long to protect 
children from the paedophile priests of the Ballarat diocese.


Taking the cake in December was Brian Finnigan, 77, once sidekick to the local 
bishop but now auxiliary bishop in Brisbane. “I have no memory,” he intoned 13 
times in the space of a morning’s questioning. “I have no memory at all.”


And George Pell <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-pell> was a 
no show. Details are scant but we’re told his heart’s the problem. Can’t fly. 
But if His Eminence won’t come back for the commission, can he ever return 
home? Might he face permanent exile in his Roman apartment where, hostile 
critics claimed in March, the cardinal has spent $6,650 on fittings for his 
kitchen sink?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71220f067c866edf754f4cef7a280e6fa19e1c6%2F0_3_3543_2127%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Marr's%20review%20of%202015%3A%20terror%20fears%20and%20shark%20scares%2C%20but%20Australia%20carried%20on%20regardless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Marr%27s%20review%20of%202015%3A%20terror%20fears%20and%20shark%20scares%2C%20but%20Australia%20carried%20on%20regardless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fdavid-marrs-review-of-2015-terror-fears-and-shark-scares-but-australia-carried-on-regardless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71220f067c866edf754f4cef7a280e6fa19e1c6%2F0_3_3543_2127%2F3543.jpg>
 Pope Francis signs a cricket bat he received from Cardinal George Pell at the 
Vatican in October. Pell could not return from Rome to appear before the royal 
commission on child sex abuse due to a medical condition. Photograph: AP 
Surprisingly little weight is being given to the suggestion that Tony Abbott 
might now return to the church. Leadership is required in Christendom. Heroic 
sacrifice has been deeply attractive to Abbott since he was a schoolboy. Here 
is a believer willing to lay it on the line about Islam.


The sudden appearance of Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> at the head of 
the cabinet table in 2015 has not obliterated support in this country for the 
Abbott worldview.


Hostility to Islam remains high. Professor Andrew Markus, who conducts the 
fine annual Scanlon Foundation surveys of social cohesion told the Guardian 
this year that more than 40% of third-generation – i.e. white - Australians 
admit to negative or strongly negative feelings towards Muslims.


And support for the republic remains tepid despite fresh leadership of the 
movement. Royal tours do their work. Abbott sent the kid through in 2014 and 
his father in 2015. An Essential poll on the eve of Charles’s tour this year 
put support for Australia becoming a republic on his mother’s death at only 50%.


Blue-sky reform isn’t Australia’s bag.


Still log-jammed in 2015 are reforms that enjoy the sort of support that 
would, in any other country, compel change. Not here. Thus equal marriage (with 
70% backing) and the recognition ofIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> (80% 
support) continue to languish.


Apart from paying too little for our minerals, the world can hardly touch us

We are pleased with ourselves and as indifferent as ever to the verdict of the 
world. As a human tide of refugees swept across Europe in 2015, we drew the 
curtains with relief knowing none were making their own way down to us.


Apart from paying too little for our minerals, the world can hardly touch us. 
True, Indonesia ignored our pleas and executed Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukamaran 
in April. But that was a tragic exception to the old rule that this country 
gets away with more or less what it wants.


When the UN castigated us for running prison camps for refugees on Manus and 
Nauru, we simply ignored them. Who are they? Why should their verdict matter? 
This was the year we kept calm and carried on. Expect the same in 2016.
 