
Ernie Wise was a talented and admired comedian, but the last part of his 
career hangs over showbiz as a warning. During the 15 years that he outlived 
Eric Morecambe, the sawn-off half of Morecambe & Wise never found a replacement 
partner.

Being half of a former double-act is the artistic equivalent of widowing: 
those who loved you as a couple may struggle to adjust to you single or – even 
worse – with someone new. Sometimes the severance is actually caused by 
bereavement, and sometimes by unsynchronised retirement: carrying on after 
Ronnie Barker quit The Two Ronnies on health grounds, Ronnie Corbett remained 
permanently in work but would always seem to be followed by a shadow.

David Walliams <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-walliams> 
doesn’t obviously have much cause to worry about the current sabbatical from 
his double-act with Matt Lucas, his partner in Little Britain and Come Fly With 
Me. On his own, Walliams has become a successful children’s writer for page and 
stage, and a theatre and TV actor, and talent-show judge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa12196607a1e499719d67cfddadcdbb27379cabe%2F0_0_1800_1558%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Walliams%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20comedy%20infidelity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Walliams%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20comedy%20infidelity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa12196607a1e499719d67cfddadcdbb27379cabe%2F0_0_1800_1558%2F1800.jpg>
 On sabbatical … David Walliams with Matt Lucas. Photograph: BBC Three/Ian Derry
Yet he seems to feel withdrawal symptoms from collaboration, and over the next 
six weeks is taking part in a sort of comedic speed-dating. Walliams & Friend 
is a sketch-show with a different co-star each week, starting with Jack 
Whitehall, then harnessing Sheridan Smith, Meera Syal, Hugh Bonneville and, 
most intriguingly, giving one slot each to Harry Enfield and Paul Whitehouse, 
moonlighting from their own double-act.

Walliams’ desire to be in a new two is surprising because – in the days since 
Morecambe & Wise and The Two Ronnies – it has become common for comic duos to 
flourish separately and together in alternation. Dawn French, Stephen Fry, 
Alexander Armstrong, Victoria Wood, Mel Smith and David Mitchell achieved as 
high a profile on their own as their erstwhile other halves: Jennifer Saunders, 
Hugh Laurie, Ben Miller, Julie Walters, Griff Rhys Jones and Robert Webb.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c1e9d13ab5fcb48364c990593714b8a87dbb9ab%2F0_0_2415_1449%2F2415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Walliams%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20comedy%20infidelity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Walliams%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20comedy%20infidelity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c1e9d13ab5fcb48364c990593714b8a87dbb9ab%2F0_0_2415_1449%2F2415.jpg>
 Many duos now flourish together and separately … French and Saunders. 
Photograph: BBC 
Others have been less lucky, doomed to be seen together or not at all, such as 
the Chuckle Brothers who, poignantly, turn up in the first Walliams & Friend 
among the inmates in the reality show Celebrity Slammer. (Mel & Sue and Ant & 
Dec’s ampersands also have the feel of handcuffs. Perhaps their best hope is to 
be allowed, one Children in Need or Comic Relief night, to commit TV infidelity 
as Mel & Dec or Ant & Sue.)

Satire of TV seems to be the show’s main material, regardless of who the 
emergency colleague is. Enfield plays Gregg Wallace in an extended Masterchef 
parody, and, more daringly, as HM The Queen in an imagined genealogical 
documentary Who Does One Think One Is? Syal gets a cop-show spoof as a 
detective whose interrogation technique is based on the scolding nosiness of a 
stereotypical Indian mother, and both Whitehall and Smith play contestants in 
sendups of TV relationship shows.

Such uniformity might suggest that the sketches arise more from the concerns 
of those creating the scripts (the main writers are Walliams and the Dawson 
Brothers) than the guests. This increases what is already the biggest risk with 
the concept of one-off double-acts.

A comedy partnership generally develops over time – earlier pairs tended to 
have started in music hall, latter ones at university – and to grow from 
physical contrasts: successful comedy duos tend to have disparities of sight or 
sound. Ominously for this series, Wood & Walters, Morecambe & Wise and The Two 
Ronnies were comedy partners who became friends rather than, as here, friends 
who briefly become comedy partners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F723f7e984c3327d82867ed7dd15f7b5cd0bee92f%2F0_48_4282_2570%2F4282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Walliams%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20comedy%20infidelity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Walliams%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20comedy%20infidelity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdavid-walliams-and-friend-the-rise-of-comedy-infidelity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F723f7e984c3327d82867ed7dd15f7b5cd0bee92f%2F0_48_4282_2570%2F4282.jpg>
 Unexpectedly filthy … Walliams and Whitehall’s Sherlock sendup. Photograph: 
BBC/King Bert/Ray Burmiston 
Of the episodes I’ve seen, the opener makes best use of the guest. Whitehall’s 
frame allows a plausible impersonation of Benedict Cumberbatch’s Sherlock, who 
makes unexpectedly filthy deductions in two standout scenes. It also makes use 
of Whitehall’s knack for playing posh boys in a “Middle-Class Jeremy Kyle show” 
in which he portrays a son at war with his parents over their cancellation of 
his annual skiing trip.

This series is probably a gimmick rather than an audition, but Walliams & 
Whitehall feels the most plausible long-term pair, with the caveat that 
single-sex comedy combinations may have had their day (they push comedy into 
drag territory, where it tends to become pantomimic). The weakest sketch in the 
Whitehall show – in which he uncomfortably imitates urban lingo – also suggests 
that the future of the sketch show, if it has one, will be in larger and more 
diverse groups rather than the double-act. The Christmas episode comes close to 
this, with Walliams and Bonneville joined by Morgana Robinson and Mike Wozniak.

Sketch shows, by their nature, are of variable standard, and this is only 
amplified if the lineup changes every week. But Walliams & Friend establishes 
that David Walliams is the comedy equivalent of a tennis star who has the 
freedom to choose between playing singles or doubles.

• Walliams & Friend starts tonight at 9.30pm on BBC1. 
 