
By the third afternoon of the conference, the horse trading was happening in 
plain sight. Mobs gathered on the floor of the auditorium. Emissaries went back 
and forth. Lone figures looked to their phones for answers. At the microphone, 
delegates from the boondocks poured their hearts out about aged care and the 
latest notion to defeat branch stacking. No one was listening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac3818ce708991c359a65e1f26ddfeb18bd3734b%2F0_0_1972_2764%2F1972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Marr%20on%20Bill%20Shorten%3A%20can%20the%20man%20from%20nowhere%20go%20all%20the%20way%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Marr%20on%20Bill%20Shorten%3A%20can%20the%20man%20from%20nowhere%20go%20all%20the%20way%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac3818ce708991c359a65e1f26ddfeb18bd3734b%2F0_0_1972_2764%2F1972.jpg>
The real interest in the vast, spring-green auditorium of the Melbourne 
Convention and Exhibition Centre was elsewhere: not on the fate of marriage 
equality, the immediate cause of the commotion on the floor, but on a question 
that mattered for the entire Labor party. WasBill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> in control?

So far at the national conference he had won every round. Pundits predicting 
his humiliation at the hands of the left had been proved wrong, indeed 
ridiculous.He had had his way even on refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/25/boat-turnbacks-bill-shorten-says-he-will-not-shirk-hard-decisions-on-asylum>
: Australia under Labor would stay in the company of the least civilised 
nations on earth, pushing refugee boats back out to sea. But could he end the 
weekend with what he needed to consolidate his leadership of the opposition: a 
near perfect score?

This is a man from nowhere. He built his career out of sight inside the union 
movement. Had he cut his teeth in parliament we would know him better by now. He
became a public figure at Beaconsfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/may/10/australia.features11> less than 
10 years ago and only edged into cabinet in the last years of Julia Gillard’s 
government.

He has failed to emerge strongly as a leader since. The verdict of the focus 
groups is mixed. There is no great disagreement with what he does. He seems a 
safe pair of hands. Yet people still wonder what he stands for.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5a669bd53b47416b1563aeb955d5e7893be7adb%2F320_16_1671_1004%2F1671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Marr%20on%20Bill%20Shorten%3A%20can%20the%20man%20from%20nowhere%20go%20all%20the%20way%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Marr%20on%20Bill%20Shorten%3A%20can%20the%20man%20from%20nowhere%20go%20all%20the%20way%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5a669bd53b47416b1563aeb955d5e7893be7adb%2F320_16_1671_1004%2F1671.jpg>
 Bill Shorten as a union official in 2006, updating the media about two miners 
trapped underground in Tasmania’s Beaconsfield goldmine. Photograph: William 
West/AFP/Getty Images 
Shorten’s story isn’t familiar. The successful decade he spent at the head of 
one of the country’s biggest unions tends to be dismissed as a job, something 
he did while waiting to get into politics. He still has a faint halo from the 
Beaconsfield mining disaster, but he is also the plotter who brought down two 
leaders to clear his own way to power. The sight of Shorten talking on his 
phone outside a Chinese restaurant on the night of Rudd’s downfall is one of 
the most familiar images of the man.

Bill Shorten has used the ALP conference to claw back some authority I Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/26/bill-shorten-has-used-the-alp-conference-to-claw-back-some-authority>
If recollected at all, his record as a minister in the Rudd and Gillard 
governments is remembered well. He is not thought to be making many mistakes as 
leader of the opposition.

But he’s seen as a shapeshifter, driven entirely by politics. Yet the party is 
united behind him and nearly every poll taken since Tony Abbott won office 
suggested Australia would welcome Labor back with open arms under Shorten’s 
leadership. Now the contest has changed.

“We are being transparent to the Australian people,” he told the delegates to 
the 47th ALP national conference, who gave themselves a standing ovation for 
being so brave debating difficult issues in the public gaze.

When the count was called, the delegates held their passes in the air like 
schoolkids begging for attention. The place was a garden of dangling red 
lanyards. And Shorten was comfortably home on pushing back the boats. But he 
knew that already. He had done what he has so skilfully done ever since he put 
on long pants: gathered the numbers.

I don’t hate anyone in the Labor party … You begin to realise over time that 
right and left arguments can get overcooked
Bill Shorten 
The Maritime Union of Australia and the Construction, Forestry, Mining and 
Energy Union had broken from the left to deliver him victory. God knows what 
debts must be paid. On the list might be “safeguards” for jobs; a seat or two 
in state upper houses; a place on a trade mission to China; and, out on the 
fringe of one of the nation’s capital cities, someone’s daughter may become 
deputy mayor.

That’s how it works, and no one works the system better than Shorten. He is a 
master of the art of negotiation, a deal maker of immense skill. He betrays 
without flinching. The career of this man of the right is proof that right and 
left don’t mean much anymore in Labor politics.

“I don’t hate anyone in the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>,” he declares. “It’s 
not a completely amoral world. But you begin to realise over time that right 
and left arguments can get overcooked.”

What were once mighty building blocs of the party are now unstable coalitions 
of the roughly like-minded. At the national conference, the CFMEU deserted the 
left on the boats and the next day the National Union of Workers broke with the 
right to undermine Shorten’s position on marriage equality.

He set to work. He is not Bob Hawke, who sat above the fray, relying on his 
lieutenants to bring him the numbers. Shorten is hands on. He uses his contacts 
deep in the party. He believes they give him a better understanding of what 
Labor is thinking than any of his recent predecessors had.

He goes right down the line. When he discovered, sometime in the morning, that 
the conference was shifting against him, he took out his phone. Labor MPs were 
allowed a conscience vote on marriage equality. Shorten wanted it to stay that 
way. But the left was determined to make the policy – like any other party 
policy – binding on MPs.

Bill Shorten is no longer Labor's 'tired accountant'. He deserves to lead them 
to victory | Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/18/bill-shorten-is-no-longer-labors-tired-accountant-he-deserves-to-lead-them-to-victory>
A collision between him and his deputy, Tanya Plibersek, was looming. He made 
calls. Faction leaders met. He twisted arms. The horse trading spilled on to 
the conference floor. About 4pm a compromise was hammered out: marriage 
equality would remain a matter of conscience in this parliament and the next, 
but become binding on the party thereafter.

Shorten pledged to bring marriage reform to the vote within 100 days of taking 
office. He faced down key opponents, that branch of the Catholic church known 
as the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees’ Union, the Shoppies. He and 
Plibersek put the compromise to the conference in the early evening and it was 
carried on the voices.

Nearly everything had gone his way over those three days in Melbourne. He had 
played the numbers superbly. His authority in the party had been showcased to 
the nation. And he could only have shared the relief of old faction warriors 
that the hours spent on this newfangled marriage policy had edged off the 
agenda the truly difficult issue facing Labor: rebalancing the power of the 
unions, the members and the machine. Shorten’s career is a product of the great 
conundrum of the party: the wretched state of democracy within.

Shorten’s body is not made for suits. His baggy frame sits on skinny legs. At 
factory gates in the old days he wore chambray shirts and bomber jackets. 
There’s something about the new uniform of coat and tie that suggests a plugger 
dressed for court.

He has that great asset for a politician: a big, easy smile. But he affects a 
clumsy, serious face, creasing his brow in what photographers who trail him 
call “the full Wi-Fi”. Time and Canberra have taken their toll. In the seven 
years since he came to parliament, he has aged about 20.

Shorten can keep Labor together. That doesn't mean he's entitled to be PM | 
Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/25/shorten-can-keep-labor-together-that-doesnt-mean-hes-entitled-to-be-pm>
At the time of the Ruddslide he cut a boyish figure. Now there is more head, 
less hair and not so much of the charm that once swept men and women off their 
feet. The accent is just right: educated and classless, part Xavier College and 
part Australian Workers Union. It’s a highly serviceable political package but 
the question is: does it scale up from party leader to prime minister?

Contenders for leadership can rarely pick the moment to make their run. 
Shorten needed more time. That’s often been the way with him. He has always 
moved so fast: from rookie union organiser to leader of the opposition in less 
than 20 years. He is yet to turn 50.

He stepped up after Labor’s defeat in 2013 without hesitation. He told friends 
he had no choice: now or never. And he put himself forward knowing history 
wasn’t with him: since the second world war no one taking the helm of his party 
after a great electoral defeat has become prime minister. It’s a sad list: 
Billy Snedden, Bill Hayden, Andrew Peacock, Kim Beazley and Brendan Nelson. But 
Shorten believes he can pull off the double, beating history and Malcolm 
Turnbull.

The conference consolidated his leadership of the party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/26/bill-shorten-has-used-the-alp-conference-to-claw-back-some-authority>
. The press accorded him grudging respect. Had he stumbled, he would have been 
torn to pieces by the commentariat. News Corp beat him about the head for union 
links and union power. That was to be expected. Questions were asked about 
whether Labor would live up to its promise to be brutal to refugees. No 
surprises there.

The recommitment of the party to tackling climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/24/bill-shorten-emmissions-trading-climate-change-labor-conference>
 was met with general respect. And then he and his party had the pleasure of 
watchingBronwyn Bishop’s helicopter ride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/bronwyn-bishop-travel-expenses-scandal-how-it-unfolded>
,Abbott’s diehard opposition to marriage equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/02/tony-abbott-digs-in-to-frustrate-any-posibillity-of-same-sex-marriage-vote>
,Dyson Heydon’s dalliance with the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/13/abbott-defends-dyson-heydon-over-revelations-he-was-to-address-liberal-fundraiser>
 and thefall of Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/australian-leader-tony-abbott-ousted-by-malcolm-turnbull-after-mps-vote>
 do terrible damage to the Coalition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffffd8a28ba204f9b15603a92a7ea96d61a6c94e8%2F196_108_1893_1137%2F1893.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Marr%20on%20Bill%20Shorten%3A%20can%20the%20man%20from%20nowhere%20go%20all%20the%20way%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Marr%20on%20Bill%20Shorten%3A%20can%20the%20man%20from%20nowhere%20go%20all%20the%20way%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdavid-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffffd8a28ba204f9b15603a92a7ea96d61a6c94e8%2F196_108_1893_1137%2F1893.jpg>
 A double exposure of Bill Shorten and Malcolm Turnbull at question time on 
Thursday. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP 
Now in front of Shorten lies a challenge he’s never faced before: a general 
election is an absolutely open contest. Each step of the way until now has been 
won by deals, faction plays and the occasional walkover.

He’s as tough a backroom fighter as federal politics has turned up in a long 
time. A Shorten speciality is a brutal backroom contest that hands him a public 
victory “unopposed”.

He is the member for one of the safest Labor seats in the country. He was the 
first leader of his party to win his position in a ballot. But that was not 
open either: 86 members of caucus had as much say as – and outvoted – 30,000 
rank-and-file members of the party.

Vale, Tony Abbott – both a unique man and a unique failure | David Marr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/18/vale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure>
Now Bill Shorten faces the nation. Another hard rule of the last half-century 
has been that only larger-than-life leaders bring Labor in from opposition. 
Gough Whitlam, Hawke and Rudd were such men. Shorten isn’t.

That didn’t matter so much against Abbott. Australians regarded Shorten as a 
great deal more understanding than the old prime minister, more broad-minded 
and a deeper thinker. But those advantagesall but evaporated once Turnbull 
seized power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/snap-poll-puts-malcolm-turnbull-ahead-of-bill-shorten-among-labor-voters>
.

Shorten is now more vulnerable than ever to the fundamental charge the 
Coalition levels against him: that this is the man who brought down two prime 
ministers and lied about it on radio.

It’s going to get dirty. At the heart of the contest will be Shorten’s 
character. All the way to polling day, Australians will be invited to rake over 
every detail of his short life and hidden career.

• This is an edited extract from David Marr’s Quarterly Essay 59, Faction Man: 
Bill Shorten’s Path to Power, available as subscription, ebook and paperback
quarterlyessay.com <http://www.quarterlyessay.com/>
 