
English teachers looking for a good example of a mixed metaphor should watch 
The Secret Life of the Zoo tonight. During a tense post-birth scene involving 
Florence the zebra, a member of zoo staff confides to camera: “We’re not 
counting our chickens yet.”


Chester Zoo, where the documentary is filmed, has had remote-control and 
super-zoom cameras fitted to capture footage “the public never normally gets to 
see.” This promise – of using the latest technology to expose animals as never 
before – will echo loudly with fans of Sir David Attenborough’sPlanet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/planet-earth-ii>, which also does 
distance filming to catch moments that would otherwise be too dangerous to 
shoot.

Indeed, the two shows are complimentary contributions – home and away – to a 
genre that could be called creature-CCTV, bringing to wildlife the kind of 
total surveillance that has become usual for human communities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4fdb158fa32cc210ed8d6a7b89f65fa0e00d2f6%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Attenborough's%20greatest%20rescue%3A%20saving%20wildlife%20TV%20from%20extinction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Attenborough%27s%20greatest%20rescue%3A%20saving%20wildlife%20TV%20from%20extinction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4fdb158fa32cc210ed8d6a7b89f65fa0e00d2f6%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Exposing animals as never before … the pygmy three-toed sloth in Planet Earth 
II. Photograph: BBC 
And there is another Attenborough connection. His first hit as a presenter was 
Zoo Quest (BBC, 1954-63), which kickstarted the entire genre of Zoo TV. Since 
he went out into the wild, successors to Zoo Quest have included Animal Magic 
(BBC, 1961-83), which used footage from zoos in Bristol and elsewhere, plus 
long-running documentaries called The Zoo in Australia, New Zealand and 
Ireland, and an observational show filmed at Dublin Zoo that has now been 
running for five seasons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf94ca8c74e04d29577eb35d4b0776e8361815db%2F0_0_3235_2362%2F3235.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Attenborough's%20greatest%20rescue%3A%20saving%20wildlife%20TV%20from%20extinction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Attenborough%27s%20greatest%20rescue%3A%20saving%20wildlife%20TV%20from%20extinction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf94ca8c74e04d29577eb35d4b0776e8361815db%2F0_0_3235_2362%2F3235.jpg>
 Zoo quest … the show that made Attenborough a star (and invented a whole new 
species of TV). Photograph: BBC/PA 
The near-extinction of such shows on British TV recently was due partly to 
political sensitivities. The premise of Zoo Quest involved tracking down rare 
animals on location then bringing them back to the UK to be put on show to the 
paying public. The fact that Attenborough’s subsequent wildlife films captured 
animals only on camera reflected an increasing revulsion about the 
hunt-and-cage trade (which also led to Animal Magic being replaced in the 
children’s TV schedules by The Really Wild Show.)

The iguana v snakes chase gives Planet Earth II its first breakout moment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/nov/08/iguana-racer-snakes-planet-earth-ii-bbc>
The Secret Life of the Zoo is quick to address the ethical issues. It’s 
explained that Iblis, Chester Zoo’s nine-year-old male Asiatic tiger, belongs 
to a species of which only around 350 now exist in India, where his relatives 
will almost certainly have glimpsed Attenborough in the undergrowth. A natural 
disaster or virus could wipe them all out, so “keeping a captive population,” 
argues one of the keepers, “is vital.”

But, if one risk for Zoo TV is the “aaaagghh!” factor from viewers alert to 
animal rights, another is the temptation to invite an “aaah!” at their 
cuteness. All wildlife TV skirts the risk of anthropomorphism. Attenborough has 
always been reluctant to assign names or personalities to his co-stars, but in 
Animal Magic, Johnny Morris literally gave voices to the animals, 
ventriloquising their thoughts and even accents.

The animals in The Secret Life of the Zoo have been given names by their 
keepers, who often impose human-like motives on them, which are picked up in 
the voiceover. Refreshingly, though, these dramatic narratives are not 
sentimental, but grimly realistic.

“Since having the youngsters,” the narrator reports of a warthog, “he has had 
a lot of hair-loss.” Long-term couples may also glance nervously across the 
sofa when the tiger keepers describe how their adult female Kibuki seems to 
have lost interest in sex with Iblis (further endangering the European 
Endangered Species Breeding Programme of which they’re part).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8723e6da41d8bddf9ba0a6275abd8ce9ce9d660d%2F0_0_1314_960%2F1314.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Attenborough's%20greatest%20rescue%3A%20saving%20wildlife%20TV%20from%20extinction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Attenborough%27s%20greatest%20rescue%3A%20saving%20wildlife%20TV%20from%20extinction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdavid-attenborough-planet-earth-ii-secret-life-of-the-zoo-saving-wildlife-tv-from-extinction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8723e6da41d8bddf9ba0a6275abd8ce9ce9d660d%2F0_0_1314_960%2F1314.jpg>
 More Mike Leigh than Walt Disney … The Secret Life of the Zoo doesn’t give in 
to anthropomorphism. Photograph: Steve Rawlins/Channel 4 
Appallingly but enthrallingly, animal sex therapists conclude that monogamy is 
the problem. In the wild, Kibuki would offer herself to the fittest male, 
whereas here she only has access to Iblis, who has become docile and slothful 
as a result of taking his mate for granted and having meals provided for him. 
So his handlers set up a sort of slaughterhouse gym, in which he has to jump 
and climb to get snacks, and the two soon get back in the groove. This may be 
anthropomorphism, but it’s more Mike Leigh than Walt Disney.

From Zoo Quest to Planet Earth II, wildlife TV has served as a vicarious 
safari, opening up vistas that only very poor native tribes and very rich 
tourist ones would otherwise see. Although its sights are available in Chester, 
The Secret Life of the Zoo offers angles – a just-born baby zebra struggling to 
stand, like a knocked-down boxer hearing the referee reach nine – that would 
never be available to punters. And, in acknowledging the politics of 
zoo-keeping, the TV species started byDavid Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough> shows that it can 
adapt to survive.

• The Secret Life of the Zoo starts tonight on Channel 4 at 8pm. Planet Earth 
II continues on BBC1 on Sunday at 8pm.
 