
David Carr, the highly regarded New York Times media columnist, died suddenly 
on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/13/david-carr-new-york-times-columnist-dies-suddenly-at-office>
 after collapsing in the newspaper’s office. He was 58.

 His death prompted widespread expressions of shock and sadness 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=david%20carr&src=typd> from NYT colleagues, 
readers and other journalists. Carr was described by the paper’s publisher and 
chairman, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr, as “one of the most gifted journalists who 
has ever worked at the New York Times”,in its own story on his passing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/13/business/media/david-carr-media-equation-columnist-for-the-times-is-dead-at-58.html?partner=socialflow&smid=tw-nytimes&_r=0>
.

David Carr, New York Times columnist, dies suddenly at office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/13/david-carr-new-york-times-columnist-dies-suddenly-at-office>
He combined formidable talent as a reporter with acute judgment to become an 
indispensable guide to modern media. But his friends at The Times and beyond 
will remember him as a unique human being — full of life and energy, funny, 
loyal and lovable.

Ezra Klein summed up the feelings of many in his tribute to Carr for Vox 
<http://www.vox.com/2015/2/12/8032235/david-carr-times-dead>:

He was a brilliant writer, and a brilliant reporter, and at a moment when the 
media often seemed to be coming apart, he was one of the few capable of holding 
it together. He was loved by old media and new media alike. He was one of the 
few people I couldn’t wait to read.

... The problem is the only write-up I want to read on this is Carr’s. Fuck.

Klein quoted from the bio Carr gave to students of his Boston University 
course:

Your professor is a terrible singer and a decent dancer. He is a movie crier 
but stone-faced in real life. He never laughs even when he is actually amused. 
He hates suck-ups, people who treat waitresses and cab drivers poorly, and 
anybody who thinks diversity is just an academic conceit. He is a big sucker 
for the hard worker and is rarely dazzled by brilliance. He has little patience 
for people who pretend to ask questions when all they really want to do is make 
a speech.

Carr was already something of a legend in US journalism circles when he became 
the unlikely star of the 2011 documentaryPage One: Inside the New York Times 
<http://www.magpictures.com/pageone/>, which introduced this remarkable 
character to a wider audience (myself included).

His acute intellect and no-BS approach was apparent when he was filmed 
interviewing Vice Media boss Shane Smith and colleagues, opening up with:

“I don’t do corporate portraiture. What the fuck is going on that you’re doing 
business with CNN?”

Carr took umbrage at a derogatory remark Smith made about the NYT, prompting 
probably the most well-known soundbite from the documentary (and most 
oft-quoted line in any piece profiling Smith or Vice):

“Just cos you put on a fucking safari helmet and looked at some poop doesn’t 
give you the right to insult what we do.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiLmkec_4Rfo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiLmkec_4Rfo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiLmkec_4Rfo&media=>
 David Carr tackles Vice Media boss Shane Smith in the New York Times 
documentary Page One 
The second act of Carr’s journalism career, culminating in his arrival at the 
Times in 2002, came after he beat an addiction to crack cocaine in the late 
1980s <http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/20/magazine/20Carr-t.html?pagewanted=all>
, and a bout of cancer – which he detailed unflinchingly in his 2008 memoir,The 
Night of the Gun <http://www.nightofthegun.com/#>. In the book’s conclusion, he 
wrote:

I now inhabit a life I don’t deserve, but we all walk this earth feeling we 
are frauds. The trick is to be grateful and hope the caper doesn’t end any time 
soon.

Addressing students at the University of Carlifornia’s journalism school in 
Berkeley in 2014, he spoke of his trade as a “grand caper” that “beats working”:

“Being a journalist, I never feel bad talking to journalism students because 
it’s a grand, grand caper. You get to leave, go talk to strangers, ask them 
anything, come back, type up their stories, edit the tape. That’s not gonna 
retire your loans as quickly as it should, and it’s not going to turn you into 
a person who’s worried about what kind of car they should buy, but that’s kind 
of as it should be. I mean, it beats working.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7V3o5ZeSEwE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7V3o5ZeSEwE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7V3o5ZeSEwE&media=>
 David Carr’s 2014 commencement address to UC Berkeley’s journalism school 
graduates. 
Once asked to repeat the best piece of advice he’d ever received about 
journalism and writing, he said:

Keep typing until it turns into writing.

The New York Times has gathered a selection of Carr’s most memorable quotes 
from his writing and public statementshere 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/13/business/media/david-carr-excerpts.html>.

Shortly before his death on Thursday, Carr moderated a TimesTalks panel 
discussion 
<http://timestalks.com/laura-poitras-glenn-greenwald-edward-snowden.html> in 
New York about the documentary Citizenfour, with film-maker Laura Poitras and 
journalist Glenn Greenwald, featuring a live video link with NSA whistleblower 
Edward Snowden.
 