
On 4 March, on what would have been his 30th birthday, Alejandro Nieto’s 
parents left a packed courtroom inSan Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco>, shortly before pictures 
from their son’s autopsy were shown to a jury. The photographs showed what 
happens when 14 bullets rip through a person’s head and body. Refugio and 
Elvira Nieto spent much of the rest of the day sitting on a bench in the 
windowless hall of the federal building where their civil lawsuit for their 
son’s wrongful death was being heard.

Alex Nieto was 28 years old when he was killed, in the neighbourhood where he 
had spent his whole life. He died in a barrage of bullets fired at him by four 
San Francisco policemen. There are a few things about his death that everyone 
agrees on: he was in a hilltop park eating a burrito and tortilla chips, 
wearing the Taser he carried for his job as a bouncer at a nightclub, when 
someone called 911 on him a little after 7pm on the evening of 21 March 2014. 
When police officers arrived a few minutes later, they claim Nieto defiantly 
pointed the Taser at them, and that they mistook its red laser light for the 
laser sights of a gun, and shot him in self defence. However, the stories of 
the four officers contradict each other, and some of the evidence.

On the road that curves around the green hilltop of Bernal Heights Park there 
is an unofficial memorial to Nieto. People walking dogs or running or taking a 
stroll stop to read the banner, which is pinned by stones to the slope of the 
hill and surrounded by fresh and artificial flowers. Alex’s father Refugio 
still visits the memorial at least once a day, walking up from his small 
apartment on the south side of Bernal Hill. Alex Nieto had been walking on the 
hill since he was a child: that evening his parents, joined by friends and 
supporters, went up there in the dark to bring a birthday cake up to the 
memorial.

Refugio and Elvira Nieto are reserved people, straight-backed but careworn, 
who speak eloquently in Spanish and hardly at all in English. They had known 
each other as poor children in a little town in central Mexico and emigrated 
separately to the Bay Area in the 1970s, where they met again and married in 
1984. They have lived in the same building on the south slope of Bernal Hill 
ever since. She worked for decades as a housekeeper in San Francisco’s downtown 
hotels and is now retired. He had worked on the side, but mostly stayed at home 
as the principal caregiver of Alex and his younger brother Hector. In the 
courtroom, Hector, handsome, sombre, with glossy black hair pulled back neatly, 
sat with his parents most days, not far from the three white and one Asian 
policemen who killed his brother. That there was a trial at all was a triumph. 
The city had withheld from family and supporters the full autopsy report and 
the names of the officers who shot Nieto, and it was months before the key 
witness overcame his fear of the police to come forward.

Death by gentrification: the killing that shamed San Francisco
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/apr/04/death-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco>
Nieto died because a series of white men saw him as a menacing intruder in the 
place he had spent his whole life. They thought he was possibly a gang member 
because he was wearing a red jacket. Many Latino boys and men in San Francisco 
avoid wearing red and blue because they are the colours of two gangs, the 
Norteños and Sureños – but the colours of San Francisco’s football team, the 
49ers, are red and gold. Wearing a 49ers jacket in San Francisco is as ordinary 
as wearing a Saints jersey in New Orleans. That evening, Nieto, who had thick 
black eyebrows and a closely cropped goatee, was wearing a new-looking 49ers 
jacket, a black 49ers cap, a white T-shirt, black trousers, and carried the 
Taser in a holster on his belt, under his jacket. (Tasers shoot out wires that 
deliver an electrical shock, briefly paralysing their target; they are shaped 
roughly like a gun, but more bulbous; Nieto’s had bright yellow markings over 
much of its surface and a 15-foot range.)

Nieto had first been licensed by the state as a security guard in 2007 and had 
worked in that field since. He had never been arrested and had no police 
record, an achievement in a neighbourhood where Latino kids can get picked up 
just for hanging out. He was a Buddhist: a Latino son of immigrants who 
practised Buddhism is the kind of hybrid San Francisco used to be good at. As a 
teen he had worked as a youth counsellor for almost five years at the Bernal 
Heights Neighborhood Center; he was outgoing and participated in political 
campaigns, street fairs and community events.

He had graduated from community college with a focus on criminal justice, and 
hoped to help young people as a probation officer. He had an internship with 
the city’s juvenile probation department not long before his death, according 
to former city probation officer Carlos Gonzalez, who became a friend. Gonzalez 
said Nieto knew how criminal justice worked in the city. No one has ever 
provided a convincing motive for why he would point a gun-shaped object at the 
police when he knew that it would probably be a fatal act.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4d09d5a91300daaaa08fae98d956f7d344d5cac%2F0_57_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20by%20gentrification%3A%20the%20killing%20that%20shamed%20San%20Francisco%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20by%20gentrification%3A%20the%20killing%20that%20shamed%20San%20Francisco%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4d09d5a91300daaaa08fae98d956f7d344d5cac%2F0_57_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Elvira and Refugio Nieto want justice for their dead son Alex. Photograph: 
Gabrielle Lurie for the Guardian 
On the evening of 21 March 2014, Evan Snow, a thirtysomething “user experience 
design professional”, according to his LinkedIn profile, who had moved to the 
neighbourhood about six months earlier (and who has since departed for a more 
suburban environment), took his young Siberian husky for a walk on Bernal Hill.

As Snow was leaving the park, Nieto was coming up one of the little dirt 
trails that leads to the park’s ring road, eating chips. In a deposition prior 
to the trial, Snow said that with his knowledge of the attire of gang members, 
he “put Nieto in that category of people that I would not mess around with”.

His dog put Nieto in the category of people carrying food, and went after him. 
Snow never seemed to recognise that his out-of-control dog was the aggressor: 
“So Luna was, I think, looking to move around the benches or behind me to run 
up happily to get a chip from Mr Nieto. Mr Nieto became further – what’s the 
right word? – distressed, moving very quickly and rapidly left to right, trying 
to keep his chips away from Luna. He ran down to these benches and jumped up on 
the benches, my dog following. She was at that point vocalising, barking, or 
kind of howling.”

The dog had Nieto cornered on the bench while its inattentive owner was 40 
feet away – in his deposition for the case, under oath, his exact words were 
that he was distracted by a female “jogger’s butt”. “I can imagine that 
somebody would – could assume the dog was being aggressive at that point,” Snow 
said. The dog did not come when he called, but kept barking. Nieto, Snow says, 
then pulled back his jacket and took his Taser out, briefly pointing at the 
distant dog-owner before he pointed it at the dog baying at his feet. The two 
men yelled at each other, and Snow apparently used a racial slur, but would not 
later give the precise word. As he left the park, he texted a friend about the 
incident. His text, according to his testimony, said, “in another state like 
Florida, I would have been justified in shooting Mr Nieto that night” – a 
reference to that state’s infamous “stand your ground” law, which removes the 
obligation to retreat before using force in self-defence. In other words, he 
apparently wished he could have done what George Zimmerman did to Trayvon 
Martin: execute him without consequences.

Soon after, a couple passed by Nieto. Tim Isgitt, a recent arrival in the 
area, is the communications director of a nonprofit organisation founded by 
tech billionaires. He now lives in suburban Marin County, as does his partner 
Justin Fritz, a self-described “email marketing manager” who had lived in San 
Francisco about a year. In a picture one of them posted on social media, they 
are chestnut-haired, clean-cut white men posing with their dogs, a springer 
spaniel and an old bulldog. They were walking those dogs when they passed Nieto 
at a distance.

Trayvon Martin's death: the story so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/20/trayvon-martin-death-story-so-far>
Fritz did not notice anything unusual but Isgitt saw Nieto moving “nervously” 
and putting his hand on the Taser in its holster. Snow was gone, so Isgitt had 
no idea that Nieto had just had an ugly altercation and had reason to be 
disturbed. Isgitt began telling people he encountered to avoid the area. (One 
witness who did see Nieto shortly after Isgitt and Fritz, longtime Bernal 
Heights resident Robin Bullard who was walking his own dog in the park, 
testified that there was nothing alarming about him. “He was just sitting 
there,” Bullard said.)

At the trial, Fritz testified that he had not seen anything alarming about 
Nieto. He said that he called 911 because Isgitt urged him to. At about 7.11pm 
he began talking to the 911 dispatcher, telling her that there was a man with a 
black handgun. What race, asked the dispatcher, “black, Hispanic?” “Hispanic,” 
replied Fritz. Later, the dispatcher asked him if the man in question was doing 
“anything violent”, and Fritz answered, “just pacing, it looks like he might be 
eating chips or sunflowers, but he’s resting a hand kind of on the gun”. Alex 
Nieto had about five more minutes to live.

San Francisco was never anti-newcomer: until recently, it had always been a 
place where new people arrived to reinvent themselves. When they arrive in a 
trickle, they integrate and contribute to the ongoing transformation. When they 
arrive in a flood, as they have during economic booms since the 19th-century 
gold rush, including the dotcom surge of the late 1990s and the current tech 
tsunami, they scour out what was there before. By 2012 the incursion of tech 
workers had gone from steady stream to deluge, and more and more people and 
institutions – bookstores, churches, social services, bars, small businesses – 
began to be evicted.

San Francisco had been a place where some people came out of idealism or 
stayed to realize an ideal: to work for social justice or teach the disabled, 
to write poetry or practise alternative medicine – to be part of something 
larger than themselves that was not a corporation, to live for something more 
than money. That was becoming less and less possible as rent and sale prices 
for homes spiralled upward. What the old-timers were afraid of losing, many of 
the newcomers seemed unable to recognise. The tech culture seemed in small and 
large ways to be a culture of disconnection and withdrawal. And it was very 
white, very male and pretty young, which is why I started to call my hometown 
“Fratistan”. (As of 2014, Google’s Silicon Valley employees, for example, were 
2% black, 3% Latino, and 70% male.)

Tech companies created billionaires whose influence warped local politics, 
pushing for policies that served the new industry and their employees at the 
expense of the rest of the population. None of the money sloshing around the 
city trickled down to preserve the centre for homeless youth that closed in 
2013, or the oldest black-owned black-focused bookstore in the country, which 
closed in 2014, or San Francisco’s last lesbian bar, which folded in 2015, or 
the African Orthodox Church of St John Coltrane, which is now facing eviction 
from the home it found after an earlier eviction during the late-1990s dotcom 
boom. Resentments rose. And cultures clashed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0928b9f9b78538af1152cd3a30a00a15287f2a8d%2F0_52_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20by%20gentrification%3A%20the%20killing%20that%20shamed%20San%20Francisco%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20by%20gentrification%3A%20the%20killing%20that%20shamed%20San%20Francisco%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0928b9f9b78538af1152cd3a30a00a15287f2a8d%2F0_52_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Bernal Heights Park in San Francisco, Cailifornia. Photograph: Justin 
Sullivan/Getty Images 
At 7.12pm on the evening of 21 March, the police dispatcher who had spoken to 
Fritz put out a call. Lieutenant Jason Sawyer and officer Richard Schiff, a 
rookie who had been in the job for less than three months, responded and headed 
for Bernal Heights Park. They tried first to enter it in their patrol car from 
the south side, the side where Alex’s parents lived, then turned around and 
drove in from the north side, going around the barrier that keeps vehicles out 
and heading up the road that is often full of runners, walkers and dogs at that 
time of day. They moved rapidly, but without lights or sirens; they were not 
heading into an emergency. At 7.17:40pm Alejandro Nieto came walking downhill 
around a bend in the road, according to the 911 conversation with Fritz. At 
7.18:08pm, another policeman in the park, but not at the scene, broadcast: “Got 
a guy in a red shirt coming toward you.” Schiff testified in court, “Red could 
be related to a gang involvement. Red is a Norteño colour.”

Schiff testified that from about 90ft away he shouted “Show me your hands” and 
that Nieto had replied, “No, show me your hands”, then drew his Taser, assuming 
a fighting stance, holding the weapon in both hands pointed at the police. The 
officers claim that the Taser projected a red light, which they assumed was the 
laser sight of a handgun, and feared for their lives. At 7.18:43pm, Schiff and 
Sawyer began barraging Nieto with .40-calibre bullets.

At 7.18:55pm, Schiff shouted “red”, a police code word for out of ammunition. 
He had emptied a whole clip at Nieto. He reloaded, and began shooting again, 
firing 23 bullets in all. Sawyer was also blazing away. He fired 20 bullets. 
Their aim appears to have been sloppy, because Fritz, who had taken refuge in a 
grove of eucalyptus trees below the road, can be heard shouting “Help! Help!” 
on his call to the 911 operator, as bullets fired by the police were “hitting 
the trees above me, breaking things and just coming at me”.

Sawyer said: “Once I realised there was no reaction, none at all after being 
shot, I picked up my sights and aimed for the head.” Nieto was hit just above 
the lip by a bullet that shattered his right upper jaw and teeth, another 
ripped through both bones of his lower right leg. Though the officers testify 
that he remained facing them, that latter bullet went in the side of his leg, 
as though he had turned away. It is unlikely that a person could stand on a leg 
injured like that.

Schiff shouted 'red', a police code word for out of ammunition. He had emptied 
a whole clip at Nieto

Two more officers, Roger Morse and Nate Chew, drove up to the first patrol 
car, got out and drew their guns. There was no plan, no communications, no 
strategy to contain the suspect or capture him alive if he proved to be a 
menace, to avoid a potentially dangerous confrontation in a popular park where 
bystanders could be hit. Morse testified in court: “When I first arrived I saw 
what appeared to be muzzle flash. I aimed at him and began shooting.” Tasers 
produce nothing that resembles muzzle flash. Chew testified that Nieto was 
already on the ground when they arrived. He fired five shots at the man on the 
ground. He told the court he stopped when “I saw the suspect’s head fall down 
to the pavement”.

Several more bullets hit Nieto while he was on the ground– at least 14 struck 
him, according to the city autopsy report. One went into his left temple and 
tore through his head toward his neck. Several hit him in the back, chest, and 
shoulders. One more went into the small of his back, severing the spinal cord.

The officers approached Nieto at 7.19:20pm, less than two minutes after it had 
all begun. Morse was the first to get there; he says that Nieto’s eyes were 
open and that he was gasping and gurgling. He says that he kicked the Taser out 
of the dying man’s hands. Schiff says he “handcuffed him, rolled him over, and 
said, ‘Sarge, he’s got a pulse.’” By the time the ambulance arrived, Alejandro 
Nieto was dead.

Nieto’s funeral, on 1 April 2014, packed the little church in Bernal Heights 
that his mother had taken him to as a child. I went with my friend Adriana 
Camarena, a gregarious lawyer from Mexico City who lives in the Mission 
District, the neighbourhood on Bernal’s north flank. She had met Alex briefly; 
I never had. We sat near a trio of African-American women who had lost their 
own sons in police killings and routinely attend the funerals of other such 
victims. Adriana had become close to Refugio and Elvira Nieto. Their son had 
been their ambassador to the English-speaking world, and gradually Adriana was 
drawn into their grief and their need. She stepped in as an interpreter, 
advocate, counsel and friend. Benjamin Bac Sierra, a former marine who teaches 
writing at San Francisco’s community college, was a devoted friend of and 
mentor to Alex. He has become the other leader of a small coalition named
Justice for Alex Nieto <https://justice4alexnieto.org/alex-story/>.

In that springtime of Nieto’s death, I had begun to feel that what was tearing 
my city apart was not only a conflict pitting long-term tenants against 
affluent newcomers and the landlords, estate agents, house-flippers, and 
developers seeking to open up room for them by shoving everyone else out. It 
was a conflict between two different visions of the city.

What I felt strongly at the funeral was the vital force of real community: 
people who experienced where they lived as a fabric woven from memory, ritual 
and habit, affection and love. This was a measure of place that had nothing to 
do with money and ownership and everything to do with connection. Adriana and I 
turned around in our pew and met Oscar Salinas, a big man who was native to the 
Mission. He told us that when someone in the community is hurt, the Mission 
comes together. “We take care of each other.” To him, the Mission meant the 
people who shared Latino identity and a commitment to a set of values, and to 
each other, all held together by place.

In the spring of Nieto's death, I began to feel that a conflict between two 
visions of the city were tearing it apart

The sense of community people were trying to hang on to was about the things 
that money cannot buy. It was about home as a whole neighbourhood and the 
neighbours in it, not just the real estate you held title to or paid rent on. 
It was not only the treasure of Latinos; white, black, Asian and Native 
American residents of San Francisco had long-term relationships with people, 
institutions, traditions, particular locations. “Disruptive” has been a 
favourite word of the new tech economy, but old-timers saw communities, 
traditions, and relationships being disrupted. Many of the people being evicted 
and priced out were the people who held us all together: teachers, nurses, 
counsellors, social workers, carpenters and mechanics, volunteers and 
activists. When, for example, someone who worked with gang kids got driven out, 
those kids were abandoned. How many threads could you pull out before the 
social fabric disintegrated?

Two months before the funeral, the real-estate website Redfin 
<https://www.redfin.com/blog/2014/02/california-home-affordability-for-teachers.html>
 looked at the statistics and concluded that 83% of California’s homes, and 
100% of San Francisco’s, were unaffordable on a teacher’s salary. What happens 
to a place when the most vital workers cannot afford to live in it? 
Displacement has contributed to deaths, particularly of the elderly. In the two 
years since Nieto’s death, there have been multiplestories of seniors who died 
during or immediately after their eviction 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/tech-boom-fuels-elderly-evictions-san-francisco-n128901>
. Gentrification can be fatal.

It also brings newcomers to neighbourhoods with nonwhite populations, 
sometimes with atrocious consequences. Local newspaper TheEast Bay Express 
recently reported 
<http://www.eastbayexpress.com/oakland/racial-profiling-via-nextdoorcom/Content?oid=4526919>
 that in Oakland, recently arrived white people sometimes regard “people of 
color who are walking, driving, hanging out, or living in the neighborhood” as 
“criminal suspects.” Some use the website Nextdoor.com to post comments 
“labeling Black people as suspects simply for walking down the street, driving 
a car, or knocking on a door.” The same thing happens in the Mission, where 
people post things on Nextdoor such as “I called the police a few times when is 
more then three kids standing like soldiers in the corner.” What’s clear in the 
case of Nieto’s death is that a series of white men perceived him as more 
dangerous than he was and that he died of it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94e6dd88ac2dadff75e3d8b4c62562ef7b7fdc4f%2F0_217_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20by%20gentrification%3A%20the%20killing%20that%20shamed%20San%20Francisco%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20by%20gentrification%3A%20the%20killing%20that%20shamed%20San%20Francisco%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94e6dd88ac2dadff75e3d8b4c62562ef7b7fdc4f%2F0_217_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Benjamin Bac Sierra, one of Alex Nieto’s best friends and co-leader of the 
Justice for Alex Nieto campaign. Photograph: Gabrielle Lurie for the Guardian 
On 1 March 2016, the day the trial began, hundreds of students at San 
Francisco public schools walked out of class to protest against Nieto’s 
killing. A big demonstration was held in front of the federal courthouse, with 
drummers, Aztec dancers in feathered regalia, people holding signs, and a TV 
station interviewing Nieto’s friend Benjamin Bac Sierra. Nieto’s face on 
posters, banners, T-shirts and murals had become a familiar sight in the 
Mission; a few videos about the case had been made, demonstrations and 
memorials had been held. For some, Nieto stood for victims of police brutality 
and for a Latino community that felt imperilled by gentrification, by the wave 
of evictions and the people who regarded them as menaces and intruders in their 
own neighbourhood. Many people who cared about the Nietos came to the trial 
each day, and the courtroom was usually nearly full.

Trials are theatre, and this one had its dramas. Adante Pointer, a black 
lawyer with the Oakland firm of John Burris, which handles a lot of local 
police-killing lawsuits, represented Refugio and Elvira Nieto, the plaintiffs. 
Their star witness, Antonio Theodore, had come forward months after the 
killing. Theodore is an immigrant from Trinidad, a musician in the band 
Afrolicious, and a resident of the Bernal area. An elegant man with neat 
shoulder-length dreads who came to court in a suit, he said he had been on a 
trail above the road, walking a dog, and that he had seen the whole series of 
events unfold. He testified that Nieto’s hands were in his pockets – that he 
had not pointed his Taser at the officers, there was no red laser light; the 
officers had just shouted “stop” and then opened fire.

When Pointer asked him why he had not come forward earlier, he replied: “Just 
think: it would be hard to tell an officer that I just saw fellow officers 
shooting up somebody. I didn’t trust the police.” Theodore testified cogently 
under questioning from Pointer. But the next morning, when city attorney 
Margaret Baumgartner, an imposing white woman with a resentful air, questioned 
him, he fell apart. He contradicted his earlier testimony about where he had 
been and where the shooting took place, then declared that he was an alcoholic 
with memory problems. He seemed to be trying to make himself safe by making 
himself useless. Pointer questioned him again, and he said: “I don’t care to be 
here right now. I feel threatened.”

The details of what had happened were hotly debated and often contradictory, 
especially with regard to the Taser. The police had testified as though Nieto 
had been a superhuman or inhuman opponent, facing them off even as they fired 
again and again, then dropping to a “tactical sniper posture” on the ground, 
still holding the Taser with its red laser pointing at them. The city lawyers 
brought in a Taser expert whose official testimony seemed to favour them, but 
when he was asked by Pointer to look at the crime‑scene photos, he said the 
Taser was off and that it was not something easily or accidentally turned on or 
off. The light is only on when the Taser is on. Officer Morse had testified 
that when he arrived to kick it out of Nieto’s hands there was no red light or 
wires coming from it. The Taser wires are, however, visible in the police 
photographs documenting the scene.

One piece of evidence produced was a fragment of bone found in the pocket of 
Nieto’s jacket. Some thought this proved that his hands had been in his 
pockets, as Theodore said. Dr Amy Hart, the city coroner, said in the trial on 
Friday, 4 March, that there were no photographs of his red 49ers jacket, which 
must have been full of bullet holes. The following Monday, an expert witness 
for the city mentioned the photographs of the jacket that the city had supplied 
him. The jurors were shown photographs of Nieto’s hat, which had a bullet hole 
in it that corresponded to the hole in his temple, and of his broken sunglasses 
lying next to a puddle of blood. The coroner testified to abrasions on Nieto’s 
face consistent with Nieto wearing glasses. Before this evidence was shown, 
Officer Richard Schiff had testified under oath that he made eye contact with 
Nieto and saw his forehead pucker up in a frown. If the dead man had been 
wearing a hat and glasses, then Schiff was mistaken that he saw those things.

When Elvira Nieto testified about her devastation at the death of her son, 
Pointer asked her about her husband’s feelings as well. “Objection,” shouted 
Baumgartner, as though what a wife said about her husband’s grief should be 
disqualified as hearsay. The judge overruled her. At another point, Justin 
Fritz apologised to the Nietos for the outcome of his 911 call and seemed 
distressed. Refugio Nieto allowed Fritz to hug him; his wife did not. “Refugio 
later said that at that moment he was reminded of Alex’s words,” Adriana told 
me, “that even with the people that we have conflict with, we need to take the 
higher ground and show the best of ourselves.”

Adriana sat with the Nietos every day of the trial, translating for them when 
the court-appointed translator was off duty. Bac Sierra, in an impeccable suit 
and tie, was right behind them every day, in the first of three rows of benches 
usually full of friends and supporters. Nieto’s uncle often attended, as did 
Ely Flores, another young Latino who was Nieto’s best friend and a fellow 
Buddhist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9be281345613e0bb7e5b15e86a0c7c9891c2d226%2F0_0_5472_3282%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20by%20gentrification%3A%20the%20killing%20that%20shamed%20San%20Francisco%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20by%20gentrification%3A%20the%20killing%20that%20shamed%20San%20Francisco%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fdeath-by-gentrification-the-killing-that-shamed-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9be281345613e0bb7e5b15e86a0c7c9891c2d226%2F0_0_5472_3282%2F5472.jpg>
 Elvira and Refugio Nieto take part in a protest march. Photograph: Steve 
Rhodes/Demotix/Corbis 
It was a civil trial, so the standard was not “beyond a reasonable doubt”, 
just the “preponderance of evidence”. No one was facing prison, but if the city 
and officers were found liable, there could be a large financial settlement and 
it could affect the careers of the policemen. The trial was covered by several 
local media outlets. On Thursday 10 March, after an afternoon and morning of 
deliberations, the eight jurors – five white, one Asian woman and two Asian men 
– unanimously ruled in favour of the police on all counts.

Flores wept in the hallway. The American Civil Liberties Union of Northern 
California published a response to the verdict headlined, “Would Alex Nieto 
Still Be Alive if He Were White 
<https://www.aclunc.org/blog/would-alex-nieto-still-be-alive-if-he-were-white>
?” Police are now investigating claims that Officer Morse posted a sneering 
attack on Nietoon a friend’s Facebook page that night 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/joelanderson/san-francisco-police-looking-into-facebook-post-by-cop-clear#.jjRbxgA8z>
.

San Francisco is now a cruel place and a divided one. A month before the 
trial, the city’s mayor, Ed Lee, decided to sweep the homeless off the streets 
for the Super Bowl, even though the game was played 40 miles away, at the new 
49ers stadium in Silicon Valley. Online rants about the city’s homeless 
population have become symptomatic of the city’s culture clash. Theopen letter 
to the mayor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/17/san-francisco-tech-open-letter-i-dont-want-to-see-homeless-riff-raff>
 published in mid-February by Justin Keller, founder of a not very successful 
startup, was typical in tone: “I know people are frustrated about 
gentrification happening in the city, but the reality is, we live in a free 
market society. The wealthy working people have earned their right to live in 
the city. They went out, got an education, work hard, and earned it. I 
shouldn’t have to worry about being accosted. I shouldn’t have to see the pain, 
struggle, and despair of homeless people to and from my way to work every day.” 
And like Evan Snow, who wanted to blow away Alejandro Nieto after their 
encounter, Keller got his wish in a way. Pushed out of other areas, hundreds of 
homeless people began to set up tents under the freeway overpass around 
Division Street on the edge of the Mission, a gritty industrial area with few 
residences. The mayor destroyed this rainy-season refuge too: city workers 
threw tents and belongings into dump trucks and hounded the newly propertyless 
onward. One of the purges came before dawn the morning the Nieto trial began.

When the trial ended with a verdict in favour of the police, 150 or so people 
gathered inside at the Mission Cultural Center and outside on rainy Mission 
Street. People were composed, resolute, disappointed, but far from shocked. It 
was clear that most of them had never counted on confirmation from the 
authorities that what happened to Alex Nieto was wrong. They did not need that 
validation. Their sense of principle and history was not going to be swayed by 
this verdict, even if they were saddened or angered by it. Bac Sierra, out of 
his courtroom suits and in a T-shirt and cap, spoke passionately, as did Oscar 
Salinas, who had justposted on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/icefreenyc/posts/968908713202884:0> the words: “Alex 
you will never be forgotten, your parents will always be taken care of by us, 
the community. As I’ve always said, the unspoken word of La Mision is when 
someone is hurting, needs help, or passes we come together as a family and take 
care of them.”

The Nietos spoke, with Adriana translating for those who did not understand 
Spanish. And Adriana spoke on her own behalf: “One of the most important 
changes in my path being involved in the Alex Nieto case has been to learn more 
about restorative practices, because as someone trained in legal systems, I 
know that the pain and fear that we are not safe from police in our communities 
will not go away until there is personal accountability by those who harm us.”

Fear that we aren't safe from police in our communities won't go away until 
there's accountability by those who harm us
Adriana Camarena 
Adriana, her historian husband, and their friends – including an Aids activist 
and a choreographer – who live nearby in a ramshackle old building, had faced 
their own eviction battle last year, and won it. But the community that came 
together that night was still vulnerable to the economic forces tearing the 
city apart. Many of these people may have to move on soon, some already have.

The death of Alex Nieto is a story of one young man torn apart by bullets, and 
of a community coming together to remember him. They pursued more than justice, 
as the case became a cause, as the expressions became an artistic outpouring in 
videos, posters, and memorials, and as friendships and alliances were forged 
and strengthened. Adriana Camarena told the crowd: “Our victory, as the Nietos 
said yesterday, is that we are still together.”

Main photograph: Gabrielle Lurie for the Guardian

Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.

• This article was amended on 29 March 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that Justin Fritz had described Nieto to a 911 dispatcher as 
“probably foreign”. That was based on a mishearing of a recording of the call. 
In fact Fritz was describing Nieto’s height and said he was “probably six-one”. 
We apologise for the error.
 