
Judging by all the indicators, capital punishment in America is gasping for 
its last breath, according to theend-of-year report 
<http://www.deathpenaltyinfo.org/YearEnd2016> from the Death Penalty 
Information Center, a non-partisan authority on the subject.

 * This year, 20 prisoners have been judicially killed. That’s down from 28 in 
2015, and vastly below the peak of 98 executions in 1999 at the height of the 
panic over urban crime and the crack epidemic.

 * New death sentences, the lifeblood of the capital system, also fell to 
historic lows. Some 30 prisoners are likely to be put on death row by year’s 
end – fewer than at any time since the death penalty was temporarily halted in 
1972 and another mighty drop since the 1996 peak of 315 new capital sentences. 
 * The practice is essentially withering on the vine: fewer condemned 
individuals are coming into the system than old-timers, who are having their 
sentences commuted or overturned or are leaving or dying of natural causes (as 
natural, that is, as causes get on death row). There were 2,984 prisoners on 
death row at the start of the year and 2,905 at its end. 
The report abounds with vivid details of the moribund state of the judicial 
death business. In 2016, fully 80% of all executions were carried out by just 
two states – Georgia and Texas.

Georgia had the dubious distinction of knocking Texas off its perch as the 
death penalty capital of the nation. Georgia took the lives of nine people, 
overtaking Texas’s seven.

Death row: the lawyer who keeps losing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/death-row-the-lawyer-who-keeps-losing>
Texas imposed just four new death sentences this year, down from 48 in the 
peak year of 1999. Even more eye-catching for those familiar with Texas’s dark 
racial history, this was only the second year since 1982 that the state failed 
to snuff out the life of a single black man.

If 2016 amounted to a full-throated whimper, it certainly lacked a bang. The 
ultimate termination of the practice rests with the US supreme court, which has 
the power to rule capital punishment unconstitutional under the eighth 
amendment ban on cruel and unusual punishment.

With President-elect Donald Trump poised to fill the court’s vacant ninth seat 
with a hardline conservative, the prospect of a judicial resolution is receding 
rapidly into the distance. Should Trump get a second justice pick during his 
term in office, locking in a rightwing majority, that would further push back 
hopes of a definitive ending for at least a generation.

So it seems likely that the long, excruciatingly drawn out death of the death 
penalty will continue, in an echo of some of its own recent executions. For 
another striking feature of 2016 was that although the incidents of judicial 
killings fell to a historic low, there was still a sufficient number to 
generate deep unease about the nature of the prisoners’ convictions and 
stomach-churning spectacles within the death chamber.

The Death Penalty Information Center points out that no fewer than three 
prisoners were executed despite strong evidence that they were intellectually 
disabled, rendering their deaths unconstitutional.Adam Ward 
<http://www.newsweek.com/adam-ward-texas-execution-mental-illness-439570> was 
executed in Texas despite being mentally ill – he had a history of bipolar 
disorder and depression since the age of 18 – again making his execution a 
breach of the US constitution.

The African American prisoner Kenneth Fults 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/03/fults-death-penalty-racism> was 
executed by Georgia having been sentenced to death by a juror who said “that’s 
what that nigger deserved”.

There was no shortage of gruesome scenes during the lethal injection 
procedure. Despite mounting evidence of the risk of using the sedative 
midazolam, Alabama decided to go ahead with the drug to execute Ronald Smith 
earlier this month. The prisoner wasreported 
<http://www.al.com/news/birmingham/index.ssf/2016/12/alabama_death_row_inmate_is_se.html>
 to have heaved and coughed for 13 minutes.

As recently as this week, shock waves could still be felt over attempts by US 
prisons to circumvent the boycott by drug companies and countries of the use of 
medicines in lethal injections. On Monday, a federal judgeimposed a stay 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/federal-judge-issues-stay-upcoming-ohio-executions-44289914>
 on the next three executions scheduled in Ohio to give time to consider a 
legal challenge against its three-drug protocol that includes midazolam.

Then on Tuesday, Arizona agreed to a legal settlement filed in a US district 
court in which it became the first state to vow never again to use midazolam in 
any of its lethal injections. The deal followed the 2014 botched execution of 
Joseph Wood in which the prisoner was seen to be struggling for almost two 
hours.
 