
Deborah Thomas, the high-profile chief executive of the company that owns 
Dreamworld, is set to receive performance bonuses of up to $840,000 despitethis 
week’s fatal accident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/oct/25/dreamworld-accident-gold-coast-theme-park>
 at the Gold Coast theme park.

At the annual general meeting of Dreamworld’s parent company, Ardent Leisure, 
Thomas’s “performance rights” appeared set to be approved by shareholders.

Kate Goodchild, from Canberra, her brother Luke Dorsett, his partner, Roozi 
Araghi and New Zealander Cindy Low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/dreamworld-tragedy-victims-remembered-as-wonderful-people>
 were killed at Dreamworld on Tuesday when their raft on the Thunder Rapids 
River ride flipped backwards, throwing them out. Two children, Low’s 
10-year-old son and Goodchild’s 12-year-old daughter,survived the accident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/dreamworld-accident-miracle-escape-for-two-children-on-fatal-theme-park-ride>
.

Dreamworld defends safety record after four deaths on ride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/dreamworld-theme-park-defends-safety-record-after-four-deaths-on-ride>
Dreamworld <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/dreamworld> will reopen 
“as normal” on Saturday but the river ride will remain closed until the 
coronial inquiry into Tuesday’s fatal accident concludes, Ardent Leisure’s 
retiring chairman, Neil Balnaves, told the AGM in Sydney.

Two resolutions were put to the meeting regarding Thomas’s performance rights. 
Based on proxy votes already cast, both appear set to be approved, which would 
reward the new chief executive with $842,000 in shares over the next three 
years under short-term and long-term incentive plans. Thomas took over as chief 
executive in April.

She told the meeting: “It is under extremely sad circumstances that we gather 
here. On behalf of all staff and management, I would like to express our 
deepest and heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of those killed.”

She said the company’s immediate concerns lay with the family and friends of 
the victims, and with guests and staff. Ardent Leisure management and employees 
were “deeply shocked and saddened” by the events.

“I am a mother, I have a family, I take my family to Dreamworld, this could 
have been my family,” she said.

Under combative questioning from the media, Thomas refused to be drawn on the 
appropriateness of accepting a bonus in the wake of the accident. “I’m not 
going to discuss anything to do with that,” she said. “I don’t think it’s 
appropriate.

“Four people died, and we are all shattered by this. Right now I do not want 
to discuss transactions.”

She declined to say whether she would accept the bonuses.

One reporter said she had been in contact with the Dorsett family who said no 
one from Ardent Leisure had spoken to them. Thomas offered to take the family’s 
phone number and promised to call after the meeting: “If I can’t help then 
personally I will ensure we help them in any way possible.”

Told that the Dorsett family were watching the press conference live online, 
Thomas addressed them directly: “Our hearts and thoughts and prayers are with 
you.”

But she declined to comment on the malfunctioning ride or the safety history 
of the attraction, which has run at Dreamworld for 30 years.

It has been reported that the ride broke down earlier in the day, just hours 
before the accident, but had passed a safety inspection to reopen. Internal 
documents from Dreamworld obtained by the Australian Workers’ Union have
revealed concerns about ride safety and inspections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/thirteen-dreamworld-rides-deemed-not-fit-for-service-in-2012-inspection>
.

“I understand the intense interest in this catastrophic event,” Thomas told 
Thursday’s meeting, “but I ask for your patience … as we seek to establish the 
facts.”


Balnaves told the AGM the ride had its “annual tear-down and rebuild” just 
four weeks ago.

Three separate inquiries have been launched into Tuesday’s fatal accident: a 
workplace health and safety inquiry by theQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> government; a police 
report for the coroner; and Dreamworld’s own internal report.

Dreamworld tragedy explainer: what we know so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/dreamworld-tragedy-explainer-what-we-know-so-far>
Balnaves defended the decision to reopen the park commercially on Saturday – 
it will also operate on Friday as a fundraising day for Red Cross – rejecting 
criticism it was insensitive to reopen the gates so soon after the tragedy.

“It is better that people get back to work, get together with their comrades, 
rather than be concerned about their jobs, sitting in isolation,” he said. “It 
is a very fine path, at some point the park will open, but this is driven by 
the utmost respect for the families.”

He added: “We can’t return four lives.”

Another resolution set to pass the AGM is a change of name for the company, 
from Ardent Leisure to Main Event.

The AGM heard that the company’s earnings increased 32% last financial year, 
largely driven by the expansion of bowling, laser tag and other entertainment 
venues in the US.
 