
The federal government is considering a now official request to extend the 
Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> royal 
commission beyond its March reporting date.

The inquiry into the protection and detention of children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
 has been under increasing pressure to finalise its investigation by March 2017 
and deliver a set of recommendations to reform controversial NT systems.

On Wednesday the office of the federal attorney general, George Brandis, 
confirmed that an official request from the commission to extend its 
investigation to August 2017 had been received and was being considered “as a 
matter of priority”. It is expected to make a decision today.

Dylan Voller wasn't violent before he was mistreated in detention, caseworker 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/13/dylan-voller-wasnt-violent-before-he-was-mistreated-in-detention-caseworker-says>
The NT government, despite having made a verbal agreement to share costs for 
at least the current schedule, was not made aware of the request.

It is understood that the verbal agreement – made by the former chief minister 
Adam Giles after Four Corners’ report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/30/northern-territory-to-pay-half-of-50m-cost-of-juvenile-detention-inquiry>
 – could be renegotiated but the royal commission believes it can run until 
August without requiring extra funding.

The NT government has said it would prefer the commission finished sooner 
rather than later so it could factor reforms based on recommendations into its 
first budget, to be delivered in May. A spokesman said any extra dollar spent 
on the commission is a dollar not spent on fixing youth justice.


In September commissioner Mick Gooda flagged an extension would be requested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/06/fears-northen-territory-juvenile-detention-inquiry-rushed-and-inadequate>
 amid fears the tight deadline would not be met.

Last week the solicitor general, acting for the NT government, sought to have 
13 witnesses scratched from this current hearing over concerns that 
insufficient preparation time could result in procedural unfairness. The 
application was opposed by other legal teams who otherwise agreed they were 
also struggling with time.

On Wednesday, the commission heard witness testimony that vitriol and hatred 
spouted by government leaders in effect gave permission to people in charge of 
troubled youth to use force as punishment.

Russell Goldflam, principal legal officer of the NT Legal Aid Commission, 
called for an end of the “demonisation of youth”, which he said occurred under 
the previous Country Liberal party government.

Goldflam cited comments by the former attorney general John Elferink, in 
September 2014, that juvenile offenders were “strapping young lads but goodness 
gracious me we will crack down on them and we will control them”.

This and other statements echoed “a similar period of rhetorical extravagance” 
under the CLP government of the 1990s, which also passed mandatory sentencing 
laws that remained in place until the suicide of a 15-year-old boy inside Don 
Dale.

“The same vitriol and hatred is being propagated [now], not just by shock 
jocks but by the people we’ve elected to run our territory,” Goldflam told the 
commission.

“This background of inflammatory rhetoric is, in my view, extremely dangerous, 
extremely damaging and it infuriates me we haven’t learned from our mistakes 
back in the 1990s when exactly the same thing happened with catastrophic 
consequences.”

Dylan Voller says he felt defenceless and panicked in restraint chair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/12/dylan-voller-says-he-felt-defenceless-panicked-restraint-chair-don-dale-northern-territory>
“What this does is it gives permission to people who have the authority 
lawfully to use force against youths … it gives them permission effectively to 
use that force to punish.”

Goldflam also criticised youth bail conditions, which he said were often 
unable to complied with and which led to detention, and the lack of mental and 
cognitive health services for accused youths.

Minor traffic offences also led to a “cascade” of consequences that led to 
detention, he said.

Asked if he agreed with a statement that “seldom is anything solved by putting 
[a young Aboriginal person] into prison”, Goldflam said yes but added he didn’t 
think children should “never” be put in detention.

“I don’t want to sweep under the carpet the fact there are some very young 
people who commit serious offences … and the justice system is required to deal 
with them.”


On Tuesday he said it was “profoundly upsetting” to be a witness at the royal 
commission after more than two decades of lobbying for change.

“I’ve been doing this for decades and, while we’ve been doing it, things are 
getting no better – possibly things are getting much worse,” he said.

“Things are going on in front of our own noses which we haven’t been able to 
call a halt to and it’s deeply disconcerting to be part of a system, and to 
occupy a role of leadership in that system, when you can see that the system is 
not working the way we purport to make it work.”

Goldflam is the final witness for this public hearing and followed testimony 
from Dylan Voller, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/13/dylan-voller-wasnt-violent-before-he-was-mistreated-in-detention-caseworker-says>
 one of the teenaged detainees at the centre of the juvenile justice scandal.
 