
The life of a celebrity is never easy, loaded as it is with relentlessly 
difficult decisions, such as how to find the optimum camera angle for a selfie. 
Imagine then, how much harder our celebrities’ lives become when a global 
tragedy occurs, and they have to decide not only on the camera angle, but 
whether they should be doing a sadface selfie, in keeping with the public mood, 
or a sexy smiling one to cheer everybody up. All right I’m joking – but only 
just, because Hollywood actorMischa Barton recently had to delete an Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/mischamazing/?hl=en> post for exactly that reason. 
It’s a tricky one, because what she wrote was an impassioned and political rant 
about the death of yet another black man,Alton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-baton-rouge-investigation-department-of-justice>
, at the hands of US police, and the need for gun control and race awareness in 
her country. Yet what she wrote was beside a photograph of herself speeding 
along on the back of a luxury yacht. In a bikini. With her eyes closed, looking 
humbled by her own thoughtfulness. One fan commented, rather politely really, 
that while they agreed with “the sentiment” it was “hard to take you seriously 
while you post a picture of you sipping alcohol on a yacht”.

A few years ago this was all so much easier. Enormous world events such as 9/11
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/september11> could happen, and we barely 
heard a peep out of any celebs, because they didn’t have social media. Well 
apart fromLee Ryan from Blue 
<http://www.bbspy.co.uk/cbb13/news/0122/lee-ryan-defends-september-11-comments-on-celebrity-big-brother-2014>
, who did manage to broadcast his interesting view that nobody should give “a 
f**k about New York, when elephants are being killed”. Many have learned from 
his mistake, and learned to keep quiet about their zoological/human preference. 
But there are still so many other faux pas that a poor celebrity can make.

Mischa Barton on a police killing
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f609097da21a54e627510a455a7849cf9ca41d8%2F4_3_806_483%2F806.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delete%20fast%3A%20when%20celebrities%20get%20it%20wrong%20on%20social%20media&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delete%20fast%3A%20when%20celebrities%20get%20it%20wrong%20on%20social%20media&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f609097da21a54e627510a455a7849cf9ca41d8%2F4_3_806_483%2F806.jpg>
 Cruising into controversy: Mischa Barton composes a post 
Shivering in her white shirt, Mischa Barton shows that the killing, just like 
her white privilege, leaves her chilled. Zoom into the glass in her hand and 
you see the clear liquid it contains is actually a vale of tears, captured as 
they fall from her eyes. Or it could be a slimline vodka tonic. Hard to be sure.

Jennifer Lopez on black lives matter
 Show of strength: JLo says all lives matter 
Trying to show her understanding of the Black Lives Matter campaign, J Lo 
wrote something onTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> 
saying that All Lives Matter, too. Which, of course, they do, but not all lives 
are getting shot at just now, so it’s hardly a mark of solidarity to take away 
from the black movement that’s trying to be heard. J-Lo, it’s not about you 
this time. She later deleted it.

Madonna on the Orlando massacre
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51bca538affbd449a22f6b014102001974771229%2F0_0_626_874%2F626.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delete%20fast%3A%20when%20celebrities%20get%20it%20wrong%20on%20social%20media&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delete%20fast%3A%20when%20celebrities%20get%20it%20wrong%20on%20social%20media&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51bca538affbd449a22f6b014102001974771229%2F0_0_626_874%2F626.jpg>
 Kiss and make it better: Madonna and Britney get intimate on stage 
After the Orlando massacre in a nightclub, Madonna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> reached out to show that her heart 
was deeply entrenched in gay culture – by uploading a photo of her snogging 
Britney Spears on stage to cash in on a bit of pretend lesbo attention, while 
they both had boyfriends at home. A heartfelt commenter wrote: “OK, it’s time 
to lay off the memes, sis.”

Bianca Jagger on the Iraq War
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17c7b1f3798cc3b0a308e9018123923de12901a6%2F223_245_2486_1490%2F2486.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delete%20fast%3A%20when%20celebrities%20get%20it%20wrong%20on%20social%20media&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delete%20fast%3A%20when%20celebrities%20get%20it%20wrong%20on%20social%20media&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fdelete-fast-when-celebrities-get-in-wrong-on-social-media%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17c7b1f3798cc3b0a308e9018123923de12901a6%2F223_245_2486_1490%2F2486.jpg>
 Right idea, wrong list…: Bianca Jagger Photograph: Nick Harvey/REX/Shutterstock
The internet is a risky place, where you can retweet something you haven’t 
actually read, at 4am. Bianca Jagger tweeted a list of Labour MPs who voted in 
the Iraq War so we could all shout at them, not stopping to notice that this 
curious list also denoted them as “Negro”, “Infamous homosexual”, or 
“Judeo-negress hybrid”. Oops.
 