 The millions who took to the streets on February 15 2003 didn't stop the war 
in Iraq, but the lesson too many extrapolated from that extraordinary march was 
the wrong one. Crowds out in the streets do have power, and they sometimes do 
change what goes on in governments. The third month of this year could have 
been called the month of marching, as students across France, migrants and 
migrant-rights activists across the US, and citizens across Nepal, took to the 
streets.
The mostly Latino marchers in the US sent a forceful message to Washington: 
that they would not be forever silent, fearful and exploitable, and they pushed 
back some of their demonisers. Theirs were some of the biggest demonstrations 
ever seen in Los Angeles and Chicago; nationwide their demonstrations swelled 
into the greatest May Day celebrations in a century in my country.

Sometimes it seems that the fate of the world is decided entirely in the ether 
of electronic communications and corporate backroom deals. That some portion is 
still determined by citizens gathering together in public is deeply reassuring 
and a little subversive - subversive of the postmodern tendency to dismiss 
bodies and places as anachronisms, of the mainstream's insistence that change 
doesn't come from outside.

But rather than see these demonstrations on foot as extraordinary, it is 
important to see them as an extension of the ordinary. The exercise of 
democracy begins as exercise, as walking around, becoming familiar with the 
streets, comfortable with strangers, able to imagine your own body as powerful 
and expressive rather than a pawn. People who are at home in their civic space 
preserve the power to protest and revolt, whereas those who have been 
sequestered into private space do not.

More and more I think of privatisation as being not just about the takeover of 
resources and power by corporate interests, but as the retreat of citizens to 
private life and private space, screened from solidarity with strangers and 
increasingly afraid or even unable to imagine acting in public. This is how 
human beings get downgraded from citizens to consumers. We talk about 
politicians being in public life, but they seldom appear in the public space 
where everyone is free to appear as a citizen.

You can design democracy out of a landscape. The University of California at 
Santa Cruz is infamous for having been designed to lure away student radicals. 
It sequesters them in a beautiful, isolated campus with no centre, 
geographically or symbolically, and therefore no place to gather and make a 
difference. The students have taken action anyway, most recently by driving 
military recruiters off campus in April, but they are handicapped by design. If 
Los Angeles has a less vital political culture than my own city, San Francisco, 
it too seemed to be partly a matter of design, if not intent: little pedestrian 
life, no boulevards ideal for marching, no plazas perfect for speechifying - 
almost nothing of the old civic landscape that has made cities such as Prague 
and Paris ideal for revolution. There cars are the measure of all things, and 
bodies often seem hapless, obsolete, certainly inadequate to navigate the 
sprawling spaces.

But on March 25, an overwhelmingly Latino crowd of migrant-rights supporters 
overcame the terrain to promenade together. Estimated at up to a million 
people, the demonstrations made it an unprecedented moment in LA history. 
Across the US, the question that hovers is: will we suburbanise Latinos before 
they urbanise us? Latino migrants en masse often revitalise a community by 
bringing a social, pedestrian energy to the often-empty sidewalks and streets 
of this country, and this activity that is often purely social easily becomes 
political.

There's a continuum between promenades, parades, festivals and uprisings, a 
continuum of active bodies and public boldness. And there's an eros of public 
life too, not as simple as cruising or getting picked up, but a more dispersed 
business of bodily confidence and pleasure in the company of strangers, 
coexisting under the same sky and perhaps finding the same passions.

For democracy itself is in part a bodily, tangible life, which is why 
dictators begin by forbidding public gatherings and groups. They know that 
democracy must be exercised, regularly and on foot. Few others seem to remember 
it; even the American Civil Liberties Union defends freedom of speech, the 
press, and religion far more often than the right of the people peaceably to 
assemble. Walking itself is often seen as a pleasant, rural, wholesome 
activity, simply because we don't often enough take stock of urban walking, of 
the life of crowds, of the vitality of the streets, and of the potential for 
revolt that always hovers there.

These days it often seems as though bodies themselves are becoming obsolete, 
ineffectual, inadequate to traverse the strange new car-scale world we've 
built, and this is both a political and an ecological catastrophe. But there 
are places, communities, and moments when the power of the people asserts 
itself, in public, in the streets, on foot, and they still matter.

Â· Rebecca Solnit is an activist and cultural historian, and author of 
Wanderlust: A history of walking, published by Verso

comment@theguardian.com <mailto:comment@theguardian.com>
 