
When the R&A sold the broadcast rights to the Open for £15m a year to Sky it 
tried to calm the chorus of critics by pointing out that an expected drop in 
viewing figures would be worth it because of the improved breadth and quality 
of coverage of one of British sport’s crown‑jewel events.

After the three days of wall-to-wall coverage from Royal Troon so far, 
including a host of technical advancements and much more insight than the BBC – 
on a limited budget – could ever offer,there can be no doubt that Sky Sports 
has succeeded in doing that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/14/the-open-sky-sports-bbc-gizmos>
. It is hardly a surprise, though. Sky has covered golf incredibly well for 
years now and is following much the same format as that of the other three 
majors to which the broadcaster holds the rights.

Sky’s early worm eye view catches the birdies on Open debut | Barry Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/14/the-open-sky-sports-bbc-gizmos>
From walk-on holograms of players shifting around uncomfortably before 
checking their yardage books, to Sarah Stirk’s well-informed post-round 
interactive interviews in front of a giant monitor in the popular Open Zone, 
the coverage is incredibly slick.

Nick Dougherty and Ian Poulter offer tidbits of wisdom as to how the golfers 
get their minds and bodies in tune, while the respected swing guru Butch Harmon 
reveals in-the-know nuggets of information about the behind-the-scenes efforts 
being made by golfers to improve their games. His son Claude meanwhile, offers 
practice range demonstrations of the varying techniques that we can expect to 
see from leading players to counter conditions. No stone goes unturned.

Olympic debacle is latest mis-hit in golf’s round of poor publicity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/16/golf-olympic-games-players-pull-out-rio-open-troon>
But for all that there is a sense that Sky is taking itself a little too 
seriously. There was a moment when Phil Mickelson lost control of his ball – 
and temper – due to the fierce wind before looking directly into the camera to 
berate its operator for getting too close and hindering his “ability to play”. 
It is the kind of thing Peter Alliss, for all his faults, would laugh off with 
a bumbling aside. On Sky? Only awkward silence.

Similarly, with torrential rain making the camera operator’s job of picking 
out a drive on the 1st tee near impossible, Richard Boxall felt impelled to 
issue an apology. “It’s difficult for our cameraman, very difficult,” he 
muttered in the manner of an embarrassed parent excusing a mischievous child. 
Viewers understand. It is golf by the rain-lashed Scottish coast. Visibility is 
always going to be an issue.

Perhaps Sky is trying too hard, mindful that whatever it does there will be 
groans as to the drop in viewing figures, down almost 80% to a peak of just 
347,000 after the first round, compared to a high-point of 1.5m for the opening 
day on theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> last year.

Andrew Johnston taps into Beef mania to be England’s big hope at the Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/andrew-johnston-beef-england-the-open-golf>
The two broadcasters are catering for vastly different audiences; Sky to the 
enthusiast with a thirst for detail who wants regular updates about the 
stimpmeter (look it up); the BBC to the casual observer who is happy to have 
golf as background noise, a steady companion chuntering on about children 
eating ice creams and how the Scottish rain will all end up as whisky.

With that in mind, Sky is doing an admirable job and showing signs of 
loosening up as the tournament reaches its climax. Ewen Murray’s relaxed 
commentary is a soothing presence and his chemistry with Harmon leads to some 
playful exchanges. “Look at those little guys. They’re having fun,” drawls 
Harmon as dogs chase one another on the Ayrshire sands. Fun? A little more of 
that and Sky will be fine.
 