
The UK’s Department for International Development does not fully understand 
how taxpayers’ money is spent, and the value of its aid is undermined by 
inadequacies in the UN system, a parliamentary spending watchdog says.

The public accounts committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/>
 said DfID does a “good job” in responding to crises overseas, buturged 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmpubacc/728/72802.htm>
 the department to use its influence at next month’sworld humanitarian summit 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> in Istanbul to secure “much needed 
change” to the UN-led humanitarian system. It said the department also needed 
to do more to track its spending in long-running crises.

Big aid donors failing to lift the lid on how they spend their cash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/big-aid-donors-failing-spend-cash-campaign-transparency>
“It is important to recognise DfID has had a positive impact in responding to 
some desperate situations around the world,” said Meg Hillier, the PAC chair.

 “It is also important that, however public money is spent, the government is 
held to account for that spending. In responding to crises, achieving value for 
money means critical support can be provided more effectively to more of the 
people who need it. The taxpayer pound goes further,” she said.

DfID has often come under fire for how it spends the 0.7% of UK income pledged 
for foreign aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
. It has beencriticised for overambitious spending and a naive tendency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/05/uk-aid-watchdog-slams-dfid-over-naive-security-and-justice-initiatives>
 to repeat unsuccessful initiatives, as well as itsuse of UK-based consultancy 
firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/01/uk-aid-budget-consultancy-firms-campaign-group-global-justice-now>
.

The committee said DfID’s spending on humanitarian crises had trebled in the 
four years to 2014-15 to exceed £1bn, with the agency recognised as a major 
player. It praised the commitment and bravery shown by DfID staff in dangerous 
environments, noting that the agency was responding to 21 crises with a range 
of causes, including conflict, natural disasters and disease.

DfID had achieved “tangible results” in several crises, including controlling 
theEbola outbreak in Sierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/apr/15/sierra-leone-saving-lives-mothers-babies-maternal-mortality-in-pictures>
, helping people in theHorn of Africa cope better with food shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/03/we-are-waiting-to-die-ethiopians-pray-even-as-drought-response-praised>
 and aiding the government of the Philippines to prepare better for typhoons, 
it said.

Although it said DfID was viewed as “innovative, agile and influential”, the 
spending watchdog concluded the department did not “have a full and clear 
understanding of what constitutes success across its crisis interventions”. It 
noted the lack of a structured approach for protracted interventions, which 
limits DfID’s ability to learn valuable lessons.

“The department can improve value for money, particularly in its response to 
those complex, long-running crises, such as Syria and Yemen, in which it is 
increasingly involved. It needs to strengthen its systems for resourcing and 
assessing the performance of its interventions, as well as improving its 
oversight of partners,” it said.

DfID should routinely “identify all the bodies involved in providing 
assistance, the funding each receives and the main costs incurred. It should 
use this information to help manage risk and identify cost-effective partners 
and practices,” it said.


With aid under attack, let's be honest about how we spend taxpayers' money | 
Simon O'Connell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/06/aid-under-attack-honest-spend-taxpayers-money-dfid-mercy-corps-syria>
Noting that UN agencies received around half of the department’s £1.3bn 
spending on humanitarian activities in 2014-15, the report warned that value 
for money was undermined by overlapping remits and inflexibility in the UN 
system.

“The department has found it difficult to influence the UN to adapt its 
structure and the practices of individual UN bodies to improve their 
effectiveness,” it said.

The watchdog urged DfID to report back on how well it had managed to push 
three priorities for UN reform – encouraging its agencies to work together; 
improve their data and extend the duration of their support for partners – at 
the world humanitarian summit.

“The department is an influential player globally and it must make full use of 
this influence to help secure change in the humanitarian system,” Hillier said.

Barry Johnston, head of advocacy at ActionAid <https://www.actionaid.org.uk/>, 
said the government should bemore transparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/oct/10/aid-donors-failing-transparency-targets-publish-what-you-fund>
 in showing how UK aid helps people affected by crises.

“Britain continues to honour its proud history of helping people in need, 
especially women and girls living in poverty or at risk of violence… Next 
month’s world humanitarian summit provides an opportunity for the UK to 
champion greater transparency and effectiveness of aid spending,” he said.

DfID said it welcomed the committee’s recognition of its success in tackling a 
wide range of crises. “The government’s aid strategy places a heavy focus on 
ensuring value for money, and the UK is playing a lead role in discussions on 
the future of the international humanitarian system and overseas development, 
including the role of UN agencies,” a department spokesperson said.
 