
Do you think it’s OK to say someone’s ugly? Not to their face (if you could 
bear it), but in a context they might hear about. Or on TV, which might be 
saying it to their face if their face happened to be watching it on TV and the 
screen didn’t shatter. Some people would say it isn’t OK. Others would say it 
is. The rest of us would be a lot better off without either of those groups, in 
my opinion.

What I think the rest of us would say is, “It depends on your definition of 
‘OK’.” If we take “OK” to mean “nice”, “polite”, “admirable” or “kind”, then it 
isn’t. But if, by OK, we simply mean “legal”, then of course it’s OK. And quite 
right too. It may not be a pleasant thing to do, the rest of us would say, but 
it should certainly be allowed.

Well, it’s not allowed in Canada. Comedian Mike Ward has just been fined 
$42,000 by the Quebec Human Rights Tribunal 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal/mike-ward-appeal-verdict-petit-jeremy-1.3688771>
 for a comic riff at the expense of Jérémy Gabriel, a young disabled singer, 
which culminated in the line: “I didn’t know what illness he had, so I Googled 
it and it turns out he’s just ugly.” Ward is incensed by the ruling and has 
responded with an Edinburgh fringe show, entitled“Freedom of Speech Isn’t Free” 
<https://edinburghfestival.list.co.uk/article/82447-interview-mike-ward-people-are-insane-and-too-goddamn-sensitive/>
. Neither is putting on an Edinburgh fringe show, if memory serves me right. If 
I were his bank manager, I’d text him the first rule of holes.

It’s ironic that Ward’s joke has been broadcast so much more widely as a 
result of the tribunal’s ruling

There’s a strange reverse-libel system at work when it comes to insults to 
people’s appearance. It’s not lies that people mind, it’s honesty. If you call 
a beautiful person ugly, no one much cares – it just reflects badly on your 
eyesight. It’s saying it when it’s true that’s taboo. Echoing the unexpressed 
thought in others’ minds is what gives greatest offence. To a person who’s been 
called ugly, the louder the offended clamour against the insult, the greater 
the implied endorsement of the insulter’s opinion.

Which isn’t to say that the Quebec Human Rights Tribunal secretly shares 
Ward’s view of Gabriel’s appearance. The tribunal is a body dedicated to 
stamping out unfair discrimination, and its judgment, as expressed by Justice 
Scott Hughes, is that “The discrimination that Jérémy fell victim to is 
unjustifiable.” Jérémy himself has claimed that Ward’s riff “made me think my 
life is worth less than another’s because I’m handicapped”.

So it’s the fact that Jérémy Gabriel is disabled that makes insulting him 
unlawful, according to the tribunal. Which, as Ward has pointed out himself, 
sounds a bit discriminatory in itself. So it’s fine to insult someone without a 
disability, but a disabled person can’t take it? They have to be given an easy 
ride, a life of patronising compliments. It all sounds a bit “Does he take 
sugar?” and unlikely to result in a marked increase in the number of 
wheelchair-using CEOs.

It’s not as if anyone, whether disabled or not, is really in control of their 
appearance. We can have a bit of a go – wash regularly, dress smartly, try and 
stay in shape – or a massive go – get hair implants, facelifts, tattoos, 
piercings and perms — but our look is primarily determined by nature, and some 
people are just uglier than others. We can’t help it any more than if we were 
also deaf. Why is it logical that legal protection against facial slurs should 
only be extended to disabled badge holders? If you’re going to fine people for 
calling others ugly, on the basis that being called ugly makes someone feel 
like shit, why not extend that to the whole community, not just those with 
parking privileges?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fmike-ward-comedian-ugly-jeremy-gabriel-freedom-of-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac42154706a6e949d9f6c65788d11122ecf8e304%2F0_0_1946_2753%2F1946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Did%20you%20hear%20the%20one%20about%20the%20%E2%80%98ugly%E2%80%99%20disabled%20singer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fmike-ward-comedian-ugly-jeremy-gabriel-freedom-of-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Did%20you%20hear%20the%20one%20about%20the%20%E2%80%98ugly%E2%80%99%20disabled%20singer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fmike-ward-comedian-ugly-jeremy-gabriel-freedom-of-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac42154706a6e949d9f6c65788d11122ecf8e304%2F0_0_1946_2753%2F1946.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Much of the above makes it sound as if I like Mike Ward’s joke, which I don’t. 
But I haven’t seen it in context. I can understand how a long tirade against 
Gabriel’s ubiquity in the Canadian media might be funny. He’dcome to prominence 
<http://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/who-are-mike-ward-and-jeremy-gabriel>
 as a frail child who’d been picked to sing for the pope – and then he stayed 
in the papers, day after day, month after month, endlessly, unjustifiably, like 
a slightly more deserving Kate Middleton.

Channelling frustration at the media’s mawkish, uninventive, repetitive 
page-filling pap into rage against a vulnerable child could be funny, purely 
because it’s unfair and disproportionate, but with a kernel of irritation that 
the audience shares. The viciousness of the punchline must have rounded it off 
very effectively. I can imagine, in context, laughing at that. I don’t think it 
makes Mike Ward a horrible person.

But it is mean, there’s no doubt. In a way, the target is the media’s banality 
and vacuous feelgood nonsense, but what elicits the laugh is almost certainly 
the dig at the disabled boy’s face. I think, if I’d made that joke, I’d find 
myself hoping Jérémy Gabriel never found out about it. I think it’s material 
I’d regret.

Right up to the point, that is, when some judge told me it was unlawful. It 
would take a statement of spellbinding barbarity such as this from Justice 
Hughes – “Unacceptable remarks in private do not automatically become lawful 
when delivered by a comedian in the public sphere” – to engender pride in what 
I’d said. The notion that remarks we make in private are not “automatically… 
lawful” is totalitarian.

Give a big cheer for our political correctness | Barbara Ellen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/26/freedom-of-speech-political-correctness>
And it’s ironic that Ward’s joke, which most people would probably find a bit 
unpleasant, has been retrospectively dignified, and broadcast so much more 
widely, as a result of the tribunal’s ruling. What was a nasty thing to say – 
probably funny in the room, but harsh and without much satirical justification 
– has been ennobled by proscription. The unkind has become the transgressive.

Does the tribunal really believe this sort of fine will do any good? Does it 
think those groups within Canada that are susceptible to discrimination will be 
helped by giving jokes at their expense the glamour of illegality? There is no 
suggestion that Mike Ward doesn’t believe in equality of opportunity for 
disabled people and yet the tribunal’s ruling has made him its enemy and turned 
a vulnerable disabled teenager into the poster boy for censorship.

The tribunal’s powers undermine principles vital to a liberal society, while 
simultaneously allowing those who want to express properly racist, sexist or 
homophobic views to present themselves as freedom-fighters. It is prepared to 
sacrifice liberty in the name of equality, a truly ignoble compromise. As a 
result, it imperils both.
 