
Dippy the diplodocus 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/discover/diplodocus-this-is-your-life.html>, star of the 
Natural History Museum since 1905, host of dinner parties and films, terrifier 
of small children, is leaving his post as guardian of the huge entrance hall 
and embarking on Britain’s firstdinosaur tour 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/about-us/national-impact/diplodocus-on-tour.html>.


As well as museums, the colossal skeleton will be shown in a community centre, 
the Welsh devolved assembly, and a cathedral. Eight venues have been chosen in 
all, including those in Belfast to Birmingham, Glasgow and Dorset. All will be 
free to the public.

One of the most unusual will be Norwich Cathedral 
<http://www.cathedral.org.uk/>, a juxtaposition of evolution and religion that 
might have amused Darwin, and still might fans of Richard Dawkins. The 
900-year-old church was built to inspire humanity by its size and magnificence, 
a feat the dinosaur managed when it was unearthed in 1898, four decades after 
the Origin of Species.

In Rochdale, the venue will be more down-to-earth, in the form of a community 
centre 
<http://www.rochdale.gov.uk/planning-and-building/regenerating-the-borough/Pages/number-one-riverside.aspx>
which the museum describes as a “destination for day-to-day life, rather than 
culture”, housing social services, council offices and a library. Councillors 
are braving the inevitable comparisons with the dinosaur.

The plans for Dippy’s planned removal provoked outrage in some quarters 
<http://metro.co.uk/2015/01/29/150-million-year-old-dippy-retires-from-natural-history-museum-5040657/>
 and the Twitter hashtag #savedippy whenfirst announced early last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/29/dippy-diplodocus-displaced-natural-history-museum>
, but the museum is now confident that the tour will prove popular.

“We wanted Dippy to visit unusual locations so he can draw in people who may 
not traditionally visit a museum. Making iconic items accessible to as many 
people as possible is at the heart of what museums give to the nation,” said 
Sir Michael Dixon, director of theNatural History Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/natural-history-museum>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdinosaur-on-tour-host-venues-for-dippy-the-diplodocus-announced-natural-history-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f1820f009e23b604dce3246e371a78e008d0d23%2F0_0_4420_2856%2F4420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dinosaur%20on%20tour%3A%20host%20venues%20for%20Dippy%20the%20diplodocus%20announced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdinosaur-on-tour-host-venues-for-dippy-the-diplodocus-announced-natural-history-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dinosaur%20on%20tour%3A%20host%20venues%20for%20Dippy%20the%20diplodocus%20announced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdinosaur-on-tour-host-venues-for-dippy-the-diplodocus-announced-natural-history-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f1820f009e23b604dce3246e371a78e008d0d23%2F0_0_4420_2856%2F4420.jpg>
 An artist’s impression of how the blue whale skeleton will look suspended and 
“diving” from the ceiling of the Hintze Hall. Photograph: Natural History 
Museum/PA 
Dippy’s iconic status – he has been the first sight for visitors to the 
Natural History Museum since 1979, when he was moved to tower over the central 
hall – makes him an ideal ambassador for science education, according to the 
organisers. “Few museum objects are better known, and surely no one object 
better evokes the awesome diversity of species that have lived on earth,” said 
Dixon.

Children in particular are likely to be drawn to the 21-metre-long, 
4.25-metre-high skeleton, said Philippa Charles, director of the Garfield 
Weston Foundation, which is financing the tour. “Generations of children have 
been awestruck by Dippy’s spectacular presence, and we hope he continues to 
inspire the nation to rediscover nature as he works his way round the UK.”

Curators hope the dinosaur’s replacement, the skeleton of a blue whale 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/visit/galleries-and-museum-map/mammals-and-blue-whale.html>
, will become no less iconic. Blue whales, the largest mammals on the planet, 
arelisted as endangered <http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/2477/0>, with fewer 
than 15,000 estimated to be in our oceans today, compared with more than 
240,000 likely to have been living before they were hunted to the brink of 
extinction for their oil, meat and bones.

The switch from a dinosaur to a whale is also symbolic of the evolving role of 
museums from treasure-houses of historic relics to places to help conserve the 
present as well as the past,encouraging visitors to explore the living world 
around them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/30/evict-dippy-dinosaur-natural-history-museum-blue-whale>
.

Curators are hoping that their blue whale, which will be accompanied by 
interactive exhibits highlighting its evolution, natural habitats and current 
plight, will serve to represent both human responsibility for pushing a species 
to the brink of extinction and our continuing responsibility for its protection 
and recovery. The museum now wants to emphasise the “natural” now as much as 
“history”.

The whale, a female which has been on display elsewhere in the museum since 
soon after it was beached in County Wexford, Ireland, in 1891, is as yet 
unnamed. No decision has been taken on whether to have a public competition or 
whether a name will naturally develop among visitors, as happened with Dippy. 
The prospect of Whaley McWhaleface may encourage the latter.

While the whale skeleton is genuine, few visitors are aware that Dippy is 
essentially a fake - a plaster-cast copy that is actually a composite of 
several diplodocuses. It was inspired by the discovery of anastonishingly 
near-complete original in Wyoming in 1899 
<http://www.carnegiemnh.org/online/dinosaurs/diplodocus.html> by workers 
building a new railway, and billed by newspapers at the time as “the most 
colossal animal ever on earth”. Andrew Carnegie, the Scottish-born billionaire, 
acquired the bones for his museum in Pittsburg, and when scientists discovered 
it was a previously unknown species of diplodocus it was named after him:
Diplodocus carnegii.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdinosaur-on-tour-host-venues-for-dippy-the-diplodocus-announced-natural-history-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F441d727867f8022a7bc91e30920658e35944fc08%2F183_0_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dinosaur%20on%20tour%3A%20host%20venues%20for%20Dippy%20the%20diplodocus%20announced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdinosaur-on-tour-host-venues-for-dippy-the-diplodocus-announced-natural-history-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dinosaur%20on%20tour%3A%20host%20venues%20for%20Dippy%20the%20diplodocus%20announced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdinosaur-on-tour-host-venues-for-dippy-the-diplodocus-announced-natural-history-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F441d727867f8022a7bc91e30920658e35944fc08%2F183_0_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Dippy in the position he has occupied since 1979. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo
Royalty intervened to bring a plaster cast to the UK, when King Edward VII 
visited Carnegie at his Scottish castle and said he would like one too. The 
copy arrived in London in 1905, with the incomplete parts of the skeleton 
replaced with pieces from other finds.

During the second world war, Dippy was dismantled and kept in boxes in the 
vaults under the museum, to keep it safe from bombs.

Dippy would originally have lived about 150m years ago, in the late Jurassic 
period. Diplodocus, of which several species are known, ate only plants and 
grew to 30 metres long and weighed 15 tonnes, making them some of the largest 
creatures ever to have walked the earth. They walked on four legs with a long 
neck and a longer tail with 80 vertebrae, that could be flicked like a whip.

Even when Dippy departs, the Natural History Museum will still boast halls 
full of dinosaur bones, fossils, eggs and models - including the first
Tyrannosaurus rex ever to be discovered - a Triceratops skull and an Iguanodon, 
one of the first species to be described as a dinosaur. Judging by the 
reactions of some of the youngest visitors recently, these will continue to be 
the biggest draw, both as exhibitions and in the gift shop.

The last day on show in London for Dippy will be 4 January, following a month 
of special events celebrating dinosaurs, after which the museum’s conservators 
will spend a year preparing the cast for the journey.

Dippy will be on show from 2018 on a tour taking nearly three years, starting 
in the Dorset County Museum on the Jurassic Coast, and taking in the Ulster 
Museum in Belfast, Birmingham Museum, the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum in 
Glasgow, the Great North Museum in Newcastle, the National Assembly of Wales, 
Number One Riverside Rochdale, and ending up in Norwich Cathedral.
 