
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has acknowledged the looming review of the Direct Action climate policy in 2017 
“may result in some changes” to the federal renewable energy target.


The prime minister’s hedged observation on Thursday morning comes ahead of the 
release of the preliminary findings ofthe Finkel energy security review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/07/chief-scientist-to-lead-review-into-australias-energy-security>
 determining whether the national electricity market can deliver reliable base 
load power while meeting Australia’s climate change commitments.

Some participants in the Finkel process think it is possible the review could 
float the desirability of an emission intensity trading scheme for the 
electricity sector –a form of carbon trading currently being championed by the 
South Australian government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/south-australia-seeks-to-put-emissions-intensity-trading-scheme-in-play>
 through the energy ministers council.

Even if Finkel doesn’t go down that path, pressure from business, energy and 
climate groups will build on the Turnbull government once the new political 
year opens, because there is widespread criticism that the Coalition’s climate 
policy won’t deliver the emissions reductions required to ensure Australia 
meets its international commitments.

Direct Action carbon reduction policy running out of steam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/direct-action-carbon-reduction-policy-running-out-of-steam>
Business and climate groups have been dismayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/06/energy-groups-and-businesses-plead-for-strategic-response-before-ministers-meet>
 by a rerun of Australia’s toxic climate politics triggered when the prime 
ministerlinked a statewide blackout in South Australia in September explicitly 
to the state’s use of renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/29/jay-weatherill-accuses-barnaby-joyce-of-pushing-anti-windfarm-agenda-over-blackouts>
 – which led to brawling between Canberra and the states on renewable energy 
targets.

In a joint statement issued in October, major business organisations and 
energy users warned that, in the absence of bipartisanship, “uncertainty will 
cause essential energy investments to be deferred or distorted, to the ultimate 
cost of us all”.

Many groups will use the review of Direct Action to call for greater policy 
certainty, either through a carbon trading mechanism, or longer legislative 
timelines on the federal renewable energy target – eventualities that would 
trigger renewed internal brawling within the Coalition about climate policy.

The government’s recent decision to ratify the Paris climate agreement 
triggered a small internal breakout, with the chairman of the government’s 
backbench committee on the environment and energy, the Liberal MP Craig Kelly, 
declaringon Facebook after Donald Trump won the presidential election in the 
United States the Paris agreement was now “cactus”. 
<https://www.facebook.com/CraigKellyMP/posts/601363700058268>

Direct Action paying polluters to avoid clearing land they would never have 
cleared – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/03/direct-action-paying-industry-to-avoid-clearing-land-they-would-never-have-cleared-report>
George Christensen, the outspoken Liberal National party backbencher from 
Queensland, later backedKelly’s view 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/10/turnbull-signals-australia-wont-follow-trumps-lead-on-paris-climate-agreement>
.

Anticipating internal turbulence, both Turnbull and the minister for 
environment and energy,Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>, have been careful 
to play down the potential for the Direct Action review to lead to major 
changes in the existing policy.

In his remarks on Thursday morning, Turnbull acknowledged the review could 
lead to change, but he also attempted to fence-sit on the issue.

“The climate policy will be reviewed and the renewable energy target is 
agreed, it is legislated, we have got no plans to change it,” the prime 
minister said. “But the 2017 review, which has been part of our policy for a 
very long time, is to examine the mechanisms that we have to meet the 2030 
Paris targets, which, as you know, is a reduction of our emissions by 26 to 
28%.”

But while playing down the prospect of big changes in the Direct Action 
review, Frydenberg has been making the case since he assumed the energy and 
environment portfolio for gas as the transitional fuel to help Australia 
continue to deliver reliable base load power while lowering carbon emissions.

The inconvenient truth about Direct Action comes from Turnbull himself
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/25/the-inconvenient-truth-about-direct-action-comes-from-turnbull-himself>
An emissions intensity scheme for the electricity sector is a favourable 
regulatory regime for gas, because gas would be considered preferable to coal 
in the short term to deliver base load power.

Frydenberg used a speech this week to argue gas provided “a pathway to a lower 
emissions generation future with up to 50% fewer emissions than coal, depending 
on the generation technology”.

“Recent events in South Australia in particular have brought home the role of 
gas in providing capacity to balance the intermittent nature of solar and wind. 
Gas can be dispatched in a short timeframe, something renewables cannot do in 
an affordable way at this stage.”

Frydenberg has consistently criticised current moratoria on coal seam gas 
exploration.

“We need to improve market efficiency and competitiveness while attracting 
further investment in exploration and development,” the minister said this 
week. “We need to make it easier for new producers to enter the market and for 
buyers to more efficiently move that gas around our pipeline networks.”
 