
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> risks 
parliamentary defeat over plans to cut £1.3bn from disability benefits as 
criticism of the scheme spread across Conservative backbenches.

The leader of the revolt warned the chancellor that the political unease was 
greater than that felt at the time of last autumn’s successful revolt over 
plans to cut tax credits.

Andrew Percy accused the chancellor of hitting “exactly the wrong people” in 
its proposal to cut personal independence payments (PIP) for people who need 
aids to help them dress and use the toilet.

The MP for Brigg and Goole said: “This is about need, it is not about welfare 
reform. These people have these needs. These needs are not going away and 
therefore the payments should not go away.

“The difference on this to tax credits is, although difficult to sell and 
wrongheaded, people who lost out from them would eventually be compensated 
through the system. Whereas that is not the case [with PIP payments]. They will 
be permanently dis-benefited. That is where it is much harder for a lot of 
[Conservative] colleagues to swallow than the tax credit changes.”

Johnny Mercer, the Tory MP for Plymouth Moor View, tweeted: “Concerned by 
proposed changes to PIP. Not sure right direction. We must look after our most 
vulnerable at every turn. No doubt welfare spend still too high, but for those 
who really need it, it is lifeline.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Ftory-rebels-osborne-disability-benefit-cuts-just-not-acceptable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb78e49df78bace7869e8ab18af41dda2fc178eb%2F0_0_759_677%2F759.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disability%20benefit%20cuts%20not%20acceptable%2C%20Conservative%20rebels%20tell%20Osborne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Ftory-rebels-osborne-disability-benefit-cuts-just-not-acceptable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disability%20benefit%20cuts%20not%20acceptable%2C%20Conservative%20rebels%20tell%20Osborne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Ftory-rebels-osborne-disability-benefit-cuts-just-not-acceptable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb78e49df78bace7869e8ab18af41dda2fc178eb%2F0_0_759_677%2F759.jpg>
 Johnny Mercer MP 
Government sources said that Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions 
secretary who wrote to MPs explaining the changes, would listen carefully to 
the concerns raised during a consultation which is not due to end for a few 
months. The regulations introducing the changes are expected to be amended 
before MPs vote.


Some unhappy senior Tories say that the handling of the affair is reminiscent 
of the way in which Jeremy Hunt has alienated junior doctors in a bitter 
industrial dispute.

Wednesday’s budget revealed that the chancellor’s biggest single 
revenue-raising measure over the next five years would be cutting PIP by 
£1.3bn. The Office forBudget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> 
Responsibility said that 370,000 people would lose out on an average of £3,500 
a year.

The seriousness of concern over welfare cuts was underlined when it emerged 
that three Tory MPs were asked to step down as patrons of prominent disability 
charities. Zac Goldsmith, the party’s London mayoral candidate, resigned on 
Wednesday as patron of his localRichmond AID 
<https://twitter.com/RichmondAID/status/710447082042171393> disability charity 
after coming under pressure for voting for disability benefit cuts.

Kit Malthouse, the MP for North West Hampshire, was told to resign as patron 
of theMS Society 
<https://www.mssociety.org.uk/get-involved/campaigns/campaigns-blog/2016/03/five-things-you-need-know-about-changes-personal-indep?utm_source=Twitter&utm_medium=link_in_post&utm_campaign=campaigns_blog&utm_content=5_things_pip>
, the national charity that campaigns on issues surrounding multiple sclerosis, 
and was no longer seen as “suitable” for the position after he voted in favour 
of cuts to ESA that would see people with MS among hundreds of thousands of 
disabled people to lose critical allowances.

James Cleverly, the MP for Braintree, was also told to resign as patron 
<https://www.facebook.com/advocacy4all/posts/1719932808252113> with “immediate 
effect” by Advocacy for All, a charity that works to help vulnerable people in 
the local area, who said they were “surprised and disappointed” to learn he had 
voted for £30 a week cuts to ESA benefits.

Downing Street defended the cuts on the grounds that health professionals 
examining whether people were eligible found that, after initial payments to 
fund aids to help disabled people, the ongoing extra costs were low or 
non-existent in 96% of cases.


Claimants are assessed for PIP by undergoing tests in 10 daily activities. If 
they are not able to perform the activities, or they need an aid or appliance, 
they receive points that go towards deciding whether a claimant is eligible. 
One of the tests is whether a claimant can dress himself or herself on their 
own.

Delays and disarray shatter lives of new disability claimants | Amelia 
Gentleman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/27/delays-disability-benefit-pip-claimants-mps-scrutiny>
The prime minister’s spokeswoman said: “Health professionals were asked to 
review cases where people qualified for personal independence payments based on 
a need for aids and appliances they have for their disability.

“What they found was in 96% of cases they were unlikely to have extra costs. 
For example they might have needed to have a hand toilet rail fitted in their 
home. Once that was completed they were unlikely to need significant extra 
costs over a sustained period that would therefore justify a weekly allowance.”

Justin Tomlinson, the minister for disabled people, highlighted irritation in 
some quarters of Whitehall at the chancellor’s handling of the cuts by saying 
that they were not a fiscal measure. In a BBC interview Tomlinson said that the 
changes were “sensible measures” to reform the system of payments which are 
designed to fund aids and appliances to help disabled people carry out basic 
tasks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Ftory-rebels-osborne-disability-benefit-cuts-just-not-acceptable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff47f7d1b8d64e685b820ac128846ab5232276e6a%2F326_100_1888_1864%2F1888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disability%20benefit%20cuts%20not%20acceptable%2C%20Conservative%20rebels%20tell%20Osborne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Ftory-rebels-osborne-disability-benefit-cuts-just-not-acceptable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disability%20benefit%20cuts%20not%20acceptable%2C%20Conservative%20rebels%20tell%20Osborne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Ftory-rebels-osborne-disability-benefit-cuts-just-not-acceptable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff47f7d1b8d64e685b820ac128846ab5232276e6a%2F326_100_1888_1864%2F1888.jpg>
 Andrew Percy MP 
The chancellor said in his budget statement that the disability budget would 
rise overall by more than £1bn. But the budget red book said that there would 
be cuts of £4.4bn in welfare for disabled people over the course of the 
parliament. Labour pointed out that in the first year of the next parliament, 
in 2020-21, the £1.2bn in cuts to PIP payments will account for a third of 
government cuts.

Whitehall sources said there are sensible reasons for introducing the changes 
which are unrelated to the chancellor’s budget. A series of court judges had 
led to a growth in the PIP budget by extending the gateway to the benefit. 
“This is about making the welfare budget sustainable,” one source said.

Percy said he welcomed the signs that ministers have acknowledged to his 
concerns: “I welcome the fact that the chancellor is listening to this as he 
done on previous issues. But the changes as proposed cannot be justified. The 
majority of the public would expect us – with PIP payments which are paid to 
people who are unquestionably disabled and have additional needs – to protect 
those benefits.
 