
Uruguay cannabis market still struggles for legitimacy a year after historic 
ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/13/uruguay-marijuana-cannabis-market-sale-legitmacy>
It takes a brave politician to advocate for the legalisation of all drugs in 
the current political climate. In Australia, Greens leader Richard Di Natale is
pushing 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/breakfast/richard-di-natale-pushes-to-decriminalise/7167314>
 for the decriminalisation of illicit substances, arguing that drug-taking is a 
health issue rather than a criminal offence. Selling and distributing drugs 
would still be a crime under this idea, leaving a curious loophole in the 
proposal which, by the way, has been workingworking well 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/evaluating-drug-decriminalization-in-portugal-12-years-later-a-891060.html>
 in Portugal for over a decade.

Australia remains largely disconnected to more enlightened drug policies or 
proposals internationally. In Ireland police officerswant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/16/irish-police-back-decriminalising-personal-possession-of-heroin>
 the full decriminalisation of all illicit drugs. Canada’s new government is
pledging 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/justin-trudeau-legal-weed-marijuana-canada-415384?rm=eu>
 to legalise marijuana. Uruguay has completelylegalised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/13/uruguay-marijuana-cannabis-market-sale-legitmacy>
 marijuana. Growing numbers of US states are regulating and taxing marijuana 
(with authoritiestaking 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/02/03/the-legal-cannabis-trade-is-now-worth-1billion-5659353/>
 in nearly US$1bn in tax). The Economist magazine recentlysupported 
<http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21692873-growing-number-countries-are-deciding-ditch-prohibition-what-comes>
 legalising marijuana while still noting the long-term health effects of 
extensive drug use.


The paucity of sensible public debate over drugs in Australia is clear. 
Neither the Labor nor Liberal party leaderships, fearing a tabloid press 
backlash, dare acknowledge the failures of prohibition. They’ll have to be 
dragged towards drug reform, though moves tosupport 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/national-marijuana-legalisation-inches-closer-with-new-bill-20141122-11rvid.html>
 legal access to medical marijuana is to be welcomed. Huge numbers of 
Australians are taking drugs every week, and this is unlikely to stop; it seems 
redundant to say the “war on drugs” isn’t working.

The painful truth about Australia's insatiable affection for opioids | David 
Caldicott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/the-painful-truth-about-australias-insatiable-affection-for-opioids>
“We must show some balls in war on drugs”, screamed 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/opinion/we-must-show-some-balls-in-war-on-drugs/news-story/5d46eeeafb610cb540d9e5b57132070f>
 Rupert Murdoch’s Daily Telegraph in 2015, and the message is followed by an 
obedient police force in New South Wales,arresting 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/half-of-sydneys-new-years-eve-arrests-at-above--beyond-dance-party-20150101-12gllb.html>
 and charging countless young Australians possessing small amounts of illegal 
drugs. Despitestrange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/it-is-baffling-stoner-sloth-anti-drug-ads-true-cost-to-taxpayers-revealed>
, expensive and mocked anti-marijuana ads andexcessive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/sniffer-dogs-greens-nsw-renew-push-to-end-their-use-in-stop-and-search>
 use of sniffer dogs, party drugs such as ecstasy and ketamine are widely 
consumed. Recently ABC TV’s 4 Corners showed the failure 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2016/02/15/4404734.htm> of current laws 
to deter drug use. Even Australia’s former top policeman, Mick Palmer, says 
that mass arresting personal drug users isfutile 
<http://www.abc.net.au/am/content/2016/s4406360.htm>.

But prohibitionists want even tougher 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/opinion/miranda-devine-cops-war-on-drugs-handcuffed-by-rules/news-story/7c43eb82df3f8bc43621a1f9be93013b>
 police actions to arrest, charge and imprison users and dealers, conveniently 
ignoring decades of this failed approach. Let’s not forget that when the US 
officially launched its “war on drugs” in the 1970s, under President Nixon, it 
wasframed 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2012/03/the-war-on-drugs-how-president-nixon-tied-addiction-to-crime/254319/>
 as a battle against hedonists, left-wingers and the counter-culture. The 
result, more than 40 years later, has been anunmitigated disaster 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/10/the-black-family-in-the-age-of-mass-incarceration/403246/>
 for African-Americans, locked up in unprecedented numbers. However, it’s been a
major success <https://theintercept.com/2015/12/22/geo-group-explains-crime/> 
for the private prison companies running the facilities.

 No major country, however, dares argue for the complete legalisation of all 
drugs. German politician Hans-Christian Stroebele, Green Party founder, key 
Edward Snowden advocate and long-time supporter of drug legalisation, recently 
told me in Berlin that, “if young politicians push for legalising cocaine it 
would be dangerous for their careers.” He sees German law-makers as slavish 
followers of America so “when the US moves towards legalising [marijuana], so 
will Germany.”

I’ve spent this year in Germany investigating the reality of its “war on 
drugs” and why, as Europe’s most powerful nation, its drug policies are so 
reactionary. Different parts of the country view drugs with varying degrees of 
severity. Journalist and author Daniel Kulla told me that, “most of Germany is 
anti-drugs; there’s a police state in Bavaria. Central Berlin, Cologne and 
Hamburg, with more liberal drug laws, are not like the rest of the country. 
Areas of repression are intense around the nation.” All the evidenceshows 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/drug-war-failing-in-germany-a-889826.html>
 that German authorities are losing their battle against drug dealing, usage 
and addiction.

Germany is remarkably similar to Australia in terms of resisting positive drug 
reform. Berlin’s Gorlitzer Park, a beautiful space in Kreuzberg, is a keydrug 
hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/18/gorli-berlin-cleaning-up-police-drugs-migrants-racism>
 for dealing. When I visited I saw men from Guinea-Bissau and Gambia loitering 
near the entrances waiting for customers. Countless African men, usually 
waiting for asylum and legally unable to work, are prosecuted for possession 
but this has no effect on general drug use. Police work seems punitive and 
pointless.

 Criminal lawyer Hannes Honecker explained to me that racism played a huge 
role in applying the law. “Many [German] police think, and they say and think 
publicly and privately, that black people in Gorlitzer Park all just deal 
drugs”, he said. There’s a clear correlation with the disproportionatelyhigh 
number 
<http://www.creativespirits.info/aboriginalculture/law/aboriginal-prison-rates#axzz40WBykRoO>
 of Indigenous Australians in jail for drug-related crimes, an institutional 
belief that men of dark skin should be punished for relatively minor 
infractions.

Australia's drug policy led the world 30 years ago. Now politics holds us back 
| Alex Wodak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/02/australias-drugs-policy-led-the-world-30-years-ago-now-politics-holds-us-back>
 One of the key arguments for legalising drugs is the perceived reduction in 
criminality and violent gangs. There’s preliminaryevidence 
<https://news.vice.com/article/how-americas-legal-weed-is-changing-the-black-market-and-influencing-mexican-cartels>
 from the US that this is happening in Denver, Colorado, due to legalising 
marijuana. But a word of caution that must be considered when drafting new 
policies. Ioan Grillo examines in his new book, Gangster Warlords: Drug 
Dollars, Killing Fields and the New Politics of Latin America, that, “drug 
cartels have morphed into weird hybrid of criminal CEO, rock star and 
paramilitary general … Over the last two decades, these crime families and 
their friends in politics and business have taken over much of the world’s 
trade in narcotics, guns, even people, as well as delved into oil, gold, cars 
and kidnapping. Their networks stretch throughout the United States into 
Europe, Asia and Australia. Their chain of goods and services arrives at all 
our doorsteps.”

 Although legalising all drugs wouldn’t completely remove criminality in the 
world it should make a significant difference, argues Annie Machon, former
British intelligence officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/24/mi6-whistleblowers-accuses-intelligence-agencies-annie-machon>
 and European director of Leap, a globalgroup 
<http://anniemachon.ch/annie_machon/category/leap> of former and current police 
and government officials who oppose the “war on drugs”. “Decriminalisation is a 
good start”, she told me from Brussels, “but it wouldn’t remove criminal gangs. 
Leap supports legalising, regulating and taxing all drugs.”

After decades of surging drug-related violence globally, especially in Mexico 
<http://interactive.fusion.net/mexico-history-violence/> and South America, 
another path is essential. Australia, Germany and other western nations, key 
markets for illicit substances that fuel the drug wars, should be the most 
committed to finding more humane and sensible solutions to manage the problem.
 