
Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox has until 6 January to notify the UK 
takeover panel of its intention to go ahead withits £11.2bn purchase of Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
. Assuming this happens, Karen Bradley, the culture secretary, must decide 
whether or not to launch a public interest test.

What will shape Bradley’s decision?

If Fox bids formally then Bradley will have 10 working days to weigh up 
whether the deal triggers public interest concerns, as laid out insection 58 of 
the Enterprise Act 2002 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2002/40/section/58>
. There are three kinds of public interest concern, only one of which applies 
here: the issue of media plurality. According to the act there is a need “in 
relation to every different audience in the United Kingdom or in a particular 
area or locality of the United Kingdom, for there to be a sufficient plurality 
of persons with control of the media enterprises serving that audience”.

What is a public interest test?

If the public interest test is triggered Bradley can ask the media regulator, 
Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>, to evaluate whether the public 
will lose too much from a reduction in plurality. Basically, to ask whether it 
is in the public interest to let Murdoch take 100% control of Sky, as well as 
running the Times, Sunday Times and the Sun through a separate company.

What is media plurality?

Ofcom believes a plurality of media sources is important for a 
well-functioning democratic society through “informed citizens and preventing 
too much influence over the political process 
<https://www.ofcom.org.uk/consultations-and-statements/category-1/measuring-plurality/statement>
”. The regulator is charged with ensuring a diversity of viewpoints across the 
media – TV, radio, print and online – and preventing any one owner “or voice” 
having too much influence over public opinion and the political agenda.

How will 21st Century Fox’s takeover of Sky affect …

1 Sky News

Murdoch could look to make Sky News more like his rightwing Fox News channel 
in the US. Any “Foxification” of Sky News would still have to adhere to Ofcom’s 
rules governing due impartiality and accuracy. Fox News, which is also 
broadcast in the UK, has fallen foul of the regulator many times through 
editorial lapses. Last year, Ofcom criticised a Fox News programme for 
breaching the UK code when a guest said Birmingham was a city “where 
non-Muslims just simply don’t go 
<http://https//www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/21/ofcom-criticises-fox-news-for-calling-birmingham-no-go-zone-for-non-muslims>
”. However, Sky News has built up a strong reputation since 1989 as a trusted 
news outlet, winning numerous awards for its journalism so changing its 
editorial strategy could damage the brand.

As part of the failed bid in 2011, Murdoch agreed to spin off Sky News to 
appease media plurality concerns, a deal accepted by Ofcom and the government. 
Fox may give the same undertaking to avoid a full-scale “phase 2” investigation 
by competition regulators this time.


2 Sky’s role in the UK TV production market

Sky spends more than £5bn on TV content each year, with its biggest investment 
in sports rights, such as Premier League football matches. It also commissions 
shows including Fortitude and The Tunnel from UK producers. It owns 70% of Love 
Productions, the company responsible for The Great British Bake Off. Fox, which 
owns part of a joint venture that includes the makers of MasterChef, American 
Idol and The Biggest Loser, as well as a Hollywood film and TV studio, could 
allow Sky to build a large-scale TV production arm across Europe.

Can News Corp – the Murdoch company split off to house publishing assets 
including the Times, the Sun and the Wall Street Journal – really be a separate 
entity from 21st Century Fox in the UK?

On paper, yes. In reality, probably not. News Corp and Fox are separately 
listed public companies, with Murdoch as executive chairman and executive 
co-chairman respectively. If regulators look at media plurality, the two 
companies will be viewed essentially as one. “From a legal perspective you 
always look at the whole group of companies so it is irrelevant that [Murdoch’s 
assets] have been split into two,” said Alan Davies, a competition lawyer at 
Jones Day. “If they are under common control then the law looks at them as if 
they are one entity.”

How does the bid affect the second phase of the Leveson inquiry into the press 
and phone hacking?

The second stage of Sir Brian Leveson’s inquiry, established in the wake of 
the News of the World phone-hacking scandal, was to have looked at issues 
including the extent of unlawful or improper conduct within organisations 
including the paper’s publisher, News International (now renamed News UK and 
part of News Corp). That second stage has yet to be launched.

In 2011, Murdoch was forced to abandon his £8bn-plus bid for full control of 
Sky as the fallout from the phone-hacking scandal made the deal politically 
impossible. The Leveson report following the first stage of his inquiry proved 
scathing about the conduct of Murdoch’s son James as chairman of News 
International. He ultimately stepped down as chairman, and from the same role 
at Sky, and moved to the US. Last year he was promoted to Fox chief executive 
and returned as Sky chairman in April.

Hacked Off, which campaigns on behalf of victims of phone hacking, argues it 
is now imperative that the second stage of the inquiry is launched, especially 
in light of the Sky takeover approach.

Could James Murdoch’s historical ties with News International derail the Sky 
bid again?

In 2012, after the phone-hacking scandal, Ofcom found that Sky remained a “fit 
and proper” owner of a UK broadcasting licence.

Remaining “fit and proper” is an ongoing requirement of all licensees, meaning 
Ofcom has the right at any stage to launch a new investigation, which includes 
looking at directors and shareholders. However, Ofcom had a chance to air any 
concerns aboutJames Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch> 
and investigate his role when news broke in January that he would be returning 
as Sky chairman.

If a range of media organisations call for the Sky takeover to be investigated 
– as happened in 2011 – is Bradley obliged to trigger the public interest 
intervention notice?

No. She is supposed to decide whether to call in Ofcom of her own accord. 
Media organisations can lodge their views with Ofcom if it is asked to conduct 
a public interest test. Many observers believe that because of the level of 
opposition to the first bid, and because her predecessor, Jeremy Hunt, felt it 
necessary in 2011, Bradley will have to refer the deal to Ofcom for scrutiny or 
face accusations of partiality.
 