
Home secretary Amber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd> 
does not want to be called a racist. “Don’t call me a racist,” she said last 
week. To be fair, very few people, including the majority of racists, like 
being called racist. You have to be really very racist not to mind the label. 
Racist voters, while they often like racist policies and racist politicians, 
don’t, in general, like them to actually call themselves racist. They’re not 
comfortable with it being openly proclaimed. For now. Things haven’t got that 
bad.

I think maybe lots of racists don’t think they’re racist. I don’t think I’m 
racist, so maybe I’m racist. Maybe everyone is, to some extent. Maybe it’s a 
spectrum. But not thinking they’re racist is almost certainly an attribute that 
many non-racists and racists share. Then again, liberal guilt being what it is, 
some non-racists probably think they’re racist – as, obviously, do the more 
self-aware racists. So, whichever way you look at it, there’s loads of common 
ground.

I can hardly think of a more damning slur on the British workforce than this 
proposed policy

But is Amber Rudd racist? That’s the key question. Unless racism is a 
spectrum, in which case it’s “Is shetoo racist?” There would have to be a 
specific point on that spectrum beyond which the level of a person’s racism 
became unacceptable, and before which you’d sort of have to go along with it 
for practical reasons. In the end, it all just reverts to the binary. It’s a 
black and white issue.

So, is the home secretary racist? I feel like, the more I ask the question, 
the more racist she seems. Well, it’s her fault for saying “Don’t call me a 
racist.” She put it in our heads – it’s almost saucy. After all this, to 
conclude she’s not racist would feel like a bit of a shame. Like a whodunnit 
where the denouement is that it was natural causes.

But I suppose we should look at the evidence. Where did all this talk of 
suspected racist Amber Rudd’s suspected racism come from? Well, she madea 
speech at the Conservative party conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
. “Ah well, that explains it!” you’re probably thinking but, in fact, there’s 
even more to it than that. There was an issue with the contents of the speech.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Famber-rudd-hate-foreigners-foreign-workers-companies-racist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5c899db58bf98820134e3e84ef1278e0aeb9989%2F0_0_1884_2664%2F1884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Amber%20Rudd%20hate%20foreigners%2C%20or%20does%20she%20hate%20us%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Famber-rudd-hate-foreigners-foreign-workers-companies-racist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Amber%20Rudd%20hate%20foreigners%2C%20or%20does%20she%20hate%20us%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Famber-rudd-hate-foreigners-foreign-workers-companies-racist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5c899db58bf98820134e3e84ef1278e0aeb9989%2F0_0_1884_2664%2F1884.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
This is surprising as, having watched some of it, I found it very difficult to 
discern what the contents were. It’s the rhetorical equivalent of small print. 
She reads it in a sort of bland lilt, like a recorded voice in a lift. The 
actual words are extremely hard to grip on to. You can hear the audience 
dutifully applauding every so often, from which I concluded that a rather 
undramatic cricket match was being played at the other end of the hall.

Nevertheless someone managed to work out what the contents were. Perhaps they 
played a recording through a speech recognition app, printed the text out in 
bold, capitalised Comic Sans and then read it next to a blaring smoke alarm 
after an overdose of ProPlus. And what she apparently said was that firms 
should be forced to reveal what percentage of their workers are foreign – 
initially just non-EU but, post-Brexit, non-UK – and to make greater efforts to 
employ, or to train and employ, British workers, instead of recruiting abroad.

This threat to “name and shame” companies that hire lots of foreigners went 
down very badly with many people. Labour said it would “fan the flames of 
xenophobia and hatred in our communities”, the SNP called it “the most 
disgraceful display of reactionary rightwing politics in living memory” and 
LBC’s James O’Brien said it was“enacting chapter two of Mein Kampf” 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/radio/presenters/james-obrien/james-amber-rudds-speech-echoes-mein-kampf/>
.

This, in turn, caused Rudd to clarify that all this was just part of a 
“review” and “not something we are definitely going to do”, but also to assert 
that “people want to talk about immigration, and if we do talk about 
immigration, don’t call me a racist”. I don’t think I can agree to that. We’ve 
all long since wearily acknowledged the old Nigel Farage cliche that mentioning 
immigration doesn’t necessarily mean you’re racist. But, let’s be honest, if 
you could take out an insurance policy against being racist, mentioning 
immigration would put your premiums up.

But obviously, whether Amber Rudd is racist (or, perhaps more pertinently, 
xenophobic) or not depends on what she’s actually saying about immigration. And 
she’s basically saying that, for a British company, employing a non-British 
national should be a last resort. Companies should do all they can – with 
advertising and training – to fill jobs locally, in the knowledge that if they 
fail too often, the percentage of foreigners they employ will be made public. 
In short, they shouldn’t employ a foreigner just because he or she happens to 
be the best person for the job. Given time and effort, they should be able to 
find someone British who’ll do.

So, no, I don’t really think Amber Rudd is xenophobic. It’s not foreigners she 
despises, it’s the British. I can hardly think of a more damning slur on the 
British workforce than this proposed policy. It takes British workers’ 
inferiority as a given, as its premise.

Sofa factory boss 'disappointed' by Amber Rudd's staffing criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/06/amber-rudd-sofa-factory-boss-disappointed-criticism-staffing-collins-hayes>
It is already harder for firms to employ foreigners than locals – foreigners 
either have to get here or, if they’re already here, be allowed to stay. That’s 
not an issue with a British worker. English may not be their first language, 
which can cause problems. That’s not an issue with a British worker. Laws 
already in place mean that companies have a considerable incentive to employ 
locally if they can. But Rudd has looked at the British workforce and decided 
they need much more help.

A fair criticism of foreign labour is that it can undercut the cost of British 
workers – that it drives wages down; that, frankly, people from poorer 
countries are willing to work for less than the British are. If that’s the 
concern, a sound government response would be to raise the minimum wage, not to 
threaten to expose companies as unpatriotic if they don’t voluntarily inflate 
their own labour costs.

This threat of exposure is what illustrates Amber Rudd’s anti-Britishness most 
shockingly. She is convinced that revealing to the public that a firm employs a 
high percentage of foreigners will be disastrous to its image. She thinks this 
nation which so many peoples over the centuries, from Celts, Romans and Angles 
to Jamaicans, Bangladeshis and Poles, have made their home, will no longer 
stand for the employment of immigrants. She may not be racist, but she 
certainly thinks we are.
 