
A fortnight ago, when the clocks went back, a joke was doing the rounds in 
various forms. They all went something like: “Don’t forget to turn the clocks 
back this weekend. Unless you voted forBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, in which case you’ve 
already turned them back 30 years.”

These obviously weren’t pro-Brexit jokes. The notion of turning the clock back 
is not supposed to connote a return to the good old days or a restoration of 
youth: it signifies regression, progress reversed, a deliberate worsening. So 
an obvious implication is that their writers think, and think that most people 
think, that in general things get better over time.

Well, milk doesn’t. And look at the natural world: things age and die and rot. 
Or grow and infest and destroy. And sometimes they germinate and bloom. They 
don’t necessarily get worse, I’m not saying that; but they don’t always 
improve, either.

I am bewildered by everyone’s conviction that anyone who disagrees with them 
has been misinformed

Technology confuses this, because that seems to be on a pretty steady upward 
graph, though it has its blips: in Europe, central heating had a chilly hiatus 
between the fourth and the 19th centuries. And this whole technological 
up-graph, from the discovery of fire onwards, may get retrospectively flipped 
into a huge down-blip in overall human fortunes if it transpires we were 
gradually making the planet uninhabitable. It’s possible that everything any of 
us has done since we first started scrabbling around for flint has been a 
mistake.

You may sense from the last sentence that I’m in a bad mood. When I recently 
expressed disquieton Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/RealDMitchell?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 atDonald Trump’s election victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>, one respondent said: 
“You should have been afraid months ago, by now [you should be] slipping into 
misanthropic apathy.” It seemed like an excellent suggestion.

I’d been hoping Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> would win, as you 
probably were, unless my evaluation of theObserver readership has descended to 
pollster levels of accuracy. Though, for me, it was mainly a hope thatDonald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> would lose. I didn’t 
have strong feelings about his opponent. She seemed OK, but then people would 
darkly say things beginning “Of course you realise…”, the end of which I never 
properly heard, focused as I was on avoiding the social embarrassment of 
looking like I didn’t realise whatever it was.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
It’s like when I’m introduced to people – I never catch their name because I’m 
so anxious not to screw up the handshake. “Just look like you realise, for 
God’s sake!” my brain always hissed over the details. “Everyone else here seems 
to have realised. You’re an educated person who realises all the complicated 
stuff that needs to be realised. You can Google it later.”

I never Googled it later, which turns out to have been an efficient non-use of 
time. Nevertheless, I assembled a vague sense that Hillary wasn’t all that, but 
at least she hadn’t said that Mexicans are rapists. If there were terrible 
things about her, she had the grace to keep them secret rather than proclaim 
them from a podium. Which, under the circumstances, seemed to me a good enough 
reason to make her the most powerful person on earth. Then I went back to 
watching Trump.

Trump is so watchable – that’s surely something his supporters and detractors 
can agree on. It’s not the hair, it’s not the extremist rhetoric, it’s the 
sheer magnetism of his self-satisfaction. The density of his self-joy is so 
great it drags your eyes towards it like galactic debris to a black hole. When 
he puts on a statesmanlike face, you just know his inner monologue is 
delightedly singing “My amazing face looks so statesmanlike right now!” This is 
whatEd Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> never 
grasped: it’s not about being convincing, it’s about relishing the role.

If politics were just a reality TV show (rather than mainly a reality TV 
show), Trump would never get voted out. So perhaps it’s surprising that he 
polled fewer votes than Clinton – though not quite as surprising as the fact 
that he will become president despite this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-means-progress-is-history-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49d1e9c1139e63a1c7a32419d7fb7bb0fc587e58%2F0_0_3293_3508%2F3293.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20win%20mean%20that%20progress%20is%20history%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-means-progress-is-history-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20win%20mean%20that%20progress%20is%20history%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-means-progress-is-history-david-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49d1e9c1139e63a1c7a32419d7fb7bb0fc587e58%2F0_0_3293_3508%2F3293.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Trump’s win hit me in several ways. First, it denied me his defeat scene. I 
wanted to see that. His character seemed designed expressly for that sort of 
comeuppance, as surely as thediner redneck in Superman II 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1nu3CLQm-SI>. I was desperate to see him spun 
round on his bar stool, all scared. It really feels like a missed opportunity, 
for him as much as everyone else.

Second, it robbed me of a comforting certainty: he can’t win – he’s too awful. 
That’s the sentiment I’ve been vacuously exchanging with people for months: 
“Surely he can’t win,” one of us says. “I know,” says the other. I’ll miss that 
even though I now regret every time it happened. “It would be a disaster,” was 
the consensus among me and other out-of-touch liberals, even more so than over 
Brexit.

And third: I’ve started to look on the bright side and it makes me despise 
myself. Because, frankly, “It would be a disaster” is much easier to live with 
than “Itwill be a disaster” or “This is a disaster”. So I fail to follow 
through on my certainty. A mixture of apathy and fear-avoidance extorts a 
sickly optimism from my brain.

Maybe he didn’t mean what he said; maybe the Republican party will restrain 
him; politicians never get much done anyway; maybe it’ll all be fine. This 
either makes me an overdramatising hypocrite a few days ago, or a 
reality-denying fool now. So I feel lazy, stupid and humiliated by the 
disturbance to my complacency, as if someone had burst in while I was eating a 
cream cake in the bath.

I am bewildered by everyone’s conviction that anyone who disagrees with them 
has been misinformed. Another response to my worried tweet mentioned an article 
I’d linked to about Trump in theNew Yorker: “That’s like reading about Obama on 
the KKK newsletter,” they told me. Is it? I really don’t think it is. But they 
seemed so much surer that I’m wrong than I am that I’m right. I’m enough of a 
historian to understand the insecurity of the lines of communication between 
what I read has happened and what actually has, but not enough to know what to 
do. Should I go to that place in Kew?

Civilisations, like investments, can go down as well as up – that’s never been 
clearer. Trump has routed the Whig interpretation of history along with the 
metropolitan liberal elite. Things don’t always get better over time. But I’m 
grateful to have lived through an era when it was still widely assumed that 
they did.
 