
It’s not just literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/05/top-10-literary-hoaxes-mark-blacklock>
 andvisual art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/sep/30/invisible-art-hoax-lana-newstrom-cbc>
. Classical music has also been a happy hunting ground for hoaxers over the 
centuries. In a market that’s less driven by cash than the art world, however, 
the hoaxers’ motivations are a more complex combination of aesthetic 
game-playing, private jokes, a bit of good old-fashioned lampoonery and, 
sometimes, a more shadowy kind of compositional fakery. Here’s my pick of 
classical music’s finest hoaxes.

Count von Walsegg

Mozart’s Requiem  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S2Ur-FosFvo>would never 
have been known as Mozart’s, ifWalsegg 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Franz_von_Walsegg> had got his way. He 
commissioned the piece in order to be able to pass it off as his own, just as 
he did with many other composers and their works. The Austrian aristocrat’s 
shameless life as a pseudo-composer is one of the most outrageous acts of 
vanity in creative history.

Piotr Zak’s ‘Mobile for Tape and Percussion’

This 1961 “experiment” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6maWI85kSxU> by an 
entirely fictitious composer, Zak, was a wheeze byHans Keller 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SNTa1aVryBA> and Susan Bradshaw 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Susan_Bradshaw> that simultaneously revealed the 
apparent randomness of contemporary composition, and – it was hoped – the deaf 
ears of critics. It was broadcast on a po-faced Radio 3 (then known as the BBC 
Third Programme), and reviewed. But their hoax didn’t quite work – most critics 
who wrote about it thought that Zak’s piece wasseriously shoddy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piotr_Zak>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6maWI85kSxU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6maWI85kSxU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6maWI85kSxU&media=>
Fritz Kreisler

The early-20th-century violinist Kreisler 
<http://best-hoaxes.blogspot.co.uk/2015/03/hoax-that-fooled-music-critics-for-30-years.html>
 composed an entire collection of hoaxed pieces in 17th- and 18th-century 
styles which he regularly included in his recitals. He passed them off as the 
works of composers such as Vivaldi, Couperin, Pugnani, Ditters von Dittersdorf 
and others, since it would be “impudent and tactless to repeat my name 
endlessly on the progammes”. Kreisler and his coterie managed to keep the 
secret for decades, and he relished sending up the “snobs” of the musical world 
“who judge merely by name”.

Haydn’s ‘lost’ piano sonatas

The world of Haydn scholarship was duped in the early 1990s by the supposed 
discovery of these sixmasterpieces for solo piano 
<http://www.amazon.com/Paul-Badura-Skoda-Plays-Piano-Sonatas/dp/B000001SW2>, 
feted as some of the finest sonatas in Haydn’s canon by the doyen of 
Haydn-ographers,HC Robbins Landon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/24/hc-robbins-landon-obituary>. But 
they were revealed to be the work of an extremely clever pasticheur,Winfried 
Michel <http://www.winfriedmichel.com/pages/bio.php>. Which – as a New York 
Times piece from the time says 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/05/15/arts/classical-view-all-right-so-maybe-haydn-didn-t-write-them-so-what.html?pagewanted=1>
 – raises some pretty gigantic existential questions: if these pieces are good 
enough to be thought to be by Haydn, then aren’t they valuable on their own 
terms? Or is it only because of the aura of Haydn’s authorship and historical 
context that they become meaningful? In which case, what is our criteria for 
judging the immanent qualities of musical works? Why can’t works of brilliant 
pastiche be as good as the “real” thing, and valued as much by musical culture?

Mozart’s Adélaïde concerto for violin
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DupeNQWJFia0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DupeNQWJFia0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DupeNQWJFia0&media=>
A violin concerto <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=upeNQWJFia0> that Mozart 
didn’t write, but which was even granted admission to an appendix of theKöchel 
catalogue <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K%C3%B6chel_catalogue> of his works (K 
Anh 294a, since you asked...). But it was a hoax, a concocted concerto that was 
put together by the French violinistMarius Casadesus  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marius_Casadesus>in 1933.

An Incomplete History of the Art of Funerary Violin

Individual pieces are one thing, but Rohan Kriwaczek 
<http://www.rohan-k.co.uk/> invented an entire genre, a repertoire, a history, 
and a whole musical subculture, with his2006 book 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Incomplete-History-Art-Funerary-Violin/dp/0715636049/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1439299636&sr=8-1&keywords=funerary+violin>
. Publishers believed it to be a work of studious, historically researched 
non-fiction. But the fact that thefunerary violin is a fake 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/04/books/04viol.html> is really beside the 
point: Kriwaczek’s book is a feat of pseudo-scholarly invention and 
musical-literary virtuosity that makes you wish that theGuild of Funerary 
Violinists <http://www.guildoffuneraryviolinists.org.uk/> really did exist. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcG5MxQTOThk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcG5MxQTOThk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcG5MxQTOThk&media=>
Joyce Hatto

And finally, no such list would be complete without mention of the most famous 
performer-hoax of recent years, theJoyce Hatto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/feb/27/musicnews.music> piano recordings, 
which were proved to be reissues of other pianists’ performances, re-released 
under her name.
 