
Early Monday morning, TMZ released a “cleaned up” video of Baltimore Ravens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baltimore-ravens> running back Ray Rice 
beating Janay Palmer, his then-fiancée and current wife, in the elevator of an 
Atlantic City casino. The footage shows Rice, the 206lb (95kg) NFL star, 
delivering a blow to Palmer that slams her against the elevator railing – that 
knocks her unconscious. He then drags her body, limp and unresponsive, out of 
the elevator with a shocking lack of apparent concern.

After investigating the accusations against Rice – to which the Baltimore 
Ravens running backpleaded not guilty and entered an intervention program 
<http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2014-05-20/sports/bs-sp-ray-rice-pretrial-program-20140520_1_rice-and-palmer-ray-rice-janay-palmer>
 for first-time offenders to avoid a trial – NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell 
handed him a paltrytwo-game suspension 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nfl/ravens/2014/07/24/ray-rice-suspension-baltimore-janay-palmer/12783281/>
 in July. Thousands of people, far and wide,called into question the NFL’s 
judgment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/24/-sp-ray-rice-got-a-two-game-ban-but-adderall-could-have-got-him-four-why>
 for such a featherweight punishment of an act so violent.

Now, within a matter of hours following the release of the tape, as those 
questions ratcheted up, the Ravens haveterminated Rice’s contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/08/tmz-video-ray-rice-punch-fiancee-elevator>
. Strangely but not surprisingly, scrutiny has also increased around the 
woman’s behavior – the woman who, by the looks of that very tape, was 
brutalized.

That we feel entitled (and excited) to access gut-wrenching images of a woman 
being abused – to be entranced by the looks of domestic violence – speaks 
volumes not only about the man who battered her, but also about we who gaze in 
parasitic rapture. We click and consume, comment and carry on. What are we 
saying about ourselves when we place (black) women’s pain under a microscope 
only to better consume the full kaleidoscope of their suffering?
This broadcasting of victims’ most vulnerable moments as sites for public 
commentary is not new. Indeed, victims of abuse have always been forced to 
recount their traumas to audiences more intent on policing their victimhood 
than finding justice. With YouTube and TMZ and all the rest, victim blaming 
extends far past simply beingshunned by your immediate community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/28/understand-victims-domestic-violence-shame>
 – it means having your most horrific memories go viral without your consent. 
It means having millions of people virtually dissect your wounds, not to heal 
them but to decide if your injuries were bad enough for everyone to feel bad 
for you.

Black women are often systematically excluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/04/renisha-mcbride-killer-criminal-black-woman-victim>
 from both the category of “woman 
<http://www.sojournertruth.org/Library/Speeches/AintIAWoman.htm>” and that of “
victim 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/10218585/Why-are-black-female-victims-seemingly-invisible.html>
”. Our pain, these days as ever, can never be pure enough.

When Chris Brown assaulted 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/1606481/chris-brown-police-report-provides-details-of-altercation/>
 Rihanna in 2009, images of her bruised face surfaced and spread across the 
web. Despite the female pop star’s wishes that the photos not be publicized, 
they were used by everyone from feminist advocates trying tomake a point 
<http://www.marieclaire.co.uk/news/celebrity/305095/shock-pic-rihanna-s-injuries.html>
 about Brown’s violence to someonepromoting the male pop star’s concert in 
Sweden 
<http://gawker.com/5959283/infamous-photo-of-a-battered-rihanna-used-to-promote-chris-browns-concert-in-stockholm>
. People couldn’t turn away; there was something addictive about her visible 
agony, both as misery porn and an all-purpose rhetorical tool.
We viciously ingest every vivid detail of women’s victimization, line our 
stomachs with their blood and tell ourselves we’re watching because we want 
people to be “educated”. If only people could seeenough black eyes, bloodied 
faces and broken ribs, the theory goes.Then they would know the truth, we tell 
ourselves. Only then would they care.
But that deluded fetishization is every bit as untrue as it is exploitative. 
In reproducing victims’ trauma over and over, we only expose them to more harm. 
Throughout this six-week public ordeal, Janay Palmer’s pain has been 
minimalized, her judgment called into question. “Why did she marry him after he 
beat her?” reverberates aroundthe web 
<https://twitter.com/MattMuller5/status/509045600332296194> and in our minds, 
an accusation masquerading as a concern. When victims reveal their experiences 
(or have their experiences revealed by someone else), viewers reach for 
pre-packaged answers, rather than listen to victims themselves.

It is easier to believe that a woman “provoked 
<http://www.ebony.com/news-views/stephen-a-smith-provokes-debate-about-violence-against-women-042#axzz3Ck8xXVg7>
” catastrophic violence from a supposedly otherwise peaceful man than it is to 
come to terms with the fact that a well-liked public figure is abusive. It is 
easier to conceive Palmer as an accomplice in her own beating than it is to 
realize that almost half of black women killed by their partners werekilled as 
they tried to leave 
<http://www.idvaac.org/media/publications/FactSheet.IDVAAC_AAPCFV-Community%20Insights.pdf>
.
The official Baltimore Ravens account tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/emilybrowns/status/508978945966874626> this earlier in the 
summer:
Emily Frazier Brown (@emilybrowns) 
In case you've forgotten, the @Ravens <https://twitter.com/Ravens> wanted you 
to know the woman who was terribly beaten by their player is sorry.
pic.twitter.com/dKFgs12tzH <http://t.co/dKFgs12tzH>
 <https://twitter.com/emilybrowns/status/508978945966874626> September 8, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/emilybrowns/status/508978945966874626> 
That is evidence of how far we will go to avoid demanding accountability from 
perpetrators as we continue to watch their victims bleed for us. That is the 
most perverse of pleasures, the hollow indulgence of someone else’s pain. We 
are wedded to our own numbing ignorance, to the slow venom that silences 
victims and emboldens abusers. It is comforting to think you could never be a 
victim, that you are better or smarter or more innocent than that wayward woman 
who “should’ve known”.
But in a world in which one in four women 
<http://www.ncadv.org/files/DomesticViolenceFactSheet(National).pdf> is the 
victim of intimate partner violence and black women aredisproportionately 
targeted 
<http://www.idvaac.org/media/publications/FactSheet.IDVAAC_AAPCFV-Community%20Insights.pdf>
, this victim blaming is not just irresponsible; it is lethal. Black women are 
punished when attempting todefend themselves 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/178641/marissa-alexander-now-faces-60-years-prison-firing-warning-shot-self-defense>
:94% of black female homicide victims 
<http://thegrio.com/2013/10/20/domestic-violence-awareness-month-black-women-homocide-intimate-partner-violence/>
 are killed by people they know and64% of those victims 
<http://thegrio.com/2013/10/20/domestic-violence-awareness-month-black-women-homocide-intimate-partner-violence/>
 are wives, ex-wives or girlfriends of their killers. Who will support victims 
when abuse is not recorded and pre-packaged solely for our consumption but 
subtle and drawn out, or when thestate itself commits violence 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/jtes/daniel-holtzclaw-alleged-sexual-assault-oklahoma-city>
?
If we viewed victims as more than a link to be tweeted, more than statistics 
to be reported to abroken criminal justice system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/05/domestic-violence-is-a-problem-we-are-barely-managing-but-we-need-to-end-it?CMP=twt_gu>
, we would have to grapple with their complex humanity. We would have to offer 
meaningful solutions to violence, holistic responses to trauma, and 
accountability for abusers whom we may love. We would have to do more than just 
watch.




Further reading:

 * Jeb Lund: The NFL has made you ‘need’ to watch Ray Rice beat his wife – 
that’s how the cover-up works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/10/nfl-watch-ray-rice-beat-wife-cover-up>
 * Jessica Valenti: Domestic violence survivors stay for a million reasons, 
and Janay Rice’s is her own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/09/ray-rice-domestic-violence-why-i-stayed-janay-rice>
 * Plus: Does watching the NFL make you evil? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/05/does-watching-the-nfl-make-you-evil>

 * And: Domestic violence is a problem we are barely managing – but we need to 
end it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/05/domestic-violence-is-a-problem-we-are-barely-managing-but-we-need-to-end-it>
 