
Twice a year, either side of the summer solstice, the setting sun is perfectly 
aligned with the grid of New York city streets. This urban phenomenon is known 
as theManhattanhenge 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/05/why-do-we-love-manhattanhenge-so-much/371841/>
 andDon DeLillo <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dondelillo> saw it once, 
some decades ago, while travelling crosstown at the back of a bus. He recalls 
the great ball of fire framed by towering buildings; the jubilant uproar of his 
fellow passengers; a vision of heaven at the end of 34th Street.The 
Manhattanhenge <http://www.livescience.com/38166-manhattanhenge-facts.html> has 
haunted DeLillo ever since, and in the final pages of his latest book he 
unearths the scene and plays it out afresh. One last golden flourish before the 
endnotes.

I meet DeLillo inside a fifth floor apartment on the Upper East Side. The room 
is crowded with books; spring blazes outside. He has positioned himself in the 
corner, in the shadows, and he shakes hands in a manner that suggests he’s 
picking up a hot coal. His fine-boned face is winged with bushy grey sideburns; 
his checked shirt and chinos seem at least two sizes too big. “I’m losing my 
voice,” he announces by way of introduction, although I wonder if this might be 
a convenient excuse. DeLillo is known as a man who dislikes giving interviews, 
detests explaining his work. He used to carry business cards that bore the 
legend, “I don’t want to talk about it”. I suspect his faltering larynx is 
being deployed as a defensive measure. “No, no,” he insists and then gives the 
ghost of a smile. “It’s an offensive measure.”

Still, it’s an alarming prospect, DeLillo losing his voice. In a writing 
career that has spanned 50 years and 17 novels, he has made it his business to 
speak the language of America; to channel its tensions and pick at its scabs. 
He’s tackled (and in some cases anticipated) the underside of pop stardom (in
Great Jones Street, his third novel, published in 1973), the dark glamour of 
terrorism (Mao II <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mao-ii.html>, 1991), the 
consequences of cyber-capitalism (2003’sCosmopolis 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cosmopolis.html>), the impact of the A-bomb (
Underworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/03/100-best-novels-underworld-don-delillo>
, 1997). His prose is always taut and unsparing. His best books hum like tuning 
forks, gathering vibrations from the culture at large. But the author turns 80 
in November, and freely admits that his work rate has slowed. Tellingly, his 
elegiac new book, Zero K, is a story with both eyes on the exit and its mind on 
the afterlife. “All plots tend to move deathwards,” DeLillo wrote in his 1985 
novel,White Noise <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/white-noise.html>. The same 
of course goes for the authors who write them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fdon-delillo-kid-from-the-bronx-interview-xan-brooks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e8566d709a484f1b629598faf7adcd52aae13f6%2F0_13_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%20DeLillo%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20think%20of%20myself%20as%20the%20kid%20from%20the%20Bronx%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fdon-delillo-kid-from-the-bronx-interview-xan-brooks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%20DeLillo%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20think%20of%20myself%20as%20the%20kid%20from%20the%20Bronx%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fdon-delillo-kid-from-the-bronx-interview-xan-brooks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e8566d709a484f1b629598faf7adcd52aae13f6%2F0_13_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The Manhattanhenge phenomenon in New York on 11 July 2014. Photograph: Carlo 
Allegri/Reuters 
It transpires that the apartment is the home of his agent, and it’s taking me 
a moment to get my bearings. The table is heaped with copies ofZero K, together 
with a stack of magazines that all bear the image of a grinning Donald Trump. 
After a brief hesitation, I place my coffee on the mags.

“Trump,” says DeLillo. “Our national hallucination.”

Let’s begin with the book, which is supple and sad and oddly compassionate 
too; his most fully realised work in more than a decade.Zero K chiefly plays 
out at a cryogenics compound in lawless Kyrgyzstan, just south of an old Soviet 
nuclear testing site. This, we learn, is to be the launchpad of a billionaire 
businessman, Ross Lockhart, and his invalid wife Artis. Both are preparing to 
enter pods, to be placed in deep freeze and then reawakened as pioneers in a 
world yet to come. Artis makes the jump because she is already dying, but 
Ross’s motivation is more complex and charged. He wants to control his own 
destiny. More than anything, perhaps, he wants to remain with his wife. “It’s 
pretty romantic for this kind of situation,” DeLillo explains. “It’s pretty 
romantic for this kind of writer.”

On setting out to write Zero K, DeLillo had no preconceptions about cryogenics 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryogenics> per se. He says he did some 
research, but was generally content to be led by the story and by a central 
image that he couldn’t shake off: of shaved, naked sleepers inside body pods. 
These people are intent on projecting themselves forward to an uncertain 
future, on maintaining “a phantom life within the braincase” until technology 
catches up. But he’s not one to judge them as either noble or foolish. He was 
simply drawn to the subject and to the implications it raised. “That’s the 
direction the narrative decided to take. I simply needed to follow it.”

I don’t see the glimmer of Don DeLillo in this book, but then I’m not the best 
person to ask

Still, I wonder if it’s an impulse he relates to. One might argue the act of 
writing a novel has something in common with cryogenics. Assuming a book stays 
in print, it helps preserve the character of its creator; it even extends their 
life span, at least after a fashion. Open the pod and there’s naked Ross 
Lockhart. Open a copy ofUlysses and there’s James Joyce.

“That’s true,” says DeLillo. “But I never thought of my own work in those 
terms. Is there a glimmer of James Joyce inUlysses? Or F Scott Fitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fscottfitzgerald> in Tender Is the Night? 
Well yeah, there must be. I don’t see the glimmer of Don DeLillo in this book, 
but then I’m not the best person to ask. I know that other people have seen 
it.” Another thin smile. “People always use the word ‘identify’. ‘Do you 
identify with these individuals?’ And I really don’t. I can’t talk about 
characters outside the frame of the fiction. I identify with the words on the 
page. I identify with the paragraphs.”

Besides, he adds, there was a point where he was unsure whether he would even 
be published, let alone conceive of a time where those books might outlive him. 
“When you come from my situation, there’s a limitation built in.”

DeLillo was raised in the Bronx, the eldest son of immigrants recently arrived 
from the Abruzzi mountains of central Italy, and weaned on a linguistic jumble 
of Italian and English. “The Italian I heard was not standard Italian. It was 
dialect, so it didn’t teach me anything beyond dirty words. I spoke Bronx 
English. The only Italian I spoke was slang with my friends.” He says his 
parents spent their lives trying to understand America, to make sense of the 
culture they found themselves in. He accepts he might be doing a similar thing 
with his books.

DeLillo once said the Kennedy assassination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/22/kennedy-assassination-50-years-jfk>
 made him a writer. What exactly did he mean by that? “Well, in the sense that 
it influenced me, although it probably influenced everyone. The assassination 
had an enormous impact, it changed everything. And all the turmoil that 
followed – the riots, the race problems, the violence – I think flowed from 
that one moment in Dallas. It was an enormous shock to the American system. It 
was like a bolt from outer space. Then you had the attendant question: was this 
done by a single individual, this lost boy Lee Harvey Oswald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2013/nov/22/picture-from-the-past-lee-harvey-oswald>
, or was it part of an elaborate conspiracy? And that uncertainty became a part 
of the environment we slept in and swam in. The sense that we were living in 
troubling times.”

At the time, he was working at a Manhattan ad agency, running with the Mad 
Men. He quit his job the following year and started navigating his first novel, 
Americana, which he almost abandoned along the way and was not completed and 
published until 1971. After that his books grew bigger, bolder, more 
successful. He revisited the Kennedy assassination, framing the crime through 
Oswald’s eyes inLibra, and rustled up a bona fide bestseller with Underworld – 
a tale that throws its arms wide to include baseball, the bomb and the entire 
sweep of cold war history; juggling real life characters (J Edgar Hoover, Frank 
Sinatra, Lenny Bruce) with the sights and sounds of his own New York youth. 
“And actually there are parts ofUnderworld where I feel that I’m in there 
somewhere,” he admits. “All those Bronx chapters. I felt I immersed myself in 
that novel.”

DeLillo fled his copywriting job and reinvented himself, but he may well have 
carried its lessons with him. He takes the flat language of ad-speak and twists 
it into exciting new shapes. He produces dark, diamond-sharp prose that hooks 
in your ear like a slogan or jingle. One might view his books as an 
anti-commercial for western capitalism or – more complicatedly – as a 
dispassionate study of how capital’s language speaks through its consumers. How 
culture rewires our brains and redefines our relationships. According to the 
literary critic Frank Lentricchia, DeLillo’s novels are “cultural anatomies of 
what make us unhappy”, whileJoyce Carol Oates  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/joyce-carol-oates>has hailed him as “a man 
of frightening perception”. And yet what fans regard as eerie and insightful, 
others have dismissed as chilly and contrived.John Updike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnupdike> lamented the way his characters 
have a habit of “spouting smart, swift essays at one another”. Reviewing 
DeLillo way back in 1985, the critic Bruce Bawer was still more pointed: “If 
you like your novels studded with Philosophy McNuggets, you’ll loveWhite Noise.”

Actually I do love White Noise <http://www.perival.com/delillo/whitenoise.html>
.It is a thing of black, tender brilliance; the tale of an academic who teaches 
a course in Hitler studies at “the College-on-the-Hill”, and of his wife, 
Babette, who takes an experimental drug, Dylar, to offset her fear of dying. I 
ask DeLillo how he came to write it, but his recollection is hazy. The rhythms 
and patterns appear to be all that remain. He says, “I can remember the main 
character’s name, which is Jack Gladney. And there was something in that name – 
JA for Jack and GLA for Gladney – which felt important. I’ve done the same 
thing in other books. I’m always very conscious of the patterns of letters in a 
name. Ross Lockhart isn’t a great example, but it’s RO and then LO. So it’s a 
thing that I do. A character takes shape because of that confluence of letters. 
I’m trying to think of another example. There must be others.”

How about Bucky Wunderlick, the reclusive rock singer from Great Jones Street? 
DeLillo nods distractedly. “BU then WU. There you go, you’re doing better than 
I am.”

He accepts he’s growing old. The stories don’t pour out the way they once did. 
Underworldwas his Moby-Dick: 800 pages, more than 100 moving pieces. But since 
then the books have been slimmer, more spare, and less feted. He wonders if he 
has anotherUnderworld in him. “I would like to think so but the truthful answer 
is that I doubt it. I don’t think I’d be able to do it at that length, even if 
I knew I was going to live long enough. I don’t know why that is. I think you 
become a little more closed in on yourself. A little more physically and 
mentally tired.”

He sighs, clears his throat and says, “The work gets slower, that’s for sure. 
This latest book took me nearly four years to write and it’s not even 300 
pages. It’s not a burden, it’s just day-to-day. But at some point I realised 
I’d been sitting there for four years. Why isn’t it a bigger book?”

I ask if the joy of writing is still the same as it was and he insists that it 
is. “I take the same pleasure in a sentence that seems to work. Two words that 
seem to be joined and have a meaning. There’s a sentence in this book, for 
instance: 17 words and only one of them is more than one syllable. And how did 
that happen? It just flowed, it just happened.”

He makes the sentence sound like a magical spell. “Well, that’s not an 
exaggeration,” he says. “That’s exactly what it is.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fdon-delillo-kid-from-the-bronx-interview-xan-brooks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18f449a51c073e0767ce3f0e5fd4a50fa5d39063%2F0_0_3390_2736%2F3390.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%20DeLillo%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20think%20of%20myself%20as%20the%20kid%20from%20the%20Bronx%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fdon-delillo-kid-from-the-bronx-interview-xan-brooks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%20DeLillo%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20think%20of%20myself%20as%20the%20kid%20from%20the%20Bronx%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fdon-delillo-kid-from-the-bronx-interview-xan-brooks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18f449a51c073e0767ce3f0e5fd4a50fa5d39063%2F0_0_3390_2736%2F3390.jpg>
 An outdoor market in the Bronx, New York, 1945. Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
A few years back the writer John Banville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnbanville> described DeLillo as “the poet 
of entropy”, adding that “the world he sets up is a tightly wound machine 
gradually running down”. So it’s no surprise that the poet himself should 
eventually wind down, although he’s enjoyed himself in the unwinding. He’s gone 
from the working-class Bronx to Madison Avenue, through plaudits and glory to a 
comfortable upstate home he shares with Barbara Bennett, his wife of 40 years. 
“I’ve had a very lucky life,” he says. “I’ve been a very lucky writer.”

Apropos of almost nothing, he recalls Ernest Hemingway. He’s been thinking a 
lot about Hemingway; he doesn’t entirely know why. He says, “Here’s a story I 
don’t think I’ve told before. Back in the early 1960s I was standing on 48th 
Street between Fifth and Madison. And there was Hemingway walking across the 
street. This was roughly a year before he killed himself. He was going towards 
Fifth Avenue and I knew that Scribner, his publisher, was right around the 
corner and that this was where he was going. And it was a wonderful thing to 
see him walk by. But what’s astonishing now is to think of Hemingway and 
Fitzgerald and to find myself with those guys in one of thosespecial editions 
<http://offtheshelf.com/2014/11/hemingway-fitzgerald-wharton-and-wolfe-10-classics-you-should-never-live-without/>
 that Scribner did recently – one for each of us. And how did that happen? It’s 
astonishing to me.” He smiles. “Because I’m not Hemingway. I’m just a guy whose 
name can’t be spelled properly.”

I think he’s being overly modest. No doubt it’s the result of his background. 
It makes him feel an interloper in literary society, a borderline fraud playing 
the role of great writer.

DeLillo chuckles. “Or am I playing the role of the Italian kid from the Bronx? 
Which is the role? Which is reality? And in fact, more and more I think of 
myself as the kid from the Bronx. I’ve reached the age when that identity 
becomes more accessible. Once I left the Bronx I didn’t think of it much except 
when I was visiting my parents. But it crept back in when I was working on
Underworld and now it’s returned on a whole other level.”

The form is strong enough to endure. There will be people who find that novels 
are the highest form of self-realisation

Maybe most people circle back towards home in the end? DeLillo nods; he’s 
positively enthused. “That’s true,” he says. “But I circle back literally, in 
that I go back to the same neighbourhood. I have a regular meal with the guys I 
grew up with, who now all live elsewhere. We all meet in a restaurant onArthur 
Avenue <http://www.arthuravenuebronx.com/>, which is in the heart of the 
Italian Bronx. All these guys – I didn’t see them for years, but I never 
forgot. And when we meet, we talk about growing up. And all of us remember 
absolutely everything the same way. I mean that there’s no argument, it’s very 
strange. It’s as though the last 50 years have been …”

A happy dream? A hallucination? “A waste of time,” he says and laughs.

The author began his career in an age before home computers. He continues to 
tap out his books on a manual typewriter. He tells me that he is not on email 
and doesn’t own a mobile phone. “Sometimes it’s a real inconvenience. But it’s 
what I prefer. It feels unnatural for me to have all of those things.” In this 
way, perhaps, the artist of the moment slips into the past, becomes a revered 
piece of history, like Hemingway before him. And where DeLillo leads, might the 
American novel follow? Just possibly the thing has already had its day: a 
20th-century behemoth, outpaced by rolling news and the rise of social media.

“Well, that’s certainly a reasonable idea,” DeLillo says, doubtfully. “But 
it’s not going to happen. People are going to keep writing novels. The form is 
strong enough to endure. And there will be enough other people, particularly as 
they get older, who find that words on a page – or words on a screen – are the 
highest form of self-realisation. It’s the best form to explore the human 
experience.”

Time is pressing; his voice is fast fading out. Evening rush hour rattles at 
the window. In our final moments, DeLillo returns to the subject of the 
Manhattanhenge. He explains that his original intention was to plant the scene 
in the middle of the book but then he came to realise that it was better placed 
at the end. He admits that he once tried to repeat the experience of seeing it 
for himself. He circled the date and camped out on the street, except that 
there were clouds in New Jersey and the sunset was ruined. In any case, he 
adds, such visions work best when they catch you unawares, when they stop you 
in your tracks. “And it was a wonderful moment. This enormous glow, like 
nothing you’ve seen, a concentration of light in that narrow street.” He 
smiles. “And you know, like most things, there and gone in a flash.”

• Zero K is published by Picador on 19 May. To order a copy for £12.99 (RRP 
£16.99), go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400538/?utm_source=editoriallink&amp;utm_medium=merch&amp;utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 