
Sometimes I think I have never seen anything as strong as Hillary Clinton. 
That doesn’t mean that I like and admire everything about her. I’m not here to 
argue about who she is, just to note what she did. I watched her plow through 
opposition and attacks the like of which no other candidate has ever faced and 
still win the popular vote. To defeat her it took an unholy cabal far beyond 
what Barack Obama faced when he was the campaign of change, swimming with the 
tide of disgust about the Bush administration. As the New York Timesreported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/opinion/clintons-substantial-popular-vote-win.html?_r=0>
, “By the time all the ballots are counted, she seems likely to be ahead by 
more than 2m votes and more than 1.5 percentage points. She will have won by a 
wider percentage margin than not only Al Gore in 2000 but also Richard Nixon in 
1968 and John F Kennedy in 1960.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%20concession%20speech%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20know%20it%E2%80%99s%20painful%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%20concession%20speech%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20know%20it%E2%80%99s%20painful%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton concession speech: ‘I know it’s painful’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concession-speech-video>
You can flip that and see that Trump was such a weak candidate it took decades 
of scheming and an extraordinary international roster of powerful players to 
lay the groundwork that made his election possible. Defeating Clinton in the 
electoral college took the 2013gutting of the Voting Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/05/edward-blum-voting-rights-act-civil-rights-affirmative-action>
 by Republican appointees to the supreme court. It took vast Republican voter 
suppression laws and tactics set in place over many years. It took voter 
intimidation at many polling places. It took the long Republican campaign to 
blow up the boring bureaucratic irregularity of Clinton’s use of a private 
email server into a scandal that the media obediently picked up and reheated.

US yet to join ranks of countries with female leaders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/13/countries-female-leaders-america-hillary-clinton>
It took James Comey, the director of the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
, using that faux-scandal and his power to stage a misleading smear attack on 
Clinton 11 days before the election in flagrant violation of the custom of 
avoiding such intervention for 60 days before an election. It took a compliant 
mainstream media running after his sabotage like a golden retriever chasing a 
tennis ball. It took decades of conservative attacks on the Clintons. Comey, 
incidentally, served as deputy GOP counsel to the Senate Whitewater committee, 
that fishing expedition that began with an investigation in a messy real estate 
deal in Arkansas before Bill Clinton’s presidency and ended with a campaign to 
impeach him on charges related to completely unrelated sexual activities during 
his second term.

It took a nearly decade-long reality TV show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/nov/13/meanness-psychology-big-desk-how-reality-tv-normalised-trump>
, The Apprentice, that deified Trump’s cruelty, sexism, racism and narcissism 
as essential to success and power. As the feminist media critic Jennifer Pozner
points out 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/2953807/qa-media-critic-jennifer-pozner-on-how-reality-tv-helped-bring-us-a-donald-trump-presidency/?fb_ref=fbshare_web>
: “Everything Trump said and did was framed in a way to flatter him, and more 
importantly, flatter his worldview.” The colossal infomercial fictionalized the 
blundering, cheating businessman as an unqualified success and gave him a kind 
of brand recognition no other candidate had.

It took the full support of Fox News, whose CEO, Roger Ailes, was so committed 
to him that after leaving the company following allegations of decades of 
sexual harassment of employees, he joined the Trump campaign. It took the 
withdrawal of too many Americans from even that calibre of journalism into the 
partisan unreliability of faux-news sites and confirmation-bias bubbles of 
social media.

It took the mainstream media’s quarter-century of failure to address climate 
change as the most important issue of our time. It took decades of most media 
outlets letting the fossil-fuel industry’s propaganda arm create the false 
framework of two equally valid opinions rather than reporting the overwhelming 
scientific consensus and tremendous danger of climate change.

To stop Hillary Clinton it also took Julian Assange, using WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
 as a tool of revenge, evidently considering his grudge against the Democratic 
nominee important enough to try to aid the campaign of a climate-denying racist 
authoritarian. Assange now appears to have so close a relationship with Russia 
that he often appears on thestate-funded TV channel and news <> site RT. He 
tweeted protests <https://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/717670056650530816> when 
Russian president Vladimir Putin’sinformation 
<https://www.rt.com/news/338683-wikileaks-usaid-putin-attack/> was included in 
the Panama Papers hack and has been coy about where his leaked information on 
the Democratic National Committee came from.

Many intelligence experts say it came from Russian hackers, and Putin made it 
clear that he favored Trump’s win. The day Comey dropped his bombshell, the New 
York Times ran a story reassuringly titledInvestigating Donald Trump, FBI Sees 
No Clear Link to Russia 
<http://mobile.nytimes.com/2016/11/01/us/politics/fbi-russia-election-donald-trump.html?_r=2&referer>
 with its own astounding, underplayed revelation buried inside: “Investigators, 
the officials said, have become increasingly confident, based on the evidence 
they have uncovered, that Russia’s direct goal is not to support the election 
of Mr Trump, as many Democrats have asserted, but rather to disrupt the 
integrity of the political system and undermine America’s standing in the world 
more broadly.”

My beef over Hillary Clinton's loss is with liberal feminists, young and old
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/12/hillary-clinton-liberal-feminists>
And it took a shortsighted campaign of hatred on the left, an almost 
hysterical rage like nothing I have ever seen before about any public figure. 
Some uncritically picked up half-truths, outright fictions, and rightwing spin 
to feed their hate and rejected anything that diluted the purity and focus of 
that fury, including larger questions about the other candidate and the fate of 
the Earth. It was so extreme that in recent weeks, I was attacked for posting 
anti-Trump news stories on social media by furious people who took the position 
that to be overtly anti-Trump was to be covertly pro-Clinton. If the perfect is 
the enemy of the good, whose friend is it? The greater of two evils?

A lot of people seemed to think the Sanders-Clinton primary ended the night 
Trump was elected. I saw that stuckness from climate activists, anti-racist 
journalists, civil-rights champions, and others who you might expect would have 
turned to face the clear and present danger of a Trump presidency. I heard, for 
example, much about Clinton’s failure to address the Dakota pipeline adequately 
– which was true, and bad, but overshadowed by what we heard so little about: 
Trump’s million dollars or so invested in the pipeline and the guarantee he 
would use presidential powers to push it and every pipeline like it through.

It’s impossible to disconnect the seething, irrational emotionality from 
misogyny, and the misogyny continues. Since election night, I’ve been hearing 
too many men of the left go on and on about how Clinton was a weak candidate. 
I’ve wondered about that wordweak, not only because it is so often associated 
with women, but because what they’re calling her weakness was their refusal to 
support her. It’s as if they’re saying, “They sent a pink lifeboat and we sent 
it back, because we wanted a blue lifeboat, and now we are very upset that 
people are drowning.”

Or, as my brilliant friend Aruna d’Souza put it Wednesday: “At some point soon 
we need to discuss whether Sanders would have been able to win, but helpful 
hint: today, it just sounds like you’re saying: ‘The Democrats should have cut 
into Trump’s lead in the misogynist vote and the whitelash vote by running a 
white man.’ Let’s come to terms with the racism and the misogyny first, before 
analyzing the what-ifs – because otherwise we’re just going to replicate it 
forever. And if you think that the angry anti-establishment vote won (hence 
Sanders would have fared better), let me remind you that patriarchy and white 
supremacy are the cornerstones of the Establishment.”

I know that if Clinton had been elected there would not be terrified and 
weeping people of color all over the country, small children too afraid to go 
to school, a shocking spike in hate crimes, high-school students with smashed 
dreams marching in cities across the country. I deplore some of Hillary 
Clinton’s past actions and alignments and disagreed with plenty of her 2016 
positions. I hoped to be fighting her for the next four years. But I recognize 
the profound differences between her and Trump on race, gender, immigration and 
climate, and her extraordinary strength, tenacity and courage in facing and 
nearly overcoming an astonishing array of obstacles to win the popular vote. 
Which reminds us that Trump has no mandate and sets before us some of the 
forces arrayed against us.
 