
We should hang fire with lavish congratulations towards The Royal Troon Golf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Club. Admission of women members in 
2016, after all, is akin to adults learning how to use cutlery properly.

Still, there was an admirable level of pace with which Troon both made certain 
that any objections regarding a change of membership policy would not hold any 
sway and completed a vote over the very subject. This year’sOpen Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/theopen> thereby will not be disrupted by 
the kind of debate on discrimination which has haunted the R&A in recent times.

On Friday evening, a show of hands among 360 attending members paved the way 
forthe entry of women to the Troon roll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/01/royal-troon-golf-club-votes-in-favour-of-female-membership>
. Martin Cheyne, the club captain, was also impressive in acknowledging a wider 
point. “The focus was on all categories of membership and how we could become 
more involved in promoting golf,a sport which is currently declining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/28/golf-hopes-for-ryder-cup-lift-to-halt-decline>
,” he said. “Declining in male, female and junior membership.

“What we did was focus on the single issue of women’s members but we need to 
focus on how we can encourage young people to play this game.”

As Cheyne noted, even the perception of golf as prejudiced is highly damaging.

Which brings us neatly to Muirfield. Last week, the Honourable Company of 
Edinburgh Golfers, which runs the East Lothian venue, suggested there would be 
a change of heart regardingtheir own, unsuccessful, bid to permit women members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/muirfield-golf-club-votes-to-continue-excluding-women>
. Another vote before 2016 is out, perhaps?

“We welcome this development,” said the R&A, which had booted Muirfield into 
Open quarantine when May’s ballot failed to reach the required two-thirds 
majority.

Welcome? The R&A should not be so hasty, nor should the rest of us if 
Muirfield belatedly manages to haul itself into the 20th Century. Historical 
evidence tells us Muirfield has been routinely detached from reality but even 
the club itself must have beenstunned by the scale of fallout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/golf-men-muirfield-women-club>
 from its indefensible voting outcome.

“The club committee believes that a clear and decisive vote in favour of 
admitting women as members is required to enable us to begin the task of 
restoring the reputation of the club that has been damaged by the earlier 
ballot outcome,” said Henry Fairweather, Muirfield’s captain. To be fair, this 
was his position all along but, crucially, he couldn’t enforce it.

There has been a lingering suspicion that Muirfield would sort itself out 
before being handed the Open in 2023 –10 years since the championship’s 
previous visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/21/phil-mickelson-the-open-2013>. 
The course would, therefore, not lose its standard place on the Open rotation, 
despitethe addition of Royal Portrush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/royal-portrush-open-championship-golf>
 as a widely-anticipated and valued host site.

Here is the point, though: for Muirfield to have a policy which excluded women 
as members in the first place was ridiculous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/love-golf-muirfield-women-second-class>
. Upon being afforded scope to change that status quo, for the move to be voted 
down by 219 individuals, is not something that should be subsequently forgiven 
and forgotten. Serious penance is necessary for an embarrassment not only 
caused to golf but to Scotland. Yes, Muirfield is an outstanding golf course 
but that isn’t an excuse to abandon all sense of principle.

Muirfield takes seriously, very seriously, a role at the heart of the 
establishment of this sport. Why should golf return to Muirfield while in a 
grateful and jubilant state after its global reputation was previously trashed 
by the same? For a start, a total Muirfield commitment to growing the game and 
vociferously denouncing prejudice should be insisted upon. Otherwise this will 
be seen as a cynical, commercial U-turn.

The HCEG did not even have the wherewithal to constitutionally alter the level 
of vote needed for women to join or, indeed, to recognise the scale of 
objection to their membership plan. To praise them now seems odd.

Here is a reminder of the stance of the key group of “no” Muirfield voters. 
They proposed a second, “lady friendly” golf course be constructed. A letter 
from this barmy group to fellow members read: “A traditional resistance to 
change is one of the foundations of our unique position in golf and our 
reputation.

“Our special nature, ‘a gentleman’s club where golf is played’, is quite 
unique with its fraternity built inter-alia on foursomes play with a round 
taking only the same time as lunch and leaving enough time for a further round 
after lunch (even in mid-winter). This is one of the miracles in modern day 
play and is much admired. Our foursomes and speedy play would be endangered.

“The introduction of lady members is bound to create difficulties. Regardless 
of the conventions when they first join they are likely over time to question 
our foursomes play, our match system, the uncompromising challenge our fine 
links present, our lunch arrangements. It will take a very special lady golfer 
to be able to do all the things that are expected of them in the template which 
is suggested and the ladies’ membership as a whole may not meet this standard.”

This was not a spoof letter; it was serious. So, too, should be consideration 
of whether Muirfield should simply be reinstated at the earliest Open 
opportunity if a change of voting heart prevails later in the year. It would be 
something of a letdown if the R&A behaves as if nothing had happened.
 