
They won’t admit it, but there is a pervasive idea among some Londoners, 
particularly the adopted ones, that the cleverest people from the north of 
England all end up in the capital, like particularly urbane moths drawn to the 
irresistible bright lights of the big city.

Exiled northerners are terrible for it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/northern-brain-drain-moving-back-london>
, flaunting their Lancastrian or Yorkshire credentials whenever there is an 
opportunity, wanging on about the Wigans and Bradfords they left behind at 
least 20 years ago.

The truth, of course, is they now make only annual, fleeting visits to see 
family members who lacked the wherewithal to get out themselves. In they sweep, 
silently despairing of getting a good flat white north of Walthamstow, scarcely 
able to believe the dearth of Pret a Mangers.

The Brexit result confirmed everything these people think about England’s 
upper half. Idiots, they thought, when Sunderland returned the first decisive 
Brexit vote. Hasn’t it occurred to those halfwits on Wearside thatNissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> might pull out from the 
Sunderland plant where they employ 7,000 locals? Are they too stupid to foresee 
the knock-on effect for the 40,000 jobs in the wider UK supply chain?

It is the same snobbery that caused an eminent art critic to recently opine on 
Radio 4 that he hadn’t seen a few Caravaggios being shown off in a London 
exhibition – because they had been “hidden away in places like Hull and 
Preston”. They might as well have been on the moon, though he would no doubt 
have seen them had they been hung in Florence or Paris.

The mantra goes that those who voted to leave are those who have the most to 
lose when Britain exits the European Union. But to say that out loud implies 
that anyone who voted that way hadn’t bothered to think through the 
consequences. It is a pretty insulting supposition, as a report from the 
Institute for Public Policy Research Northrightly notes today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/northern-englands-brexit-voters-need-to-be-heard-says-thinktank>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Bregrets%3A%20Sunderland%20after%20the%20vote%20to%20leave%20the%20European%20Union%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Bregrets%3A%20Sunderland%20after%20the%20vote%20to%20leave%20the%20European%20Union%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video&media=>
No Bregrets: Sunderland after the vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/08/no-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video>
“Of course we did! We knew both sides of the argument,” the retired nurse in 
Sunderlandtold me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/08/no-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video>
. “They said we would go right to the bottom of the heap, but it hasn’t 
happened. It might happen. We might go through a rough patch. But we will get 
through it in two or three years’ time, and I think it’s worth it.”

From where she was sitting, things looked pretty good. Nissan had not only 
decided to stay in the north-east but had vowed to build two new models in the 
Washington plant, a few miles out of Sunderland, having extracted opaque
assurances from the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/30/nissans-post-brexit-deal-could-lead-to-colossal-bills-for-taxpayers>
 that no trade barriers would affect their business, which exports 80% of the 
500,000 cars produced each year. Even the local Labour councillor for 
Washington North voted leave,telling me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/08/no-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video>
 that globalisation had failed his constituents on the doorstep of Europe’s 
most productive car plant.

I went to visit AV Dawson, a logistics company in the Nissan supply chain, 
which lost a string of multimillion-pound, 15-year contracts in the immediate 
aftermath of the referendum result. Most of the workers receiving and 
delivering steel to make car bonnets at the Sunderland Nissan plant voted to 
leave. And of course they considered whether Nissan was likely to up sticks. 
Yet when Nissan’s bossmade threats to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/nissan-hard-brexit-compensation-new-uk-investment-tariffs>
, back in late September, they didn’t take it seriously.

“In my personal opinion it was scaremongering,” a thoughtful 24-year-old crane 
operator told me. “I always thought that the quality of work that we can 
produce in England is much greater than anywhere else. So if they really want 
top quality, they are not going to go over just a couple of quid.” He felt 
buoyed by the result. “It did make you feel like you counted, this time 
around,” he said.

Giving evidence in Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/brexit-not-have-to-be-bad-uk-exporters-north-east-firm-ebac-mps>
 to the new select committee on exiting the European Union on Thursday, Ross 
Smith, policy director of the North East Chamber of Commerce, said the media 
needed to start to present a more nuanced view of the consequences of Brexit. 
There’s the view that Brexit will either be a “glorious triumph” or a “complete 
disaster”, he said: “The reality is that it will probably be somewhere in 
between.”

Instead of sneering, people need to understand why most of the north, apart 
from some inner cities and a few wealthy rural exceptions, voted to leave. 
Could it be that they are fed up with receiving crumbs when London and the 
south-east get whole loaves? Spending on schools, arts, transport 
infrastructure and so much more is vastly weighted in London’s favour.

Many northerners look at London getting £50m for a frivolous garden bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/15/garden-bridge-cost-taxpayers-50-million-if-project-fails>
 – as well as £4.6bn for Crossrail, more than will be spent on transport in the 
whole of the north during the same period,according to the IPPR 
<http://www.ippr.org/news-and-media/press-releases/transport-secretary-urged-to-close-1-600-per-person-london-north-spending-gap>
 – while they commute on juddering “pacer” trains,literally bus chassis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pacer_%28train%29> welded on to ancient 
wheelbases. We keep hearing about the possibility of a “crossrail for the 
north”, improving east-west links. But what did the chancellor really trumpet 
in his autumn statement? A new “Varsity” rail line between … Oxford and 
Cambridge. If there is any track left over when they’re finished, perhaps 
they’ll send it up north.
 