
Dismay, fear for the future, alarm at a country that no longer respects the 
same values, anger at a political class that fails to represent. Those of us 
who have been waking up since the referendum with thesefeelings of shock and 
grief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/why-remainers-finding-it-hard-to-deal-with-eu-referendum-result>
 now have a real taste of what many of those excluded from the benefits of our 
globalised economy have felt for decades.

It is arrogance to call leave voters stupid, as some have done. We have a 
responsibility to listen to what the Brexit majority want to say, especially on 
immigration. The horrificrise in xenophobia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/frenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage>
 makes it all the more urgent for the left to develop and articulate a coherent 
response on free movement of people that neither panders nor patronises.

‘A frenzy of hatred’: how to understand Brexit racism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/frenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage>
The first step is to acknowledge that the referendum result was not simply a 
protest by the poor and marginalised. The urge to withdraw from Europe cuts 
across classes. Anti-immigration sentiment is felt by those who have not been 
directly affected by migration as well as by those who have. A few are no doubt 
just straightforwardly xenophobic, but I doubt most are.

Look at Lord Ashcroft’s polls <http://lordashcroftpolls.com/> showing how the 
leave view correlates with other beliefs. The vast majority of leavers feel 
that multiculturalism, social liberalism, feminism, the internet and 
globalisation are forces for ill. Voting out of Europe is an expression of 
social conservatism, of a sense that their whole world has changed too fast; 
migration is the lightning rod but not the only weather.

Moreover, despite all the rhetoric about EU migration, the geography of the 
leave vote reflects the focal points of the economic crises of the 1970s and 
1980s as much as the impact of arrivals from eastern Europepost-EU enlargement 
<http://www.perc.org.uk/project_posts/thoughts-on-the-sociology-of-brexit/> in 
2004.

The temptation for many in Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>
 is to seek out a centrist position, offering a more managed migration and 
curbs on numbers without shutting the door, somehow triangulating between the 
demands of business and the fears of up to a third of its voters (at the last 
election) who now say they no longer support the party. But this will not work 
any more than Tory promises to “take back control” of our borders. Politicians 
have been promising to impose limits on immigration for years and have failed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fmigrants-workers-rights-migration-employers-cheap-foreign-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cc7e43b160a9622f67846c892ff53381464bf83%2F29_120_3569_2141%2F3569.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%E2%80%99t%20keep%20migrants%20out%2C%20strengthen%20workers%E2%80%99%20rights%20%7C%20Felicity%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fmigrants-workers-rights-migration-employers-cheap-foreign-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%E2%80%99t%20keep%20migrants%20out%2C%20strengthen%20workers%E2%80%99%20rights%20%7C%20Felicity%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fmigrants-workers-rights-migration-employers-cheap-foreign-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cc7e43b160a9622f67846c892ff53381464bf83%2F29_120_3569_2141%2F3569.jpg>
 Sports Direct pay protest. ‘The left should address fears about migration not 
by claiming falsely that it can be stopped but by preventing employers abusing 
it. That means banning zero-hours contracts.’ Photograph: Matthew Taylor/Rex 
Shutterstock 
Open societies, whose citizens wish to study and holiday abroad, whose markets 
depend on capital and goods flowing across borders, cannot also live with the 
draconian policing required to close them to foreigners. Only totalitarian 
regimes have achieved that sort of control. To promise it, as Ukip and some on 
the right have, is to disappoint dangerously and give comfort to nationalism.

The left needs to say that more loudly. To fudge it won’t do. Access to the 
single European market without free movement is not on offer. Even if it were, 
rejecting free movement would risk a return to the period before EU 
enlargement, which gave east Europeans the right to come and work in the UK, to 
a time when hundreds of thousands of foreign-born Europeans were in the country 
anyway but often illegally, and therefore with no rights. They came on tourist 
visas, on student visas, on temporary work schemes, and stayed.

People from poorer countries whose own economies offer them no hope will 
continue to migrate. The UK, which is indeed one of the EU countries to have 
experienced the largest inflows of foreign nationals along with Germany, will 
always be attractive to them. (The UK in fact comes 10th among 28 EU countries
when measured 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN06077#fullreport>
 by percentage of foreign nationals among the population – ours was 8.4% 
foreign national at the beginning of 2015.)

Depriving foreign workers of rights does not stop migration, but it does 
create an environment in which employers exploit them as cheap labour and 
undermine the conditions of British workers, creating resentment and fear. The 
way to tackle it instead is to give all workers, regardless of origin, labour 
rights and to enforce them.

Labour rights have been under sustained assault in the UK since 1979. One of 
the great myths of neoliberalism is that the market must be freed, but there 
has been nothing laissez-faire about the steady stream ofnew regulations 
<http://www.ier.org.uk/resources/chronology-labour-law-1979-2008%E2%80%8B> 
introduced to prevent organised labour from exercising its collective muscle.

Secondary action or sympathy striking was outlawed, for instance, and unions 
required to give employers notice of what action they were going to take, 
limiting its effectiveness. Onerous regulations on how unions were governed 
were also brought in. It is only capital that has been deregulated.

Why remainers are finding it hard to deal with the EU referendum result
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/why-remainers-finding-it-hard-to-deal-with-eu-referendum-result>
The Conservatives led the charge, but Labour did not seek to reverse it, only 
to soften it with the national minimum wage (barely enforced) and individual 
employment rights. The left should now address fears about migration, not by 
claiming falsely that it can be stopped but by preventing employers abusing it. 
That means banningzero-hours contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/zero-hours-contracts>, promoting equal 
treatment of agency workers and applying collective agreements for better terms 
negotiated in sectors to all workers in those industries. Labour should break 
with the triangulation of the Blair years and promise to lift restrictions 
imposed on solidarity action by union members. This is one way to re-empower 
those in Brexit areas who feel dispossessed.

This would free it to celebrate the contribution that free movement of workers 
has made. Then it can make the urgent and unequivocal declaration needed to 
repudiate xenophobia: that EU citizens already in the UK will be able to stay 
and are welcome. They are our doctors, dentists and nurses, our carers of both 
young and old, our builders and our bankers. The future of our economy and our 
ageing population depend on them.
 