
The Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> phenomenon 
confused the great minds of the Hillary Clinton campaign. Needing to thwart a 
new, weightless force in American politics, they nicknamed him Dangerous 
Donald, rubber stamping his renegade brand. Leave it to Trump to have to give 
them a better one: fraud.

On Tuesday, Trump called a press conference to prove he gave $6m to veterans 
groups, a very large sum of very beautiful money that hetotally would have 
given even without the press hounding him. Honest to God. Later, US district 
court judge Gonzalo Curielreleased 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/01/donald-trump-university-presidential-campaign-language>
 400 pages of “Trump University” documents showing how much Trump promises are 
worth.

Trump University: the proving ground for Donald Trump's campaign pitch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/01/donald-trump-university-presidential-campaign-language>
The documents confirm what everyone who wasn’t making money off the deal 
already knew: that, like every get-rich-quick scheme, it reliably delivered 
that outcome to the people running it by efficiently separating hopeful 
attendees from their money in exchange for empty promises of billionaire 
real-estate savvy.

It’s uncanny how much Trump’s sham university sounds like his campaign. Trump 
U salespeople were encouraged to pitch the three-day Gold Elite package to 
student-clients for the low, low price of $34,995 dollars, pushing clients to 
max out credit cards or tap other assets to pay for it even if it put them 
financially at risk. (The Silver Elite package ran $19,495, while the Bronze 
Elite dinged students a mere $9,995.) An early part of the pitch included the “
blast phase 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/01/us/politics/donald-trump-university.html?_r=1>
” that focused on “giving your clients hope again”.

If clients balked at the price of the Gold Elite package, salespeople were 
told to tell them that everything was horrible, andonly one expert had the 
solution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/31/donald-trump-university-playbook-real-estate-courses>
:


You’re not even close to where you need to be, much less where you want to be. 
It’s time you fix your broken plan, bring in Mr Trump’s top instructors and 
certified millionaire mentors and allow us to put you and keep you on the right 
track. Your plan is BROKEN and WE WILL help you fix it.

Eschewing things like concrete strategies for making money (item one of which 
would, presumably, be “don’t spent $35,000 on three days of seminars in a hotel 
conference room), salespeople were instead told toplay on clients’ self esteem 
and anxieties 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/court-documents-reveal-how-trump-university-staffers-sold-the-brand>
:


You don’t sell products, benefits or solutions – you sell feelings ... This 
sales process is based on managing the emotions of the client by focusing on 
the psychology of the sale. The metaphor we use for this process is the Roller 
Coaster of emotions.

It’s not hard to hear echoes of everything Trump has sold his campaign on for 
nearly a year. At any given moment, America is riding a wave of fear, 
resentment and the certainty that it all can go away, just as long as we sign 
up for the Trump experience.

Good journalists have known for a while that the way you rattle Trump is by 
honestly reporting on his business acumen. It’s not great! You report on the 
fact that his construction empire now is largely his name franchised and 
slapped on other people’s projects. You report on the fact Trump’s steaks, 
airline, bike race and the United States Football League were failures. You 
report on howhe does better hawking mattresses 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/07/donald-trumps-personal-wealth>. 
You report on howhe’d be $10b richer if he’d just invested his money in index 
funds 
<http://finance.yahoo.com/news/why-probably-better-investing-donald-233020366.html>
.

The Trump balloon pops pretty easily. All you have to do is say that it kind 
of sucks.

It sounds big and luxurious and exclusive, but mostly it doesn’t work, apart 
from preying on people’s emotions, promising them champagne wishes and caviar 
dreams, then cashing their check and not giving a damn what happens afterward. 
In the short term, he loses his cool, but in the long term he loses his appeal.

Trump critics, especially the Clinton campaign, have been going about this all 
wrong. You don’t label him dangerous; it’s a label he’d gladly apply to 
himself. You don’t shriek that he’s unprepared on foreign policy and fails to 
observe Beltway niceties: people steeped in both brought you the Iraq war and 
Isis. Just call him a scam artist.

There’s a very clear line waiting to be drawn between an authoritarian who 
promises hope and has no plans, and a man cashing $35,000 checks after selling 
hope and delivering zero plans. You can puncture the Trump dream with the words 
“caveat emptor” until “Make America Great Again” reads like “There’s A Sucker 
Born Every Minute”.

If nothing else, beating Trump now with his own record of bilking the little 
guy is a much better deal than waiting until 2017 to see if millions of 
Americans can file a civil suit against a sitting president.
 