
A shaky detente between Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and the intelligence agencies 
he will soon control has broken down, as Trump wrongly accused US intelligence 
of leaking an unverified, salacious document to damage his nascent presidency.

At a press conference on Wednesday, Trump said that “who knows, but maybe the 
intelligence agencies” were responsible for the document, which he said would 
be “a tremendous blot on their record”.

Earlier, Trump likened the intelligence agencies to “Nazi Germany”, 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819164172781060096> in a tweet, 
saying they “never should have allowed this fake news to ‘leak’ to the public. 
One last shot at me”.

Intelligence veterans reacted with shock to the renewed and intensified 
attack, with one saying Trump had exhibited “open, irrational and hysterical 
hostility” to the community on the eve of Thursday’s confirmation hearing for 
Trump’s nominee forCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> director, Mike 
Pompeo. Another suggested conscientious intelligence officials may have to 
contemplate resignation.

The intelligence agencies neither compiled nor leaked the unverified dossier. 
It and several of the claims it contained havecirculated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-report-opposition-research-john-mccain?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 for months within newsrooms, including the Guardian’s, which resisted their 
publication until adequate verification could be unearthed.


James Clapper, US director of national intelligence, said he told Trump on 
Wednesday evening that the intelligence community had not been responsible for 
the leaking of the documents.

“I emphasized that this document is not a US intelligence community product 
and that I do not believe the leaks came from within the IC,” Clapper said in a 
statement. Trump referred to the call in a tweet first thing on Thursday 
morning, which said Clapper had denounced “the false and fictitious report that 
was illegally circulated”.

Before CNN reported that aspects of the dossier, acquired by the FBI in 
December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 from the Arizona Republican senator John McCain, were briefed to Barack Obama 
and Trump, no news organization had published the accusations, which purport to 
reveal compromising information Russia possesses on Trump. Trump has denied 
them, andNBC later reported 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/trump-cites-nazi-germany-rejects-dossier-alleged-russia-dealings-n705586>
 that the material was prepared for the Trump briefing, but not discussed.

Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat on the Senate intelligence committee and a 
consistent critic of spycraft excesses, told the Guardian it was “profoundly 
dangerous” for Trump to continue his feud with the agencies.


“The president is responsible for vital decisions about national security, 
including decisions about whether to go to war, which depend on the broad 
collection activities and reasoned analysis of the intelligence community. A 
scenario in which the president dismisses the intelligence community, or worse, 
accuses it of treachery, is profoundly dangerous,” Wyden said.

What we know – and what's true – about the Trump-Russia dossier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-dossier-explainer-details>
Vicki Divoll, a former attorney for the CIA and the Senate intelligence panel, 
saw little chance for a rapprochement between the intelligence agencies and 
Trump.

“After disparaging and demeaning the hardworking officers of the intelligence 
community, then grudgingly accepting their conclusions about Russian election 
hacking, Mr Trump is now hurling the worst epithet out there – comparisons to 
Nazi Germany – against them, without basis and on the eve of taking office,” 
Divoll said. “We are at our peril to be entering an era in which there is such 
open, irrational and hysterical hostility by a president against a community of 
17 agencies whose mandate is to keep us safe.”

Trump’s outburst was a departure from the moderated tone he had taken on the 
intelligence agencies since Friday, when he met with the director of national 
intelligence, James Clapper; FBI director James Comey; NSA director Mike Rogers 
and CIA director John Brennan to discuss theirjoint conclusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 that Russia had intervened extensively in the 2016 election to benefit Trump.

Trump had previously referred to an intelligence “witch-hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/donald-trump-russia-hacking-meeting-intelligence-officials>
” and threw the CIA’s fatefully erroneous 2002 assessment that Iraq possessed 
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction back in the agency’s face. Clapper 
and Rogers had warned of plummeting morale within the intelligence community 
ahead of Trump’s presidency. After the meeting, Trump spoke of his “tremendous 
respect for the work and service done by the men and women of this community”.

At his press conference on Wednesday, Trump simultaneously accepted and 
diminished the intelligence assessment that Russia was responsible for the 
Democratic National Committee hack, saying “I think it was Russia” and later 
adding the caveat: “You know what? It could be others also.” On Sunday, aide 
Reince Priebusinsisted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/donald-trump-not-denying-russia-hacking-report-reince-priebus>
 that Trump “is not denying that entities in Russia were behind this particular 
hacking campaign”.

The story of the Trump dossier: secret sources, an airport rendezvous, and 
John McCain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-report-opposition-research-john-mccain>
One retired intelligence official, who declined to be named, said he was in a 
“wait and see” mode with Trump, as Pompeo and Trump’s nominee for director of 
national intelligence, Dan Coats, seemed like “reasonable choices” for their 
positions. Trump’s rhetoric “hasn’t helped morale” within the agencies, but the 
ex-official questioned its theatricality and said former colleagues’ reactions 
to Trump were “mixed” and were not panicked.

“Nobody’s planning on quitting or jumping from the seventh floor of the 
building,” the retired official said.

But Glenn Carle, a retired CIA officer, said resignations were a rational 
response to Trump, as the intelligence agencies face “existential crisis” 
prompted by the imminent prospect of serving “someone for whom the truth is 
irrelevant”.

Carle continued: “One is forced either to serve a man disdainful of the 
community’s mission, and of facts in general, as essentially a toady, or 
provide intelligence to the parts of the government that may actually know how 
to use it in the national interest, such as the military or other organs of the 
government, or resign. The choice is that stark.

“This crisis cannot be covered over with a politician’s, or an egotist’s, 
bromides and lies.”
 