
On Friday night, Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
 packed 20,000 fans into the USF Sun Dome in Tampa. Later, it was 16,000. The 
capacity of the Sun Dome is 10,000. No matter: there were “thousands of people 
waiting outside”. There weren’t.

The phony in American politics: how voters turn into suckers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/13/american-politics-election-voters-suckers>
There are always “thousands waiting outside”, even if the teeming throngs have 
never been recorded. It is a lie that has now become as customary to the Trump 
rally experience as the reading of polls and airing of grievances, but the 
image was better than the reality of a few college leftists with too-wordy 
placards mainly displaying them at each other.

Afterward, one could bounce from group to group of USF students marveling at 
how they showed up after the 7pm start time – 40 minutes before Trump appeared 
– and were shown right in.

That did not mean that others did not wait. 

“I think you should go to the back of the line,” barked a thin woman in her 
late 40s, in jeans and a T-shirt, waiting to go through a secret service 
checkpoint at 5.30pm. Her eyes had focused on my media badge.

“My friends and I have waited two hours,” she said. “I don’t know who the hell 
you think you are.”

“It’s OK, you’re just doing your job,” muttered a professionally dressed woman 
ushered in behind me, which made the thin woman wheel on her and restart the 
game of Who The Hell Are You.

“Go in front of me, ma’am,” the professional woman replied, “I don’t care.” 

The game continued. The thin woman’s partner eventually grabbed her by the 
shoulders and turned her to face the secret service.

The professional woman, it turned out, was an officer of the Pinellas County 
Republican party. When asked whether she was there as a representative of the 
Pinellas GOP or as a fan, she declined to comment.

Inside, things got friendlier. In Trump world, numbers inflate as a matter of 
showmanship. Like the WWE wrestler who stands at 6ft 5in and is billed as a 
towering 7ft, 10,000-person arenas swell to 20,000, and a robust press pool of 
50 turns into “230 members of the press”, not all of whom, it is only 
grudgingly admitted, are terrible. Still, as often happens with Republican 
events, the allotted press space was almost pointedly small.

Which left Tom Censullo, 50, and his son Nicholas, 16, who sat outside the 
small press area, offering to watch cameras and computer bags for various hacks 
showing up and looking for a place to put things down.

Tom and Nicholas looked like a time-lapse photo, with both wearing big smiles 
and flannel stars-and-stripes pants; Tom in a tie-dyed flag shirt and Nicholas 
in a Team Trump tee. Both had close-cropped hair and mustaches – Tom’s 
salt-and-peppered and robust, Nicholas’s wispy and dark. Both had firm 
handshakes. Tom called people “brother”. Nicholas said “sir”. Neither liked any 
candidate but Trump.

Tom had voted for Jeb Bush twice but doesn’t “like his progressive ways, the 
Common Core … and he doesn’t have what it takes to be president”. He allowed 
that Bush had managed Florida well during natural disasters, but “left Charlie 
[Crist] holding the bag with Citizens Property” – the state-run insurer of last 
resort forFlorida <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> residents, 
which “wasn’t designed to rebuild the state”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-tampa-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fecd211b757b6bbf6bbc16d90c3f56129635163%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20recycles%20the%20hits%20in%20arena%20gig%20to%20the%20Tampa%20thousands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-tampa-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20recycles%20the%20hits%20in%20arena%20gig%20to%20the%20Tampa%20thousands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-tampa-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fecd211b757b6bbf6bbc16d90c3f56129635163%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
 A Trump supporter with a HIllary Clinton puppet. Photograph: Jeb Lund/the 
Guardian 
Trump and Cruz bare knuckles in South Carolina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/feb/12/trump-cruz-south-carolina-clinton-sanders-nevada-2016-us-presidential-campaign-minute>
Tom picked “Chain Gang Charlie” Crist over Rubio in the 2010 senate election 
because Rubio “starts something, doesn’t finish, and moves on”. He likes Rubio 
even less now.

Trump, on the contrary, “says things that people think, only he says it out 
loud. Sometimes a little honesty – there’s nothing wrong with it. I think he’ll 
be humble when he needs to be humble, but he’ll speak his mind when he needs to 
… It’s time for America to do our thing again.”

His son, who was in third grade when Obama was elected, credits his political 
awakening to Trump’s appearance in the first Republican debate.

“I used to be like the rest of the youths. Liberals wanted to vote for 
equality, everyone’s getting the same thing,” he said. “But they want to give 
these people rights when they already have rights … we’re trying to give these 
people free stuff. You’ve gotta pay for things. These people don’t.”

Nicholas was eventually drowned out by the comedy stylings of Tim Wilkins, 
local nobody from the CBS-affiliate morning show You Are Dying In A Hospice And 
Can’t Change The Channel. In between teleprompter jokes, he noticed that 
liberals are a lot like ex-wives.

Down on the floor stood Randy Chapman, a 26-year-old black man and recent 
transplant to greater Tampa by way of Virginia Beach and, previously, Queens, 
New York. Nattily dressed in a checked button-down, Make America Great Again 
hat and a Trump scarf, Chapman was not hard to spot in the Trump crowd.

Despite its Hispanic population, even Florida GOP rallies already offer 
something like a very easy version of Multicultural Where’s Waldo. Trump 
rallies are startlingly monochromatic.

The Sun Dome is divided horizontally into 22 sections, in which one might have 
spied as many as four non-white Hispanic attendees each, making for about 88 
out of 9,000 people. Chapman was the only black attendee in sight until a 
protester began waving a smuggled-in banner mid-speech before being ejected.

“You’re the fourth person to interview me,” he said.

I like to not stay stuck in one box, I like to be a Rubik's cube. A lotta 
people are stuck in a box
Randy Chapman, Trump supporter 
Chapman is a registered Democrat planning to switch his registration come 
Monday, and has spent the last few months trying to persuade his co-workers to 
come around on Trump. A computer-lab coordinator for a non-profit community 
development center that, among other things, teaches GED and ESL courses for 
native Spanish speakers, he admitted stumping for Trump was not easy.

“I’m getting a lot of heat at work, but we’ve come to agreements on a lot of 
terms,” he said. That includes pushing back against politicizing racial 
identity. “It’s hard, a lotta minorities …” he trailed off. “I like to not stay 
stuck in one box, I like to be a Rubik’s cube. A lotta people are stuck in a 
box.”

For him, a large part of Trump’s appeal comes in his branding, not just the 
slogan on the hat but on how it can energize others.

“Trump’s allowing others to be successful off his success,” Chapman said, 
citing the popularity of private YouTube channels that stream his events. 
“You’ll see 25,000 watching it live right now. Switch to another Trump live 
channel, there’ll be 9,000. Other candidates, they’re holding live rallies too, 
you’ll see 436 people watching … Trump’s already creating revenue for others.”

Like the Censullo’s, Chapman had no preferred candidate besides Trump. And he, 
too, was eventually drowned out, this time by music.

Trump has several favorites that play multiple times each before he emerges. 
Elton John’s Tiny Dancer, whose appearance at a rally for a traditionally 
homophobic party is explained away with Trump’s describing him as “my good 
friend”. Pavarotti singing an aria. The Beatles’ Hey Jude. Then a welter of the 
Stones. Mother’s Little Helper, Time Is On My Side, It’s All Over Now, Tell Me 
(You’re Coming Back), You Can’t Always Get What You Want, and, in another 
gesture of conservative suitability, Let’s Spend The Night Together.

Other writers have focused on the hostility of Trump rallies, the demonizing 
of journalists, of sectors of the population and concepts of governance, the 
teasing fascism of Trumpian grandiosity paired with nativist loathing. But 
whatever else it was, fascism was a movement, born of disaffected ex-soldiers 
and laborers who took from both in modeling their organizational structures, 
their speaking events, their marches, their literature.

The Trump rally, by contrast, offers something like an exercise in grand 
solitude. The Stones blast at volumes loud enough that all conversation must 
come via the hot, damp and surprisingly intimate type of concert shouting one 
does directly into a neighbor’s ear. Given that, few people did it. One could 
look around the Sun Dome and see people singing along, half-heartedly boogieing 
in their seats – all white elbows moving side-to-side – some people mouthing 
the “nah, nah nah, nah nah nah nah” of Hey Jude. But not a lot of talking. The 
communal nature of politics, of a thing about and for shared needs, instead 
compresses into a direct relationship with a star.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-tampa-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16599729505ef2dc350635548361ba66b4df756d%2F0_151_4032_2420%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20recycles%20the%20hits%20in%20arena%20gig%20to%20the%20Tampa%20thousands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-tampa-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20recycles%20the%20hits%20in%20arena%20gig%20to%20the%20Tampa%20thousands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-tampa-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16599729505ef2dc350635548361ba66b4df756d%2F0_151_4032_2420%2F4032.jpg>
 An anti-Trump protester spells it out. Wrongly. Photograph: Jeb Lund/the 
Guardian 
Clinton seeks to build on old strengths as campaign rolls into South Carolina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/13/clinton-sanders-trump-cruz-bush-south-carolina>
This isn’t the filmic political tyranny of Triumph of the Will but politics 
via Ticketmaster, somewhere between bloated rock show and bloated arena 
standup. Like seeing a Boomer band going through the hits, every Trump speech 
is different but sounds exactly the same. You know the melody, just not some 
bits of the solos. Fans stand in communion with the act onstage, who recognizes 
them with the perfunctory air of a rock star grabbing the mic and saying, “It 
is great to be in” –pauses, looks at paper on the back of the guitar – “Tampa! 
Where we have the best fans! This is our biggest show!”

There are moments of call-and-response, but these are just audience engagement 
between set pieces.

“Who won the last debate, please? Who won?”

(Cheers)

“Who’s gonna pay for the wall?”

Mexico!”

“Whoooo?”

“MEXICO!”

Then it’s back to a hit track. China. The Democrats. The Winning. The Airing 
of Grievances. We Will Destroy Isis. The Flogging of the Bush. We Will Make 
America Great Again.

There was – there is – no explanation for any of this, neither how it will 
happen, nor what it will cost, nor what will be done for any of the people in 
attendance, let alone what will be asked of them. There is only the assurance 
that everything will be great again and that they will get so tired of winning 
(what? against whom? how?) and be restored to their greatness. Between Trump’s 
promises of renaissance and a soundtrack of the Stones, what is being 
communicated, above all, is nostalgia.

When they began streaming out the exits, fans were greeted by nothing. No 
volunteers stood handing out literature or asking people if they knew where 
their voting precincts were. Nobody conducted surveys or asked for feedback. 
There were no tables with sign-up sheets for phone banking or going 
door-to-door. Someone had parked a food truck at one exit – The Bacon Boss, a 
black camper van bearing a mascot of a pig in a tuxedo.

At another exit, one could at least find T-shirts. Yeah, you might not have 
gone door-knocking for the guy, but check it out. I saw Trump play Tampa in 
’16. He did the one about the Great Wall. It was great.
 