
Donald Trump’s long-awaited announcement on how he intends to separate his 
business conflicts from his presidential responsibilities has been postponed 
until January, though a late-night tweet hinted at at least one new detail.


Russia and conflicts of interest: Rex Tillerson embodies quandaries for Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-quandaries-trump-russia-conflicts-of-interest>
On Monday night, Trump said his company would make “no new deals 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808529888630239232>” during his 
time in office.

In a series of posts, Trump wrote: “Even though I am not mandated by law to do 
so, I will be leaving my businesses before January 20th so that I can focus 
full time on the presidency. Two of my children, Don and Eric, plus executives, 
will manage them. No new deals will be done during my term(s) in office.”

In a third tweet, Trump affirmed that he intended to hold a fresh conference 
on his financial conflicts at a later date. He wrote: “I will hold a press 
conference in the near future to discuss the business, Cabinet picks and all 
other topics of interest. Busy times!”

Trump has not formally taken questions from a group of reporters since 27 July.

The media conference regarding his real estate and intellectual property 
holdings was originally planned for 15 December and wasannounced by Trump on 
Twitter on <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/803926488579973120> 30 
November.

Trump has long faced major ethical issues surrounding his holdings, which 
include a number of hotels and golf courses, as well as royalties from the NBC 
reality television show The Apprentice. 

Although Trump’s attorney, Michael Cohen, has said in the past 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/trump-children-business-blind-trust-231179>
 that the president-elect would put his assets into “a blind trust”, Cohen also 
insisted that Trump’s three oldest children, Donald Jr, Ivanka and Eric, would 
administer the trust.

All three are on Trump’s transition team – and Ivanka, in particular, has 
played a hands-on role advising her father. She joined the president-elect in a 
meeting with Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, in mid-November and also
participated in a phone call 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-argentina-idUSKBN13H1MN> that 
Trump held with Argentina’s president, Mauricio Macri, less than a week after 
the election. The Trump Organization has long been involved in a development 
project in Buenos Aires.

Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
The president-elect’s various holdings present a variety of possible conflicts 
of interest. Although federal ethics laws do not directly apply to the 
presidency, Trumprisks a constitutional violation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-conflicts-interest-constitutional-crisis>
 under the emoluments clause. That provision found in Article I, Section 9, 
Clause 8 of the US constitution provides that “no person holding any office of 
profit or trust under them shall, without the consent of the Congress, accept 
of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind whatever, from any 
king, prince, or foreign state”.

Trump’s foreign investments, as well as foreign governments doing business at 
his hotel, could be considered a violation. The Washington Postreported in 
November 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/capitalbusiness/2016/11/18/9da9c572-ad18-11e6-977a-1030f822fc35_story.html?utm_term=.3fe05581b5a1>
 that foreign diplomats were already planning on frequenting the 
president-elect’s Washington hotel in attempt to court favor with the new 
administration.

The media conference is not the first major one that the president-elect has 
postponed. In early August, Trump pledged that his wife, Melania Trump, would 
hold a conference to address questions about her immigration status that were 
raised during the campaign. That conference was never held.


 