
Donald Trump is definitely (probably) skipping Thursday’s Republican Party 
Debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/26/donald-trump-boycott-fox-news-republican-debate>
, the last before the Iowa caucus. We could attempt to understand why he’s 
doing this by going off what he’s said, but the results are as apt to be 
bounded by reality as the reasons why a kid “playing spies” is creeping around 
the house making pew-pew noises and calling you “Capitalist Laser Dog”. You 
apply literalism at your own peril.

Ostensibly, Trump decided to boycott the debate and consider hosting a 
counterprogramming event, like a Wounded Warrior Project fundraiser, because he 
objects to the bias of Fox News anchor and debate moderator Megyn Kelly. You 
may remember Kelly for herrightfully challenging Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/27/megyn-kelly-donald-trump-fox-news-debate-roger-ailes>
 on the ample number of odious things he’s said about women – not to mention 
Trump later explaining her conduct as having sprung from “blood coming out of 
her wherever”.

That could be the reason. When Kelly gets riled up about something, she tends 
to go after it hard. Just takethe case of the non-white Santa Claus, or the 
totally real existential threat to democracy posed by the New Black Panther 
party <http://gawker.com/megyn-kelly-is-a-horrible-person-1750968367>. She’s 
relentless. Trump might have reasonably concluded that Kelly could embarrass 
him and cost him key points in Iowa.

But this is Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
we’re talking about, a man who has proved that political physics are as 
explicable as gravity in a Wile E Coyote cartoon. Countless times the man has 
charged off the cliff face and walked blissfully unharmed across the open air 
of a gorge because he’s decided that hecan walk on air and refuses to look 
down. Almost every explanation for his behavior is the acme of pundit 
divination, hoping the predictions they just fired off don’t blow back on them.

Trump may have calculated that he could flex and make Fox back down and 
replace Kelly. The last time he directly threatened them about her,the network 
mostly went silent as she reportedly received hate mail from Trump supporters 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2015/08/fox-news-picked-trump-over-megyn-kelly.html>
.

Or he could have, in his canny showman way, realized that he could make the 
entire pre-Iowa debate about him without having to risk giving any awkward 
answers on troublesome topics. He’d give every candidate in the room an excuse 
to attack him, positioning them as haters and losers who can only take potshots 
at the big guy when he’s out of the room, while positioning himself as the 
people’s candidate instead of another do-nothing party hack.

Meanwhile, he could make Wednesday, Thursday and Friday’s news cycles about 
him. What no one can tell you for certain is whether this will hurt him. The 
first time he faced Megyn Kelly, he responded to fair questions about misogyny 
byimplying she was menstruating 
<http://www.mediaite.com/tv/trump-on-megyn-kelly-blood-coming-out-of-her-eyes-blood-coming-out-of-her-wherever/>
. He insulted Beltway darling John McCain andsuffered no consequences 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/poll-donald-trump-john-mccain-2015-7>. He 
called II Corinthians “Two Corinthians 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/01/20/politics/donald-trump-tony-perkins-sarah-palin/>
” and wasendorsed by Jerry Falwell’s son 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/01/26/evangelical-leader-jerry-falwell-jr-endorses-trump/>
.

You can already see critics’ murmurs of arguments like, “If Trump can’t face 
Megyn Kelly, how can he face Putin or Isis?” It’s a stupid question, because 
the Republican party has already decided that the Republican candidates should 
not be challenged, and Donald Trump doubly so.

The Republican party just disinvited the National Review from an upcoming 
debate 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/01/national-review-rnc-debate-donald-trump-218098>
 so Trump wouldn’t have to face them, chucking its own dogma organ of the last 
half century because it released an issue critical of Trump. The party also 
dumped NBC from upcoming debates because it thought questions from the 
plutocrat-fondlers at CNBC were too difficult.

And what, really, can Fox News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox-news> do 
to retaliate for Trump’s announced departure? The trouble with Fox spending two 
decades telling conservatives that all media criticisms of conservative leaders 
are lies is thatFox News is still the media. Eventually your tactics come back 
to hit you. 

They’re also in a double bind of having spent two decades marginalizing women 
who cry misogyny as shrill, hysterical harpies. And they’re in the triple bind 
of having stared down Trump before, started to turn their guns on him, then put 
them aside after a truce was drawn, revealing the conflict to be personal, not 
based on actual policies. How could it be any less, when the network has feted 
The Donald for years, even encouraged him to run for president?


Any future action runs against 20 years of audience programming and risks 
re-litigating a previous conflict that only draws attention to the fact that 
they will be attacking a conservative with the same kind of self-interested 
animosity the rest of the lying media supposedly bears.

Tuesday night’s tantrum could have cost Trump Iowa, or it could have just 
cleanly delivered it. He could win with 40% of the vote. Or his supporters 
could have been illusory – well-wishers who never planned to caucus, who will 
melt back into the fields like some counterinsurgent force that never felt like 
bothering with the shooting part of the war. Right now all of these can be 
true, like Schrodinger’s Cat, but with a matted combover in the box instead.

If this election is really as unpredictable as everyone has claimed it is for 
months now, let’s stop predicting it. The pundits won’t be able to help 
themselves, prognosticating against the tide, likeCanute 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_Canute_and_the_waves>, if Canute cashed 
six-figure checks for roundtable analysis. But for the rest of us, let’s really 
surprise them. Let’s take pundits at their word, call this whole thing either 
an ugly or a joyous mess, and meet back Monday night.
 