
The senior Turnbull government tactician Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne> has said a 
double-dissolution election remains “a live option”, as the Coalition struggles 
to defend its handling of tax reform.

A day after Scott Morrison was ridiculed for saying he would not sell the 
Australian people a unicorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
, the treasurer revisited the fantasy theme as he declared he was determined to 
curb new spending and rein in the “excesses” of some tax concessions.

Scott Morrison says Labor 'selling a unicorn' with negative gearing savings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/scott-morrison-says-labor-selling-a-unicorn-with-negative-gearing-savings>
“I can sell them a fantasy or whatever you want to call it, pixie horses, 
whatever your preferred analogy is, but I’m not going to spin the public a line 
that there is some simple answer to getting expenditure down,” Morrison told 
3AW on Friday.

“It’s a long, hard, drilling through hardboards process.”

The government has now comprehensively ruled out increasing the goods and 
services tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/turnbull-says-labors-negative-gearing-plan-harms-average-earners-as-gst-ruled-out>
 and is seeking to lower expectations of wide-ranging tax reform, with the 
details due to be spelled out in the May budget.

Pyne, who is the industry minister and leader of the house, said the 
government would not rushed into making announcements on taxation just because 
of pressure from the media and commentators.

But he also noted the government retained the option of dissolving both houses 
of parliament and triggering an election based on the Coalition’s stalled 
workplace relations legislation.

“That is a live option; of course it is,” Pyne told the Nine Network’s Today 
program on Friday.

“There are not only issues around savings measures, there is also the 
Australian Building and Construction Commission. Labor doesn’t want to clean up 
construction and building in Australia, they want the CFMEU to continue to be a 
lawful organisation on building and construction sites. That’s bad for 
productivity.”

When asked about the remarks on Friday, the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, said a double 
dissolution was “available in circumstances where bills have been rejected 
within the appropriate time period ... but at the moment your question is a 
hypothetical one”.

Calling a double dissolution would be a high-stakes decision and the timetable 
is difficult.

The earliest date for a normal general election for the House of 
Representatives and half of the Senate is 6 August, but the constitution gives 
the government the option ofdissolving both houses to resolve legislative 
deadlocks 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/about_parliament/house_of_representatives/powers_practice_and_procedure/00_-_infosheets/infosheet_18_-_double_dissolution>
.

The attempt to create a registered organisations commission to crack down on 
unions already provides the government with a trigger, because the same bill 
has been rejected in two Senate votes held more than three months apart.

The government is also preparing to try again to get Senate support to 
reintroduce the Howard-era Australian Building and Construction Commission, 
which if blocked would create another trigger.

The ABC election analyst Antony Green has pointed out 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2016/02/prime-minister-says-double-dissolution-a-live-option.html>
 that the dissolution of both houses was not allowed in the last six months of 
a parliament, so the procedure would have to be invoked on or before 11 May – 
the day after the budget.

That could allow an election to be held in June or July, although Malcolm 
Turnbull would have to lock in an unusually long campaign with polling day on 
2, 9 or 16 July to avoid the risk ofprevent the Senate and House of 
Representatives terms from getting out of alignment 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2015/12/the-turnbull-governments-options-for-a-2016-election.html>
.

The government is working with the Greens and the independent senator Nick 
Xenophon onlegislation to change Senate voting rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/senate-voting-changes-coalition-wins-over-nick-xenophon-and-greens>
 to counter the rise of micro-parties, which, if passed, would increase the 
appeal of dissolving both houses.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said his party was ready to fight an election, 
but called on the government to stop threatening to call a snap poll “to cover 
up their lack of action on the economy”.

Four things we learnt from Scott Morrison's first speech to the National Press 
Club | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/17/four-things-we-learnt-from-scott-morrisons-first-speech-to-the-national-press-club>
“Labor’s not afraid of an election but the Liberals are afraid of the budget. 
They need to tell us what their economic plans are,” Shorten said.


“What do they stand for? They’re all waffle and no action.”

The Labor frontbencher, Anthony Albanese, said it was unclear why Turnbull had 
taken over from Tony Abbott “apart from getting the keys to the Lodge”.

“The whole of Australia was pleased when we got rid of Mr Angry and we got Mr 
Smiley, but now we know what we have got is Mr Waffle,” Albanese told the Nine 
Network.


Morrison, who used a National Press Club speech this week to signal that only 
“modest” income tax cuts would be possible, said the election would be held 
after the budget so people could have their say on the reform package.

Coalition distances itself from previous bracket creep warnings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/coalition-distances-itself-from-previous-bracket-creep-warnings>
The treasurer said addressing bracket creep – whereby people are pushed into 
higher tax brackets as inflation drives up wages – remained one of his key 
goals.

The finance minister, Mathias Cormann, also said he continued to believe 
bracket creep was a “drag on growth”, a day aftersuggesting it was not as big a 
problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/18/coalition-distances-itself-from-previous-bracket-creep-warnings>
 now that wage inflation was low.

Attempting to clean up his previous comments, Cormann told Sky News he had 
seen some “strange” interpretations of what he had said, and he wanted to make 
clear he was not playing down the importance of bracket creep.
 