
Ardent Leisure chief executive Deborah Thomas has announced she will donate 
her annual cash bonus of $167,500 to charity in the wake of the fatal accident 
at the company’s Dreamworld theme park inQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>.

Thomas, who faced tough questions about her response to the tragedy on 
Thursday, will give $167,500 to the Red Cross which will go towards supporting 
the victims and their families.

Shareholders on Thursday approved a bonus package for Thomas worth nearly 
$843,000 in cash and shares.

Kate Goodchild, from Canberra, her brother Luke Dorsett, his partner, Roozi 
Araghi and New Zealander Cindy Low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/dreamworld-tragedy-victims-remembered-as-wonderful-people>
 were killed on Tuesday when their raft on the Thunder Rapids River ride 
flipped backwards, throwing them out. Two children, Low’s 10-year-old son and 
Goodchild’s 12-year-old daughter,survived the accident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/dreamworld-accident-miracle-escape-for-two-children-on-fatal-theme-park-ride>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fardent-leisure-ceo-deflects-questions-about-pay-bonus-despite-dreamworld-deaths-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ardent%20Leisure%20CEO%20deflects%20questions%20about%20pay%20bonus%20despite%20Dreamworld%20deaths%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fardent-leisure-ceo-deflects-questions-about-pay-bonus-despite-dreamworld-deaths-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ardent%20Leisure%20CEO%20deflects%20questions%20about%20pay%20bonus%20despite%20Dreamworld%20deaths%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fardent-leisure-ceo-deflects-questions-about-pay-bonus-despite-dreamworld-deaths-video&media=>
Ardent Leisure CEO deflects questions about pay bonus despite Dreamworld deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/oct/27/ardent-leisure-ceo-deflects-questions-about-pay-bonus-despite-dreamworld-deaths-video>
Through a statement released on Thursday night, Thomas said she had been 
deeply affected by the accident, which has also given rise toconcerns about 
safety at the decades-old theme park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/dreamworld-theme-park-defends-safety-record-after-four-deaths-on-ride>
.


“I have been deeply affected and saddened by the tragic deaths of Kate 
Goodchild, Luke Dorsett, Roozbeh Araghi and Cindy Low atDreamworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/dreamworld> on Tuesday, in 
particular the impact of this incident on their children and families,” Thomas 
said in the statement.

“I will be making a personal donation of $167,500, which comprises my entire 
cash bonus.”

Dreamworld defends safety record after four deaths on ride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/dreamworld-theme-park-defends-safety-record-after-four-deaths-on-ride>
The announcement came as a planned memorial for the four Dreamworld victims 
and the park’s reopening were cancelled. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/dreamworld-reopening-in-doubt-as-police-worry-about-scene-security>

Ardent Leisure was forced by Queensland police to call off Friday’s 
fundraising memorial at the theme park and full park reopening on Saturday due 
to their ongoing investigations.

Police were worried reopening the park would compromise their investigation of 
the accident site.

Assistant commissioner Brian Codd said the area remained a crime scene and 
police would take as long as they need to gather evidence.

“We are not going to compromise the speed or thoroughness in order for us to 
vacate the area and acquire the evidence or facts we need,” he said.

The Ardent annual general meeting in Sydney on Thursday revealed that Thomas 
was in line to receiveperformance bonuses of up to $840,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/deborah-thomas-set-to-receive-840000-in-bonuses-despite-dreamworld-deaths>
 in shares over the next three years under short-term and long-term incentive 
plans.

Thomas, who took over as chief executive in April, refused to be drawn at the 
meeting on the appropriateness of accepting the bonus in the wake of the 
accident. “I’m not going to discuss anything to do with that,” she told 
reporters. “I don’t think it’s appropriate.

“Four people died, and we are all shattered by this. Right now I do not want 
to discuss transactions.”

She declined to say whether she would accept the bonuses, paving the way for 
her later announcement of a donation to charity.

Her statement also headed off more possible questions about her company’s 
handling of the tragedy.

Dreamworld cancels reopening after police warning on crime scene security
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/dreamworld-reopening-in-doubt-as-police-worry-about-scene-security>
One reporter said at the AGM media conference that the Dorsett family had said 
that no one from Ardent Leisure had spoken to them. Thomas offered to take the 
family’s phone number and promised to call after the meeting. “If I can’t help 
then personally I will ensure we help them in any way possible,” Thomas said.

On Thursday, some relatives of those killed have given emotional accounts of 
the tragedy.

The mother of 32-year-old Kate Goodchild’s husband David described the horror 
that confronted her 12-year-old granddaughter – one of two children who 
survived the accident.

“My son managed to reach his partner ... who died in his arms while his 
12-year-old daughter looked on screaming in the background,” Gillian Turner 
said in a statement to reporters in Canberra.

“I would like to believe that my 12-year-old granddaughter was saved so she 
could tell her little sister what a wonderful mum Kate was.”

Additional reporting by Australian Associated Press
 