
Failure is a big theme in Jessica Knappett’s Drifters. The show, which returns 
this week, centres around the character of Meg, an emblem of the hopeless 
twentysomething muddling through a quarter-life crisis. It’s a pandemic experts 
have recently labelled“suspended adulthood” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/22/young-people-living-in-a-suspended-adulthood-finds-research>
 and something the former hospital caterer/waitress/vending machine 
assistant/qualified masseuse from West Yorkshire knows all too well: her 20s, 
particularly the latter end of the decade, were a conveyor belt of inadequate 
blokes, booze and shoddy employment.

“I was definitely having a meltdown. I call it ‘The Wilderness’. Which is when 
I went into a period of my life when I was just drunk and going on too many 
dates, shall we say … sleeping in too many people’s houses that were not my 
own. Having a jolly good time. But looking back at it, very self-destructive. I 
think I was just trying to binge drink my entire youth away.”

Much like Meg, Knappett lived in a loft and liked to stay out “as long as 
possible because I just didn’t want to go back and climb up my rickety ladder 
and sleep on my futon”. She also speaks with the same warmth and irreverence as 
her clownish Drifters character. Aside from that, the parallels now are few and 
far between. Fresh off a flight from LA, Knappett got married last month – and 
her show, now in its fourth season, is thehighest-rating sitcom on E4 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/drifters>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fjessica-knappett-drifters-e4-comedy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa11d736a199d6a8b77d72060a63685353afd04c4%2F200_0_800_800%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drifters'%20Jessica%20Knappett%20on%20turning%20her%20wilderness%20years%20into%20a%20TV%20smash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fjessica-knappett-drifters-e4-comedy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drifters%27%20Jessica%20Knappett%20on%20turning%20her%20wilderness%20years%20into%20a%20TV%20smash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fjessica-knappett-drifters-e4-comedy-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa11d736a199d6a8b77d72060a63685353afd04c4%2F200_0_800_800%2F800.jpg>
 Twentysomething drifters … from left, Lydia Rose Bewley as Bunny, Jessica 
Knappett as Meg and Lauren O’Rourke as Laura. Photograph: Ian Derry/Channel 4 
Initially sold as the “female Inbetweeners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/27/comedy-television>”, the show 
was written in 2011 amid the recession that spawned this generation of 
‘suspended adults’. “When I first started writing, I had no money and I was 
working in a call centre,” Knappett recalls, “and I remember buying a box of 
tampons and a sandwich and my card getting declined and being like: sandwich it 
is! Things like that don’t happen to me any more,” she says a little 
disappointedly. “I am basically likeEminem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/eminem> on his second album.”

Unlike recent drama-comedies that have swept the critical board – Master of 
None 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/06/aziz-ansari-master-of-none-netflix>
,Transparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/26/transparent-review-the-best-thing-on-tv-at-the-moment>
,Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/07/phoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-to-return-to-soho-theatre>
 (friend Phoebe Waller Bridge has writing credits on three Drifters episodes) – 
there is very little despair or chewy intellectualism embedded in Knappett’s 
series. Instead, it is a show based around shagging, eating and drinking that 
works with slapstick humour, gross-out silliness and a lot of ruthless ribbing 
between its key characters, Meg, Laura and Bunny.

Someone asked if I would 'dare' use the word feminist … so I joked in an 
episode that 'women are really in right now'?

 In the first episode of this new series we meet Andrew – a right-on 
Corbynista who values Meg so much he won’t have sex with her (until she tricks 
him with a notion Knappett refers to as “the cum bluff”). Representing the 
shifting gender roles, he is a world away from Meg’s love interests in series 
one, two and three, boyfriends who are largely primal beings with basic 
functions.

“When I first started doing interviews about Drifters I remember someone 
asking me if I was a feminist and if I would ‘dare’ use the wordfeminist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism>. It just wouldn’t happen now. It 
was this huge taboo, and now I feel like men are walking around saying it and, 
actually, that has just happened in the past five years. I made a joke about it 
in an episode, that ‘women are really in right now’. Like, feminism has become 
really hot, hasn’t it? Women are on trend as a gender,” she says sarcastically.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ0ONpik32bY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ0ONpik32bY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ0ONpik32bY&media=>
Watch a trailer for series 4 of Drifters <https://youtu.be/Q0ONpik32bY> 
Key to Drifters’ success is also its setting in Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/leeds>. Although she lived in London for some of 
her 20s – a city which left her “financially crippled” – Knappett, who was 
brought up inBingley <http://www.bingleyhistory.co.uk/bingley.html>, West 
Yorkshire and went to university in Manchester, was keen to place her world in 
the north of England.

“So much stuff is based in London or has RP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2014/sep/22/secrets-posh-accent-video-riot-club-vowels>
 accents. Not everyone lives in London. Well, unfortunately nearly everyone who 
writes comedy for television does. And if you don’t then you will be travelling 
down on a train to London five times a week, which is what happened to me,” she 
says.

There is a huge drive to get women and racial diversity on screen. I'd like 
the same efforts made with class

She believes the north is still underrepresented in the media, and although 
its visibility is slowly improving, there is a long way to go. “I am sure we 
have had more regional comedy in the last few years and that’s a great thing. 
There is a huge drive not just with getting women on the screen but racial 
diversity. I’d just like to see the same efforts made with class now. Because 
that’s something we are kind of lacking in,” she says.

“If you are a commissioner and you are looking for some scripts you’re not 
necessarily going to get them from working-class people. You might get them 
from ‘once’ working-class people, at the most really … and you might get them 
from someone who is middle class who thinks they know a lot about writing about 
the working class, but that’s a problem because then you don’t get authentic 
voices. I haven’t really seen anything sinceShameless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/18/farewell-shameless-gallaghers-austerity-uk>
 portray real working-class hilarity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fjessica-knappett-drifters-e4-comedy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83cbac2d8c11b2d005137c6963d286690432b884%2F0_0_5748_4160%2F5748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drifters'%20Jessica%20Knappett%20on%20turning%20her%20wilderness%20years%20into%20a%20TV%20smash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fjessica-knappett-drifters-e4-comedy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drifters%27%20Jessica%20Knappett%20on%20turning%20her%20wilderness%20years%20into%20a%20TV%20smash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fjessica-knappett-drifters-e4-comedy-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83cbac2d8c11b2d005137c6963d286690432b884%2F0_0_5748_4160%2F5748.jpg>
 ‘Shagging, eating and drinking’ … Drifters. Photograph: Channel 4 
Class isn’t at the forefront of Drifters, but plays a discreet role. Meg’s 
cousin Bunny is a giddy, posh amateur actor; possessing very little talent but 
the ego of an A-lister. Meg and Laura, meanwhile, routinely fail to make ends 
meet. Its subtle realism about contemporary Britain sits alongside other 
comedies such asChewing Gum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/04/michaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex>
,People Just Do Nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/aug/20/people-just-do-nothing-watch-a-clip-series-three-bbc3-comedy>
 andRaised by Wolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/media-blog/2013/may/29/caitlin-moran-raised-by-wolves-sitcom>
.

Before the interview ends, we talk about Meg’s future; one that seems to 
remain in the endless postgraduate slump. For her part, Knappett faces a new 
challenge. She no longer has to climb a rickety ladder up to a futon, but the 
next phase of adulthood brings its own barrage of pressures and expectations.

“I went to my GP and he saw that I’d turned 30 and gave me a big lecture about 
getting on with it – I was like, you didn’t ask me if I wanted children! It’s 
crazy. It’s a huge burden for women to navigate but men simply don’t have to 
worry about it. I mean I’m stating the fucking obvious, but that’s probably why 
there’s a lot of women making comedy. There’s generally a biological reason why 
women are telling these stories! It’s a way of making the pain go away. Isn’t 
it? The dreadful pain and suffering: let’s laugh at it until it doesn’t hurt 
any more.”


She’s being very deadpan. But like all good jokes it’s rooted in reality.

 * Series 4 of Drifters starts on E4 on 10 October, at 10pm 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/drifters>  