
Top Gun pitted Maverick and Goose against the Iceman and Viper. At the UK 
Drones Show Championships atBirmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> NEC on Sunday, it was Saggy Nun and 
Collision who competed to be crowned the nation’s fastest pilot of an unmanned 
flying vehicle.

It was Collision, aka 22-year-old graduate trainee Brett Collis, who took the 
£1,000 prize in this new event in which pale young men sporting special goggles 
synched with flying cameras navigated an illuminated 3D obstacle course in the 
dark.

FPV (first person view) drone racing is rapidly becoming a lucrative business: 
Sky Sports recently decided to show aUS race series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/drone-racing-the-new-sport-that-could-go-sky-high>
 on its Mix channel and in March a 15-year-old British boy called Luke 
Bannister won $250,000 (£173,900) whenhe triumphed at the World Drone Prix 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/article/british-teenager-luke-bannister-wins-worlds-biggest-drone-race>
 in Dubai.

Wearing his call sign on the back of his T-shirt, Collis explained how he 
graduated to drone racing from video games. “It’s like a real-life computer 
game, with the extra dramatic dimension that if you crash you can’t just 
reboot,” he said, as a smattering of drone groupies pressed up against the 
barriers to eavesdrop on their hero. Poor old Saggy Nun, aka Oliver Peters, who 
occasionally competes in a wimple, barely got off the start line before hitting 
a barrier and wiping out.

With even the cheapest Chinese drone costing £150, crashing can be an 
expensive mistake – not to mention a dangerous one. In November pilots reported 
four near misses in a month between drones and passenger aircraft, including 
one flying near the Shard in London andanother at Liverpool airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/17/drone-came-within-5-metres-of-passenger-jet-at-liverpool-airport>
.

Self-described serial entrepreneur Alan Proto (“a ghastly title, I know”) was 
one of a fast-growing number of drone flying academies vying for business at 
the trade show, now in its second year. He set up Phantom Flight School in 
Chester two years ago after a career that began with a degree in economics from 
Cambridge and cycled through accountancy, construction, nurseries and skiing 
holidays. “I bought my first drone at the start of 2015. I took it home, got it 
out of the box and thought, fantastic! Then, oh my God, I could kill somebody 
with this,” he recalled.

Since 2002 the CIA has been using Predator drones to kill insurgents in 
Afghanistan, but Proto wanted to fly in peace. Unable to find an instructor, he 
taught himself and now employs five pilots who have now taught for a combined 
2,000 hours at £120 an hour. This year Phantom branched out into drone flying 
holidays in Spain. “It just struck me that flying drones can be quite a lonely 
pursuit. Standing in a field in England on your own is not as fun as standing 
in a field in Spain with five soon-to-be mates,” he said.

Prolo’s customers – like 90% of visitors to the NEC on Sunday – are 
overwhelmingly male. “I wish I knew why,” he mused, “because the few lady 
pilots I have trained have been very good and my five-year-old daughter is one 
of the best pilots I know.”

Carys Kaiser, who runs a blog called The Drone Lass 
<https://thedronelass.wordpress.com/>, is one of the few female commercial 
drone pilots in the UK. Looking up at the all-male competitor list for the 
flying championships, she bemoaned the lack of women involved with the 
fast-evolving technology. “Why is it so blokey? Mainly because woman feel that 
it’s not a career for them. You need to be a little bit technical and there’s a 
shortage of women in Stem [science, technology, engineering and maths],” she 
said.

One of the most popular exhibits at the show was a synchronised flying display 
by eight dancing drones, fresh from an appearance on Britain’s Got Talent and 
its French equivalent. The Parrot Bebop 2 (£599 including FPV goggles) is 
really designed as a flying camera for ambitious wedding or wildlife 
photographers but can be programmed with software to perform tricks in time to 
music. On another stall, the Drone Zone advertised itself as a “safe place to 
fly your FPV” on a purpose-built track in Popham, Hampshire.

Top Gun it’s not. But to the ever-swelling number of drone pilots in the UK, 
it’s the place to be.
 