
Peter Dutton <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton> would 
dearly like to channel some of the rising anger over Australia’s indefinite 
offshore detention of refugees towards those who are trying to hold him to 
account for the policy.

This week he sought to blame Guardian Australia, the ABC, academics, Save the 
Children, other human rights groups and the refugees themselves for his 
problems. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/18/peter-dutton-says-he-wont-be-defamed-by-guardian-and-abc-over-nauru-files>

But by flailing around with inaccurate criticisms, false descriptions of what 
has been happening and myopic assessments of the possible solutions, the 
immigration minister only succeeds in highlighting his own increasingly 
desperate political situation.

Dutton says the government has been searching for places to resettle the 442 
men, women and children on Nauru and the 854 men onManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> – and that’s true, it 
has.

But it started that search with an intransigent mindset that more or less 
doomed it from the start. Stopping the boats was not just the primary 
objective; it was an absolute. Any boat that even attempted a journey was an 
unacceptable sign of policy failure.

Peter Dutton attacks Guardian and ABC over reporting of Nauru files
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/18/peter-dutton-says-he-wont-be-defamed-by-guardian-and-abc-over-nauru-files>
The bipartisan race to the bottom began in the 2013 election, and by 2016 had 
become so entrenched that any expression of compassion by a Labor candidate for 
refugee children facing deportation to Nauru was fodder for an immediate“soft 
on people smugglers” political attack. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/17/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-asylum-catchup>

Even when turnbacks under Operation Sovereign Borders have stopped 
people-smuggling operations – even though the government now boasts to the 
Daily Telegraph that it has establisheda “ring of steel” across the waters of 
northern Australia 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/manus-island-navy-and-air-patrols-increased-ahead-of-offshore-detention-centre-closure/news-story/f652395b09ef46b71c52ed291a438349?sv=a5e2513e99cbe755b55a98bb1533911c>
 – any resettlement option that leaves open even the remotest chance that an 
asylum seeker embarking by boat might one day, somehow, end up here has been 
deemed to pose a risk that people smugglers might start to try their luck 
again. However small that risk is, and however unlikely it is that people 
smuggling operations will succeed, these options have been ruled out.

And so the asylum seekers languish, and their suffering escalates, and 
gradually, despite every effort to keep it out of sight, pressure from the 
international community and the Australian public starts to build and the 
political consensus frays.

When John Howard found himself in this situation, he set up a process that 
eventually resulted in the majority of those onNauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>, who were found to be genuine 
refugees, being settled in Australia and New Zealand.

Some in the Coalition can see history repeating. Russell Broadbent, a Liberal 
moderate who was one of those agitating on asylum issues during the Howard 
years,noted recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/10/liberal-mp-russell-broadbent-appeals-to-people-of-conscience-after-release-of-nauru-files>
 that the Nauru Files – the 2000 incident reports from Nauru published by 
Guardian Australia – were “the sort of thing that brought John Howard to a 
place where he had to do something about it”.

But, however logical resettling refugees here might seem, especially with the 
“ring of steel” in place to head off any people-smuggling resurgence, Dutton 
seems to be leaving no room at all for that kind of backdown, no space to 
balance the limited risk of a couple more turnbacks against the crushing moral 
weight of our detention policy.

And that purely political choice turns a difficult situation into an 
intractable impasse – with 1,296 lives as its human consequence.

It’s a choice that means we have also rejected all other ideas to break the 
deadlock, including New Zealand’s standing offer to take 150 refugees, and 
options to entice refugees to accept resettlement in Cambodia with the chance 
to apply to be part of Australia’s humanitarian intake after a number of years, 
and options similar to the Gillard government’s Malaysia swap deal (which even 
Tony Abbott now wishes he hadn’t joined with the Greens to scupper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/labor-gobsmacked-by-tony-abbotts-u-turn-on-malaysia-solution>
).

Did you see the Border Force story on last night's news? | First Dog on the 
Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/12/did-you-see-the-border-force-story-on-last-nights-news>
Of the 854 men on Manus Island, 98% of those who have had their claims 
assessed have been found to be refugees 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/rp1516/Quick_Guides/Offshore>
 who have a “well-founded fear of persecution”. Papua New Guinea has so far 
resettled only a tiny handful and despite the announcement that the detention 
centre will close – because the PNG courts say it has to – there are still no 
answers about what will happen to the men despite two deaths, documented 
assaults and rising mental illness and despair.

Of those assessed on Nauru, 77% have been found to be refugees. Only one has 
agreed to resettlement in Cambodia. There are no other resettlement options 
even though Dutton seemed to suggest on ABC’s 7.30 report this week that the 
refugees on Nauru had refused to go to New Zealand, Canada, the United States 
or Malaysia.

After three years in detention, with no idea where, or when they might be able 
to rebuild their lives, Nauru is also a growing human rights disaster.

Dutton has variously accused Guardian Australia of “hyping’ and “trivialising” 
the plight of those on Nauru with the publication of the Nauru Files.

“The trouble, frankly with the approach of the Guardian and the ABC has been 
to trivialise the very serious issues by trying to promote the 2,100 reports as 
somehow, all of those being serious when they’re not. Many of those reports 
relate to corporal punishment by children by their own parents. They report 
about some minor assaults by detainees on detainees, refugees on refugees,”he 
said on ABC radio on Thursday 
<http://www.abc.net.au/am/content/2016/s4521864.htm>.

But that is exactly what we reported. As we explained when we published the 
document cache, it contained incident reports – short summaries of events in 
the Nauru detention centre ranging from serious allegations of sexual assault, 
to observations of a threat of self-harm, to abuse of a child, or more mundane 
incidents such as a child falling over when playing soccer.In our data log 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
 we record each incident under its official risk rating – minor, major or 
critical, and type, from sexual assault, suicide attempts and self-harm to 
property damage and lost items.

The Nauru files: the lives of asylum seekers in detention detailed in a unique 
database – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
Dutton says he is investigating the allegations in the leak (bizarrely he also 
attacked Save the Children for not providing him with the unredacted documents, 
which Nauru service providers have confirmed his department already has) and 
insists the allegations of assault and sexual abuse will be taken seriously, 
while dismissing the trivial nature of other incidents.

But that misses the point. All but a few carefully selected journalists are 
prohibited from visiting Nauru. One reason for publishing the Nauru Files was 
to provide a picture of the reality of life there through the everyday 
bureaucracy of the reports, the serious allegations and the minor daily 
indignities and humiliations. This isn’t just about sexual abuse. It’s about 
the sanity-sapping uncertainty, and tedium and tension of life under indefinite 
detention, which quickly amounts to systemic abuse. And Peter Dutton is in 
charge of the system.

We’ll continue to do what we can to document the consequences for the human 
beings whose lives are on hold because Australia’s toxic political debate has 
turned a difficult policy problem into a stand-off without any obvious end 
point.

Dutton says we in the media sit in the “cheap seats” with no responsibility 
for finding a solution. But our job is to hold power to account and that is 
what we are doing. We can report and discuss possible answers. But, Minister 
Dutton, the moral judgments and the decisions about solutions are your job and 
your responsibility. Whoever you try to blame.
 