
Dylan Voller was not a violent boy before he went to detention and was 
mistreated by guards, his long time caseworker has toldthe royal commission 
into the protection and detention of children in the Northern Territory. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>

Antoinette Carroll said Voller, one of the teenage detainees at the centre of 
the juvenile detention scandal in the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/12/dylan-voller-says-he-felt-defenceless-panicked-restraint-chair-don-dale-northern-territory>
, had never been given the option of therapeutic or rehabilitative options and 
was “set up to fail” in a cycle of incarceration.

In 2015 Voller was shackled in a restraint chair for almost two hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/royal-commission-tours-don-dale-this-is-where-that-young-fella-was-held>
 andfootage of it  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/video-of-boy-strapped-into-restraint-chair-keeps-australia-on-the-edge-of-its-seat>
 formed part of a Four Corners report thatsparked the royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/malcolm-turnbull-announces-royal-commission-northern-territory-detention>
. Other footage showed him being stripped and thrown to the floor by guards 
and, in another incident, struck by a guard.

Dylan Voller says he felt defenceless and panicked in restraint chair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/12/dylan-voller-says-he-felt-defenceless-panicked-restraint-chair-don-dale-northern-territory>
“When you look at the footage everyone has seen … it’s big men dealing with a 
very small child,” said Carroll, who is the youth justice advocacy project 
coordinator of the Central Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency.

She said this was the learning environment Voller, who has been in and out of 
detention since he was 11, was raised in, and she believed it contributed to 
his subsequent violent offending.

Carroll’s experience with him was “very empathic” and so, when he was later 
convicted of a violent crime, “it was very sad to see him go down this path”.

Carroll said she had worked with Voller since he was given his first 
“devastating” sentence of 18 months at the age of 11 for a combination of 
breaching orders and further offending, which she described as low order.

Carroll broke down as she described going to visit Voller in an Alice Springs 
youth residential rehab facility at Christmas when he was just 13 and alone 
except for one other older detainee.

“It was just a very sad situation for someone so young,” she said.

She said staff were untrained and unable to deal with young detainees such as 
Voller who had behavioural issues, which led to frequent bouts of isolation and 
restraint.

“I think essentially a child went into that system,” she said later. “The fact 
he went into a detention centre system so young exacerbated his challenging 
behaviours, which were already identified way early in the piece.”

In one instance Voller had opted to be transferred to the adult Alice Springs 
facility to distance himself from some guards but, when she visited him, he was 
held in isolation because of his young age and shackled.

“I visited him in the second week and was deeply distressed by what I observed 
in his appearance,” she said. “He was shackled, it wasn’t good. We made a 
request to get him out of there as soon as possible.”

Over the course of multiple arrests and charges, Voller had always pleaded 
guilty and never received diversion, Carroll said. He has been granted bail on 
occasion but never parole despite applying.


Dylan Voller says NT detainees were denied toilet access and forced to pay 
guards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/12/dylan-voller-says-nt-detainees-were-denied-toilet-access-and-forced-to-pay-guards>
She said he had never been permitted to take part in youth justice 
conferencing with any of his victims, which Carroll said “would have been a 
good thing” had he been allowed.

“It just became very evident from the get-go that there would be a punitive 
approach taken to Dylan,” she said.

She said in many cases the department couldn’t present an alternative to 
detention, as should be the priority under the NT’s Youth Justice Act. Instead 
Voller was “subjected to a punitive social work approach to his needs void of 
any conflict resolution approaches”.

“When Dylan first came into the care and protection system his mother was 
genuinely seeking some supports, some respite in how to manage Dylan and his 
challenging behaviours,” she said.

“What became apparent was that his care workers were somewhat helpless in 
dealing with his complex issues. The department seemed unwilling to resource 
the appropriate therapeutic approaches to disengage him from at risk 
behaviours.”

She said it became “adversarial” for each of the many caseworkers he went 
through and people became judgemental.

NT royal commission: claims of chaos as government tries and fails to cut 
witness list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/nt-royal-commission-claims-of-chaos-as-government-tries-and-fails-to-cut-witness-list>
“Decisions were made on behalf of him, on behalf of his mother, and I think 
that was very problematic.”

On Monday the commission heard from Voller, who described difficulties with 
ADHD andraised multiple allegations and incidents of abuse and mistreatment by 
guards. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/12/dylan-voller-says-nt-detainees-were-denied-toilet-access-and-forced-to-pay-guards>

Monday’s evidence also revealed Voller had been held in isolation for 24 days 
immediately preceding his release in 2013. Carroll was asked if that was ever 
appropriate.


“Clearly not, because he re-entered the criminal justice system,” she said.

Voller was arrested after a violent crime spree in Alice Springs and is now 
finishing his three-year sentence in Darwin’s adult jail.

“He was very much set up to fail,” she said. “The whole point is to ensure 
that a young person isn’t re-entering the community a hardened criminal and 
then committing more crime.”

On Tuesday afternoon lawyers for the NT government put a number of assertions 
to Carroll that were raised during Voller’s testimony – who they were not 
allowed to cross-examine on Monday.

She said she was unaware that Voller – who described his history of spitting 
as a defence mechanism – had spat at staff including female nurses and officers 
hundreds of times.

The commission’s public hearing continues in Darwin.
 