
Juvenile detainees were made to pay “rent” to guards and forced to defecate 
into pillowcases when they weren’t allowed to go to the toilet at night,the 
Northern Territory royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
 has been told by teenager Dylan Voller.

Voller, the detainee seen strapped in a restraint chair on ABC’s Four Corners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/royal-commission-tours-don-dale-this-is-where-that-young-fella-was-held>
, also said he was denied toilet breaks when he was transferred at short notice 
from Alice Springs to Darwin and taken the 1,500km journey in the back of a 
police vehicle with no air conditioning.

Lawyers representing other parties, including the Northern Territory 
government, hadagain sought to restrict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/nt-royal-commission-claims-of-chaos-as-government-tries-and-fails-to-cut-witness-list>
 part of Voller’s testimony being published and for the commissioners to make 
clear Voller was only telling his version of events. He is the first detainee 
to testify,following a number of expert witnesses. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/royal-commission-told-new-detention-centres-no-solution-to-incarceration-crisis>

NT royal commission: claims of chaos as government tries and fails to cut 
witness list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/nt-royal-commission-claims-of-chaos-as-government-tries-and-fails-to-cut-witness-list>
Voller introduced his criminal history to a closed courtroom in Darwin on 
Monday, including a long list of “serious offences” to which he had pleaded 
guilty.

“I’m definitely not proud of it,” he said. “It’s humiliating and has a lot of 
mistakes that were made. I’m sorry for it but I’ve done it already.”

The now 19 year old made multiple fresh allegations of mistreatment against 
him by guards and described the condition of his detention in multiple NT 
facilities,including both Don Dale centres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/royal-commission-tours-don-dale-this-is-where-that-young-fella-was-held>
.

Voller alleged guards charged detainees “rent” for staying at Don Dale, taking 
$1.5o a day from money the detainees had earned through good behaviour.

He also said he was forced to defecate into a pillowcase after guards at the 
Alice Springs juvenile facility refused to let him out of his cell to go to the 
toilet during the night. He said detainees would repeatedly be forced to 
urinate through the cell bars.

He was first strip-searched at about the age of 11 or 12, he said, and it 
would occur every time he was moved between facilities or in and out of 
isolation cells, or when he coming back from the bathroom because he had been 
throwing toilet paper at cameras to cover the screen.

Voller also alleged officers repeatedly stripped him of clothes and bedding 
for hours as a form of punishment, and denied him food and water.

One youth justice officer at Alice Springs noticed he was hungry in the middle 
of one night and threw muesli bars and fruit through to his cell, Voller said.

Inside the Don Dale detention centres – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gallery/2016/dec/08/inside-the-don-dale-detention-centres-in-pictures>
“He didn’t agree with what they did by starving me, I guess.”

Voller also described the process of transferring detainees between facilities 
often without warning.

“If you were lucky you can get one last visit with your family,” he said.

In one instance he was sent from Alice Springs to Darwin, despite his 
psychologist recommending against it. He said he was handcuffed in the back of 
a police vehicle for the two-day, 1,500km road journey and forced to urinate 
through the back of the cage.

“I started threatening self-harm because I was hoping, if I were at risk, they 
wouldn’t continue to drive,” he said. “I started choking myself with the 
seatbelt, stuff like that.”

He described “two good officers” who accompanied him from Tennant Creek to 
Darwin and let him sit at the side of the car with the door open at rest stops, 
and would buy him cold drinks and talk to him during the journey.

He also had positive experiences with a one-on-one tutor and three individual 
caseworkers who “made the effort to talk to us, contact our families, ask us 
‘is everything all right with you and the guards?’”.

But most didn’t make an effort to help keep his family relationship strong, he 
said.

“One caseworker was saying my family didn’t really care about me and stuff 
like that,” he said. “For a while I started believing it, I guess.”

Dylan Voller fears reprisals if he gives royal commission evidence from prison 
– mother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/dylan-voller-fears-reprisals-if-he-gives-royal-commission-evidence-from-prison-mother>
Voller and his sister were put into foster care at about the age of 14, where 
he lived with older boys and they smoked marijuana and committed criminal acts.

He received his last proper schooling when he was about 10 years old and had 
wanted to complete year 10 while in detention but wasn’t allowed to. He told 
the commission as a child he wasn’t allowed to attend school unless he took his 
ADHD medication but the medication made him sick.

Voller’s family has campaigned for his release. Applications for parole, which 
he has been eligible for since last year, have been knocked back. Last week his 
mother saidVoller was fearful of reprisals by guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/dylan-voller-fears-reprisals-if-he-gives-royal-commission-evidence-from-prison-mother>
 inside the adult jail where he is currently serving a three-year sentence.

The hearing, including Voller’s testimony and those who are responding to his 
allegations, continues in Darwin.
 