
There’s a rich tradition of dystopian tales in this country, narratives of 
disaster that have struck a widespread chord by reflecting sociopolitical 
realities of their times, rendering worst-case scenarios as a warning to change 
our ways.

The textbook example of this is Shirley Jackson’s classic short story The 
Lottery <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1948/06/26/the-lottery>, which 
horrified readers when published in 1948 by imagining that seemingly normal 
people could commit an act of barbarism against their neighbor. The story 
debuted in the context of the release of interred Japanese-American citizens, a 
few years after occupied and fearful Europeans gave up their neighbors to the 
Nazis. The Lottery and its successors didn’t distract us from terrors of our 
world, they in fact demanded that we reckon with them.

Contemporary dystopian literature and films, on the other hand, pull their 
inspiration increasingly from our worst imaginings of ourselves and seem to be 
closer to reality than not. The line between entertainment and reality blurs to 
a point of alarm. In anappearance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u3Qia44yPhs&feature=share> earlier this month 
at St Francis College in Brooklyn, Margaret Atwood told the audience that 
dystopia is a feature of 21st century society.

Take the universe conjured in Atwood’s new novel, The Heart Goes Last 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/23/the-heart-goes-last-margaret-atwood-review-novel>
, where a once middle-ish class couple, now destitute, has to contend with an 
America undone by financial collapse. In the not-so-distant past of 2008’s 
economic crash and global recession, we’re dropped in an America that lived 
beyond her means, with the super wealthy fortified into comforts denied to all 
those left behind and forced to live in their cars, beg and con their way into 
work.

To solve the problem of the transient lifestyle and unemployment, a lucky few 
compete and agree to live in the town of Consilience to participate in the 
Positron Project, a prison in exchange for free housing program, alternating 
monthly to work at the prison and live in a house.

Atwood’s dystopia marries our economic nightmares with the prison industrial 
complex, austerity and unemployment. It sounds frightfully close to real 
communities in the US likeHuntsville, Texas 
<http://www.vice.com/read/what-happens-when-you-build-a-town-around-a-prison>, 
where residents accept the fact that their existence is sustained by a prison 
economy and the local joke is “half the population of Huntsville’s under key, 
and the other half gets paid for their time”. Or alternatively, it sounds like 
small towns that have seen their depressed employment market shift whennew 
prisons are built 
<http://www.newsweek.com/do-rural-prisons-benefit-locals-74437>, and shape 
their politics around it, or the slow rise ofsuburban poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/14/the-new-face-of-homelessness-in-america-suburbanites>
.

Another example is The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>, which premiered in 
2010 while we navigated the aftershocks of a global economic recession. The 
show resonated with viewers: the zombies were no longer fringe but normalized 
masses, familiar, like many friends and family jobless from the massive 
layoffs, clamoring for any work. Moreover, as fans will attest, the zombies are 
the least of the problem when you measure them against the humanity of the 
survivors.

It all echoes other horror stories that are real in our society, where we 
over-police and criminalize the poor. As my colleague Steven Thrasher noted in 
a recent column, some are even ordered togive blood or face incarceration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/21/donate-blood-or-go-to-jail-when-did-us-judges-become-vampires?CMP=fb_us>
. The questions that dystopic narratives – and being black, or poor, in America 
today – raises for all of us boil down to,will I make it through?

Contrast that to The Lottery, which Ruth Franklin wrote 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/the-lottery-letters> in 2013 
“anticipates the way we would come to understand the 20th century’s unique 
lessons about the capacity of ordinary citizens to do evil – from the Nazi camp 
bureaucracy, to the Communist societies that depended on the betrayal of 
neighbor by neighbor … In 1948, with the fresh horrors of the Second World War 
barely receding into memory and the Red Scare just beginning, it is no wonder 
that the story’s first readers reacted so vehemently to this ugly glimpse of 
their own faces in the mirror, even if they did not realize exactly what they 
were looking at.”

We know what we’re looking at, now.

We like to believe we’ll be better than this. I wasn’t alone in recognizing, 
if notappropriating <https://twitter.com/subtle_squid/status/614934655146573824>
, the imagery from Susan Collins’s Hunger Games when activist Bree Newsome 
posed, captured and took down theconfederate flag from the South Carolina 
statehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/27/woman-removes-confederate-flag-south-carolina-statehouse>
 this summer. The image was striking because it embodied righteous defiance to 
an old and destructive order. Like a spark, it reignited a movement to remove 
the flag from other southern state capitals.

This is probably why I find strange comfort in consuming dystopian stories. 
They are reminders, despite reflecting a dire present, that it’s never too late 
for us, that we’re not that far gone and can reverse the machinery that makes 
our nightmares real. Maybe they are a kind of litany for survival, that 
humanity will continue despite our best efforts to destroy ourselves.
 