
Today we have two opposing views of the future of orchestral music-making from 
opposite sides of the United States: one as a virtual digital utopia, the other 
as a tech-free sanctuary.

Out west, there’s the Los Angeles Philharmonic’s VAN Beethoven 
<http://www.wired.com/2015/09/la-philharmonic-vr/>, a touring yellow van – 
geddit?!? – which will tour the city for five weeks and allow six people at a 
time to don virtual reality headsets and immerse themselves in four minutes of 
Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony as – as the phrase goes – you’ve never experienced 
it before.


This time, though, that might actually be true. According to Wired’s 
correspondent, after putting on yourOculus Rift  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_2oYgpdvEdg>or equivalent, you are plunged 
into the middle of the orchestra, with a sophisticated interface that changes 
the sound and what you see depending on which way you’re facing. WhereWired was 
bowled over <http://www.wired.com/2015/09/la-philharmonic-vr/> - “no 
programming [of VR] has moved me as much”, over atSlate, there was less 
overwhelm-ment 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2015/09/08/los_angeles_philharmonic_experiments_with_virtual_reality.html>
, and more frustration about the lack of real flexibility in the software, as 
well as a plea to make the VAN experience last as long as a whole movement or 
whole symphony rather than a virtually bleeding chunkette.

None of which would probably impress Anthony Tommasini at the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/14/arts/music/the-concert-hall-as-refuge-in-a-restless-web-driven-world.html?_r=0>
, who makes a plea this week for “classical music as a haven for device-free 
absorption in live musical performances … Where else in society, right now, are 
the web-free spaces? … We’re down to the concert hall and the opera house. Now, 
that’s a selling point.” Tommasini writes, somewhat unfashionably, about 
classical music’s demands on our collective attention spans in the face of our 
withering abilities to concentrate throughout our culture.

What was I saying? Oh, right, sorry...

Tommasini may have a point, but there are many examples of the opposite trend, 
what with our obsession with box-set binges and Netflix marathons. Tommasini 
rails against “even older audience members” checking their emails until the 
first downbeat is given in the concert hall – “most then put their devices away 
– though not everyone, I’ve found to my amazement”.(I’m with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/jun/05/classical-phone-rage-david-patrick-stearns-confiscated-phone-philadelphia-orchestra-concert>
 on that particular phone-free stricture for orchestral concerts.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fus-orchestras-technology-east-coast-west-coast-opposing-visions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f2ccd64d46826626b4197a4ba21871e61b2ff39%2F0_0_5063_3038%2F5063.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20coast%20v%20west%20coast%3A%20two%20opposing%20US%20visions%20of%20the%20orchestra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fus-orchestras-technology-east-coast-west-coast-opposing-visions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20coast%20v%20west%20coast%3A%20two%20opposing%20US%20visions%20of%20the%20orchestra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fus-orchestras-technology-east-coast-west-coast-opposing-visions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f2ccd64d46826626b4197a4ba21871e61b2ff39%2F0_0_5063_3038%2F5063.jpg>
 ‘Even older audience members’ check their emails until the first downbeat is 
given. Photograph: Alamy 
Following through his ideas, however, the suggestion that classical music 
concerts need to be sold as these tech-free oases of un-networked bliss is, I 
think, missing the point and the opportunity of our digital age. There are many 
contexts in which some kind of technological interactivity isn’t just an 
intrusion but an essential part of the experience, and there are imaginative 
ways of delivering much more meaningful information about a piece and a 
performance thanks to the infinity of little blue screens we all carry around 
with us.

For me, it’s a question of respect for the performers and your fellow audience 
members. The supposed passivity of the conventional concert situation is a 
myth: the audience has always been essential to the experience; their attention 
is almost as much a performance as, well, the performance! But there are a
growing number of contexts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/aug/14/eric-whitacres-bbc-prom-music-inspired-by-hubble-space-telescope>
 – in the concert hall and across broadcast media  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/aug/15/proms-2012-week-five-review>
– where that isn’t true any more; in which audiences are experiencing classical 
music inmultiple enriching dimensions  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/dec/07/the-orchestra-ipad-app-philharmonia>
thanks to the wizardry of their manifold devices, phones, tablets, computers, 
talking fridges and networked toasters. And that’s OK too.

So while the US west and east coasts might be offering these diametrically 
different takes on the possibilities for the future, the beauty for all of us 
is that we can have both the web-free oasis and the heightened-reality 
technopolis. Long live the new flesh! And, er, the old…
 