
The horror of ebola in West Africa has taken thousands of lives and spread 
fear around the world. This fact, coupled with ignorance and misinformation, 
has created the perfect storm. The risk is real, but you wouldn’t know the full 
picture from watching last weekend’s American 60 Minutes. Lara Logan’s report 
took her to Liberia, butit did not include 
<http://fair.org/blog/2014/11/11/cbs-covers-liberias-ebola-crisis-without-liberian-voices/>
 any black African voices. It was as if colonialism never died, and the 
life-saving Americans were the only barrier between calm and chaos.

 Meanwhile in Australia, last week’s news that private company Aspen Medical 
was awarded a $20m contract to run an ebola response in Sierra Leone was given 
surprisingly little scrutiny. Federal health minister Peter Duttonpraised 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-06/precautions-are-sensible-health-minister-defends/5870380?section=business>
 the company’s record and claimed that the firm was chosen because “they’ve got 
the capacity and the logistical capacity to deliver very quickly what 
governments want on the ground.” He played the patriotism card –“Aspen is an 
Australian company” – and said that Aspen “will have this up and running 
efficiently, effectively, saving lives.”

Non-government organisations with months of front line exposure in battling 
ebola were shunned for a corporation that won’t face any freedom of information 
requests because it’s a private entity. We have to take it on trust that 
taxpayer dollars will be spent appropriately. With former senior politicians 
and civil servants on Aspen’s board (a typical feature of companies thatsucceed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/dec/26/g4s-hires-ex-mandarins> in 
winning government contracts globally) financial benefits and political 
knowledge for the company are assured.

The company, established in 2003, has a history 
<http://www.aspenmedical.com.au/our-past-and-present> assisting Australian 
defence in the Solomon Islands, policing in East Timor and a range of other 
activities in the customs, health and fossil fuel arenas. Since 2007, the 
department of defence has awarded Aspen contracts worth more than $200m.

But deeper questions are being ignored in the rush to do something – anything 
– aboutEbola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola>. While it’s incredibly 
brave and noble for Australian nurses and doctors to volunteer with Aspen to 
establish a 100-bed treatment unit, most media coverage framed the discussion 
over awarding Aspen the contract as a partisan battle between the Abbott 
government and Labor opposition.

Victorian Greens senator and public health expert Richard Di Natale has been 
one of the sole voicesquestioning 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-06/aspens-qualifications-in-fighting-ebola-under-question/5873088>
 Aspen’s qualifications. He tells me that the contract “has a real stink about 
it. I’m at a loss. The only plausible explanation is that a government is so 
ideologically committed to advancing private interests, even when it’s 
counter-productive. ”

Di Natale says that Aspen’s win without a tender process bastardises 
democracy. “If it went to tender, a range of NGOs would have been able to get 
personnel in the field much more cheaply”, he argues. He worries that “mission 
creep” could happen, and that Aspen will require more funds to complete further 
work. The Greens MP is planning a trip to West Africa to examine the reality on 
the ground and hopes to receive help from Canberra in facilitating his visit.

He’s blunt on the reasons the Abbott government took so long to respond: 
“There aren’t any votes in black Africans dying. We’ve led the world in 
developing a vaccine for the Hendra virus which affects race horses, and yet 
when it comes to something like Ebola both in Australia and in the US we 
haven’t given it appropriate concern.”

One of the leaders 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/africa/2014/11/msf-says-new-strategy-needed-fight-ebola-201411111130277537.html>
 in fighting Ebola remains Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF). Its Geneva 
headquarters tells me that they have concerns with the for-profit model that’s 
creeping into disaster relief. “Our concern is an uncoordinated approach 
overall that is inflexible and aid-money rather need-driven. It should not be 
about what governments want but what is needed to respond effectively to the 
needs on the ground.”

 The scale of MSF’s commitments and the money it is spending places Aspen’s 
meager program in perspective. This year, the NGO has sent more than 700 
international staff to the region, and admitted more than 5,600 patients in 
four West African states while providing roughly 600 isolation beds and two 
transit centres. This year, this has cost around $74m. As a rich Western 
nation, Australia’s contribution is stingy.

This era of unaccountable neo-liberalism has brought moves to privatise 
disaster management across the world. Recall former US Republican presidential 
nominee Mitt Romneysuggesting 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mojo/2012/08/paul-ryan-mitt-romney-tampa-fema> in 
2012 that federal emergency assistance should be outsourced? Hurricane Sandy 
brought out the usual suspects of rent-seekers and disaster capitalists looking 
tomake money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/06/hurricane-sandy-americas-disaster-capitalists>
 from misery.

This ideology must be fought when fighting wars, disease or natural 
catastrophes at home or abroad.
 