
More than 100 senior editors representing every UK national newspaper, the 
regional press and broadcasters have signed a letter urgingDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to intervene to help 
protect journalists’ phones and communications records from being secretly 
snooped on by police.

The letter calls on the prime minister to consider changes to a draft code of 
practice put forward by the home secretary, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/13/freedom-of-expression-anti-snooping-campaign-launched-ripa-changes>
, to meet concerns over the police use of surveillance powers linked to the 
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (Ripa). The letter, signed by 
senior industry figures including Guardian editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger as 
part of a campaign organised by the Society of Editors and industry news website
Press Gazette <http://www.pressgazette.co.uk>, states that the new code 
“appears to do very little which would stop a repeat of such abuse of Ripa”.

May had offered to provide guidance over existing police powers after it 
emerged the Metropolitan police secretly accessed the phone records of Sun 
journalist Tom Newton Dunn to find the people who had leaked him information in 
the Plebgate affair. Critics of May’s safeguards fear that the police will 
still have sweeping powers allowing them to authorise themselves to access the 
phone and email records of professionals such as journalists, lawyers, doctors, 
MPs and priests who handle privileged, confidential information.

The letter adds: “The code needs to balance the seriousness of the alleged 
crime against the public interest in protecting the confidentiality of all 
journalistic sources and potential whistleblowers.

“The guidance needs to make it clear that a public official communicating 
information to a journalist without official approval (ie. a leak) cannot be 
sufficient justification for a Ripa telecoms request.”

Cameron has called for an extension of the laws that give snooping powers to 
security services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/12/david-cameron-pledges-anti-terror-law-internet-paris-attacks-nick-clegg>
 with a plan to ban encrypted messages in the wake of the Charlie Hebdo Paris 
attacks.
 