
Rectangles of pale blues and greens lie scattered across a sea of grey sand, 
looking a bit like someone droppedtheir Farrow & Ball 
<http://www.farrow-ball.com/colours/paint/fcp-category/list> colour swatches in 
a cat litter tray. The mottled grey background is marked with faded layers of 
scratches and scribbles, like an endlessly reworked charcoal drawing, from 
which the little blocks of colour shine out as bright jewels in the dust.

This is what the salt pans of Gujarat in northern India look like, when seen 
through the painterly bird’s-eye lens ofEdward Burtynsky 
<http://www.edwardburtynsky.com/>. The 61-year-old Canadian photographer has 
devoted his career to capturing man’s impact on the landscape from above, 
elevating the brutish debris of slag heaps and open-cast mines into sublime 
wall-sized hymns to how we’ve made our mark on the surface of the Earth. And 
he’s on a mission to document it all before it’s too late.

“I happened upon the salt pans on Google Earth one day,” he says, sitting in 
east London’sFlowers Gallery 
<http://www.flowersgallery.com/exhibitions/view/edward-burtynsky-essential-elements>
, where an exhibition of his work opens on 16 September. “A few months later I 
was in a Cessna flying over them, trying to capture this incredible terrain 
before it disappears.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b49f2ea811684a1d4d6ac9c5a5f14014cc92bef%2F0_13_1100_660%2F1100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edward%20Burtynsky%20on%20his%20ravaged%20Earth%20shots%3A%20'We've%20reached%20peak%20everything'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edward%20Burtynsky%20on%20his%20ravaged%20Earth%20shots%3A%20%27We%27ve%20reached%20peak%20everything%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b49f2ea811684a1d4d6ac9c5a5f14014cc92bef%2F0_13_1100_660%2F1100.jpg>
 ‘Like someone dropped their Farrow & Ball colour swatches’ … Salt pans in 
Gujarat, India Photograph: Edward Burtynsky, Courtesy of Flowers Gallery, 
London / Metivier Gallery, Toronto 
Home to more than 100,000 salt workers, who extract around a million tonnes of 
salt a year from the floodwaters of the Arabian Sea, the remarkable lunar 
landscape of the Little Rann of Kutch might not exist for much longer. The 
industry is under threat from receding groundwater levels and declining market 
values, potentially putting paid to a way of life and land-forming that has 
existed here for over 400 years.

Like most of Burtynsky’s work – which graces collections from Tate to MoMA and 
the Guggenheim – when you first see these pastel-hued planes of lines, squares 
and scribbles, it’s not quite clear what you’re looking at until you peer a bit 
closer. The furrows in the dappled grey backgrounds, which have the ghostly 
patina of an etching, turn out to be the tracks of trucks and the grooves of 
dykes and berms, dug out to stop the desert sand from blowing into the salt 
pans.

“I like it when the viewer can’t ‘get it’ instantly,” says Burtynsky, poring 
over one of his two-metre wide prints to find a clue that proves we are looking 
at a river delta, not just an abstract swirl of reds and browns. Like spotting 
the striped red jersey in aWhere’s Wally illustration 
<http://www.whereswally.co.uk/>, there is a satisfaction that comes from 
decoding the signs of life and industry in one of his sprawling scenes. “You 
should have to dig in with your eyes to work out what’s going on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7109d00f51565b244e9d916d4b4278b2ffcbf6f6%2F0_0_1100_825%2Fmaster%2F1100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edward%20Burtynsky%20on%20his%20ravaged%20Earth%20shots%3A%20'We've%20reached%20peak%20everything'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edward%20Burtynsky%20on%20his%20ravaged%20Earth%20shots%3A%20%27We%27ve%20reached%20peak%20everything%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7109d00f51565b244e9d916d4b4278b2ffcbf6f6%2F0_0_1100_825%2Fmaster%2F1100.jpg>
 Highland Valley #8 … an open pit copper mine in Canada Photograph: Edward 
Burtynsky/Edward Burtynsky, Courtesy of Flowers Gallery, London / Metivier 
Gallery, Toronto 
He’d like you to dig in a little with your brain too, because these glossy 
visions are no mere enviro-porn. “There’s definitely a ‘holy shit!’ aspect to 
the work,” he says. “We’re at a critical moment in history where we’re starting 
to hit the thresholds of human expansion and the limits of what this planet can 
sustain. We’re reaching peak oil, peak fish, peak beef – and the evidence is 
all there to see in the landscape.”


Since his interest was first sparked in man’s imprint on the environment in 
the 1980s, when he was working part-time in a Canadian gold mine while studying 
photography, Burtynsky has produced major bodies of work on everything fromthe 
oil industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/20/edward-burtynsky-photography-oil-review>
 andmining <http://www.edwardburtynsky.com/site_contents/Photographs/Mines.html>
 toquarrying 
<http://www.edwardburtynsky.com/site_contents/Photographs/Quarries.html> and 
water <http://www.edwardburtynsky.com/site_contents/Photographs/Water.html>, 
the most recent of which have expanded in scope to includedocumentary 
film-making <http://www.edwardburtynsky.com/site_contents/Films/introFilms.html>
.

Edward Burtynsky's corrupted landscapes – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/sep/15/edward-burtynsky-corrupted-landscapes-aerial-photography-in-pictures>
To achieve his favoured god-like perspective, he began with high vantage 
points and tall tripods, then graduated to telescopic hydraulic poles (think of 
a 50ft selfie stick), then planes and helicopters, and now computer-controlled 
drones. His team scouts potential subjects from the comfort of Google Earth, 
then with GPS technology Burtynsky can fix a position in the air by latitude, 
longitude and altitude, and send a drone-mounted camera back again and again to 
the exact same spot until he’s happy with the shot.


He is currently engaged in a five-year project on the anthropocene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/01/generation-anthropocene-altered-planet-for-ever>
, the pending name for the present geological age in which humans have had a 
discernible impact on the environment, working in collaboration with scientists 
from the internationalAnthropocene Working Group 
<http://quaternary.stratigraphy.org/workinggroups/anthropocene/>. “We’ve had 
the five great extinctions,” he says, referring to prehistoric devastations 
from the “Great Dying” of the Permian eruptions, to the asteroid that wiped out 
the dinosaurs. “Now humans are having the equivalent effect of that meteor 
impact.”

If his message is one of impending catastrophe – or indeed a catastrophe 
that’s already happened – it is tempered by the fact that these manmade scars 
are incredibly seductive. Who could deny the alchemical allure of thetoxic 
phosphor tailings ponds 
<http://www.flowersgallery.com/works/view/14915-phosphor-tailings-pond-2-polk-county-florida>
 in Florida, or the beauty of the scrubby patchwork quilts left by mass 
deforestation? As Burtynsky admits, his images would be equally at home on a 
Greenpeace poster or the cover of an oil company’s annual report. “The work 
asks more questions than it answers,” he says. “Which is what artists are there 
to do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16afc5269bc641a002aa9052208375b46c9e9abf%2F0_0_1100_824%2F1100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edward%20Burtynsky%20on%20his%20ravaged%20Earth%20shots%3A%20'We've%20reached%20peak%20everything'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edward%20Burtynsky%20on%20his%20ravaged%20Earth%20shots%3A%20%27We%27ve%20reached%20peak%20everything%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fedward-burtynsky-photography-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16afc5269bc641a002aa9052208375b46c9e9abf%2F0_0_1100_824%2F1100.jpg>
 ‘An archaic, almost primordial feeling’ … salt pans in the Little Rann of 
Kutch, Gujarat, India. Photograph: Edward Burtynsky, Courtesy of Flowers 
Gallery, London / Metivier Gallery, Toronto 
Further questions are raised in a new book that accompanies the exhibition, 
Essential Elements 
<http://www.thamesandhudsonusa.com/books/edward-burtynsky-essential-elements-hardcover>
, which pairs his photographs, sometimes by tonal values or patterns, rhyming 
the forms of rice terraces with those of oil fields, but also by narratives 
that hint at a more critical agenda. On one spread, the mirror-glass skyline of 
Toronto, shot in the late afternoon sun, faces a gnarled hole in the ground in 
Australia, the sunset pinks and turquoises echoing the sandy soil and greenish 
lake at the bottom of the copper mine. “We build cities and leave holes in the 
ground where they came from,” says Burtynsky. He refers to quarries as 
“inverted skyscrapers”.

Flicking through the book is like touring the landscapes of late capitalism, 
tracing the supply chains of our consumer culture back to both ends – where the 
stuff came from and where it ends up. A field of shiny motorbikes is paired 
with a heap of tyres, an iron-ore mine with a ship-breaking yard. His 
post-production can be a little heavy-handed with the contrast and saturation 
levels, in the quest for pin-sharp clarity. But this is also part of his 
conscious aesthetic: images are pumped up until the entire picture plane is 
flattened into a surface seething with granular detail, or what he calls “the 
democratic distribution of light and space across the whole field,” a 
neutrality that encourages the eye to wander.

The flattening of these gaping scenes plunges the viewer headlong into the 
dams and reservoirs, aqueducts and deltas of this global survey. It brings a 
visceral sense of places that have been drained, drilled, excavated and 
extracted, terrains that have an archaic, almost primordial feeling. This is 
the fundamental matter from which human civilisation has been wrought, the 
landscapes that have been squeezed and scraped for their material worth, 
ravaged and disfigured on an epic scale, leaving beautiful residue in their 
wake.

“In our ephemeral information age, people think we’ve left behind the stone, 
bronze and iron ages,” says Burtynsky. “But they’re all still going on – we use 
tonnes of this stuff every day. You just have to look.”

• Edward Burtynsky: Essential Elements <http://www.edwardburtynsky.com/>, 
edited and curated by William A Ewing, is published by Thames & Hudson on 15 
September;Salt Pans  <http://www.flowersgallery.com/>and Essential Elements 
<http://www.flowersgallery.com/> will be on display at Flowers Gallery, London 
from 16 September-29 October.
 