
Eva Chen is the queen of Instagram. The former Lucky magazine editor’s Insta 
game is so good that the social platform gave her a job as head of fashion 
partnerships. Her contribution to the artistic canon of Instagram is what’s 
known as the Eva Chen pose: feet up in the back of a taxi, showing off her 
shoes, alongside a handbag and a piece of fruit. Sort of Caravaggio with Chanel 
pumps and a filter. This week, @evachen212 was dispensing her Instagram wisdom 
to the fashion industry, who, being in the throes of a massive love affair with 
the medium, lapped it up. But what about people who aren’t brands but who want 
to get ahead onInstagram <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>? We 
asked her for her top tips.

Don’t overthink it. 

Don’t think about the likes. Just think about what you like. As with 
Instagram, so with life. Pleasing yourself makes you happier.

Post things that repeat in your life.

With Chen, it is her fancy accessories and manicures. With you, it could be 
your local bus stop.

😻 colored pencils organized neatly <https://www.instagram.com/p/BFZaHwLvPbK/>

A photo posted by Eva Chen (@evachen212) on May 14, 2016 at 11:02am PDT

Less polished images do better.

Chen has a thesis that Instagram’s story arc is basically this: started with 
crappy pictures, then lifestyle gurus with SLR cameras made skinny flat whites 
into still-life perfection. Now, people have rejected this and it has become 
all about rawer, more mundane pictures again.

Outtakes tell a story.

You have to take your followers behind the scenes. Chen says that if Coco 
Chanel had been a modern-day perfumier, she might have posted a video about the 
four imperfect formulations that came before version No5. That would have got a 
lot of views, Coco. Especially if she had used Chen’s tip of tapping four 
fingers on the Boomerang app to mess with the speed.

Not pregnant again (the last time I posted baby shoes on my feed people were 
like 🙀🙀🙀😹😪)! Just cleaning out Ren's closet for a spate of pregnant 
friends... I loved getting hand me downs for Ren (♻️♻️♻️👍🏼) and love passing 
things on! <https://www.instagram.com/p/BFeGeAKvPer/>

A photo posted by Eva Chen (@evachen212) on May 16, 2016 at 6:46am PDT

Show your B-side.

Accountant by day, talented horticulturalist by night, that kind of thing.

Get into “longer reads”.

Clipped captions are out, paragraphs are in. Marc Jacobs was an early adopter 
of this trend. Explaining why he admired the stars of his advertising campaign 
felt more personal.

I usually do my manicure claw clenching my nailpolish color but spotted this 
rainbow yogurt parfait at lunch today (and btw brace yourselves for Aqua Wall 
Overload bc it's the best wall for photography at work 😜) and could not 
resist. The shade is OPI in Sunrise to Sunset, a springy coral for this dreary 
winter-slash-spring day. <https://www.instagram.com/p/BDytfGVPPQF/>

A photo posted by Eva Chen (@evachen212) on Apr 4, 2016 at 1:49pm PDT

Use the editing tools not filters.

Chen messes with the warmth and the shadows rather than relying on filters. 
It’s the way forward.

Start with a private account.

And start following according to your hobbies. There’s Nasa for space geeks, 
chefs for foodies. There’s 400 million users, so someone is into what you’re 
into.

Stomping into the weekend in combat boots and a Pac-Man bag 😁 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BEObRnIPPat/>

A photo posted by Eva Chen (@evachen212) on Apr 15, 2016 at 8:09am PDT
 