
Elaine Chao 

Secretary of transportation 

Background

Elaine Chao is one of Donald Trump’s least controversial appointments to his 
cabinet. A Washington insider with thepolitical – and personal – experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/elaine-chao-trump-transportation-secretary-nominee>
 to help Trump accomplish his ambitious goal to overhaul the nation’s 
infrastructure, Chao would bring diversity and a government background to his 
cabinet.

The key points from Jeff Sessions' confirmation hearing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-confirmation-hearing-news>
She became the first Asian American woman to hold a cabinet position when she 
served as labor secretary under George W Bush from 2001 to 2009. During her 
tenure, she faced persistent criticism that her department favored business and 
failed to protect low-wage workers. She also served as deputy secretary of 
transportation and director of the Peace Corps in the George HW Bush 
administration.

Chao, who is married to the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, of 
Kentucky, was born in Taipei, Taiwan, and said she spokeno English 
<http://elainelchao.com/biography/> when she emigrated to the US at age eight. 
She received US citizenship at 19 and went on to earn an MBA from Harvard 
Business School. McConnell has said he would not recuse himself from a vote on 
her confirmation.

Key points to watch for 

Infrastructure plans: Trump has said that infrastructure redevelopment is a 
top priority. In his victory speech the president-elect pledged that the US was 
going to “rebuild our highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, schools, hospitals” 
and “put millions of our people to work as we rebuild”. As secretary of 
transportation, Chao would play a central role in shepherding through the 
administration’s infrastructure plan.

What you need to know: confirming Trump's cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/jan/06/donald-trump-cabinet-nominees-confirmation-process-senate>
Business ties and labor practices: As secretary of labor under Bush, Chao drew 
scrutiny from Democrats and labor leaders that her department was deferential 
to businesses and lax on enforcement of labor laws that protect low-wage 
workers. A scathingreport <http://www.gao.gov/assets/130/122107.pdf> by the 
Government Accountability Office, a nonpartisan agency known as the 
“congressional watchdog”, claimed that under Chao the Department of Labor 
“frequently responded inadequately to complaints, leaving low wage workers 
vulnerable to wage theft”.

Friendly questions: As a longtime Washington operator and the wife of the 
Senate majority leader, Chao has a personal relationship with many of the 
senators who will ask the questions. The likelihood of fireworks is low.
 