
In the end, the so-called “faithless electors” of the US electoral college 
failed resoundingly in their aim to stop Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-votes-donald-trump-electors>
 from reaching the White House. But they did strike a small but significant 
blow for reform of America’s arcane way of choosing the president.


With counts still ongoing in California and Texas, the number of electoral 
college members who attempted to cast a protest vote was likely to reach at 
least nine. Of those, all but one was a Democrat, making the rebellion largely 
symbolic.

'Faithless electors' explain their last-ditch attempt to stop Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-faithless-electors-donald-trump>
The one Republican expected to cast a vote against Trump – Chris Suprun in 
Texas – led a lonely stand that fell well short of the 37 Republican defections 
that would have been needed to block the president-elect’s rise to the nation’s 
highest office. Several of the nine were also likely to have their actions 
scrubbed from the records under state rules, thus depleting the scale of the 
rebellion as it will be remembered.

But that still leaves at least five electors who are likely to go into the 
history books as having participated in a rare outpouring of dissent, in part 
directed at Trump himself and in part towards the indirect form of democracy 
that the electoral college represents.

You have to look back more than a century to find anything like it. In 1912, 
eight Republican electors switched votes from vice-presidential candidate James 
Sherman to Nicholas Butler – but only after Sherman died in the course of the 
campaign.

The largest rebel state in the electoral college of 2016 was Washington, where 
no fewer than four of the 12 electors refused to vote forHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> in a protest directed 
against Trump. The idea was that their example could have encouraged their 
Republican fellow electors to follow suit and rally around a compromise 
alternative candidate.

One elector, Robert Satiacum, voted for Faith Spotted Eagle, and the remaining 
three – Bret Chiafalo, Levi Guerra and Esther John – all voted for a compromise 
moderate Republican who they identified as Colin Powell, the former secretary 
of state under George Bush.


Guerra told the Guardian that the trio had settled on Powell because he had a 
moderate reputation and was well liked in her part of Washington state as a 
military leader. “Military experience is a big thing in my area,” she said.

But by Monday evening, Chiafalo conceded that as an attempt to stop Trump the 
“Hamilton Electors” movement he had co-founded – named after Alexander Hamilton 
who helped shape the role of the electoral college in the Federalist Papers – 
had failed. “We didn’t come close to stopping Trump. That’s unfortunate, but it 
was always a long shot.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Felectoral-college-revolt-faithless-electors-analysis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89f511fbae0695c60cca6b4ebd632421ed9b0cb%2F0_206_3432_2060%2F3432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Electoral%20college's%20'faithless%20electors'%20fail%20to%20stop%20Trump%20but%20land%20democratic%20blow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Felectoral-college-revolt-faithless-electors-analysis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Electoral%20college%27s%20%27faithless%20electors%27%20fail%20to%20stop%20Trump%20but%20land%20democratic%20blow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Felectoral-college-revolt-faithless-electors-analysis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89f511fbae0695c60cca6b4ebd632421ed9b0cb%2F0_206_3432_2060%2F3432.jpg>
 Former Colorado elector Micheal Baca, left, writes in his vote on his pen case 
as his replacement, Celeste Landry, right, votes at the Colorado Capitol 
building in Denver. Photograph: Chris Schneider/AFP/Getty Images 
But he said the protest had been worthwhile as it had put the spotlight on the 
electoral college system itself, the indirect process whereby US presidents are 
chosen not by direct mandate of the American people – Clinton won the direct 
popular vote – but by electors indirectly nominated by each state. There are 
538 electors in the electoral college, and the successful candidate has to 
garner 270 of them to win.

“We have started a national dialogue about how we elect our president,” 
Chiafalo said.

In Colorado, a state that does not permit electors to cast a dissenting vote, 
there were volatile scenes as one of the nine voted for John Kasich, the 
Republican governor of Ohio, rather than for Clinton. For his pains, Micheal 
Baca was removed from his position within the electoral college, only for the 
remaining eight electors to then unanimously vote for him as his own 
replacement.

That protest was in turn overturned by state authorities, and in the end an 
alternate elector was brought on who was prepared to vote for Clinton. After 
the vote, Baca told the Guardian that in his view his removal was 
unconstitutional, but he said he had no regrets. “This was liberating for me. I 
put my country before my party, and I will continue to do so.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
There were unexpected single dissenting votes in Maine and Minnesota, though 
neither was allowed to go into the record books. In Maine, a Democratic elector 
cast his ballot for Bernie Sanders rather than Clinton, but was later forced to 
cast a second vote for her.

He explained his action on his Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/davidbright.us> page: “I cast my vote for Bernie 
Sanders not out of spite, or malice, or anger, or as an act of civil 
disobedience. I cast my vote to represent thousands of Democratic Maine voters 
who came into Maine politics for the first time this year because of Bernie 
Sanders.”

He added: “I can’t do anything to change the results of the election this 
year. But perhaps by encouraging these idealistic voters to stick around, I can 
change the results of elections to come.”
 