
Within a few minutes of meeting the actor Ellen Page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ellenpage> near her Los Angeles home, we’re 
talking about what she enjoys doing around here, which is going surfing with 
her girlfriend,artist Samantha Thomas <http://www.samanthathomasart.com>. She 
likes to watch Thomas, the more experienced surfer, examine the waves. Thomas 
tells her which way to turn, based on movements in the water that Page can’t 
even see. “Particularly on days where there are onshore winds, so it’s kind of 
rough, she’ll say, ‘Oh, a wave’s coming at you, it’s a right, go right’ and I’m 
just like, ‘What are you looking at? You can read the ocean like that?’ It’s 
really hot,” she adds, the excitement in her gentle voice suggesting that she 
is quietly, but madly, in love.

There is nothing hugely remarkable about any of this, especially here in 
California, except that until February 2014 Page would have been unable to have 
such a conversation with a journalist. The actor who starred inJuno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juno>, Hard Candy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/110886/hard.candy> and Whip It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/134817/whip-it>, all films about tough 
young women who go against the grain, was living a lie. She was pretending to 
be straight, or at least “lying by omission”, as she puts it, intent on 
fulfilling her acting ambitions without any adverse attention, even though she 
had been out of the closet with her loved ones for years. But the double life 
had started to take its toll on her sanity, so she decided, a month before the 
event, that she would come out duringa speech at a Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/15/ellen-page-comes-out-speech-human-rights-campaign>
 conference for counsellors of young LGBT people. “I’m here today because I am 
gay,” she revealed, halfway throughan eight-minute talk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1hlCEIUATzg>, to a standing ovation that began 
before she had even finished. It was Valentine’s Day.

Page was only 26, but had been acting professionally since the age of 10; at 
20, she was nominated for an Academy Award for best actress for her role as the 
eponymous pregnant high-school student inJuno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juno>. The gulf between her public and 
private lives had been growing long enough. “I felt, let’s just please be done 
with this chapter of discomfort and sadness and anxiety, and hurting my 
relationships, and all those things that come with it,” she says now, sitting 
in the corner of a restaurant, in a baseball cap, sipping a green tea. “I felt 
guilty for not being a visible person for the community, and for having the 
privilege that I had and not using it. I had got to the point where I was 
telling myself, you know, youshould feel guilty about this. I was an active 
participant in an element of Hollywood that is gross. I would never judge 
somebody else for not coming out, but for me, personally, it did start to feel 
like a moral imperative.”

The day after the speech, she flew straight to Montreal to do reshoots for her 
role as Kitty Pryde inX-Men: Days Of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/22/xmen-days-of-future-past-review-hugh-jackman-peter-bradshaw>
, and everyone there told her she seemed totally different. “And Iwas totally 
different! Just the immediacy of how much better I felt. I felt it in every 
cell of my body.”

I'm very proud of the movie [Freeheld], and one of the things I'm most proud 
about is how it's so not de-gayed

Videos of her confessional moment soon hit YouTube, and have now been viewed 
by more than 5 million people around the world. It seems extraordinary that the 
sexuality of one young person in a secular democracy can still make headline 
news, but then Hollywood is an extraordinary place. As Page herself says, 
“It’ll be amazing, the day when it’s not a thing, when an actress doesn’t feel 
like she needs to make a speech. That’s obviously the goal.”

When we meet, she has just finished shooting a film called Freeheld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/freeheld>, which she both co-starred in and 
helped produce; it has been her passion project to get the story behind it 
turned into a movie. She and Julianne Moore play real-life couple Stacie Andree 
and Laurel Hester who, in 2005, fought to have their relationship officially 
recognised so that Hester, a New Jersey police detective who was dying of 
cancer, could leave her pension to Andree. Page plays Andree, the upfront young 
car mechanic who gets angry with her older lover for keeping their relationship 
a secret.

The film got a mixed reception on its US release last year. The New York Times 
review called it“as generic as the bullet points in a gay rights brochure” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/02/movies/review-in-freeheld-a-dying-detective-fights-for-gay-rights.html?_r=0>
 and declared that “the lives behind this movie deserve better”, laying some of 
the blame with screenwriterRon Nyswaner <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0638913/>. 
Nyswaner responded in a speech at a Los Angeles awards ceremony, claiming that 
the final production was not true to his script, thatit had been “de-gayed” to 
make queer lives look more mainstream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/freeheld-screenwriter-ron-nyswaner-degaying>
: “The gay characters were idealised, their edges were smoothed out, the 
conflict between them was softened.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f0b7b917a3f5d81aeefe0d78c2921f5e53178b9%2F0_0_5632_3383%2F5632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ellen%20Page%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20out%20became%20more%20important%20than%20any%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ellen%20Page%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20out%20became%20more%20important%20than%20any%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f0b7b917a3f5d81aeefe0d78c2921f5e53178b9%2F0_0_5632_3383%2F5632.jpg>
 ‘I felt guilty for not being a visible person for the community, and for 
having the privilege that I had and not using it.’ Photograph: Amanda Friedman 
for the Guardian 
Page and I meet the morning after Nyswaner’s speech, and when I bring it up, 
it is the only time I see her upset. She says Nyswaner has already apologised 
personally, “but it was a hard day yesterday”. Her speech falters. “Sorry, it 
clearly affected me. I’m glad he wrote the apology, because… sorry, it was such 
a shock to me. I mean, I love the movie, I’m very proud of the movie, and one 
of the things I’m most proud about is how it’s sonot de-gayed. Look, it’s hard 
to make any independent movie, particularly one that stars two women, and this 
one also happens to be two, you know, gay women. You will never be able to 
please everybody, but I cannot even begin to speculate why he would have said 
that.”

Does Page wish more people had seen the film?

“Of course! But the thing about movies now is they can have really, really 
long lives.” She points out that people can find it later online, and that if 
it didn’t have “the life in the American theatre that I wish”, that’s not the 
end of the story.

I have to ask her what it was like being married to Julianne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliannemoore>, which, despite the whole 
terminal cancer thing, must have been pretty great. Page laughs. “She’s the 
best, yeah, and she’s an extraordinary person, too. She’s obviously one of the 
best actresses, I think, ever.” She was thrilled when Moore signed up, because 
they had never met; now, they are close friends. “She’s just a wonderful, utter 
delight of a human, who just loves her job and works so hard. And has an 
awesome family.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a7408558f5aaa8b33ab416d5d3a615af822d11%2F10_30_2594_3887%2F2594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ellen%20Page%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20out%20became%20more%20important%20than%20any%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ellen%20Page%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20out%20became%20more%20important%20than%20any%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a7408558f5aaa8b33ab416d5d3a615af822d11%2F10_30_2594_3887%2F2594.jpg>
 Juno, in 2007, was the film that sent Page’s career stellar. Photograph: 
Twentieth Century Fox 
Ellen Page <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ellenpage>, real name Ellen 
Philpotts-Page, grew up in Halifax, in the Canadian maritime province of Nova 
Scotia. Her father was a graphic designer and her mother a French teacher; Page 
talks about photos of her as a student in France, before motherhood, “in these 
beautiful clothes and a really short haircut. She’s stunning.” They divorced 
when Ellen was tiny, so she spent her childhood between their two houses, a 
fortnight in each, something she says may have given her an aptitude for “being 
in new spaces all the time”.

The young Page lacked her mother’s talent for French, “but my mom is so 
passionate about what she does that it made me respect teachers. I was 
fortunate that I had something ingrained in me, that I had to do well at 
school.” She became self-sufficient: riding her bike to the woods, jumping in 
the lake, playing soccer at a high level. She loved Nova Scotia’s remoteness: 
“You’re just surrounded by so much beauty and stillness.”

But her mother had family in the big city, Toronto, and on one visit they all 
went to see The Phantom Of The Opera. “I think that was the only show there, 
ever, and we couldn’t even sit together.” She learned the words to all the 
songs; she gives me a few lines of The Music Of The Night, giggling. “I asked 
my mom, ‘What school do I go to to learn to be Christine?’ and she said, ‘You 
go to university.’ And I was like, ‘You’ll come with me, right?’ She was like, 
‘Honey, by that time, I think you won’t want me to.’ I was like, ‘No, don’t say 
that!’”

Page left home to work as an actor even sooner than that. She joined the drama 
club at school, where a casting director spotted her and put her in a 
television movie,Pit Pony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4LnfCpfK9JA>, which 
became a TV series. “It’s just mind-boggling, what I do now. I sometimes think, 
what if I was sick that day the casting guy came into school?” There followed 
more Canadian TV and films, and another movie shot in Europe. She grew very 
independent; she was supposed to be accompanied by chaperones on set, but 
because her parents both worked full-time, “we’d finagle it so, say, the 
horse-wrangler’s daughter was my chaperone”.

At 16, she moved to Toronto on her own, then went to Los Angeles to star in 
Hard Candy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hvx0m2SeOSk>, an astonishing film 
about a paedophile and a teenage girl who turns the tables on him. I tell her 
it blew my mind. “Yeah, Hard Candy was intense. My dad came with me to do that. 
But they were always cool with the subject matter, they trusted me. I think 
back now to the idea of your daughter moving out at 16, when you’re a child 
actor,” she pauses. “But I was so disciplined. I knew this was what I wanted to 
do.” In the film, her character tortures the older man, handing him a noose in 
a potential forced suicide. “I remember getting ready for those scenes, I was 
16, and I was almost separate from myself: shocked by it, and curious, and 
excited. It was a very exhilarating feeling, and very addictive.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblk27Jj9UE8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblk27Jj9UE8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblk27Jj9UE8&media=>
 The trailer for Freeheld 
But it was Juno, in 2007, that sent her career stellar, with nominations for 
the Oscars, Golden Globes and Baftas. At the Oscars, the film won best original 
screenplay. Thankfully, Page, who was 20 at the time, had an industry mentor to 
look out for her; by then she hadn’t built her own life in Los Angeles. “I 
basically lived withCatherine Keener 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/30/catherine-keener-david-thomson> 
when I was going through Juno’s awards season time, which was wonderful but 
crazy. It’s like a lot, you know? We’d met when we worked on a film together 
that nobody saw.” (An American Crime, a true story in which Keener’s character 
tortures the younger Page; the film never made it to the cinemas.) “So she was 
really protective and kind.”

After a trip away, Page landed back in LA on her 21st birthday. “I got to 
Catherine’s house and she had a surprise party for me. I came in and she’d put 
up balloons and stuff. But I didn’t know anybody, so everyone wore name tags.” 
Which is how she met her close friend, film directorSpike Jonze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spike-jonze>, wearing his name on his shirt. 
Peaches <https://www.theguardian.com/music/peaches>, the electro pop star, is 
now a good friend, too; they met, “weirdly, when I was in Amsterdam with her 
friendHar Mar Superstar <http://www.harmarsuperstar.com>, writing a show we 
sold to HBO that never got made. I’m crazy about Peaches. I’m going to see her 
do a show tomorrow.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2215532bc833bb1b7a4dd5a8e276a2315c5a279%2F15_31_3730_5596%2F3730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ellen%20Page%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20out%20became%20more%20important%20than%20any%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ellen%20Page%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20out%20became%20more%20important%20than%20any%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2215532bc833bb1b7a4dd5a8e276a2315c5a279%2F15_31_3730_5596%2F3730.jpg>
 ‘It’s just mind-boggling, what I do now. I sometimes think, what if I was sick 
that day the casting guy came into school.’ Photograph: Amanda Friedman for the 
Guardian 
But it’s not all famous friends and parties. After shooting Whip It, directed 
by Drew Barrymore, Page retreated for a month – not to a Caribbean beach, but 
to an eco-village in Oregon with total strangers, where she studied 
permaculture and went to sleep and woke up with the sun. “We created giant 
composts. We’d pee in a bucket with hay in it, then put the pee buckets on the 
compost.”

Did she ever think, I’m a movie star now: I could just press a button and get 
out of here?

“No! I loved it. When I left and everyone in the class was holding hands in a 
circle, I was fully sobbing. One of those kinds of cries where you’re just… I 
would not have anticipated that’s what my response would have been. I was ugly 
crying. There was something really special about it, because I’d gone from 
shooting Juno to Whip It, and then straight there. And all of that was so 
incredible, but I was clearly desiring something that really felt connected to 
the earth. And that’s where I met my best friend, Ian Daniel, who’s been my 
soul twin ever since.” Daniel is a gay man from Indiana, who had driven to 
Oregon in an old school bus powered by vegetable oil; he describes their 
friendship as a “love story”, but not a love affair.

I think my gayness was already playing its role in regards to my career

The soul twins now have a job together, presenting Gaycation for Viceland 
<http://www.out.com/popnography/2015/11/06/get-taste-ellen-pages-travel-show-gaycation-viceland>
. The series was Page’s idea, and it involves them going to parts of the world 
where coming out doesn’t win you a standing ovation: Jamaica, Japan, or lunch 
with a US Republican senator. In a Brazilian favela, they visit a man who 
prides himself on murdering gay people. “He said things like, ‘If I’m in my car 
and I see a gay person, I run them over.’ The moment he walked into the room, 
it felt like a black hole sucking something out of me. I haven’t experienced 
anything like it. He didn’t know that we were gay.” Did the thought cross her 
mind that she could kill him, right then? “Yeah, you do stand there thinking, 
well, what am I doing?” The man left the room before they could say any more. 
Other encounters have been more aggressive, with people screaming in Page’s 
face. “And then the cameras turn off and they hit on the lesbian: that happens 
a lot. They’re like, ‘You don’t know what you’re missing.’ Fuck off!”

They made another film with a young man who “for whatever reason, wanted us to 
be there when he came out to his mother, which was one of the most intense 
experiences of my life.” Did his mother not wonder why there was a camera crew 
in her kitchen? “He told her that his media friends were here, and she was just 
sort of like, ‘Cool.’ It was weird, and believe me, we had a conversation about 
it: is this OK? It was really what he wanted. But before his mother got there, 
he asked me, ‘How did you do it?’ So I shared that with him. But when I’m 
looking at the edits of the show, if it’s me talking about myself, it makes me 
cringe a little. The goal is to go and look at the LGBT culture, at the joy and 
the liberation.”

In recent years, Page has spoken publicly about domestic violence, trans 
rights, gay suicides, inequality. “And the thing that I would say you get the 
most hate about, on social media, in my experience, is if youtweet anything 
about women’s rights or feminism <https://twitter.com/EllenPage>. It blows my 
mind. But it’s the thought ofnot being a feminist that actually blows my mind. 
I feel that, at least now, there seem to be more women who are willing to say, 
‘Yes, I’m a feminist.’ It’s shocking to me that that would ever be an issue, to
not say that. I really struggle to wrap my head around that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafdd879fb1df9af70874dd97e75130f8e6757b6e%2F83_139_3073_4615%2F3073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ellen%20Page%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20out%20became%20more%20important%20than%20any%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ellen%20Page%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20out%20became%20more%20important%20than%20any%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fellen-page-being-out-became-more-important-than-any-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafdd879fb1df9af70874dd97e75130f8e6757b6e%2F83_139_3073_4615%2F3073.jpg>
 With girlfriend, the artist Samantha Thomas. Photograph: Gregory 
Pace/BEI/Shutterstock 
Otherwise, life is pretty peachy. Page recently bought a modernist house in 
the Hollywood Hills and says that LA really feels like home now. She and her 
“awesome girlfriend” have a cute dog called Patters, who gets posted a lot on 
theirInstagram feeds <https://www.instagram.com/ellenpage/>. Plus, Justin 
Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> is the new Canadian 
prime minister. “And it’s exciting, not only that he got elected and that 
Stephen Harper’s finally gone, but because the Liberals have a majority in 
parliament.”

Actress Ellen Page comes out in speech to Human Rights Campaign event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/15/ellen-page-comes-out-speech-human-rights-campaign>
I ask if coming out has affected the roles that are offered to her, and she 
has to take a breath, nod, sigh. “I’d be lying if I said that wasn’t something 
I feared, and that’s the big reason so many people haven’t come out. For me, 
being out within my life became far more important than being in any movie.”

Of course, Page wasn’t exactly getting the typical romcom parts anyway. 
“Totally. I think my gayness was already playing its role in regards to my 
career. I’m not naive to that element of the business. I hope it changes.”

We discuss the gender pay gap in Hollywood, and an essay that Jennifer 
Lawrence wrote about it 
<http://us11.campaign-archive1.com/?u=a5b04a26aae05a24bc4efb63e&id=64e6f35176&e=1ba99d671e#wage>
. “The issue is also about how many female writers there are, female directors, 
even female soundtrack composers,” Page adds. “I just mean, pretty much every 
facet of this industry. In my circle of friends, it’s something we talk about 
all the time. And I feel like there’s finally a conversation happening.”•

• Freeheld <https://www.theguardian.com/film/freeheld> goes on general release 
next month.

 * This article was edited on 10 February 2016, to correct a misspelling of 
the name of Page’s dog, and to clarify the title of Vice’s new TV channel on 
which Gaycation is broadcast.
 