
Further concerns have been raised over China’s involvement in the £18bn 
Hinkley Point nuclear power project after it emerged that the state-owned 
company backing the plant is facing espionage charges in the US.

The chair of the parliamentary energy and climate change committee said the 
allegations raised serious questions about the corporate integrity of China 
General Nuclear Power (CGN) and must be part of the government’s current review 
of Hinkley.

The Guardian view on doing business with China: not a question of whether, but 
when and how | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/11/the-guardian-view-on-doing-business-with-china-not-a-question-of-whether-but-when-and-how>
Warning that there are now “grave concerns” about CGN’s 33% stake in Hinkley, 
Angus MacNeil MP said: “It does raise questions about how honourable the 
company is and whether it could cut corners on construction methods and issues 
like that.”

CGN has been named as a defendant in legal papers filed by the US authorities 
in a Tennessee district court, where the accused face charges of involvement in 
a conspiracy to steal nuclear secrets in order to help speed up China’s own 
nuclear power programme.

Another defendant is a 66-year-old naturalised US citizen called Szuhsiung 
“Allen” Ho, also known as Allen Ho. A senior adviser to CGN, Ho is scheduled to 
appear next week accused of trying to recruit US atomic experts to gather 
nuclear technology secrets. Details of the charges emerged as Australiablocked 
the sale of a power grid company to a Chinese firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/scott-morrison-blocks-ausgrid-sale-on-national-security-grounds>
 on security grounds.

One energy expert urged Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to immediately pull the plug 
on the Somerset power project, saying it was the final nail in a scheme already 
under threat after the prime minister ordered a review of the plant last month.

Paul Dorfman, a senior research fellow at the energy institute at University 
College London and a former government adviser, said the decision to undertake 
a review, on the basis of security concerns about China’s involvement, had 
already upset Beijing.


Referring to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, he 
said: “No other OECD country would let China into its critical nuclear 
infrastructure, given its history of nuclear weapon proliferation. May has 
already taken the diplomatic hit for this, so what’s she got to lose?”

Dorfman said a convenient excuse for pulling out of Hinkley could be supplied 
by problems with the plant’s main backer, France’s EDF, which is committed to 
usingEuropean pressurised reactor (EPR) technology that is running over budget 
at sites in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/flamanville-france-edf-nuclear-reactor-hinkley-point-c>
 and Finland.

“If government wanted to, it could avoid taking China to task on this by 
reframing the problem in the context of the failed French EPR reactor, which is 
three times over-cost and over-time where it’s being built in Finland and 
France.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fenergy-specialists-raise-concerns-on-chinese-hinkley-involvement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38166ebe3a654ac56e6294c327f798cfb078397a%2F0_0_665_805%2F665.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Energy%20specialists%20raise%20concerns%20about%20Chinese%20Hinkley%20involvement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fenergy-specialists-raise-concerns-on-chinese-hinkley-involvement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Energy%20specialists%20raise%20concerns%20about%20Chinese%20Hinkley%20involvement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fenergy-specialists-raise-concerns-on-chinese-hinkley-involvement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38166ebe3a654ac56e6294c327f798cfb078397a%2F0_0_665_805%2F665.jpg>
 Szuhsiung ‘Allen’ Ho is charged by the US government with nuclear espionage. 
Photograph: Knox county sheriff's office 
Energy <https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/environment/energy> industry sources also 
raised questions over how much the former prime minister and chancellor knew 
about the CGN case in the US. One source said the Tennessee case had been known 
about in security circles for nearly a year because elements of it had been in 
the public domain but not highlighted by media.

“It is inconceivable that George Osborne and David Cameron had not been told 
about the case by the security forces. May – as former home secretary – was 
perhaps willing to listen more intently to what they (MI5) were telling her,” 
said one.

CGN said it could not immediately comment on the scandal but promised it would 
provide a written statement. Ho’s attorney, Peter Zeidenberg, said his client 
had been openly engaged in commercial activity involving non-classified 
information.

The UK’s prime minister’s office and the Department of Business, Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) 
also declined to discuss the issue or its implications. “This is a matter for 
the American authorities. It would be inappropriate for us to comment on a live 
court case,” said a BEIS spokesperson.

Hinkley was meant to be a central part of George Osborne’s bid to usher in a 
“golden decade” of closer trade relations with China. Final details of the deal 
were announced as the former chancellor toured the country last year.

In addition to potential security concerns, some in Whitehall had always 
harboured doubts about whether the vast reactor project was worth the generous 
subsidies that the government had had to pledge to get an investment agreement.

Hinkley Point C: case against CGN has the feel of a modern spy thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/hinkley-point-c-case-against-cgn-has-the-feel-of-a-modern-spy-thriller>
But Osborne was known to be so attached to the project that objections were 
pushed aside. The former chancellor, who was sacked by May last month in one of 
her first acts as prime minister, could not be reached for comment yesterday.

Greg Clark, the new energy secretary, is known to be keen to scrutinise the 
financial details before formal approval is given. Downing Street has said a 
decision will be made next month while theChinese have already made clear their 
irritation with the delay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/08/china-warns-uk-relations-historical-juncture-hinkley-point-liu-xiaoming>
.

Barry Gardiner, shadow energy secretary, expressed concern about the court 
case being used by ministers as an excuse for dumping Hinkley. “There are many 
reasons to criticise the Hinkley C deal: the vast cost; the long subsidy 
lock-in while other technologies fall in price and the technical feasibility of 
the project ever being built. These are genuine risks the government ought to 
have addressed two years ago.

“The government says it wants to boost international trade. If the government 
held off the deal because of these allegations, they have jeopardised a 
relationship with a key future trade partner at a time when we need to be 
creating new friends and forging new trade alliances.”

 