
Large-scale batteries to store energy and devices that switch themselves off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/27/hand-over-control-of-my-fridge-to-an-energy-company-no-thanks-say-brits>
 are likely to be key technologies for keeping the UK’s lights on while 
shutting down old coal and nuclear plants, an influential committee of MPs has 
said.

The threat of blackouts has receded for this winter after scares earlier in 
the year,National Grid said on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/14/winter-electricity-blackouts-risk-recedes-says-national-grid>
, citing a reprieve for Yorkshire’sEggborough coal-fired power station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/02/eggborough-power-station-to-close>
, as well as greater flexibility from companies with big energy requirements.

But the respite will be brief unless further action is taken, warned 
parliament’s energy and climate change select committee. The MPs recommend 
investment in two major areas: on the supply side, energy storage; and on the 
demand side, efficiency technologies that smooth out peaks in usage, for 
instance by switching devices off and on and running them at lower power at 
times.

Angus MacNeil, chair of the committee, said: “The government must get a move 
on and encourage the energy market to embrace smart technological solutions 
like energy storage and demand-side response. There is an incredible 
opportunity for the UK to become a world leader in these disruptive 
technologies, yet our current energy security subsidies favour dirty diesel 
generation over smart new clean tech solutions.”

The committee also called for sweeping reforms to the government’s regulation 
of the energy market, which include a “capacity market” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jul/23/concerns-uk-electricity-market-reforms>
 for ensuring there is sufficient electricity supply andcontracts awarded to 
suppliers through an auction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/15/reform-electricity-market-unworkable>
. While these systems were supposed to reward renewable energy companies and 
reduce the carbon emitted by electricity generation, in practicesome of the 
main beneficiaries have been generators using diesel oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/11/diesel-farms-built-subsidies-national-grid-auction>
, which is one of the dirtiest forms of generation but very flexible.

Redrawing these regulations could benefit cleaner generation such as wind 
farms and solar power, as well as newer technologies such as large-scale 
batteries and systems to manage energy, called demand-side response.

John Sauven, executive director of Greenpeace UK, backed the call for reform: 
“This report from a cross-party group of MPs is an urgent wake-up call for 
Theresa May’s government. It’s embarrassing that Britain, one of the world’s 
leading economies, has to hand out taxpayer-funded subsidies to clunking old 
coal plants and highly polluting diesel generators to keep the lights on. The 
right mix of renewable energy, battery storage and efficiency measures offers a 
much better alternative.”


The technology available to manage demand and increase efficiency is growing 
fast, according to Friends of the Earth, and the cost of it is also falling. 
But government support – such as reforms of the current regulations – would 
increase its uptake, with beneficial effects.

Simon Bullock, campaigner at the charity, said: “[These technologies] are a 
massive economic opportunity for the UK. They’re essential to build the smart, 
flexible, clean electricity grid we need in the 2020s, and they reduce our 
reliance on fossil fuel plants for backup power, and can help lower people’s 
bills.”

Companies involved in demand-side response technology say that, after decades 
of development, it is now at a stage where it can play a big role in energy 
efficiency, which will help to reduce demands on electricity supply.

Patrick Liddy, director of EnerNOC, one of the companies developing such 
tools, said: “Demand-side response technology is mature [and] provides many 
benefits for the UK, including engaging heavy energy users such as factories, 
commercial property and public sector estates in keeping the network balanced. 
Current UK energy policy was originally written with generation in mind, so 
it’s only right that now we have the demand-side technology available, [the UK 
should] evolve our approach.”

The report, entitled The Energy Revolution and Future Challenges for UK Energy 
and Climate Policy, is the last from theenergy and climate change committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/energy-and-climate-change-committee/>
. The latter will be dissolved and future reports on energy and climate change 
will come from the committee that reports on the newDepartment for Business, 
Energy and Industrial Strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/15/decc-abolition-major-setback-for-uk-climate-change-efforts>
 (BEIS).

That will mean far fewer parliamentary reports on the UK’s energy and climate 
change policies than in the past, as the new BEIS committee will have a far 
broader remit, covering all of the UK’s industry, business and commerce. Past 
reports, from a cross-party committee of MPs that was until last yearchaired by 
a Conservative former minister 
<http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/commons/mr-tim-yeo/136>, have often 
criticised government policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/17/national-grid-needs-overhaul-say-energy-committee-mps>
.

In the report, the MPs also warn that the risks of Brexit to the UK’s energy 
supply must be taken into account as a high priority. They highlight, for 
instance, the risk that collective EU systems will be discarded - for instance, 
a collective agreement to help any nation at risk from a sudden shortage in gas 
supply, such as that which might be threatened from the Russian president, 
Vladimir Putin.


A spokesperson for BEIS, responding to the committee’s findings, said: “The 
capacity market ensures that our families have a secure energy supply at a fair 
price that they can rely on.

 “We are fully committed to a low carbon energy future and the potential 
benefits that new technologies such as storage could bring to this. However, 
for the capacity market to work effectively it relies on flexible technology 
that is ready to be deployed”
 