
One golden boot won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/tottenham-harry-kane-doubters-golden-boot>
, another to go. That is the ambition for Harry Kane, who has barely stopped 
scoring since his remarkable breakthrough last year, as he approaches the final 
weeks of a campaign that ended in disappointment at Tottenham Hotspur but could 
yet finish with a summer to remember with England.

Jack Wilshere out to prove Roy Hodgson right and history wrong for England | 
Owen Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/20/jack-wilshere-history-roy-hodgson-england-turkey>
Kane, Dele Alli, Eric Dier, Kyle Walker and Danny Rose were not the ones who 
arrived at St George’s Park this week with Premier League winner’s medals. 
Leicester’s players, not Tottenham’s,had that honour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
 and Kane was one of the first to congratulate Jamie Vardy and Danny Drinkwater 
on theirseason of seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/07/leicester-city-bonkers-party-league-winning-season>
.

It is the Spurs striker, though, who is expected to lead the line for England 
at the European Championship in France. This time last year Kane wasin the 
Czech Republic with the under-21s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/30/harry-kane-england-under-21s-european-championships-roy-hodgson-gareth-southgate>
 after a stunning end-of-season run at Tottenham and, despite a brief period 
when the goals slowed up on his return, there have been few signs of personal 
fatigue, even though questions have been asked about Mauricio Pochettino’s 
intense training regime and its effect on Spurs’ last few performances.

Kane rejected suggestions of heavy legs within the Tottenham contingent of Roy 
Hodgson’s squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/england-euro-2016-squad-23-picked-roy-hodgson>
 before Sunday’s friendly with Turkey at the Etihad Stadium, coming before 
other England warm-up gamesagainst Australia and Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/04/england-euro-2016-manchester-sunderland>
. Instead, Kane says, the squad is vibrant and fearless.

“For a lot of us it’s our first major tournament,” he said. “There’s no real 
fear – we are not scared to play our football. Throughout the whole 
international year we’ve been playing well, we’ve been going out and trying to 
play good football, we’ve been scoring goals, pressing high. That’s what the 
manager wants us to do and that’s what we’ll try to do.

“There’s been some disappointments over the years but now we’ve got a great 
young side, we’re very excited about the tournament and we’ve got no fear. 
We’ll go out, play our football and express ourselves and see where that takes 
us.”

Asked about Pochettino’s teams potentially tiring at the end of a season, Kane 
said: “I don’t really believe that. Obviously, we didn’t get the performances 
we wanted in the last four or five weeks but we were still running, still 
pressing high but things probably just got in our way.

“We put so much energy into fighting for the title and the race, maybe it 
might have had a little psychological effect but that’s something we’re going 
to get better at. I know the manager spoke about that – getting a better 
mentality. Hopefully it’s something that we can learn from and get better at.

“But we’re all still feeling good. There’s not been one complaint or anybody 
moaning that they were tired. We’re here and we’re excited to get going. I feel 
very good, I feel fit and ready to go. I’ve kept myself in good shape, had a 
good recovery and I think that’s important.”

Kane is one of five forwards Hodgson named in his provisional 26-man squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/england-euro-2016-squad-marcus-rashford-jack-wilshere-andros-townsend-jordan-henderson>
 on Monday. Wayne Rooney, Daniel Sturridge and Vardy were not surprise 
selections but it was the name of Marcus Rashford that caught the eye and 
Hodgson has challenged the young Manchester United striker to knock one of the 
established names “off their perch” and make the cut for the final 23 who will 
go to France.

Rashford has made the most of his chance at United since being given his debut 
because ofan injury in the warm-up to Anthony Martial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/25/manchester-united-midtjylland-europa-league-match-report>
 before a Europa League game, and although Kane has yet to properly meet the 
18-year-old, he is expecting fireworks when Rashford links up with the squad.

“He’s been outstanding,” Kane said. “Full credit to him, he deserves his 
place. He’s young, he’s come in and shown no fear of playing on the big stage 
and he’s just expressed himself. He’s not been fazed by playing in the Premier 
League and hopefully he can take that on to the international stage. We are 
looking forward to meeting him when he reports next week, seeing his ability. 
He’s shown at the back end of the season that he can score goals and he’s a 
real talent.

“Obviously we [Tottenham] played against United a month or two ago now and 
shook his hand but I never really got into a conversation with him. But it will 
be good to meet him next week and see what he’s like as a person, and as a 
player. If you’re playing forEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> you’re going to have threats for 
your position. We’re all fighting for our position – no one is secure or a 
definite starter, so we go from now up to the Euros trying to cement our place.”

Kane believes England’s performance in Germany two months ago, when Hodgson’s 
team overturned a deficitto win 3-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
, is evidence of their potential. Kane, who scored 25 goals in the Premier 
League in the season just finished, has proven himself at club level. Next up 
is a sterner examination.

“That’d be nice,” he said, when asked if he was targeting the Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> golden boot. “That’s the aim, 
definitely. The more the merrier. The whole team are very excited. Now the 
season is over we’re itching to get out there, to see what it’s like and get 
going.”
 