
Most times, it’s easier to say nothing.

When a man gropes you on a subway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/28/jessica-valenti-my-life-as-a-sex-object>
. If a stranger tells you to smile as you walk down the street. When someone 
calls you a bitch because you turned them down at a bar. The decision of 
whether to speak up or push back is made in a split second, and for a lot of 
women, it’s just not worth it.

The person that just harassed you might get even more aggressive if 
confronted. Besides, what difference will it make, you think. Why spend energy 
on a person like this?

As the election looms closer and women continue to come forward to accuse 
Donald Trump of assault, I’ve noticed a shift in the way women aretalking 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/10/laughing-until-we-cry-conversations-about-getting-groped.html?mid=twitter-share-thecut>
 about dealing with these all-too-common indignities. They’re not just fed up 
with the harassment itself, but with the resigned feeling that this is just the 
way things are.

More and more, women are sharing stories of speaking up in those moments – and 
crediting Trump’s misogyny with what they did. Carolina Siede, writing at 
Quartz, describedbeing leered at 
<http://qz.com/816565/donald-trump-sexual-assault-allegations-how-trumps-creepiness-inspired-me-to-fight-back-in-my-own-life/>
 by a man one evening and changing her usual tactic of not “rocking the boat”.

As we sat in uncomfortable silence, I began to think again about Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. I thought about the women 
he’d groped. I thought about the men who, through their ignorance or denial, 
enable this behavior to happen. I thought about Michelle Obama telling women 
and girls that they deserve dignity and respect too. And I decided enough was 
enough.

Writer Rebecca Solnit shared a similar story on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/rebecca.solnit/posts/10154469650640552> from a woman 
who was called a “cunt” by a stranger and decided to confront him. “Are you 
going to tell me it was just locker room talk?,” she asked.
membership callout 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/us-membership/truth.html> 
There’s more talk, too, of the less obvious kinds of harassment and assault. A 
woman on Twitter this week describeda man caressing her calf 
<https://twitter.com/aardvarsk/status/790003295200903168> as she walked by him 
on an airplane, for example. When we think of groping what comes to mind is 
someone grabbing “private” areas. But if it’s another person’s body – it is 
private.

Trump’s remarks about women – his bragging about assaulting women without 
consequence and his continued insistence that every accuser is lying – have 
brought us to a sort of national tipping point. AsElizabeth Warren said about 
Trump to tremendous applause this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/24/elizabeth-warren-hillary-clinton-nasty-women-donald-trump>
, “Women have had it with guys like you”.

Women are tired. Tired of being told that this is just the way men talk or 
act. Tired of looks or touches that we’re expected to deal with because they’re 
not “real” assault. Tired of saying nothing in the face of unrelenting sexism 
and slights. Why should we have to live like this?

Perhaps when the election is over, the anxiety and anger women are feeling 
right now will subside and many of us will go back to saying nothing in those 
scary moments. Maybe the national conversation around assault will wane. But I 
doubt it. When you start to speak up, it’s hard to stop. America should be 
prepared for a lot of loud, “nasty” women to make themselves heard.

 * No billionaire owner, no shareholders. Just independent, investigative 
reporting that fights for the truth, whatever the cost. Why not support it?
Become a Guardian US member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_USWarrenValenti_footer>
 for $49 a year, ormake a contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/home?INTCMP=co_us_editorial_footer_USWarrenValenti>
.  