
John Nevil Maskelyne was a 19th-century magician. He founded the Egyptian Hall 
in Piccadilly where, between 1873 and 1904, there were twice-daily magic shows. 
He was also the inventor of the penny lock widely used in public toilets right 
into the 1960s, which gave rise to the phrase “spend a penny”. He began his 
career as a showman by unmasking the trickery of theDavenport Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/25/infamous-brothers-davenport-review>
, who toured America and Europe claiming to raise spirits andtalk to the dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/04/blithe-spirit-theatre-as-seance>
, and used his own mechanical skills to bamboozle audiences further.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fescape-into-la-soiree-the-show-to-dispel-the-gloom-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F204470a6d6eaa4bf3a1139e927e9470df09757ab%2F0_0_1062_1414%2F1062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Escape%20into%20La%20Soir%C3%A9e%3A%20the%20show%20to%20dispel%20the%20gloom%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fescape-into-la-soiree-the-show-to-dispel-the-gloom-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Escape%20into%20La%20Soir%C3%A9e%3A%20the%20show%20to%20dispel%20the%20gloom%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fescape-into-la-soiree-the-show-to-dispel-the-gloom-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F204470a6d6eaa4bf3a1139e927e9470df09757ab%2F0_0_1062_1414%2F1062.jpg>
 John Nevil Maskelyne in action, part of the exhibition Victorian 
Entertainments: There Will Be Fun. Photograph: British Library Board 
Maskelyne was but one of the many showmen and women who delighted Victorian 
audiences and some of them are celebrated in a delightful little free foyer 
exhibition,There Will be Fun 
<https://www.bl.uk/events/victorian-entertainments-there-will-be-fun>, 
co-curated byChristopher Green <http://christophergreen.net/>, at the British 
Library in London. It continues into the spring and on occasional weekends 
includes live entertainments. The next is on 7 January.

The exhibition celebrates the antics of “Lord” George Sanger, who founded “the 
greatest circus, hippodrome and menagerie in the world”. One of his most 
successful presentations was Toby the learned pig, which could apparently both 
read and spell. There is Miss Annie de Montford, born Annie Riley, a mill 
worker turned mesmerist, who claimed her mind “ruled the world” even after a 
New England newspaper called her act “a splendid temple of humbug”. There is 
also a section dedicated to the great clown and pantomime dame Dan Leno, who 
brought joy to so many.

There seems to be a renewed interest in this kind of variety entertainment. 
The Star at Liverpool Playhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/08/victorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star>
 celebrates the lost age of the music hall and, in Salisbury,A Little of What 
You Fancy 
<http://www.salisburyplayhouse.com/whats-on/the-salberg/a-little-of-what-you-fancy/>
 takes in the best and worst of Victorian entertainment. Magic acts have made a 
comeback on the West End stage in the showImpossible, Derren Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/23/derren-brown-youre-only-sad-if-you-tell-yourself-youre-sad>
, and the cabaret scene is thriving.

Top of the bill remains La Soirée <http://www.la-soiree.com/>, which this year 
has taken up residence in London’s Leicester Square, where it remains into the 
new year with a show that features new acts and old, including one last chance 
to seeUrsula Martinez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/09/burlesque-striptease-ursula-martinez-soho-theatre-london-free-admission>
 perform her rightly celebrated disappearing-hanky act. If you think that 
Victorian entertainment was full of oddities, you haven’t seen the bubble 
display of Denis Lock, one half of the English Gents – his balancing act takes 
on an extra frisson after the Brexit vote – or witnessed the double-jointed 
Captain Frodo force his entire body through the head of a tennis racket. I have 
seen Captain Frodo. Several times. Yet his act remains mesmerising, in its own 
way a comment on the absurdity of all outlandish human endeavour, whether it’s 
climbing Everest, reaching the South Pole or pushing your limbs into impossible 
positions.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fescape-into-la-soiree-the-show-to-dispel-the-gloom-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0166d369ab0193a030daed44a5206b87f9a658%2F0_337_5179_3108%2F5179.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Escape%20into%20La%20Soir%C3%A9e%3A%20the%20show%20to%20dispel%20the%20gloom%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fescape-into-la-soiree-the-show-to-dispel-the-gloom-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Escape%20into%20La%20Soir%C3%A9e%3A%20the%20show%20to%20dispel%20the%20gloom%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fescape-into-la-soiree-the-show-to-dispel-the-gloom-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0166d369ab0193a030daed44a5206b87f9a658%2F0_337_5179_3108%2F5179.jpg>
 The Star at Liverpool Playhouse. Photograph: Robert Day 
La Soirée continues to be a class act, largely because it keeps its tongue 
firmly in its cheek and never takes itself too seriously. It send up its own 
attempts at sexiness and in the process becomes more alluring, like a beautiful 
person unaware of their own charms. It is knowing and innocent at the same 
time, artful and artless.

In all the years that I’ve seen Martinez perform her hanky act, I’ve never 
seen her in anything but total control of the audience, even in these 
misogynistic times when women are daily subjected to comments online and in the 
street about how they look and behave. At 50, she’s decided to retire the 
routine, but I reckon she could carry on doing it for another 20 years at 
least. In any event she will continue to do her Spanish song turn, which also 
takes on an extra comic edge after the Brexit vote.

If you are looking for a show to lift and dispel the gloom of 2016, La Soirée 
is it. The heyday of American burlesque coincided with the Great Depression, 
suggesting that when times get hard our desire for frivolous, freaky 
entertainment is all the greater. La Soirée is perfect escapism, but the 
remarkable skill of the performers and the subversion that underpins it is a 
clever reminder that, however much you try to chase the darkness away, it 
always lurks somewhere beneath the glitter. That’s not just entertainment, but 
a real art.
 