
Michael Gove will accuse remain campaigners of treating people like “mere 
children” after his close friend and cabinet colleague,George Osborne, warned 
that leaving the EU would create a £36bn tax blackhole. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/uk-would-lose-36bn-in-tax-receipts-if-it-left-eu-treasury-report-says>

The justice secretary will say that a 200-page report published by the 
Treasury also contains an admission that immigration will continue to rise by 
hundreds of thousands year on year, amounting to a failure by his own 
Conservative government to reduce the net rate to below 100,000.

Treasury analysis of effects of Brexit on UK economy: key points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/treasury-analyses-impact-brexit-scenarios-uk-economy>
 A day after the chancellor’s warnings dominated the news agenda, Gove will 
say: “The remain campaign want us to believe that Britain is beaten and broken 
... It treats people like mere children, capable of being frightened into 
obedience by conjuring up new bogeymen every night.”

The Treasury concluded that Brexit could cost British families £4,300 every 
year by 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/eu-referendum-reality-check-uk-households-worse-off-brexit>
 and reduce tax receipts by £36bn, the equivalent of 8p on the basic rate of 
income tax.

Guardian graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/apr/2016-04-18T15:23:51/embed.html>
Osborne’s suggestion that opponents of Britain’s membership of the EU were 
making an“economically illiterate” case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/george-osborne-brexit-campaigners-case-is-economically-illiterate>
 led to a furious response from Conservative colleagues on the opposite side of 
the debate.

The comments underline just how divisive the battle of Britain’s future in the 
EU has become for the Conservative party, with cabinet colleagues and MPs 
pitted against each other. Gove’s speech raises the stakes by including a 
direct attack on his own government for failing to reduce immigration levels.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fbrexit-would-mean-higher-taxes-says-george-osborne-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20would%20mean%20higher%20taxes%2C%20says%20George%20Osborne%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fbrexit-would-mean-higher-taxes-says-george-osborne-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20would%20mean%20higher%20taxes%2C%20says%20George%20Osborne%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fbrexit-would-mean-higher-taxes-says-george-osborne-video&media=>
Brexit would mean higher taxes, says George Osborne yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/apr/18/brexit-would-mean-higher-taxes-says-george-osborne-video>
“The report from the Treasury is an official admission from the in campaign 
that if we vote to stay in the EU then immigration will to continue to increase 
by hundreds of thousands year on year,” Gove will say. “Over 250,000 people 
came to Britain from Europe last year. As long as we are in the EU we cannot 
control our borders and cannot develop an immigration policy which is both 
truly humane and in our long term economic interests.”


Vote Leave has focused on immigration because the Treasury report uses 
forecasts from the independent Office for Budget Responsibility, which suggests 
net migration will be above David Cameron’s 100,000 target every year of this 
parliament.
Poll of polls 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/brexit_poll/giv-12515IvRW8NC2H1Mi/>
Gove will use his speech to also warn that the European court of justice will 
make a decision over whether prisoners can vote, intervene on how intelligence 
services monitor suspected terrorists and control asylum and refugee policy.

Treasury Brexit report is 'unfair and biased', says Tory minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/treasury-brexit-report-unfair-biased-tory-minister-andrea-leadsom>
The intensity of the debate is likely to increase as opinions polls point to 
an uncomfortably tight referendum for the chancellor and prime minister. A new 
Guardian/ICM telephone poll, conducted over the weekend, puts the remain on 54% 
and leave on 46%, while a second poll – conducted online – suggests a dead heat.


Many Conservative MPs believe a narrow victory for the remain side could be 
the most dangerous outcome for Cameron and Osborne, because it would lead to a 
backlash among out campaigners who believe the government is using unfair 
tactics.

Osborne described the Treasury report as “serious and sober” as he launched it 
alongside energy secretary, Amber Rudd, work and pensions secretary, Stephen 
Crabb, and environment secretary, Elizabeth Truss.

It looked at three alternative scenarios for a post-Brexit Britain, from a 
Norway-style deal in which there would still be freedom of movement, a 
bilateral agreement like the EU has with Canada, or signing up to World Trade 
Organisation rules.

Osborne said the £36bn lower tax receipts under the Canadian model was 
equivalent to one third of the budget for NHS England. “Under any alternative, 
we’d trade less, do less business and receive less investment, and the price 
would be paid by British families. Wages would be lower and prices would be 
higher,” he said.
Guardian graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/apr/2016-04-18T15:27:07/embed.html>
The chancellor said his position was backed up by economists from the IMF, 
OECD, Bank of England and London School of Economics, and claimed all of 
Britain’s trading partners wanted it to remain in the EU, and accused out 
campaigners of saying that allowing people to be poorer was a “price worth 
paying”.

As well as support from Rudd, Truss and Crabb, he received the backing of 
business minister, Anna Soubry, who said Gove’s intervention was another 
example of Vote Leave failing to set out a detailed vision for an exit will 
look like.

But the publication was pounced on by out campaigners who claimed it was 
absurd to make predictions 14 years into the future, and wrong to turn GDP 
estimates into a figure per household.

The Guardian view on the economics of Brexit: a fact-based fear | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/18/the-guardian-view-on-the-economics-of-brexit-a-fact-based-fear>
The Mayor of London, Boris Johnson, another prominent out campaigner, also hit 
back, claiming that 24 June marked independence day for Britain if the country 
backed Brexit. “Her majesty’s Treasury of course were the people who said we 
should stay in the ERM [exchange rate mechanism], and that turned out to be a 
disaster; they said there would be economic benefits of joining the Euro, and 
that turned out to be a complete disaster. The Treasury has not been totally 
successful in all its economic forecasts – let’s be honest.”

Chuka Umunna, Labour MP for Streatham, accused his opponents of letting the 
mask slip. “Millions of working families will be horrified that the leave 
campaigns believe pursuit of an ideological agenda is worth sacrificing their 
jobs, livelihoods and living standards. They should be ashamed of themselves,” 
he said.

The in campaigner also hit out at Gove, who he accused of cutting back on 
schools. “People will remember that Michael Gove’s first act as education 
secretary was to stop investment in schools in my constituency and elsewhere.”

Arron Banks, the multimillionaire co-founder of Leave.EU, said: “Their 
worst-case scenario of £4,300 per household is a bargain basement price.” The 
group calculated that the figures added up to 21p per person, per hour, which 
they said was in exchange for national independence and secure borders. 
“Freedom has never been so cheap,” he claimed.

The Royal College of Midwives also announced its support for remaining in the 
EU, claiming that the union has driven rights for women to have paid time off 
to attend antenatal appointments, and has helped maintain safety in the NHS.

 