
BLOOMBERG SPEECH

23 January 2013

In a long-trailed speech – the wait is compared to Tantric sex – David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> seeks to control his riven 
party and see off Ukip by pledging a future Conservative government to the 
“simple choice” of an in/out referendum on renegotiated terms of membership. 
Outers celebrate. Others, among them some of Cameron’s own party, call it a 
reckless gamble.

ELECTION VICTORY

7 May 2015

The Tories’ surprise election win leaves him with no wriggle room. Cameron 
will have to deliver on his pledge to put the question to Britain before the 
end of 2017. After some shenanigans in parliament, especially over attempts by 
the House of Lords to lower the voting age to 16, the pledge is made law.

CAMERON ON TOUR

Summer 2015-early 2016

The prime minister clocks up the air miles as he shuttles between European 
capitals trying to secure allies for his renegotiation and find out what the 
EU’s other 27 leaders might be willing to sign up to. While he makes progress 
on some of his ambitions, he meets too much resistance to introducing curbs on 
freedom of movement to be able to push the idea.

GO YOUR OWN WAY

5 January 2016

In a bid to manage the pressure building within his party, Cameron announces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/05/eu-referendum-david-cameron-confirms-ministers-campaign-brexit>
 that Tory Brexiters will be allowed to remain members of the government even 
while they campaign against him over Europe.Iain Duncan Smith will soon resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/18/iain-duncan-smith-resigns-from-cabinet-over-disability-cuts>
 anyway, ostensibly over his opposition to welfare cuts in the March budget.

THE DEAL IS DONE

18-19 February 2016

After round-the-clock negotiations in Brussels, Cameron announces that he has 
got the 27 other member states to agree a deal that includes a British opt-out 
from “ever closer union”, protection for the City from eurozone decisions and a 
four-year ban on in-work benefits for new arrivals. He says this will make 
Britain “better and stronger” in a “reformed Europe”. Outers say it amounts to 
diddly-squat. Both sides agree that the country must now make a 
once-in-a-generation decision.

LET’S PLAY NICELY

20-22 February 2016

The cabinet has a rare Saturday morning meeting. The inners and outers around 
the table piously agree that it should be a good, clean fight. Six of their 
number then declare for Brexit – and it almost immediately becomes a nasty, 
dirty fight.Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> comes 
out as an outer at an alfresco news conference, to the surprise of Cameron and 
also of many Boris-watchers. The next day in parliament, Cameron suggests he is 
just after his job.

IT’S COLD OUT THERE

8 March 2016

The Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, makes the first of several 
interventions, cautioning that Brexit would be a serious risk to the economy. A 
barrage of similar warnings pound in from the IMF, OECD, the World Bank and 
others. The outers reply with Norman Lamont and a suggestion from Michael Gove 
that a Brexited Britain could seek to emulate Albania. The inners believe they 
have won the argument on the economy, but are troubled that it doesn’t seem to 
be having as much traction with voters as they had expected.

THE EAGLE HAS LANDED

21-24 April 2016

Barack Obama enters the debate, urging Britain to stay with the EU because it 
is a triumph for “British values” of democracy and open markets. He adds a 
warning that the UK would be at the “back of the queue” for a trade deal with 
the US if it left. Outers reply with their now familiar cry that no one who 
disagrees has the right to express an opinion. Johnson disparages the president 
on the grounds that he is “half-Kenyan”.

NO HOLDS BARRED

23 May 2016

The outers do what Nigel Farage had always told them to do: they go big on 
immigration, gambling that they can use fears about migration to trump voter 
anxieties about the economic risks of Brexit.They unveil a poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/21/vote-leave-prejudice-turkey-eu-security-threat>
 claiming that millions of Turks will soon be coming to Britain. Inners 
denounce the poster as mendacious, while becoming increasingly worried that the 
outer strategy could be working. Farage expresses delight that Tory Brexiters 
are now singing his anti-migrant songs.

COMPUTER SAYS NO

7 June 2016

Appeals to unregistered voters to sign up are followed by a surge of 
last-minute applications too large for the government website to cope with. 
Parliament scrambles to passemergency legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/08/eu-referendum-live-voter-registration-site-crashes-cameron-farage-debate>
 that authorises an extension of the registration deadline by 48 hours. Some 
outers initially react by crying foul. They shut up when they twig that it is 
not a good look to be seen to be against maximising participation.

LABOUR DAY

13 June 2016

Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, the shadow 
cabinet and a chorus of union leaders urge a vote for remain amid fears that 
the campaign has been far too dominated by blue-on-blue slanging matches and 
that a chunk of the Labour vote is sliding towards leave. To the frustration of 
remain strategists, the Labour leader and his deputy, Tom Watson, differ on how 
to address immigration.

TRAGEDY

16-18 June 2016

The horrific murder of talented and admired Labour MP Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/the-guardian-view-on-jo-cox-an-attack-on-humanity-idealism-and-democracy>
 causes shock and sorrow. Cameron and Corbyn travel to her constituency for a 
first joint appearance in which they both declare that the politics of hate 
will not be allowed to prevail. It is announced that parliament will be 
recalled on Monday. Campaigning is suspended. The effect of her death on the 
referendum is unknowable, but that doesn’t stop behind-the-scenes speculation 
about how it might influence the vote.
 