
These days a referendum campaign group only truly wins its colours when it 
comes up with a wheeze that is promptly laughed out of court.

The pro-UK Better Together campaign passed with flying colours during the 
Scottish independence referendum when it was widely mocked forreleasing a video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/27/patronisingbtlady-how-better-togethers-latest-ad-went-wrong>
 featuring a woman who could not make up her mind how to vote.

The pro-EU Britain Stronger in Europe has followed in the footsteps of Better 
Together bylaunching a “Talk to Gran” campaign 
<https://drive.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/file/d/0B4emy5VJuGRtTGl0OHRVSFg3X1U/view?pref=2&pli=1>
 to encourage young voters to try to win round their grandparents to the remain 
side.

The group, which was formally designated on Wednesday by the Electoral 
Commission as the main pro-EU campaign group, has designed 14 postcards it 
hopes supporters will send to their grandparents.Messages on the cards 
<http://www.talktogran.co.uk/#intro> range from: “Nan, I know I should call 
more but … I want you to know why I’m voting to stay in Europe” to: “Gran, 
let’s sit down for a cuppa, a slice of Battenberg and … A chat about why my 
future’s in the EU.”

The campaign is designed to address two of the central weaknesses of the 
remain side: the need to enthuse younger voters, who are likely to be more 
pro-EU but who are less likely to vote, and the need to change the minds of 
older voters who are more likely to be anti-EU and more likely to vote.

Gerry Hassan, the Sunday Mail columnist, tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/GerryHassan>: “#EUref 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/EUref?src=hash> Remain campaign launch ‘Talk to 
Gran’ campaign. This could be their patronising BT lady moment.”

Will Straw, executive director of Britain Stronger In Europe, said: “We 
believe that the passion and enthusiasm of young voters can be channelled into 
getting their older relatives out to vote for Britain to remain inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. This referendum will not be 
won simply by winning the argument in the media, but by creating a bottom-up, 
word-of-mouth campaign that will reach voters of every age in all parts of our 
country.

“We have already trialled these postcards at a number of the universities, 
where they have been shifted like hot cakes. So when young people next share a 
slice of cake and a cup of tea with their gran, they can tell them proudly that 
the positive, progressive and patriotic choice is to vote to remain.”
 