
Michael McGovern

Northern Ireland goalkeeper

McGovern’s performance against Germany in the final group game, when he 
produced a series of superb blocks, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-germany-euro-2016-match-report>
 initially seemed set to be a footnote to the story of the group stages. But in 
keeping the score down– Germany had 11 shots on target – McGovern enabled 
Northern Ireland to qualify for the last 16 on goal difference. And his search 
for a club this summer will be a lot easier.

Kyle Walker

England defender

Few in the England squad have enhanced their reputation thus far, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-euro-2016-player-ratings-wales>
 but the Tottenham right-back is one of the exceptions. Edged ahead of 
Nathaniel Clyne in Roy Hodgson’s thoughts in the buildup to the tournament and 
rewarded the manager with two barnstorming performances. Defensive doubts are 
likely to be put to the test shortly though.

England to advance in Euro 2016 but Italy have drawn the short straw | Paul 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/25/england-euro-2016-italy-spain-iceland-last-16-harry-kane-dele-alli>
Marek Hamsik


Slovakia midfielder

The midfielder always tends to be noticeable thanks to his marvellous mohican 
but in France his performances have also caught the eye, not least his display 
against Russia in which he provided an assistand a goal-of-the-tournament 
contender. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/15/marek-hamsik-calm-class-slovakia-win-russia>
 Showed his versatilityagainst England with a dogged and disciplined effort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/england-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
 despite playing just behind the striker in Slovakia’s 4-2-3-1.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4f36ee636ca09f64e7093b2b45a8c70d97ccee2%2F0_204_3153_1893%2F3153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%2010%20transfer%20targets%20whose%20stock%20has%20risen%20sky-high%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%2010%20transfer%20targets%20whose%20stock%20has%20risen%20sky-high%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4f36ee636ca09f64e7093b2b45a8c70d97ccee2%2F0_204_3153_1893%2F3153.jpg>
 Marek Hamsik, who plays his club football in Serie A for Napoli, celebrates 
scoring against Russia. Photograph: Philippe Huguen/AFP/Getty Images 
Ivan Perisic

Croatia midfielder

The 27-year-old, who once joined the French club Sochaux to help save his 
father’s chicken farm, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/ivan-perisic-croatia-chicken-farm>
 scored the winning goal against Spain that has helpedgive Croatia genuine hope 
of going deep into the tournament. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/croatia-spain-euro-2016-match-report>
 While Luka Modric and Ivan Rakitic have merely confirmed what Real Madrid and 
Barcelona already knew about their abilities, Perisic has finally fulfilled his 
talent.

Grzegorz Krychowiak

Poland midfielder

Arguably the standout defensive midfielder of the tournament so far. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/24/guardian-euro-2016-team-of-the-tournament-so-far>
 Krychowiak was already on the transfer radars of plenty of European giants 
after back-to-back Europa League successes with Sevilla but his performances so 
far, particularly against Germany,may have persuaded Paris Saint-Germain to 
activate his €45m release clause.

Euro 2016: every performance rated and profiles of all 552 players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
Joe Allen

Wales midfielder

He made just eight Premier League starts for Liverpool last season but in 
three games in France Allen has proven his ability – his pass to create Wales’ 
second goal against Russia had a Xavi-esque quality. Aaron Ramsey and Gareth 
Bale have taken the deserved headlinesbut Allen’s efforts have not gone 
unnoticed. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/wales-joe-allen-praise-euro-2016>

Laszlo Kleinheisler

Hungary midfielder

A row with his club Videoton meant Kleinheisler missed the first half of last 
season and after joining Werder in January he made only one Bundesliga start. 
But in France he has been key – along with Balazs Dzsudzsak – in a refreshingly 
enterprising Hungarian midfield. Such is his import to the side that,with 
Hungary already through, he was rested for the final group game. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f11bf861911cfe8533f632fc989acf80a50e9b6%2F0_92_2900_1740%2F2900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%2010%20transfer%20targets%20whose%20stock%20has%20risen%20sky-high%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%2010%20transfer%20targets%20whose%20stock%20has%20risen%20sky-high%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f11bf861911cfe8533f632fc989acf80a50e9b6%2F0_92_2900_1740%2F2900.jpg>
 Laszlo Kleinheisler has been compared with Paul Scholes, for obvious reasons. 
Photograph: Guillaume Horcajuelo/EPA 
Birkir Bjarnason

Iceland midfielder

Iceland have had no shortage of heroes in the tournament thus far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/jun/18/euro-2016-picture-of-the-day-iceland-in-unison>
 but Bjarnason’s tireless performances in midfield have provided the 
foundations for their success. The 28-year-old scored theteam’s equaliser 
against Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 and it was his 95th minute clearance that sparked the counterattack from which 
Iceland scored their dramatic winner against Austria (he also sprinted the 
length of the pitch to join that attack, speaking volumes about his energy). A 
rock that England must find a way around.

Dimitri Payet

France forward


Already flying high after a superb season with West Ham, Payet has gone to the 
next level with his performances for the host nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/dimitri-payet-france-euro-2016-emotion>
. Scored an 89th minute winner – a screamer – in the opening game of the 
tournament, followed that up with another late goal against Albania and was the 
width of the bar away from repeating the trick against Switzerland.

Euro 2016 interactive wallchart: tables, results, fixtures and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/dec/12/euro-2016-interactive-wallchart-groups-fixtures-venues-and-more>
David Silva

Spain forward

Often somewhat overshadowed in Spain’s 2008-2012 dominance by the country’s 
other outstanding midfield talents – Xavi, Iniesta, Busquets, Alonso – but in 
this tournament the Manchester City man has been to the fore. While others look 
to give Spain control, Silva provides the forward thrust. Reached 100 caps 
during the group stage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0de684f50d54a59fb7e81225dc7e9cfd87808859%2F0_59_2091_1254%2F2091.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%2010%20transfer%20targets%20whose%20stock%20has%20risen%20sky-high%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%2010%20transfer%20targets%20whose%20stock%20has%20risen%20sky-high%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0de684f50d54a59fb7e81225dc7e9cfd87808859%2F0_59_2091_1254%2F2091.jpg>
 David Silva has featured in all three of Spain’s matches so far at Euro 2016. 
Photograph: Sergio Perez/Reuters 
The reputation of these managers has shot up too ... 

Bernd Storck 

Hungary

The German is something of a gambler – he sacked his backroom staff just 
before the Euro 2016 play-off against Norway last November and gavethe then 
21-year-old Kleinheisler his debut in the first leg. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-bernd-storck-revival-euros>
 They came through that successfully and he has turned the Hungary side into an 
entertaining and effective outfit, even when he gives players a rest as he did 
in the 3-3 draw with Portugal.

Euro 2016 power rankings: Croatia go top but problems for France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/euro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france>
Antonio Conte 

Italy

Italy may have lost their 100% record in the defeat to Ireland but that they 
were able to make so many changes for that game – eight in all – was down to 
their excellence in the first two matches. The pivotal opening win over Belgium 
was a triumph of organisation forthe Chelsea-bound manager. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/04/chelsea-antonio-conte-new-manager-three-year-deal>
 “I’ve played under a lot of good managers but he is one of the best there is,”
said Daniele De Rossi. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/italy-antonio-conte-euro-2016-belgium-chelsea>
 “He’s a special kind of coach.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b34f5fc010b3cb0792eb133fcbef5090248cff%2F902_59_2222_1333%2F2222.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%2010%20transfer%20targets%20whose%20stock%20has%20risen%20sky-high%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%2010%20transfer%20targets%20whose%20stock%20has%20risen%20sky-high%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-transfer-targets-stock-risen-france-dimitri-payet-ivan-perisic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b34f5fc010b3cb0792eb133fcbef5090248cff%2F902_59_2222_1333%2F2222.jpg>
Italy’s coach Antonio Conte will take charge at Chelsea next season. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/04/chelsea-antonio-conte-new-manager-three-year-deal>
 Photograph: Vincenzo Pinto/AFP/Getty Images 
Chris Coleman 

Wales

It’s fair to say that Coleman’s career as a club manager – with Fulham, Real 
Sociedad, Coventry City and Larissa – was pretty mixed . But his stewardship of 
Wales, building on the work of Gary Speed, has been nothing short of 
exceptional. Yes, he has Gareth Bale at his disposal but Wales are a side 
greater than the sum of its parts and produced one of the best team displays of 
the group stage withtheir 3-0 demolition of Russia. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/wales-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
 