
It took a dozen questions and an abundance of platitudes for a key detail of 
the European Tour’s Rolex Series to be revealed. Keith Pelley, the tour’s chief 
executive, was asked precisely where a total shortfall of about $7.7m in prize 
money for three 2017 events alone would come from.

“We, along with Rolex, are bringing them [each] up to $7m,” said Pelley of the 
purses for the BMW Championship, the Irish Open and the Scottish Open. 
Therefore, a much-heraldedEuropean Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour> project actually looks like 
costing the body – who announced a 2015 loss of nearly £8m – money. With more 
tournaments to be added, that subsidy will grow, dependent on precisely how 
much Rolex are putting into this.

In short, this appears a commercial punt taken on the basis that the 
rebranding of certain competitions may fly. And, of course, it may, but it 
isn’t a fully safe strategy; the “robust marketing and promotional” plan as 
promised by Pelley also comes at a capital cost to someone. “All the resources 
for every tournament in the Rolex Series will be magnified,” Pelley said. Easy 
translation; more money.

Rory McIlroy admits he was ‘too proud and too stubborn’ over putting problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/rory-mcilroy-too-proud-stubborn-putting-problem>
“At this particular time we, along with Rolex, are bringing those tournaments 
to that level,” added Pelley when pressed as to whether the existing sponsors 
of the events in question would subsidise the shortfall towards the $7m minimum 
prize fund to be part of the newly-created series. For now, and pardon the pun, 
those already prominent competitions have actually won a watch courtesy of the 
Tour and a partner. Pelley refused to even confirm how long the agreement with 
Rolex is for, which would hardly seem a massive breach of commercial 
confidentiality.

Pelley remains quite the showman but close analysis of his work continues to 
raise queries. What this Rolex Series will actually provide, barring more money 
at the elite level of the Tour and enhanced media coverage which it is hoped 
will make golf more accessible, is a cause for debate. The gulf in resource to 
the PGA Tour remains vast.

One could make a decent case for the batch of events as boosted, with the 
French Open being certain to follow, being strong enough in any case. What is 
being done for the poorly attended, unattractive stuff at the lower end? Pelley 
has to be careful not to pander only to the players at the top of his 
organisation.

There is no overall narrative to knit the seven tournaments together and no 
combined prize at the end of them. The European Tour already has an order of 
merit, which it is stressed will retain key status. This, it is feared, could 
add confusion; the announcement of a second money list, lost in the Rolex 
melee, certainly should.Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> hasn’t 
really grasped the concept of simplicity being king.

European Tour to embrace change for 2017 but can’t keep everyone happy | Ewan 
Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/09/european-tour-2017-golf-patrick-reed>
The Rolex series has apparent flaws. The first tournament under its umbrella 
isn’t until May at Wentworth, with two of the European Tour’s marquee 
competitions earlier in any given year obviously problematic for different 
reasons. The Dubai Desert Classic is sponsored by another luxury watch brand, 
Omega. The HSBC Championship in Abu Dhabi is hugely attractive to the world’s 
best players partly because of appearance fees, which presumably would need to 
be ditched for the subsidy of a $2.7m prize fund unless the Tour and Rolex step 
forward once more.

The Turkish Airlines Open was ruined in part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/09/european-tour-2017-golf-patrick-reed>
 by the refusal of certain players to travel this year on security grounds. If 
that stance persists – andRory McIlroy intimated on Tuesday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/rory-mcilroy-too-proud-stubborn-putting-problem>
he wouldn’t be rushing back after ill-advised comments from a leading golf 
administrator in Turkey – then the Rolex Series, just as with this year’s Final 
Series, is undermined.

Despite grand statements, Pelley is yet to prove he can sell golf to fresh 
markets. Rolex is a long-standing and loyal partner of the European Tour. The 
one tournament which has been seriously enhanced financially from 2017, the 
Italian Open, owes everything to government intervention linked to the claiming 
of the 2022 Ryder Cup. For all that contractual obligations tie Pelley’s hands 
to an extent, there has been no arrival of alternative sponsorship from areas 
where other sports – football, primarily – have profited. Golf’s profile means 
it should actually be an easier sell.

In maintaining a theme of bullish rhetoric, Pelley insisted the Rolex Series 
is “one of the most important initiatives in the Tour’s 44-year history”. It 
may become precisely that but, for now, thoughts of emperors and new clothes 
are hard to shift.
 