
Suzann Pettersen has issued a lengthy apology for her conduct on the final day 
of theSolheim Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/solheim-cup>, with the 
Norwegian doing likewise in person to the United States captain Juli Inkster.

Pettersen prompted fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/sep/20/row-solheim-cup-players-both-sides-tears-pettersen-lee-video>
 in the final stages of the event’s fourball session by claiming a hole when 
one of her opponents, Alison Lee, mistakenly picked up her ball in the belief a 
short putt had been conceded. The United States went on to reclaim the Solheim 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/solheim-cup-2015-players-tears-row>
 from Europe, with Pettersen’s actions widely recognised as a key motivating 
factor.

In the aftermath of the competition in Germany, Pettersen was utterly 
unrepentant. That stance changed on Monday morning, when the two-time major 
winner took to her Instagram account.

Pettersen said: “I’ve never felt more gutted and truly sad about what went 
down Sunday on the 17th at the Solheim Cup.

Solheim Cup 2015: USA roar back to win after bitter row on 17th green
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/solheim-cup-2015-players-tears-row>
“I am so sorry for not thinking about the bigger picture in the heat of the 
battle and competition. I was trying my hardest for my team and put the single 
match and the point that could be earned ahead of sportsmanship and the game of 
golf itself! I feel like I let my team down and I am sorry.”

Pettersen had earlier been backed by her captain, Carin Koch. Inkster, though, 
couldn’t contain her fury at the time of the incident. Pettersen plies her 
trade on the LPGA Tour in the United States, where she would inevitably have 
been afforded a rough time from galleries had Europe prevailed.

Pettersen added: “To the US team, you guys have a great leader in Juli, who 
I’ve always looked up to and respect so much. Knowing I need to make things 
‘right,’ I had a face-to-face chat with her before leaving Germany this morning 
to tell her in person how I really feel about all of this. I wanted her also to 
know that I am sorry.

“I hope in time the US team will forgive me and know that I have learned a 
valuable lesson about what is truly important in this great game of golf which 
has given me so much in my life.

“The Solheim Cup has been a huge part of my career. I wish I could change 
Sunday for many reasons. Unfortunately I can’t.

“This week I want to push forward toward another opportunity to earn the 
Solheim Cup back for Europe in the right way. And I want to work hard to earn 
back your belief in me as someone who plays hard, plays fair and plays the 
great game of golf the right way.”
 