
Whatever the result of the Australian election, it is an unmitigated disaster 
forMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>. He promised one 
thing – stability – but the only thing this election has delivered for sure is 
ongoing political uncertainty.


The result is on a knife edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/malcolm-turnbull-says-coalition-can-form-majority-despite-shock-election-result>
. The Coalition may lose its majority. That would plunge the country into 
another election campaign, having just endured eight weeks on the hustings. The 
only alternative is what Turnbull himself insisted would be the “chaos” of a 
minority government – an outcome he told Australians would be a national 
calamity and something he would never even contemplate.

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> may 
retain a narrow majority – the result Turnbull is now predicting. But that 
would be a calamity for his leadership, the starting gun for another bout of 
internal instability.

To vindicate his leadership coup, assert his authority over the Liberals’ 
conservative wing and cement his own future Turnbull needed to do better than 
this; much, much better.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-im-confident-that-we-can-form-a-majority-government-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malcolm%20Turnbull%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20confident%20that%20we%20can%20form%20a%20majority%20government%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-im-confident-that-we-can-form-a-majority-government-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malcolm%20Turnbull%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20confident%20that%20we%20can%20form%20a%20majority%20government%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-im-confident-that-we-can-form-a-majority-government-video&media=>
Malcolm Turnbull: ‘I’m confident that we can form a majority government’ – video
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/02/malcolm-turnbull-im-confident-that-we-can-form-a-majority-government-video>
The Liberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> 
reluctantly returned to him and toppled a first term prime minister, Tony 
Abbott, for one simple reason – they were facing certain defeat at this 
election and they thought Turnbull’s popularity would reverse their fortunes. 
It hasn’t.

And after changing the voting laws and dissolving the entire Senate, he faces 
an upper house just as unwieldy as the one he dissolved, withPauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/pauline-hanson-set-to-return-to-parliament-as-queensland-senator>
, Jacqui Lambie, Derryn Hinch and Nick Xenophon’s senators likely to be among 
the eclectic crew sharing the balance of power.

Turnbull does not even have the numbers to pass the industrial legislation 
that was the ostensible reason forcalling a double dissolution election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/australia-set-for-double-dissolution-poll-on-2-july-after-senate-rejects-abcc-bill>
. In the lower house, even if he wins, he’ll be just a few scandals or 
byelections from losing his majority.

Australian election 2016: how the night unfolded with no clear winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/australian-election-2016-how-the-night-unfolded-with-no-clear-winner>
And even if Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> loses the election, 
he emerges triumphant. In just one term and against all expectations he has 
taken the demoralised Labor party to the verge of victory against a leader most 
thought was invincible. His continuation in the Labor leadership is almost 
certainly ensured.

As the count wore on and the result grew more uncertain, Shorten was the first 
to emerge to deliver what sounded like a victory speech. “Labor is back,” he 
declared and followed with a lethal charge against the Coalition: “They have 
lost their mandate.”

Turnbull did not appear until well after midnight and his speech was brittle 
and defensive, full of justifications and explanations.

He told his supporters he was confident he would eventually form a majority 
government, but blamed the close result on Labor’s campaign “lies” and 
“shameful” and underhand campaign tactics, which he claimed the police would 
investigate.

He began his defence against the internal critics questioning his decision to 
call the double dissolution election. Because even as the count was proceeding, 
the backlash and recriminations from the Abbott camp were starting, with 
warnings of a party room revolt against Turnbull’s budget changes to 
superannuation.

Sacked Abbott minister senator Eric Abetz blamed the super policy, in part, 
for the party’s shock result saying: “I for one will be advocating that we 
reconsider aspects of it, clearly it has hurt our core constituency, those 
people who have scrimped and saved for their retirement.”

Abbott’s former chief of staff Peta Credlin, sitting on the Sky news election 
night panel said: “I guarantee you [the superannuation changes] will not go 
through the party room in the current format.”

The Victorian Liberal president, Michael Kroger, said his branch had been 
“deluged with complaints” and he “hopes the party room will look at this 
issue”. He said that between Turnbull taking the leadership and the budget in 
May the Coalition had meandered and “lost its economic leadership”.

Predictably, conservative commentators such as Andrew Bolt, who have always 
railed against the small-l Liberal Turnbull,immediately started calling for his 
resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/02/andrew-bolt-demands-turnbull-resign-as-conservatives-turn-on-each-other-after-election>
.

Far more likely, if he does form a government, Turnbull’s authority will be 
slowly eroded. Getting rolled on superannuation would be a deep humiliation. 
His ability to win internal arguments on climate change or marriage equality 
will be diminished.

The election scalps: Jamie Briggs and Andrew Nikolic lead Coalition's casualty 
list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/the-election-scalps-jamie-briggs-and-andrew-nikolic-lead-coalitions-casualty-list>
Turnbull faced the fiercest swings in regions with lower average incomes and 
high unemployment – in Tasmania, western Sydney, regional New South Wales, the 
Northern Territory and northern Queensland. These were the places where 
Shorten’s assurances about health and education spending and warnings about the 
Liberal’s plans for Medicare had the deepest resonance.

Credlin noted pointedly these were exactly the areas where Abbott was popular. 
“He resonates in the places where Labor has made gains,” she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbill-shorten-declares-the-labor-party-is-back-after-australian-federal-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Shorten%20declares%20%E2%80%98the%20Labor%20party%20is%20back%E2%80%99%20after%20Australian%20federal%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbill-shorten-declares-the-labor-party-is-back-after-australian-federal-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Shorten%20declares%20%E2%80%98the%20Labor%20party%20is%20back%E2%80%99%20after%20Australian%20federal%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbill-shorten-declares-the-labor-party-is-back-after-australian-federal-election-video&media=>
Bill Shorten declares ‘the Labor party is back’ after Australian federal 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/03/bill-shorten-declares-the-labor-party-is-back-after-australian-federal-election-video>
There were some other factors at play, of course. In South Australia, 
disaffected voters flocked to Nick Xenophon’s party and in Queensland to 
Pauline Hanson. Preferences from independents and the Greens were behind 
Labor’s better than expected showing – its primary vote was very low. In 
Queensland in particular, Hanson preferences helped Labor gain seats they had 
almost given up on.

As the count wore on, more and more Liberals railed against Labor’s late 
campaign Medicare “scare”. “It’s a lie ... Labor has been boasting about this 
monstrous lie at the heart of its campaign,” the deputy Liberal leader, Julie 
Bishop, fumed. But the result must be seen as a verdict on the two leaders’ 
core messaging.

And despite having signed a “pledge” early in the campaign to do no deals with 
minor parties to form government, each leader may be confronted with exactly 
that prospect – putting the lower house independents Cathy McGowan, Bob Katter, 
Andrew Wilkie, the new Nick Xenophon Team MP Rebekha Sharkie and the Green’s 
Adam Bandt in the hot seat.

It could take weeks before Australians know who will form the next government.

Malcolm Turnbull’s small target “plan”, his strategy to coast to victory on 
the strength of his personal popularity and assertions that he alone could 
manage the economy in uncertain times did not convince Australian voters. 
Shorten made gains with his spending promises on health and education.

If Shorten loses this election, he wins politically. 

And even if he pulls off a narrow victory, Turnbull loses. 
 