
Ronald Koeman rolled his eyes when the subject cropped up but Everton’s 
performance inthe Merseyside derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/19/everton-v-liverpool-premier-league-live>
 on Monday ensured there was no avoiding a repeat of the question. Namely, will 
the potential of Ross Barkley morph into the consistent performer David Moyes 
and Roberto Martínez believed he could be? “I am not sure,” Everton manager’s 
said. “I am not sure.” The honest appraisal may not sit comfortably with 
Barkley but represents a fair gauge of the midfielder’s predicament at Goodison 
Park.

Ronald Koeman says keeping Romelu Lukaku will show Everton’s intent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/ronald-koeman-keeping-romelu-lukaku-everton-intent>
To clarify, in case Koeman’s remarks are seen as another deliberate pop at a 
player with 18 months remaining on his contract, he was reluctant to discuss 
Barkley. As is his wont, however, the straight-talking Dutchman did not gloss 
over the player’s form once the questioning began. His feelings were evident 
during the derby when the England international shanked a free-kick high into 
the Gwladys Street stand two minutes beforeSadio Mané won the match for 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. Koeman threw his arms in the air in disgust, his frustrations at another 
fitful contribution from the 23-year-old abundantly clear.

“First of all, I don’t like to say because every word I say about Ross is used 
by the media in a negative or positive way,” Koeman said when a topic that has 
dominated his early months in the job reappeared.

“Of course I think the player needs to improve. He needs to improve the 
tactical aspect of his football, out of his position, he needs to be more 
clinical and have more creativity in the offensive part of the team but he is 
working hard on that and trying to get the best out of himself.

“Maybe that type of aggression [Barkley’s dangerous challenge on Jordan 
Henderson] meant he lost a bit of control in that action but he is working 
hard. He needs to improve to be the player that maybe everyone expected when he 
was 18 or 19.”

Can he be the player that everyone expected, Koeman was asked. “I am not sure. 
I am not sure,” came the reply. Those doubts reflect the general feeling around 
Goodison about one of their own and are not based on one derby performance 
featuring poor decision‑making and hesitant reactions. They started during 
Everton’s two‑season slide under Martínez and have continued during Koeman’s 
brief time in charge.

Barkley has made 129 Premier League appearances for his boyhood club, scoring 
18 goals, and turned 23 at the beginning of the month. He has not only had to 
adjust to different tactics under Martínez and Koeman but contrasting treatment.

Whereas the Belgium head coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/roberto-martinez-appointed-belgium-manager-everton>
 fuelled the hype around Everton’s “diamond” – as the Gwladys Street song goes 
– by comparing him to Michael Ballack, among others, and occasionally deploying 
the player out wide, Koeman has taken the opposite approach. From the start of 
his reign the former Southampton manager has publicly told Barkley he must 
improve and can no longer be considered a young player, while giving him the 
midfield positions he favours. Neither manager has managed a consistent return.

Everton’s tendency to go long and direct to Romelu Lukaku this season clearly 
does not help the man in the No10 role. Equally, in the 4-2-3-1 formation 
Koeman has favoured, the three behind Lukaku – whoever they may be, and they 
have been changed frequently – have failed to answer the manager’s call for 
greater productivity whenEverton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> 
do control possession.

Barkley, as the club’s big hope, or perhaps because of the unforgiving 
spotlight on local players, has become the focal point of the debate 
surrounding Everton’s ambitions rather than developing into the focal point of 
the team.

“We want the same from him whether we play four against four or five against 
five – that’s he is shooting, scoring goals and giving assists,” Koeman said. 
“Now he needs to change sometimes because that action in our half is the same 
action as what he is doing in the opponent’s half. He can improve with 
experience, by studying clips, by talking, all these things. He is on a good 
way but he is still not that player [raises hand] that maybe he can be in the 
future.

“I had the same stories in Holland with players who, when they were 16 or 17, 
they were too good in the academy. They didn’t really have competition because 
they were stronger or they were a better player than the rest. But then they 
step up a level and everyone is strong, everybody is a good player, and still 
you need to make a difference – and that is more difficult.”
 