
The former European commissioner Neelie Kroes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/neelie-kroes>, who is now a paid adviser 
to Bank of America and Uber, failed to declare her directorship of an offshore 
firm in the Bahamas while she was the most powerful corporate enforcer in 
Brussels.

A cache of previously unseen documents published on Wednesday reveal that 
Kroes was recruited by a venture funded by theUnited Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates>, which intended to 
snap up the international assets of the energy company Enron in a $7bn (£5.4bn) 
deal.

Bahamas files leaks expose politicians' offshore links
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/leaked-bahamas-files-expose-politicians-offshore-links>
The information comes from a leak of 1.3m files from the Bahamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahamas> corporate registry, which has 
brought to light the names of directors and shareholders at nearly 176,000 
shell companies, trusts and foundations located in the Caribbean tax haven.

The data was received by Süddeutsche Zeitung <http://www.sueddeutsche.de/>, 
the German newspaper behindthe Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
, and theInternational Consortium of Investigative Journalists in Washington 
<https://www.icij.org/> is releasing it to the public online.

Kroes was an EU commissioner from 2004 until 2014, initially overseeing the 
powerful competition directorate and then Europe’s digital agenda. She was 
forbidden by the commissioners’ code of conduct to hold any outside 
directorships while in the roles. Thecode states 
<http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/ethics-for-commissioners/index_en.htm>: 
“Commissioners may not engage in any other professional activity, whether 
gainful or not.”

Kroes was also obliged to make a full declaration of her previous financial 
and corporate interests, stretching back 10 years. She may have breached both 
of those rules.

Papers from the Bahamas corporate registry show that between July 2000 and 
October 2009, she was registered as a director of Mint Holdings Limited, a 
company set up by a polo-playing private equity boss from the Middle East.

Leaks reveal Amber Rudd's involvement in Bahamas offshore firms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/bahamas-leaks-reveal-amber-rudd-involvement-offshore-firms>
When she joined the European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> in 2004, Kroes declared 
previous roles at more than 60 companies, foundations and educational bodies, 
including Volvo, McDonald’s, the defence and aerospace company Thales and the 
British mobile phone group mmO2. None of her filings, however, mention Mint 
Holdings.

After being approached by the Guardian, the Dutch newspapers Trouw and Het 
Financieele Dagblad and other media, Kroes responded through her lawyer, who 
said: “My client agrees that formally she should have declared this 
directorship … Mrs Kroes will inform the president of the European commission 
of this oversight and will take full responsibility for it.”

Kroes’s lawyer said she made her filings in good faith because she believed 
Mint Holdings had been liquidated in 2002, before her appointment as Europe’s 
antitrust watchdog.

She said she was not paid for her role, did not offer advice on the Enron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/enron> deal and did not hold shares in 
the company. She said the company never became operational and there had been 
no board meetings.

Mint Holdings is owned by Amin Badr-El-Din, a former special adviser to the 
president of the UAE. A polo fanatic who used to breed ponies at an estate in 
the Chiltern hills, his team has been a regular fixture atCowdray Park 
<http://www.bognor.co.uk/sport/more-sport/cup-finals-keep-the-polo-thrills-coming-at-cowdray-park-1-5373840>
 and other prestigious grounds.

In 2000, Badr-El-Din led a group of investors in negotiations to buy almost 
all of Enron’s international assets. He then recruited Kroes, who is also a 
former Dutch transport minister, to advise on the venture.

The talks took place shortly before Enron collapsed, brought down by a major 
accounting fraud. The UAE deal fell through in the late summer of 2000, because 
of financial complexities and concerns about Enron’s accounting, Badr-El-Din 
said.

Amber Rudd and Monticello: an ill-fated step in a complicated career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/amber-rudd-monticello-ill-fated-step-complicated-career-bahamas-leaks>
Had it succeeded, the transaction would have placed between $6bn and $8bn 
worth of assets in India, Turkey, Brazil, the Caribbean and Japan into a 
company of which Kroes was a board member. The assets included power plants and 
utility groups, oil and gas reserves, ships and terminal rights and an 
international gas pipeline. One of the aims was to makeEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> less dependent on Russian gas.

Mint Holdings was set up to “open the dialogue with Enron”, Badr-El-Din’s 
lawyer said. The directors were to oversee the hiring of professional advisers, 
raise funds and agree the final details. The financier briefed Kroes on the 
strategy, which she found “intriguing enough to join a few friends in Mint”.

He said: “If the deal had been successful then her continued involvement would 
have been immensely valuable for her strategic vision. Many of the board would 
have come from the various assets of Enron, the Middle East and 
internationally. The idea was to build the world’s premier gas-based company.”

The financier said he had ordered Mint Holdings to be wound up in 2002, but a 
“clerical error” meant this never happened. In 2004, it became active, holding 
shares in another Bahamas company unrelated to Enron or Kroes. It was not until 
2009, he says, that Kroes and two other individuals recruited for the Enron 
deal were discovered to be still on the register of directors. Their names were 
then removed. Kroes said she was not aware of the mistake until being 
approached by reporters last week.

The UAE attempt to buy Enron’s assets has been reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/09/business/enron-sought-to-raise-cash-two-years-ago.html?_r=0>
, but Kroes’s involvement has not been public knowledge until now. The online 
version of the Bahamas registry, which often contains patchy information on 
companies, does not list the directors of Mint Holdings.

The revelation is likely to cause controversy. During her term, Kroes 
initiated major interventions in the oil and gas markets.

Nicknamed “Steely Neelie” during her time in Brussels for tackling Microsoft 
and other corporate giants, she conducted a two-year inquiry aimed at 
challenging the power of former national monopoly companies in the oil and gas 
sectors. In 2006 she ordered dawn raids on six gas companies, which resulted in 
E.ON and GDF Suez payingmore than €500m (£430m) each 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jul/08/gas-company-fines-european-commission>
 for breaching cartel rules.

Carl Dolan, the EU director of the campaign group Transparency International, 
said the case reinforced the need for public registers to be more transparent 
about the owners of offshore companies. He said: “Kroes’ links to the proposed 
Enron deal would have remained a secret were it not for this leak. All EU 
commissioners, and in particular competition commissioners, have access to 
privileged and market-sensitive information.

“That’s why asking for a complete record of a commissioner’s past business 
links is one of most basic things the commission can do to avoid potential 
conflicts of interest. The fact that Neelie Kroes did not take this obligation 
sufficiently seriously shows the need for the commission to scrutinise these 
self-declarations more thoroughly.”

The revelations will fuel tensions over the business ties of European 
commission bosses. The commission’s former president José Manuel Barroso is 
under fire for taking up a post this summer with the investment bank Goldman 
Sachs as chairman of its international business.

Barroso has countered that he is not a lobbyist for the US bank, but one 
French minister has described the move as “scandalous” and it has prompted an 
inquiry by the EU ombudsman. The current European commission president, 
Jean-Claude Juncker, has asked its ethics panel to investigate, and 145,000 
people have signed a petition calling for Barroso to have his pension withdrawn.

The only sanction available against former commissioners is the loss of their 
pension and other benefits such as allowances for moving home, and to exercise 
this the commission must first secure an order from the European court of 
justice.

In order to secure her post as the EU’s antitrust chief, following concerns 
about her business ties to an array of multinationals, Kroes vowed “not to 
engage into any business activity following the end of my term”.

Within two years of leaving the commission, however, she has joined three US 
companies. She is a special adviser to Bank of America Merrill Lynch, a full 
board director at the customer data firm Salesforce, and a policy adviser to 
the taxi hailing company Uber, whichshelters its international revenues from 
tax through the Netherlands. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/29/londons-black-cab-drivers-consider-court-action-against-uber>

Kroes is already busy promoting US interests. Earlier this month, she made 
headlines by criticising the European commission’s ruling that Apple owed the 
Irish government an estimated €13bn in unpaid back taxes.

Challenged on why Kroes, now 75, had gone back on her promise to stay out of 
the private sector, her lawyer said: “It is true that Mrs Kroes made this 
pledge at the beginning of her first term with the European commission. Having 
fulfilled this term, Mrs Kroes fulfilled this pledge and did not enter into 
business activity. Instead, she was honoured with a second term in a completely 
different field. Having now finished her second term, she no longer feels bound 
by the commitment made prior to taking her first post.”

Additional reporting by Gaby De Groot, Frederik Obermaier, Bastian Obermayer 
and Will Ftitzgibbon
 