
Anglo-Saxon democracies, which were never invaded in the 20th century, have 
produced a rich series of alternative histories of resistance. When the Nazis 
win the Second World War, audiences can flatter themselves that they would 
never have collaborated with Robert Harris’s Fatherland or Amazon’s Man in the 
High Castle.

No one is more prone to imagining how well they would have behaved in 
conflicts that they never experienced than American conservatives. The cult of 
Churchill in the US would embarrass even his most devoted British admirers. 
From George W Bush, who placed a Jacob Epsteinbust of Churchill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/22/i-love-the-guy-obama-settles-rumours-about-winston-churchill-bust>
 in the Oval Office in 2001, via the CEOs who put Churchill theirmost admired 
leader 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/northamerica/usa/10417854/Winston-Churchill-an-all-American-hero.html>
, ahead of Steve Jobs, to today’s Republican leaders in Congress, the 
mainstream right is unanimous and unctuous in its admiration.

In truth, they are only admiring themselves. When the House of 
Representatives’ leader, Paul Ryan, said that for Churchill it was an
“unforgivable sin” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/06/09/republican-leaders-who-support-trump-are-modern-day-neville-chamberlains>
 for a politician to fail to warn the electorate about an impending threat, or 
whenJohn McCain compared Barack Obama to Neville Chamberlain 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2013/12/10/mccain-compares-obama-castro-handshake-to-chamberlain-hitler/>
 as he cut a deal with the Castros, they were signalling their courage. 
Churchill and the minority of anti-Hitler Tory and Labour MPs were abused in 
their own parties, and beyond, until appeasement fell apart in late 1938. No 
matter. Like them, today’s Republicans would rather be right than be popular.

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has proved that 
they are destined to be neither.

I don’t throw the word “fascism” around, but can we at least accept that Trump 
follows theFührerprinzip? He has no colleagues, only followers. He is a racist. 
Not a closet racist, or a dog-whistle racist, but a racist so unabashed that 
the Klan endorses him. Above all, he has the swaggering dictator’s 
determination to bawl opponents into silence with screams of “loser”, “dummy”, 
“fraud”, “puppet,” “biased”, “disgusting”, “liar” and “kook”. As with theweb 
trolls Trump so resembles 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/01/28/upshot/donald-trump-twitter-insults.html>
, it is never the point and always the person. Female news presenters have to 
explain that they are not asking him difficult questions because they have
“blood coming out of whatever” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/08/08/politics/donald-trump-cnn-megyn-kelly-comment/>
 or surrender to him, asMegan Kelly of Fox News 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/05/25/megyn_kellys_pitiful_surrender_fox_news_completely_belongs_to_donald_trump_now_partner/>
 did to her shame. Latinos have to explain why they are not rapists and 
murderers or shut up and give up. Muslims have to explain that they are not 
terrorists or they lose the right to a hearing. At every stage, the argument is 
shifted on to the troll’s terrain of ethnic and religious loyalty tests. Except 
here the troll could become the world’s most powerful man.

Confronted with a dictatorial menace, they lack the courage to risk the 
unpopularity Churchillian dissent would bring

Conservatives boasted too that they knew that the old-fashioned virtues of 
good character mattered as much as a man or woman’s ideology. By this 
reckoning, Trump’s bragging, vainglory, dark fury and towering vanity should 
disqualify him from the presidency regardless of his politics. Republican 
grandees must agree with Hillary Clinton when she said: “A man you can bait 
with a tweet is not a man we can trust with nuclear weapons”, not least because
Marco Rubio 
<http://www.weeklystandard.com/rubio-i-still-believe-trump-cant-be-trusted-with-americas-nuclear-weapons-codes/article/2002759>
, one of their own, has said as much himself. Yet McCain and Ryan, those 
enemies of appeasement, have folded and endorsed Trump. Rubio, that piercing 
judge of his character, has decided that, after all, Trump’s finger should be 
on the button. Presidents Bushpère et fils are bravely abstaining. Bobby 
Jindal, who described Trump as a “narcissist and egomaniacal madman”, wants him 
in the White House. Nearly all the Republican names you remember follow suit. 
The Dick Cheneys, Rand Pauls and Condoleezza Rices arebacking Trump 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/07/where-republicans-stand-on-donald-trump-a-cheat-sheet/481449/>
 or refusing to commit. Confronted with a dictatorial menace in their own time 
and their own country they lack the courage to risk the unpopularity that 
Churchillian dissent would bring.

Even when Trump followed his years of promoting the interests of a dictator of 
a hostile foreign power by urging Vladimir Putin to hack Clinton’s emails, they 
held steady in their cowardice. TheRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, the party of red-baiters and 
Cold Warriors, is now in the pocket of a Kremlin “useful idiot” and the best 
its national security conservatives can manage are embarrassed mutters.

Only Mitt Romney, Jeb Bush and Ted Cruz openly oppose him, among prominent 
Republicans. And when a once mighty political movement relies on Cruz to uphold 
its honour it is so deep in the dustbin of history it is already composting.

My friend and comrade, the American journalist Jamie Kirchick, coined the 
phrase “Vichy Republicans” to describe its leaders. They don’t quite support 
Trump, you understand, but you surely can’t expect them to oppose him either. 
It is not as if America is under occupation. It is not as if the man in the 
high tower will order the secret police to herd them on to cattle trucks. The 
only suffering they will face is challenges in Republican primaries and many 
won’t even face that.

A little fear goes a long way. Just the possibility of being told off for 
challenging a candidate that they fear to be mentally unstable has been enough 
to persuade them to conform.

Optimists say that America’s founding fathers designed its constitution to 
cage men such as Trump. “An elective despotism was not the government we fought 
for,” saidJames Madison 
<http://westillholdthesetruths.org/quotes/386/an-elective-despotism-was-not-the>
 in 1788, “but one in which the powers of government should be so divided and 
balanced among the several bodies of magistracy as that no one could transcend 
their legal limits.”

But where are Madison’s checks today? Trump has already made his contempt for 
judicial independence clear by race-baiting andbullying a judge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/donald-trump-bully-race-bait-judge-gonzalo-curiel-trump-university>
 who was investigating one of the many accusations of fraud against him.

As for the legislature, a Trump victory would ensure a Republican-dominated 
Congress – those same Republicans who are too frightened to raise a word of 
protest against him today.

Compare them to the British Labour MPs fighting Jeremy Corbyn. They are 
everything that conservatives despise: hand-wringingly PC, eco-conscious, 
emotionally literate, bleeding-heart do-gooders every last one of them. Christ, 
some of them may even read theObserver. But after the killing of Jo Cox by an 
alleged rightwing extremist, Angela Eagle, Jess Phillips and all the other 
anti-Corbyn MPs who are speaking out know that the death and rape threats from 
left-wing extremists may not just be bluster.

They are showing true courage. Not just moral courage but physical courage. A 
courage that those American conservatives, who are so loud in the determination 
to fight the threats of the past, and so silent before the dangers of the 
present, entirely lack.
 