
ExxonMobil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/exxonmobil> moved to squash a 
well-established congressional lecture series on climate science just nine days 
after the presidential inauguration of George W Bush, a former oil executive, 
the Guardian has learned.

Exxon’s intervention on the briefings, revealed here for the first time, adds 
to evidence the oil company was acutely aware of the state of climate science 
and its implications for government policy and the energy industry – despite 
Exxon’s public protestations for decades about the uncertainties of global 
warming science.

My father warned Exxon about climate change in the 1970s. They didn't listen | 
Claudia Black-Kalinsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/25/exxon-climate-change-greenhouse-gasses>
Indeed, the company moved swiftly during the earliest days of the Bush 
administration to block public debate on global warming and delay domestic and 
international regulations to cut greenhouse gas emissions, according to former 
officials of the US Global Change Research Program, or USGCRP.


The Bush White House is now notorious for censoring climate scientists and 
blocking international action on climate change by pulling the US out of the 
Kyoto agreement.

The oil company is under investigation by 17 attorney generals for misleading 
the public about climate change, and is facing a shareholder revolt at its 
annual general meeting on Wednesday byinvestors pressing Exxon for greater 
disclosure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/24/exxonmobil-shareholders-climate-change-impact-investments>
 about the effect of climate change on its profits.

In early 2001, however, after Al Gore lost the White House to George Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-bush>, Exxon officials apparently 
saw a chance to influence the incoming administration, according to former 
officials of the research program.

The government agency was set up in 1990 and charged with producing definitive 
reports to Congress every four years on the effects of climate change on the 
US. In the mid-1990s, as part of its legal mandate, USGCRP began organizing 
monthly seminars on climate science for elected officials and staffers in 
Congress.

On 29 January 2001, nine days after Bush’s inauguration, Arthur Randol, a 
former senior environmental advisor at Exxon, telephoned Nicky Sundt, then 
communications director for the research program, to inquire about the future 
of the lecture series.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fexxonmobil-climate-change-scientists-congress-george-w-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6df66d275a25acd98ae1bab2c8fe509bdf003b43%2F0_225_3358_2015%2F3358.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ExxonMobil%20tried%20to%20censor%20climate%20scientists%20to%20Congress%20during%20Bush%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fexxonmobil-climate-change-scientists-congress-george-w-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ExxonMobil%20tried%20to%20censor%20climate%20scientists%20to%20Congress%20during%20Bush%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fexxonmobil-climate-change-scientists-congress-george-w-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6df66d275a25acd98ae1bab2c8fe509bdf003b43%2F0_225_3358_2015%2F3358.jpg>
 ExxonMobil moved to squash the well-established series just nine days after 
the presidential inauguration of George W Bush, a former oil executive. 
Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
A few days earlier, Sundt had emailed a survey to congressional staffers 
seeking suggestions for the next lecture series. Exxon had not been on his 
distribution list, and Sundt said he was surprised to receive a call from 
Randol.

“I thought it was very unusual, if not inappropriate, for a fossil fuel 
lobbyist to be calling me directly days after the administration was sworn in 
only directly to instruct me on how we would be communicating to the Congress 
on climate change,” Sundt told the Guardian. “This is ExxonMobil reaching into 
the federal government science apparatus and seeking to influence the 
communication of science.”

Sundt, who now directs the WWF-US climate science programme (although he said 
he was not speaking on behalf of the organisation), said he made notes of the 
phone call.

The briefings had then been running for a number of years and were well 
regarded by Republican as well as Democratic staffers, according to Bryan 
Hannegan, a Senate staffer and scientist who went on to work for the Bush 
administration and is now at the National Renewable Energy Lab.

But the Exxon lobbyist saw it differently. “I very specifically remember him 
suggesting that the seminars were what he called ‘agenda-driven’, and he 
indicated that with the new administration and the Congress that – if the 
seminars continue – he hoped to see a different balance of viewpoints,” Sundt 
said.


That was Sundt’s only encounter with Randol. He told his USGCRP colleagues 
about the telephone call but did not speak out publicly until now.

In retrospect, Sundt said the telephone call was the first sign of the energy 
industry’s efforts to squash the agency’s reporting about climate change, and 
the broader debate about global warming, during the George W Bush era.

Bush went on to pull the US out of the Kyoto climate change agreement, and 
White House officials were later found to haveplayed down scientists’ warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2003/sep/21/usnews.georgewbush> about 
the dangers of climate change.


Randol, who left Exxon in 2003 after 25 years with the oil company, was known 
to have played a key role in such efforts – even before Sundt came foward.

On 6 February 2001, not long after his phone call to Sundt, Randol wrote a memo
 
<http://www.climatefiles.com/exxonmobil/2002-exxon-memorandum-to-the-white-house-on-replacing-team-for-ipcc-assessment/>
 urging the Bush administration to demand the removal of Bob Watson, a 
well-regarded climate scientist, as head of the UN’s climate science panel, the 
intergovernmental panel on climate change.

Randol describes Watson as “hand-picked by Al Gore”. “Restructure the US 
attendance at upcoming IPCC meetings to assure that none of the Clinton/Gore 
proponents are involved in any decisional activities,” the memo reads.


In the same memo, Randol also recommended sacking three US climate officials. 

The Exxon lobbyist was extraordinarily successful. At the IPCC, Watson was 
replaced by Rajendra Pachauri, an Indian engineer who stepped down from the 
science panel last year after beingaccused of sexual harassment.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/24/ipcc-chair-rajendra-pachauri-resigns>

Following Randol’s recommendations,  a number of climate sceptics 
<http://research.greenpeaceusa.org/?a=view&d=4382> were appointed to the 
administration, including Harlan Watson, a then Republican congressional 
staffer, who went on to lead the US climate negotiating team.


Meanwhile, Randol sought to put Exxon’s stamp on the blockbuster US climate 
reports. On 22 March 2002, Randol forwarded acompany memo 
<http://www.climatefiles.com/exxonmobil/exxonmobil-memo-2002-from-randy-randol-to-phil-cooney-at-ceq/>
 to the White House council of environmental quality suggesting an overhaul of 
the USGRCP’s national climate assessments.

The memo, which extolled Exxon’s qualifications in climate science, 
recommended the agency focus more on “gaps and uncertainties” in climate 
science.

Exxon and Randol did not respond to requests for comment. 

However, Mike MacCracken, a former chief scientist at the USGRCP, said Sundt’s 
account of the phone call fits in with his recollections of Exxon’s efforts to 
influence government climate science research. “I don’t recall the call 
directly but they were objecting to all sorts of things as the new 
administration came in,” he said. “I guess the Republicans were sort of pushing 
from Congress. They were taking over and they had their views.”
 