
They say perfection is a flame that many touch but few can hold. If so, Chelsea
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> are showing every indication of 
possessing sufficient ruthless consistency to achieve it this season, with the 
latest, fairly compelling, evidence arriving at Sunderland’s expense.

A 10th straight Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> win left Antonio Conte’s 
team six points clear at the top of the table on a night when Cesc Fàbregas not 
only scored the winning goal but, courtesy of a high-calibre central-midfield 
performance, reminded everyone of his enduring importance in west London.

Starting his third League game of the campaign, Fàbregas also helped keep the 
home side stuck firmly to the bottom of the division with their horizon looking 
increasingly bleak. Despite restricting Chelsea to that single goal,Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> created precious little of 
note until stoppage-time when Thibaut Courtois’s brilliant diversion of Patrick 
van Aanholt’s volley came between Conte and a technical area meltdown.

“I’m pleased for sure,” said Chelsea’s manager. “It’s not easy to win 10 games 
in a row in this league and we had to fight to win this one. We couldn’t quite 
kill it and, at the end, Sunderland had a big chance to equalise.”

After joking about his decision in selecting the “very good” Fàbregas, Conte 
stressed there can be no room for complacency. “Me and my players are doing 
something important,” he said. “But this league is very tough – the title is 
between six teams.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fc720052022e522617525b956aaff9e4e1e160e%2F111_77_3115_1868%2F3115.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F%C3%A0bregas%20sweeps%20Chelsea%20past%20Sunderland%20and%20six%20points%20clear%20at%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F%C3%A0bregas%20sweeps%20Chelsea%20past%20Sunderland%20and%20six%20points%20clear%20at%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fc720052022e522617525b956aaff9e4e1e160e%2F111_77_3115_1868%2F3115.jpg>
 Thibaut Courtois makes a stunning last-gasp save as Chelsea held on for a 10th 
league win in a row Photograph: Lee Smith/Reuters 
David Moyes has never championed three at the back and points out that serious 
prizes are rarely won by sides configured with central-defensive trinities. 
There are exceptions to every rule though and, here, Sunderland’s manager 
arranged his team in a 3-4-3 formation, mirroring Chelsea’s system.

Maybe the full moon high in the Wearside sky prompted such boldness, perhaps 
imitation really is the sincerest form of flattery or possibly matching your 
opponents’ shape is the latest tactical fad. Whatever the reason, John O’Shea 
mirrored the David Luiz sweeping role as Sunderland started quite securely, if 
a little cagily, in a new design well suited to Billy Jones and Van Aanholt, 
their wing-backs. Chelsea enjoyed more possession but they initially struggled 
to trouble Jordan Pickford.

Change beckoned when, for once, Diego Costa escaped the attentions of O’Shea, 
Lamine Koné and the former Chelsea centre-half Papy Djilobodji. Unmarked, the 
centre-forward connected with a cross from Marcos Alonso, a one-time Sunderland 
loanee, but failed to get a proper purchase and sliced wide.

Adam Lallana scores twice to ease Liverpool to victory over Middlesbrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/middlesbrough-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
It was a warning Sunderland failed to heed as they permitted N’Golo Kanté to 
seize possession deep in midfield. That interception prefaced Fàbregas and 
Willian – deputising for the injured Eden Hazard – exchanging passes. By 
shaping to shoot but, instead, squaring, Willian deceived a backline that 
proved powerless to prevent Fàbregas sweeping the ball imperiously past 
Pickford into the bottom right corner from the edge of the area.

Moyes’s gameplan of sitting back and hoping to snatch something on the break 
shattered instantly and the resultant frustration seemed manifested by swift 
bookings for Jermain Defoe and O’Shea for fouls on Fàbregas and Costa. Indeed, 
with a Willian free-kick whizzing fractionally off target half-time could not 
come quickly enough for the home side.

They emerged apparently galvanised and, almost immediately, nearly scored with 
their first real chance. Catching Chelsea in momentarily dozy mode, Defoe 
played in the overlapping Adnan Januzaj whose fine, first-time, shot forced the 
previously marginalised Courtois into a superb diving save.

Suitably stung, the visiting riposte proved rapid and vicious. Willian 
delighted in dodging Koné in a manner that made a mockery of the £25m release 
clause contained in the defender’s contract and his ensuing shot brushed the 
bar after deflecting off Djilobodji. Pickford barely had time to sigh with 
relief before ably repelling Costa’s low angled shot.

Mark Noble counts his spot luck as West Ham see off bullish Burnley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/west-ham-united-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
Victor Moses bewildered Sebastian Larsson before shooting left-footed and 
narrowly wide in an on-going onslaught also featuring Willian missing the 
target after collecting David Luiz’s typically elegant pass.

Fàbregas, meanwhile, delighted in showing off his stellar passing range with 
one particularly exquisite delivery almost prompting a goal for Willian before 
a volley of his own swerved off target.

Such near misses almost proved extremely costly when, in stoppage time, Van 
Aanholt unleashed a spectacular volley destined for the top corner until 
Courtois’s stunning, win-preserving, intervention. “I thought it was in,” said 
Moyes. “But he made a top save.”
 