
Two families who claimed that the bedroom tax, which restricts housing 
subsidies, was unfair have won their appeals against the UK government at the 
supreme court.

But five other claimants had their challenges dismissed at the country’s 
highest court in a judgment that considered the specific circumstances of each 
individual applicant.

The seven-justice panel upheld the claims of Jacqueline Carmichael, who is 
disabled and cannot share a room with her husband, Jayson, as well as that of 
Paul and Susan Rutherford, who care for their severely disabled grandson, 
Warren, 17, in a specially adapted three-bedroom bungalow in Pembrokeshire, 
south Wales. Both had claimed discrimination under the European Convention on 
Human Rights.

Roger Toulson, who read out the main judgment, said: “Mrs Carmichael [who has 
spina bifida] cannot share a bedroom with her husband because of her 
disabilities … The Rutherfords need a regular overnight carer for their 
grandson, who has severe disabilities.” Subjecting them to the bedroom tax was 
therefore “manifestly without reason”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffamilies-win-supreme-court-appeals-over-unfair-bedroom-tax-jacqueline-carmichael%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59e39d3095c13dcf086d483c5146ef1f38713ddd%2F0_85_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Families%20win%20supreme%20court%20appeals%20over%20'unfair'%20bedroom%20tax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffamilies-win-supreme-court-appeals-over-unfair-bedroom-tax-jacqueline-carmichael%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Families%20win%20supreme%20court%20appeals%20over%20%27unfair%27%20bedroom%20tax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffamilies-win-supreme-court-appeals-over-unfair-bedroom-tax-jacqueline-carmichael%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59e39d3095c13dcf086d483c5146ef1f38713ddd%2F0_85_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Paul Rutherford with his grandson Warren at their home in Pembrokeshire. 
Photograph: Benjamin Wright/PA 
The ruling pointed out that housing benefit regulations allow claimants to 
have an additional bedroom where children cannot share a bedroom because of a 
disability and that this exemption should be extended - as in the case of the 
Carmichaels - to adults.

The judgment follows a three-day hearing, which began on 29 February, at which 
lawyers representing adults with disabilities and adult carers went to the 
supreme court to argue two sets of cases.

The claimants, who were represented by Central England Law Centre, Leigh Day 
and the Child Poverty Action Group, said disabled people were being 
discriminated against because they were subject to regulations made for the 
able-bodied.

Since April 2013, housing benefit for people in the social rented sector 
deemed to have a spare bedroom has been reduced by 14% and people deemed to 
have two or more spare bedrooms have had their housing benefit reduced by 25%. 
In these claims the issue was over whether disability meant they could move to 
smaller accommodation.


Cases brought by the other families were dismissed even though the court said 
it had “profound sympathy” for some of the claimants who lost. There were cries 
of “shame” from some of them when the judgment was announced.

Paul and Susan Rutherford were in court to hear the result. “It’s been a 
three-and-a-half-year battle,” Paul said afterwards. “We have had to keep 
re-applying for benefit all the time. It hasn’t been easy. I’m relieved, happy 
that a lot of other people who are in the same position as us will benefit from 
this decision.

“Warren cannot communicate but knows that we have gone up to London. If we had 
lost we would have had to downsize and fit out a new property with ceiling 
hoists and special adaptations. If we moved to a two-bedroom place we wouldn’t 
have had anywhere to employ carers. Health and safety would not have allowed it.

“Our [present] bungalow was fitted out for Warren and the spare room was 
intended to be used by a carer so that he or she could stay overnight.”

Sophie Earnshaw of the Child Poverty Action Group <http://www.cpag.org.uk/>, 
who represented the Rutherfords, said: “This is a great result. Today marks the 
end of a three-year ordeal for the family. This means that those with disabled 
children who need overnight care will not be subject to the bedroom tax. 
Thousands of people will no longer be affected by the bedroom tax.

“For Paul and Sue this means they will be able to move on with their lives and 
be able to care for Warren at home. We hope the government will repeal the 
bedroom tax in its entirety.”

Rosa Curling, a solicitor at the law firm Leigh Day, who represented the 
Carmichaels, said: “This is an extremely important and welcome decision which 
recognises that the government cannot trample over people’s rights in the name 
of austerity.

“Our clients had a very clear medical need for two bedrooms and it’s 
disappointing that the government chose to fight this case for three years, 
putting our clients through a long period of uncertainty. Our clients are 
delighted that justice has been done and they can now start to move on with 
their lives knowing that their rights as a disabled person and their right to a 
family life together will be respected.”

But the claim brought by a woman identified only as A, who is a victim of 
domestic violence, was dismissed by a majority of five to two justices on the 
supreme court.

Her predicament has been highlighted by campaigners concerned that women who 
have had their homes specially adapted because of security threats from 
ex-partners will be forced to move to smaller and potentially less secure homes 
at great cost.

Rebekah Carrier, a solicitor with the law firm Hopkin Murray Beskine, who 
represented A, said she would appeal to the European court of human rights. “My 
client has been subjected to the bedroom tax because she was allocated a 
three-bedroom house 25 years ago, through no choice of her own, due to a 
shortage of two-bedroom houses,” Carrier said.


“She is a vulnerable single parent who has been a victim of rape and assault. 
Her life remains at risk and she is terrified. As a result, she has been given 
the protection of a multi-agency network and had her home specially adapted by 
the police, at great expense.”


Brenda Hale, who was in the minority, observed in her dissenting judgment: 
“The state has provided Ms A with such a safe haven. It allocated her a 
three-bedroomed house when she did not need one. That was not her choice. It 
later fortified that house and put in place a detailed plan to keep her and her 
son safe.

“Reducing her housing benefit by reference to the number of bedrooms puts at 
risk her ability to stay there. Because of its special character, it will be 
difficult if not impossible for her to move elsewhere and that would certainly 
put the state to yet further expense.”

A spokesperson for the Department for Work and Pensions said: “It is welcome 
that the court found in our favour in five out of the seven cases. The court 
also agreed with our view that discretionary housing payments are generally an 
appropriate and lawful way to provide assistance to those who need extra help.


“In the two specific cases where the court did not find in our favour, we will 
take steps to ensure we comply with the judgement in due course. In most cases, 
local authorities are best placed to understand the needs of their residents, 
which is why we will have given them over £1bn by the end of this parliament 
for discretionary housing payments to ensure that people in difficult 
situations don’t lose out.”

Among campaigners in court to hear the judgment was Paula Peters, of Disabled 
People Against Cuts <http://dpac.uk.net/>. She said: “While we are pleased for 
Jayson and Paul, who had their claims upheld, we are very concerned for 
disabled people who are in adapted property and who need a spare bedroom. The 
court ruled that the decision does not cover them in specially adapted property 
and they would have to move to another adapted property of a smaller size, of 
which there is a great shortage.”

The Rev Paul Nicholson, of Taxpayers Against Poverty 
<http://taxpayersagainstpoverty.org.uk/>, said: “I have watched people lose 
weight because they can’t survive on cuts imposed by the bedroom tax. It’s a 
bad law.”

Claire Glasman, of the anti-poverty group WinVisible 
<http://www.winvisible.org/>, said: “The bedroom tax is an attack on low income 
people. It only affects people in social housing. Councils have been 
discriminatory in how they administer housing payments.

“We are worried that women and children are going to die as a result of the 
ruling on women fleeing domestic violence. There’s no safety for them in this 
judgment. [The judges] are picking and choosing in disability cases. Why should 
people have to lose their homes?”

Debbie Abrahams MP, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said: “The bedroom 
tax is a cruel and unnecessary policy. It is widely despised by the British 
public, who see it what for what it is; a callous attempt to punish low-income, 
social housing tenants. A Labour government will scrap [it], ending the misery 
faced by thousands across the country.”

 