
First things first: apologies to Ben Fogle, whose series the Guardian has 
managed to ignore for its four previous seasons. I can only assume that 
everyone working here has been so busy swiping left and drooling in a digital 
stupor to give this simple, sweet rejection of the hyper-connected world the 
props it deserves.

New Lives follows Fogle as he lives with people who have abandoned modern 
luxuries for soil and, frequently, solitude. You might consider it part of a 
wider trend for “digital detox” retreats, in which people hooked on the 
dopamine hit attained from an accidental Snapchat FaceSwap with a baby/walnut 
are forced to lie in a bath filled with rice until their brain is reconfigured. 
None of that faddy crap for the focus of this week’s episode, though. Swedish 
eco-warriorLynx Vilden 
<http://moonmagazine.org/lynx-vilden-the-call-of-the-wild-2013-09-01/> is the 
real deal. She strictly follows stone-age survival rules while living in a 
frozen forest in Seattle, promoting a radically self-sustaining existence that 
mainly involves being really cold and really dirty.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5qajkpoYVBg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5qajkpoYVBg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5qajkpoYVBg&media=>
Fogle first meets Vilden deep within the woods, where she makes her entrance 
on a stout horse while wearing a pointy pixie hat. The sexual tension is 
electric. “You look amazing,” says Fogle, whose “Ursula Andress wading through 
the ocean in a white bikini 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_bikini_of_Ursula_Andress>” fantasy appears 
to be a punk dressed in animal skins and straddling a pony. Her archaic 
existence also involves drinking boiled pine cones and washing her teeth with 
twigs. Sunday morning at Glastonbury, essentially.

Throughout the rest of the episode, we see Fogle cook, chat and keep fires 
alight with Vilden, a former hedonist whose new life has propelled her towards 
a different kind of extreme. At one point, Fogle is woken up in the middle of 
the night to the sound of her taking a slash in a bowl. He seems bewitched, and 
I can see why. Vilden’s unvarnished qualities are aspirational. She’s the 
person you smirk at for having blonde dreads and wearing afelt Zelda costume 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/originals/71/09/43/7109432cd6276db23adfa81e527b96eb.jpg>
 at a party, but by the end of the night you’re half-naked up a tree with a 
tattoo of an acorn on your arse. She made you ceremonially stamp on your iPhone 
7 earlier, and you’ve agreed to babysit a bevy of otters for her next weekend. 
You also might be a bit pregnant. With her twins.

While other shows about the wild – eg. anything Bear Grylls-affiliated – are 
riddled with chest-thumping machismo, there are ethical, environmentally driven 
intentions to New Lives In The Wild that make for wholesome, if sobering, TV. 
But there is personal tragedy in this episode, too: Vilden lives alone. She has 
a daughter, who was brought up for a while in the wild but now lives in the 
city. At one point she gives a desperate plea to camera, calling for a caveman 
to sweep her off her feet. You suspect she might want him to be Fogle.

Much to my dismay, the likelihood of romance on is low. According to our 
presenter, Lynx has a “unique odour”. In an act of defiance she shows him her 
bath to prove she does wash. It’s an iron pot heated by a fire, which she calls 
the Cannibal Tub. “I really thought you were going to eat me!” shouts Fogle – 
dressed now in a pair of small blue pants – as he joins her to soak in 10 
years’ worth of dead skin and pubic hair. “The evening’s not over,” Vilden 
smiles. For the first time, Fogle looks nervous, like he wishes he wasn’t 
trapped in a cauldron in Washington state with a woman who wants to rut him 
into a pulp and use his leftover skin as a waterproof. Or maybe he just misses 
his iPhone.

Ben Fogle’s New Lives in the Wild begins tonight, 9pm, Channel 5
 