
Sound Women <http://www.soundwomen.co.uk/>, the lobbying/mentoring/ 
issue-raising group for women in audio, was formed five years ago. The trigger, 
as I recall, was the 2011 Sony awards, a celebration of radio where almost 
every woman who got on stage was there to present, rather than receive an 
award; where each of those women’s looks were commented upon by the host; where 
TalkSport won Station of the Year – a station which, at the time, featured an 
online quiz that rewarded correct answers with a video of a “lovely” removing 
her clothes. Gah. Even writing this makes me mad again. Anyway, executive 
producer and getter-of-things-done Maria Williams got a group of radio women 
into a room to talk about such things, and Sound Women was born. We launched in 
October 2011, at the Radio Festival in Manchester, with badges that became the 
most coveted festival item anda short film <https://youtu.be/hgXKlVbIoM0>, 
featuring Gemma Cairney, Victoria Derbyshire, Margherita Taylor, Angie Greaves 
and Annie Mac. The film gave the grim stats. Of BBC local radio breakfast 
shows, 82% were presented by a solo man, 2% by a solo woman. Men made up 90% of 
studio operators and 99% of editors. Just 16% of women working in radio had 
dependent children.

Sound Women’s aims have not all been achieved, but merely by raising the 
issues, something has shifted

Very quickly, Sound Women made a difference. The BBC’s director general, Tony 
Hall, made it a priority for BBC local stations to employ more women as 
presenters. Absolute Radio did the same. Training schemes for women in radio 
tech were set up. Many male Sound Women supporters started refusing to appear 
on all-male panels (high five,Paddy O’Connell 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/39mDzfJ6YwJf9KJdSTpDyCL/paddy-oconnell>
). And Sound Women itself was a success: its mentoring scheme was fruitful, the 
regional and local meet-ups supportive and over 1000 men and women joined up on 
a paid subscription.

However, subs are not enough. A group that offers training, mentoring, 
meet-ups, research cannot continue without money behind it. For five years, due 
to non-stop funding efforts, Sound Women survived on grants and awards from 
organisations such asCreative Skillset 
<http://creativeskillset.org/about_us/diversity/sound_women_on_air> and the 
BBC. But money has become harder to come by, and it seems wrong to ask busy 
women to work for no recompense when the organisation is fighting for equal 
pay. So Sound Women is ceasing to exist. Its legacy is impressive, and its 
final months will be spent runningTech Train 
<http://www.soundwomen.co.uk/events/>, a course that teaches women how to 
“drive” a studio desk (evidence shows that presenters are paid more if they do).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fhow-sound-women-changed-the-conversation-radio-gender-representation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F404b33dd5d9f2ad688f14f50ee391fa8dc08dd8f%2F0_0_3696_2448%2F3696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farewell%2C%20Sound%20Women%2C%20you%20made%20a%20difference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fhow-sound-women-changed-the-conversation-radio-gender-representation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farewell%2C%20Sound%20Women%2C%20you%20made%20a%20difference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fhow-sound-women-changed-the-conversation-radio-gender-representation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F404b33dd5d9f2ad688f14f50ee391fa8dc08dd8f%2F0_0_3696_2448%2F3696.jpg>
 ‘Revolutionary’ (l-r): Sound Women founder Maria Williams with Annie 
Nightingale, Sound Women chair Chris Burns and Radio 4’s Jane Garvey and Fi 
Glover at the Houses of Parliament on Sound Women’s third birthday. Photograph: 
Sound Women 
Sound Women’s aims have not all been achieved, but merely by raising the 
issues, something has shifted. Radio festivals have changed, as have 
controllers’ attitudes towards female presenters and producers. TheToday 
programme has been regularly hosted by two women, and no one has died. Annie 
Nightingale, Jenni Murray, Sue MacGregor are working at the top of their game 
and are celebrated for it. 1Xtra has upped its numbers of female DJs. Sadly,
Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2 is still abnormally 
dominated by men (from 6.30am until 8pm every weekday!), but their stand-ins 
are usually female. If one of the big beasts drops out, then there will be a 
plethora of highly trained women to grab his earphones.

As a radio listener, I still get frustrated by so-so men taking up airspace 
when there are many other women who could do so much better. I yell in traffic 
at zoo formats that boast three male speakers to every one female. I switch off 
shows where the male host does the political interviews and the woman talks
Strictly. Radio 2, Radio X, most shows that involve “serious” music, sport or 
politics still skew madly male. The job is not yet done. It’s a bitter shame 
that SoundWomen <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> cannot 
continue. Still, everyone involved should be proud of its achievements and 
remember its positive, revolutionary approach. Things change if we make them 
change.
 