
The furrows deepened on the brow of Father Brian Lucas. His bouncy confidence 
evaporated in the witness box. He sweated under questioning. He confessed over 
and over again to be puzzled by his own actions. Puzzled by the actions of 
others. So puzzled. But he gave no ground.

 On one reading of this tangled story, Lucas could face possible criminal 
charges for failing to alert the police 24 years ago to the apparently frank 
confessions of a paedophile priest. He doesn’t see it that way.

 Lucas put everything he had this week into convincing the royal commission 
into institutional responses to child sexual abuse that his handling of the 
case of Father John Farrell – who was abusing children from the moment he was 
ordained in 1981 – was absolutely proper.

 Lucas matters. Though he has no fancy title and doesn’t wear lace, this 
lawyer priest has been a fixer of great skill within the Catholic church for 
decades. He has been one of the hard men in the church bureaucracy: for years 
the spokesman of the archdiocese of Sydney and then secretary to the Bishops’ 
Conference.

The Farrell case is the commission’s last look at the role of the Catholic 
church. It’s no afterthought. This is the scandal that raises the fundamental 
question of the church’s attitude to Australian law. Is it a “good citizen” as 
CardinalGeorge Pell <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-pell> 
has so often claimed? Or does the church see itself as a separate realm 
answerable to the laws of Rome?

Lucas never took notes. No incriminating documents were left behind

 Lucas was the go-to man when paedophiles had to be persuaded to leave the 
church. Rules set in Rome made it essentially impossible to dismiss these men. 
They could be suspended from duties, given no work, forbidden to celebrate mass 
– but they had to consent to their own sacking.

 How many cases he had handled before he confronted Farrell he couldn’t 
exactly say. Perhaps 35. He never turned them over to the police. And he never 
took notes. The ground rule of his operation was that no documents were left 
behind.

 Even in the witness box this week, Lucas insisted the church had a right to 
protect the confidences of these men. He argued to a clearly sceptical 
commissioner, Peter McClellan, that they spoke to him on condition no record 
was made, so no record was made. There was nothing for civil authorities to 
discover in the archives. Lucas called it the right to silence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffarrell-scandal-puts-catholic-churchs-attitude-to-australian-law-under-the-microscope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F093b35539147e2e0ff7c0cdfcb577e129cf3f38a%2F0_80_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farrell%20scandal%20puts%20Catholic%20church's%20attitude%20to%20Australian%20law%20under%20the%20microscope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffarrell-scandal-puts-catholic-churchs-attitude-to-australian-law-under-the-microscope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farrell%20scandal%20puts%20Catholic%20church%27s%20attitude%20to%20Australian%20law%20under%20the%20microscope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffarrell-scandal-puts-catholic-churchs-attitude-to-australian-law-under-the-microscope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F093b35539147e2e0ff7c0cdfcb577e129cf3f38a%2F0_80_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
 Lawyer priest Father Brian Lucas has been a fixer of great skill within the 
Catholic church for decades. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP 
 Lucas was not alone when he met Farrell in September 1992. With him were two 
senior churchmen: Monsignor John Usher, director of the Catholic charity 
Centacare, and the judicial vicar of the Armidale diocese, Father Wayne Peters.

 Peters made a document. 

Those three men already knew a good deal about Farrell and the trail of 
scandal he had left behind in his decade as a priest. After only a couple of 
years, he was forced out of his first parish, Moree in westernNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales>, pursued by angry 
parents and accusations he was abusing his altar boys.

 The church undertook no investigation. 

 Farrell was charged in 1987 with five counts of indecent assault on one boy 
and six of sexual intercourse without consent. The church provided the priest 
with a fierce Sydney criminal QC, Chester Porter, to tear the victim to shreds 
in the witness box in Narrabri. Farrell wasn’t committed for trial.

 He was then moved to western Sydney, where his abrasive attitudes, strange 
behaviour with children and sexual banter with altar boys led him to be shifted 
from Kenthurst to Merrylands and then thrown out of the diocese in June 1992.

Catholic church to use late Ballarat bishop's estate to help victims of abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/06/catholic-church-to-use-late-ballarat-bishops-estate-to-help-abuse-victims>
 By any measure, Farrell was a bad man. Lucas also knew the priest had 
indecently assaulted a young girl who described to Lucas in great detail what 
Farrell had done to her: touching her legs and breasts.

 “Did you refer that complaint to the police?” asked counsel assisting the 
royal commission, Gail Furness.

 “No, she was very adamant she did not want that done.”

 Lucas had a policy then of not encouraging victims to go to the police: not 
dissuading, but not encouraging. He explained to the commission that he 
preferred to take a neutral stance: “I was nervous about putting too much 
pressure on someone.”

 Farrell, cast adrift from Sydney, was keen to return to work in his old 
stamping ground, the diocese of Armidale. But a new bishop there, Kevin 
Manning, was wary.

 He called the priest in for a remarkable interview at which Farrell claimed 
to be innocent of the Narrabri charge. But according to the bishop’s notes, “he 
referred to three other incidents which could have brought him ‘14 years 
apiece’.”

 Manning did not question Farrell, nor did he report the priest to the police. 

 A couple of nights later, at Manning’s request, Lucas, Usher and Peters 
confronted this recklessly confessional man in the presbytery of St Mary’s 
Cathedral. Lucas told the royal commission: “I would have explained the nature 
of the meeting, that this was confidential as between ourselves and the bishop, 
and that he should be able to speak freely.”

 Just how freely and truthfully he spoke in that three-hour meeting is the key 
dispute in this grubby saga. No one took notes. The priest refused to go 
quietly. All he would agree to do was take leave from the church for five 
years. Lucas accepted that. Nothing at all was reported to the police.

 A few days later, Peters wrote a “short report” to Manning. Lucas and Usher 
had no idea it had been written. It’s only two and a half pages long but the 
details are dynamite. The bishop read it and he, too, failed to call the 
police. Instead, the report was left like a time bomb in the diocesan files.

 Two suicides lead to Four Corners

 Miracles happen. For 20 years Farrell remained a free man. Neither the church 
nor the police seemed curious about his depredations, not even after a few of 
his victims brought him to account.

 The young man destroyed in the witness box won a settlement from Catholic 
Church Insurance. A few years later he took his life.

 Another young man (known at the commission as CPK) began demanding money from 
Farrell. After handing over about $20,000, Farrell went to the police and the 
19-year old was charged with demanding money with menaces.

 Peters’ letter fell into the hands of CPK’s lawyer. It arrived in a bundle of 
documents subpoenaed from the Armidale archdiocese. Though it was not admitted 
into evidence, it was shown to Farrell and he was questioned about it at CPK’s 
trial in Parramatta in 2004.

 “I suggest to you that at that meeting you made certain admissions to those 
priests that you had had oral sex with young boys. What do you say about that?”

 “Yes,” replied Farrell. 

 “And that’s the reason why they won’t let you carry out your duties as a 
priest, isn’t it?”

 “That’s part of it, yes.”

 CPK told the police of Farrell fondling, fellating, masturbating and 
digitally penetrating him. He was acquitted. The police took no further action. 
CPK began civil proceedings and, in the course of reaching a settlement, the 
church finally compelled Farrell to resign from the priesthood.

It looks like you put your heads together to come up with a view that was in 
each of your own interests
Gail Furness, counsel assisting the royal commission 
 CPK hanged himself in 2007. 

 Still nothing happened to Farrell. Those suicides – both at the age of 28 – 
and the continuing immunity of the paedophile who preyed on those young men put 
the Farrell case high on the list of outrages pursued by Broken Rites, the 
support group for survivors of clerical abuse.

 It was a long haul, but in early 2012 ABC television’s Four Corners became 
interested. How, the journalists wondered, could this man have made those 
admissions to the church in 1992 and to the court in 2004 with no charges ever 
being laid? How could the police and the church be so blind to his crimes?

 Four Corners made first contact with Lucas in late May 2012. The producer 
Mary Ann Jolley emailed wanting to know what happened at the 1992 meeting. 
Lucas immediately flicked her email to Usher. He also spoke to Peters. At one 
point Lucas organised a three-way conference call to prepare what he called a 
“common recollection” of the meeting in St Mary’s Cathedral presbytery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffarrell-scandal-puts-catholic-churchs-attitude-to-australian-law-under-the-microscope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5018734325df8d6ea849db226d1f69d9ae129e9e%2F0_57_3134_1881%2F3134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farrell%20scandal%20puts%20Catholic%20church's%20attitude%20to%20Australian%20law%20under%20the%20microscope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffarrell-scandal-puts-catholic-churchs-attitude-to-australian-law-under-the-microscope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farrell%20scandal%20puts%20Catholic%20church%27s%20attitude%20to%20Australian%20law%20under%20the%20microscope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffarrell-scandal-puts-catholic-churchs-attitude-to-australian-law-under-the-microscope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5018734325df8d6ea849db226d1f69d9ae129e9e%2F0_57_3134_1881%2F3134.jpg>
 Monsignor John Usher, left, says Father John Farrell ‘made no personal 
disclosures of criminal behaviour’. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP 
 “It looks,” Furness suggested, “like you put your heads together to come up 
with a view that was in each of your own interests.”

 Lucas explained he was an expert handling the press and this was common 
operating procedure: “We were genuinely trying to be honest in the response.” 
What had to be avoided was giving Four Corners three different versions of what 
happened at the 1992 meeting.

 So what, asked Furness? Wouldn’t they be giving three honest recollections of 
a meeting now 20 years in the past? Again Lucas explained: the discrepancies 
would become the story and the result would be “confusion … total confusion”.

 The three men agreed: Farrell made no admissions. 

 Four Corners knew they were on to something for, as the journalists kept 
pressing, Lucas and Farrell tweaked the formula. Confusion was creeping in. The 
denials were no longer absolute. Lucas told the ABC the priest “was not 
specific with respect to any admissions”. Usher said Farrell “made no personal 
disclosures of criminal behaviour”.

 But they all agreed, there was nothing to tell the police. 

 Pell fronted the camera. He looked the reporter Geoff Thompson in the eye and 
said: “The file note of that meeting does not show that he made any admission 
and that is the recollection of the three priests who were actually at that. 
They were dissatisfied with his credibility. They thought he represented some 
sort of danger for the future and although he made no admissions to them they 
suggested to the bishop who followed it that he be stood down.”

 The cardinal had no file note of the meeting. He was referring to a briefing 
paper Usher had put together only days before. But from early in the research 
for the show, Four Corners was aware that a contemporaneous document did exist 
that gave an absolutely contrary account of the 1992 confrontation with Farrell.

Cardinal George Pell calls child abuse allegations a smear campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/cardinal-george-pell-calls-child-abuse-allegations-a-smear-campaign>
 The problem was to find it. Weeks after Pell was interviewed and only a few 
days before the show went to air, Four Corners tracked down a copy of Peters’ 
report among the court papers from the CPK case in Parramatta.

 The document was devastating. It recorded Farrell admitting “there had been 
five boys around the age of ten and eleven that he had sexually interfered with 
in varying degrees in the years approximately 1982 to 1984 while he was the 
assistant priest at Moree”.

 Farrell also admitted fondling a boy’s genitals “during a car trip from Moree 
to Narrabri” and assaulting another two boys far more seriously: “He admitted 
that over a period of approximately twelve months he fondled the genitals of 
each of these boys and to quote ‘sucked off their dicks’. As far as Rev. 
Farrell can remember this was done on about a monthly basis …”

‘I have to stand by my letter’

 Four Corners called the show Unholy Silence. Its impact was enormous. Along 
with a handful of scandals that broke in mid-2012, the report was key to Julia 
Gillard’s decision four months later to call the royal commission.

In Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>, police 
denounced the church for failing to hand paedophiles over for investigation. In 
the NSW Hunter Valley, a police whistleblower claimed Catholics among his 
colleagues were frustrating investigation of paedophile priests. And now in 
Sydney, it seemed that officials of the church had kept secret for 20 years 
highly detailed admissions of paedophile behaviour crimes.

The common theme was the impression that the Catholic church saw itself 
standing outside the law.

Lying to Four Corners – if indeed these were lies - is not a crime. But in NSW 
the ancient offence of misprision of felony survives in section 316 of the 
Crimes Act. The crime of concealing knowledge of a crime is punishable with up 
to two years’ imprisonment.


 Within days of Four Corners going to air, the former NSW director of public 
prosecutions Nicholas Cowderytold the Sydney Morning Herald 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/clergy-could-face-charges-over-alleged-sex-coverup-20120704-21hnj.html>
 there were grounds to proceed against Lucas, Usher and Peters under section 
316. He said: “I can’t, frankly, see any reason why it would not proceed.”

 By this time, Pell’s officials in Sydney had held urgent meetings with 
lawyers to look for a way out of this mess. File notes from these meetings have 
been in evidence before the royal commission. Lucas and Usher were not in the 
hot seat. Peters was. Why did he write the report? How did it get out? Was it 
accurate?

 “If that is what I wrote,” said Peters, “I have to stand by my letter.” 

 Peters left the room. A combative Lucas came on the line from America. 
According to the minutes he had a plan. “He would talk to Mgr Peters about the 
letter and the need for him to include that he had embellished it. He said that 
in the context of time this would be understandable. That would be the end of 
it and ‘gets him off the hook’. This is the only way ‘to clear this up and 
explain things’.”

 This troubled Danny Casey, the business manager of the archdiocese and Pell’s 
right-hand man. When he suggested this course was imprudent, Lucas slapped him 
down. The minutes record: “BL responded that he had 25 years of media 
experience (and was not inclined to take advice from DC).”

 The Sydney archdiocese put out a press release the same day to announce Lucas 
and Usher were holding their ground. Lucas was not its author, but under 
questioning at the royal commission he conceded the release made a series of 
claims that were not right – among them that:

 * Lucas and Usher “separately told” the ABC no admissions were made

 * Peters’ letter to his bishop was “not an official record” of the meeting

 * the Church’s Professional Standards Office held “notes of the meeting”.

 Lucas conceded all were wrong. The Professional Standards Office didn’t even 
exist in 1992.

 Furness finished questioning Lucas about the release by ridiculing a flourish 
of rhetoric about the continuing commitment of the archdiocese to “bringing 
sexual abuse to light”. Wasn’t the opposite result achieved by the machinations 
of the church in these weeks? Lucas replied: “I accept that.”

The explicit description of that appalling behaviour would have been seared in 
my memory
Father Brian Lucas 
 The church now pursued a familiar strategy: hiring a former judge to conduct 
a private inquiry into an embarrassing scandal. Antony Whitlam QC began work a 
fortnight after the Four Corners show to report on the church’s management of 
Farrell from his earliest days in the seminary until he finally threw in the 
towel in 2005.

 Whitlam would excoriate the failings of the church, particularly its failure 
to investigate Farrell’s crimes and to properly protect children in the various 
parishes to which this obviously dangerous priest was sent.

 But the former federal court judge came to a curious conclusion about the 
1992 meeting. He found that Farrell’s talk that night was essentially fantasy. 
The priest was not confessing to his invigilators but “speaking in some detail 
about sexual fantasies”.

 The royal commission’s inquiry into the Farrell scandal is, among other 
things, a review of Whitlam’s findings – particularly his conclusion that there 
was “no cover-up” in 1992 and “nothing sinister” in the gulf of recollection 
that separated Peters on one side from Lucas and Usher on the other.

 Furness probed this issue for days, taking Lucas and Usher in detail through 
all the accounts of the meeting they have given over the years – to the ABC, 
the church, Whitlam and, in Usher’s case, to the NSW police.

 Lucas held his ground. He still maintains no useful admissions were made by 
Farrell and that Peters’ letter is not accurate. “The explicit description of 
that appalling behaviour,” he told the commission, “would have been seared in 
my memory – those explicit words – and I did not hear them.”

 Usher gave ground. He won’t endorse Peters’ language and doesn’t accept he 
wrote a fair account of that fateful meeting, but under close questioning from 
Furness he agreed that Farrell might well have said what Peters recorded him 
saying. But that was no reason to believe him.

 “Farrell raved on about many things,” Usher said. “It is not inconceivable 
that Wayne Peters heard some of this stuff and believed that he was making 
admissions about things when, in fact, he was just raving on about many, many 
aberrations, fantasies and ‘What people say about me’.”

 Whitlam ultimately accepted that argument. Furness is sceptical. She was keen 
to trace its origins. She noted it first appeared only after Four Corners had 
gone to air. She took Usher through document after document from 1992 that 
suggested whatever had or had not been said at the fateful meeting, everyone 
took Farrell seriously.

 “Now, is it the case, Father, that you have constructed him as rambling, 
bizarre, et cetera, because that’s the only way you have sought to explain 
Father Peters’ letter?

 “No, no,” replied Usher. “He was strange and bizarre.”

Farrell sentenced – and more charges laid

Immediately after Four Corners went to air, the NSW police established Strike 
Force Glenroe with detectives from the NSW Sex Crimes Squad and the New England 
and Barwon local area command to investigate Farrell’s crimes. There would be 
those who said this move came 20 years late.

 Once the first charges were laid in October 2012, Farrell was protected by 
non-publication orders and the pseudonym Father F. They were lifted in May this 
year when he was sentenced for 62 historical sex crimes against children, with 
a further 17 offences taken into account. The sentence was 29 years.

 A few weeks ago, Strike Force Glenroe laid further charges relating to child 
sex assaults in the 1970s and 1980s. That trial is set down for April.

 Usher told the royal commission he had been interviewed by detectives from 
Strike Force Glenroe. “They told me that … the DPP had asked them to 
investigate this Farrell matter to see whether I, and others, had failed to 
report matters to the police.”

 Though Peters was placed under great pressure, he never backed away from his 
letter. He would not declare it was embellished. Furness assured the commission 
that under questioning by Whitlam, “he said he stood by the letter as being 
accurate”. In the aftermath of the scandal, Peters drank heavily and died in 
February last year.

 Whitlam is suing the ABC for, he says, accusing him on the 7.30 program in 
May this year of conducting a “sham” inquiry and being a “stooge” of the 
Catholic church. A case management conference is set down for 10 October.

 The commission seems not to have finished with the Farrell scandal. Furness 
announced that this week’s adjournment was to allow “further inquiries that 
those assisting the royal commission wish to make”.
 