
Public School NYC


Public School are Maxwell Osborne and Dao-Yi Chow. Both native New Yorkers, 
they met in 2003 when Chow, a former journalist, was marketing director of Sean 
John and Osborne was an intern. They launched their own label in 2007; since 
then their minimal, mainly monochrome streetwear with a high fashion twist has 
been a retail hit and won them several fashion industry awards, includingthe 
first International Woolmark prize for menswear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/jan/09/public-school-nyc-wins-international-woolmark-prize>
 this year. The pair are based in New York’s garment district and as well as 
runningPublic School <http://publicschoolnyc.com/>, they were recently appointed
creative directors of DKNY 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/29/is-menswear-the-new-route-to-the-top-jobs-in-fashion>
.

Maxwell Osborne
I don’t remember the first time I met Dao-Yi but it was an easy transition to 
working with him. We had the same aesthetics, the same references, almost the 
same groups of friends. He quit Sean John and opened up a clothing store in 
Miami. He was starting a line for the store and asked me to take part in it. 
Then around fashion week one year, we were talking about what brands we were 
excited to wear as consumers and we were stumped. That was the beginning of 
Public School.

We disagree, who doesn’t? But since we’re coming from the same place, it 
becomes an argument about who’s putting out the most passion. The louder voice 
wins. If you really believe in something, then cool, let’s do it. It’s like a 
relationship: if you’re open and communications are strong, it all gets worked 
out. I love it when we get hit with a big decision that really lets us put 
everything on the table – you can talk it all out and cleanse your soul.

When the company was just Dao-Yi and me, we worked on every stitch of every 
jacket. Now we have a bigger staff and more on our plate. So there might be 
things I don’t see until the sample stage, but the trust is there.

Dao-Yi’s good at setting things up and he’s an amazing creative writer, good 
at getting his point across. I learned a lot from him about how to be a 
manager, how to not sweet-talk someone but be very diplomatic. When we’re 
pushing the envelope in terms of fit, he’s great. In my head, I’m thinking, ‘Oh 
shit, will we need to make it again?’ but it always comes out really good.

Outside work, he has a wife and two children, and I’m a single man. I might go 
out and have some drinks and dinner. But if it’s a barbecue at his house, we’ll 
hang out.

He hates the way I eat sometimes, but we were in Tokyo recently in a sushi 
restaurant. It was really quiet and he was taking a sip of wine. He’s not a big 
drinker and he was going like this [slurps and sighs]. You know when you’ve 
known someone for so long and it’s like a new thing? Him drinking wine… It was 
so weird.

Dao-Yi Chow
I remember meeting him really clearly; he came to drop something off in my 
office. Max has a really good spirit and it was infectious. I remember saying 
to myself, “Ah, that kid’s got good energy… and what the hell is he wearing in 
the back of his pocket?” It was a tie.

When we first started, we did pretty much everything together – design, 
branding, we shipped our first two seasons by ourselves from a friend’s 
warehouse. Now as the business has got more complex, we’ve learned to divvy up 
our roles. Max oversees men’s, I oversee women’s, then we’ll collaborate on 
everything else, from marketing to sales strategy.

Most of our disagreements come because of the difference in age and lifestyle 
– I think that impacts us most in terms of where we are in our lives, what we 
want, and our responsibilities outside the business. Ultimately, because we’re 
seen as a unit, we affect each other’s outcome, so all those decisions you make 
together, it’s like being married. It gets heated but we both know that the 
intent is always coming from a good place. You never have to worry about a 
hidden agenda. Going into business with your friends is probably not the best 
idea. It weighs on a relationship for sure, but we figure it out. I smacked him 
once with spit in my hand – he didn’t enjoy that.

Max is good at making people feel included and welcome – something in my old 
age I probably could do more of. There’s a good yin and yang. Max is calm; I 
let my emotions get the best of me. I’m more proud than Max is. Sometimes we’ll 
make decisions based on whether we’ve been fairly treated by someone outside 
the company; Max will try to see it from their point of view or he’ll be a 
little hesitant to pull the plug just yet – he’d rather figure it out. I’m more 
impetuous.

I think Max is good at the finer details, like an idea for a pocket shape or a 
flange on an armhole, which is his favourite detail of all time. He can look at 
a little thing and make it feel like a big thing.

Casely-Hayford
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436801131894%2F31acccb9-3a5b-41b8-ad77-4266627a12f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20duos%3A%20'I%20believe%20that%20I%20have%20the%20better%20taste.%20I%20think%20she%20would%20say%20the%20same'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20duos%3A%20%27I%20believe%20that%20I%20have%20the%20better%20taste.%20I%20think%20she%20would%20say%20the%20same%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436801131894%2F31acccb9-3a5b-41b8-ad77-4266627a12f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Keeping it in the family: Charlie (on left) and Joe Casely-Hayford. 
Photograph: Richard Saker 
Joe and Charlie Casely-Hayford are the father and son behind the Casely-Hayford
 <http://casely-hayford.com/> menswear label, launched in 2009. Joe has worked 
in fashion since the 1980s, on his own label, on stagewear for musicians 
includingthe Clash <https://www.theguardian.com/music/clash> and U2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/u2>, and as creative director for Gieves & 
Hawkes <http://www.gievesandhawkes.com/>. Charlie, who joined the family 
business after finishing his studies, has also styled musicians such asNas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/03/nas-review-rapper-takes-nostalgic-tour-through-hip-hop-perfection>
 andthe xx <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-xx>.

Joe Casely-Hayford
When Charlie was growing up, I recall actively discouraging him from coming 
into fashion. It’s a notoriously hard industry and I didn’t want this for my 
children. But now he works with me, andmy daughter 
<http://www.bbyfce.com/girls/alice-casely-hayford/> is editor of a fashion 
magazine – the best way to get your kids to do something is definitely by 
telling them not to do it. Charlie did a foundation course atCentral Saint 
Martins <http://www.arts.ac.uk/csm/>, before studying history of art at the 
Courtauld Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/may/10/universityguide-courtauld-institute-art>
. While there, he showed an increasing interest in my work – I was consulting 
at Gieves & Hawkes and had started work on launching the Casely-Hayford brand. 
He would often offer his opinion. I remember the pivotal moment: he called in 
sick at the Courtauld and came out to Tokyo on a work trip with me, and we have 
not looked back since.

It’s hard to stop being Charlie’s father and become his business partner, 
though fashion is unique in that it’s accepted that young ideas can carry more 
weight than they would in other industries. Sometimes I will propose a random 
fabric that my experience and intuition tell me will work. This process has 
been known to give Charlie palpitations – until the orders start coming in.

The success of our partnership is in that, though our inspirations are 
similar, we bring different things to the table. There’s a unique level of 
understanding between us. We believe that at Casely-Hayford we have created our 
own sartorial language which reflects our very particular vision and history. 
This would not have been possible in a regular working relationship.

Charlie is very considered in his approach. I like the way he thinks about a 
long-term strategy. Timekeeping isn’t a strong point, but he is very kind and 
respectful to others. Running a family business is a 24/7 affair. My wife forms 
the third part of the triumvirate and she’s definitely the boss.

Charlie Casely-Hayford
I’ve been surrounded by fashion since I can remember. It was such a constant 
in my life that over time I think I became oblivious to it. Until I was in my 
late teens, the art world was all I wanted to do. It took an outside source to 
my family, in the shape of studying at Saint Martins, to make me see what was 
in front of me. It was then that I began to think about clothing in terms of 
identity and perception.

I moved out of my parents’ house as soon as we started working together. It’s 
important for us that there is some separation between work and home, otherwise 
it becomes unhealthy.

I don’t feel we disagree at work, really, more that we often bring in 
disparate elements, then convey to the other why they feel relevant. It’s a 
process that provides constant exchange, often through experiencing the same 
things differently. And anyway, my mum is the boss. End of. She is the rock 
behind our business.

My path into fashion was pretty old school – I apprenticed under my father in 
a very traditional way. That was the best education. My admiration for him is 
limitless. When I look through his archive, I can’t help but feel he has been 
relevant in different guises in every decade of his career. He has such 
willingness to be open to change and adapt with the times. That’s something I 
really admire, particularly in an industry built on transiency.

My dad understands me more than I know myself, and in many ways is more of a 
youthful spirit than I am in his approach to engaging with culture and 
translating that into design.

Loquet London

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436883718957%2F1d898fc4-3b44-4209-b868-28d5fc578a8b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20duos%3A%20'I%20believe%20that%20I%20have%20the%20better%20taste.%20I%20think%20she%20would%20say%20the%20same'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20duos%3A%20%27I%20believe%20that%20I%20have%20the%20better%20taste.%20I%20think%20she%20would%20say%20the%20same%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436883718957%2F1d898fc4-3b44-4209-b868-28d5fc578a8b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Friends with benefits: Sheherazade Goldsmith (on left) and Laura Bailey. Make 
up by Tania Grier using Charlotte Tilbury. Photograph: Richard Saker 
Luxury jewellery label Loquet London <https://www.loquetlondon.com/> launched 
in 2013, with a modern take on old-fashioned lockets. It is a collaboration 
between writer and environmentalist Sheherazade Goldsmith and model Laura 
Bailey. The label specialises in bespoke lockets personalised with charms and 
birthstones. From its beginnings as a London-based concept jeweller’s, it has 
rapidly expanded and its creations are now sold in countries from Japan to the 
UAE and the US.


Sheherazade Goldsmith
Our paths have been crisscrossing since we were about 18, but it wasn’t until 
our late 20s that Laura and I became really close, finding we had more and more 
in common, and starting to spend more time together.


It’s lovely to have a friend like Laura. She is so warm, so vivacious – and 
such a feminist, always on your side, standing up for what you need.

I had been writing columns for various newspapers for 10 years but was on a 
sabbatical when I came up with the idea for Loquet London. My son bought me a 
little Perspex container with dried flowers in it, at a funfair. I wore it all 
the time, because he had given it to me, and thought about how nice it would be 
if you could open and close it and personalise it. Of course, lockets have been 
around for centuries – in Victorian times they contained teeth and hair and all 
kinds of scary things – and they have stood the test of time. My idea was to 
give them a contemporary twist. I ran the idea past Laura and she loved it so 
much that we decided to partner up.


I didn’t know very much about fashion but Laura knows the industry well – she 
diversified out of modelling to have a fascinating career. We design the pieces 
together, but whereas I work on Loquet every single day of my life – from the 
wholesale distribution to the website – Laura’s role is to oversee, for 
example, styling the look books, knowing which photographers will be brilliant 
and how to make it look interesting. I trust her views and I trust her to make 
decisions, and she trusts me. Aesthetically, our tastes are very similar.


Of course, I worried about the impact that working together might have on our 
friendship, but actually, being friends offers huge advantages. We’re both very 
busy and have the same priorities in our lives; that understanding allowed us 
to build the business very quickly. The hardest thing is to remember to find 
time for a chat over a glass of wine – to consciously be together and talk 
about life, not business.

Laura Bailey
Our relationship was a slow flirtation. We had been in each other’s orbit for 
a while through mutual friends. I remember being so in awe of the fact that 
this slip of a girl could be the mother of three young children, alongside her 
writing and everything else she did. Something clicked around the time I was 
pregnant with my son and our lives came into sync. Now we are great friends and 
so are our kids.


We were at dinner one night two years ago with a mutual friend, Thandie Newton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/thandie-newton>, when Sheherazade told me 
about Loquet. Initially, I said, “Use me as a sounding board if you want to 
explore this”, without any business ambitions of my own, but gradually the idea 
of working together collected between us. Things went very fast. I was so 
impressed by her research and ambition – a few weeks later she had a business 
plan; a whole world dreamed up.


It was nerve-racking going into business with a friend, but we have always 
been very open and honest about our other commitments, which is one of the 
reasons it works. We are not over-promised to each other. I have a very 
freelance, on-the-road life, so we knew our time together would have to be 
disciplined, but I’m used to that. There are many conversations, going way into 
the night, by Skype and email.


What’s brilliant about working with a friend is that we have an emotional 
shorthand and an understanding of the way each other works. It has been 
important to know to disagree and bash things out without conflict, through 
open communication. Both our lives are very full, we don’t have time to let 
things stew. Our friendship is more important than the business; we are really 
protective of it. There are times when we have so much to catch up on in “real 
life” but there are deadlines looming and we have to leave that aside and get 
on with the work. That’s a discipline we have had to learn. But it works. It’s 
a smooth ride.

Justin O’Shea and Veronika Heilbrunner
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437066325717%2F427a349c-b37d-42e0-8c5c-0d55fba3150b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20duos%3A%20'I%20believe%20that%20I%20have%20the%20better%20taste.%20I%20think%20she%20would%20say%20the%20same'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20duos%3A%20%27I%20believe%20that%20I%20have%20the%20better%20taste.%20I%20think%20she%20would%20say%20the%20same%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Ffashion-partners-duos-public-school-loquet-hayford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437066325717%2F427a349c-b37d-42e0-8c5c-0d55fba3150b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 First couple of fashion week: Justin O’Shea and Veronika Heilbrunner. 
Photograph: Christopher Lane 
Justin O’ Shea is buying director of mytheresa 
<http://www.mytheresa.com/en-gb/> and Veronika Heilbrunner is a fashion editor, 
founder ofhey-woman <http://hey-woman.com/> and star of the latest Sportmax 
campaign <http://www.sportmax.com/en/sportmax-campaign>. They met in an Acne 
Studios <https://www.acnestudios.com/> showroom in Copenhagen in 2010 and 
became a couple three years later. Since then they have worked together at 
mytheresa and become the street style darling duo of the fashion show circuit. 
It’s an industry fame neither sought out but both embrace with cheerful 
reluctance. Though they no longer work together, they remain the first couple 
of fashion week.

Justin O’ Shea 
I remember looking around the corner and I saw a tall, beautiful German girl 
standing there wearing a black leather jacket, white T-shirt, high-waisted 
Levi’s denim shorts and a pair of Acne pistol boots. I was hungover, so I had 
the confidence to go over to her. I was like, “Do you want to go to the pub?” 
and she agreed and we sat drinking beer until 9pm. She had a boyfriend so we 
didn’t get together immediately.


I believe that I have the better taste. I think it will sound super cocky but 
I think she would say the same. When we first met she wanted to wear the most 
colourful, craziest stuff, but I’m not into looking like a circus. I was like, 
“You are six foot one and a half, you are beautiful, you don’t need anything 
else except for just you. You’re enough.” Maybe it was all the compliments I 
gave her when she dressed more simply that have had an effect.


There hasn’t been a lot for her to influence – not because I don’t listen to 
her, but because I don’t change much. She was with me when I shaved off my 
beard. I basically didn’t exist before the beard – I was driving trucks back 
home in Australia before I worked in fashion. I didn’t want to get rid of it on 
principle because everyone else was growing one and I didn’t want to I look 
like I’d been trying to be trendy. When I shaved it off, I couldn’t look in the 
mirror and I went over to Veronika and she was really happy. She likes that she 
can see my expressions. She was like, “I always just felt you were really 
unhappy! “


At first with the street style pictures, I didn’t like having my girlfriend 
and private life in public, but the photographers are so nice, they made it 
fun. My favourite picture of us is outside a Valentino show and we are dancing, 
being stupid, Veronika is really smiling and very happy. I find a lot of street 
style very wanky when it’s all posey-posey. People might think we are a posey 
couple but it’s just not really like that. It’s more real. I don’t want to be 
serious fashion people, that wasn’t ever the point – it’s just that you have to 
get from A to B and all the photographers are in the way, so...

Veronika Heilbrunner
The day we met we spent the whole day in a pub which was very funny. It’s not 
what I usually do. He wasn’t in his suit phase yet, so he was wearing black 
jeans and a black T-shirt with a shaved head and a two-week beard. He didn’t 
look how you would imagine a fashion buyer would dress. He looked pretty 
badass. That’s his thing – he is very charming, with good manners, but he 
didn’t look like that and I found him super interesting.


In the beginning it was easier for me with the street style photographers. I 
would smile and find it funny. He was stiff and looked unhappy, but he learned 
quickly; now he finds it funny, too.


I haven’t changed my overall look since I met Justin but thanks to him my look 
is more refined. You can end up wanting it all when you work in fashion but he 
helped me work out that simpler is better for me. Ages ago I was wearing a 
beautiful white Valentino dress to the shows. I was on the Metro and I was 
wearing sneakers for speed with high-heeled pumps in my bag. I wanted to change 
before the show and Justin told me it looked cooler with trainers. I was like, 
“Really? It’s Valentino.” He was like, “No, no, trust me, it looks cooler.” 
From then on I always wore them. I really trust him.


I don’t think I influence the way he dresses. I really liked him with a beard, 
but I was curious to see him without because I couldn’t really remember how he 
looked before. I prefer him without it now. I personally like him in jeans and 
a T-shirt – he looks younger and more casual. He sometimes asks me which of 
those eight ties he should wear and then wears another one. When I didn’t know 
him so well, I bought him a vintage Hermès tie but it was a boy’s tie, not a 
man’s. It was pretty embarrassing. I know the difference now.

Justin is very decisive and quick with everything, I spend time thinking and 
often change my mind, but he is done in a second. When we worked together he 
was very direct and straightforward, and that worked really well. That’s also 
how it is in private life with Justin.
 