
Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> police are 
investigating an alleged death threat made to a former Don Dale detainee and 
his father.

Kenny Rogan, 14, is expecting to give evidence to the royal commission into 
the protection and detention of children in the NT but has been left shaken 
after an anonymous call to his father on Wednesday.

Colin Rogan told Guardian Australia he had received a call from a restricted 
number and the caller asked if he was Kenny’s father.

“I said yeah. They said, ‘Well tell that cunt dog son of yours he’s gonna cop 
it. We’re gonna kill him,’” Rogan said.

Royal commission tours Don Dale: 'This is where that young fella was held'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/royal-commission-tours-don-dale-this-is-where-that-young-fella-was-held>
“I said, ‘Listen mate if you’re going to talk like that come round and talk to 
my face.’ He said, ‘Yeah, fat cunt, I’ll come round and kill you as well while 
you’re asleep, but I’ll get that cunt dog son of yours first.”

Rogan said the caller was articulate and authoritative, and didn’t sound as 
though he was under the influence of drugs or alcohol.

He called the police, who he said told him it would be easy to track the 
caller. NT police have confirmed to Guardian Australia that an investigation is 
ongoing, and it is thought to be the only such threat made recently.

In the meantime, Rogan has told Kenny not to go outside after dark. “I told 
him, ‘Mate, you gotta not go down to the shops after sundown.’ He’s a little 
bit worried about it.

“We just didn’t need it. I can handle this from anybody, I’m an adult … But 
children, that’s hitting far below the belt.”

Rogan said it had been difficult for his family and son amid the increased 
public attention after the nationwide outrage sparked by the ABC’s Four Corners 
broadcast, which featured Kenny as well as other detainees.

“People around Darwin <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/darwin> and 
round Australia throwing their opinions on Facebook. My son just told me not 
long ago there was a post where somebody said, ‘It’s not so good now the shoe’s 
on the other foot.’

“Why would they say something like that? Are they insinuating I’m a criminal 
as well? Or Kenny is a bad criminal? He’s never killed hurt anybody. He’s a 
petty criminal. And these people think it’s OK to threaten people with their 
lives. It’s not OK.”

Kenny still intended to give evidence to the royal commission, Rogan said.

The teenager has been out of juvenile detention for a little over six months. 
He first came into contact with the justice system when he was 10 years old. 
Kenny told the ABC he had been stripped of his clothes with a knife while in 
detention, and was held inthe controversial behavioural management units 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/royal-commission-tours-don-dale-this-is-where-that-young-fella-was-held>
.

The juvenile detention crisis has divided the NT community as the government 
struggles to find a balance between responding to immediate concerns about the 
treatment of young people and the high rates of property crime.

Social media have been awash with complaints about a perceived lack of 
criminal sanctions against youth offenders and lack of support for victims of 
crime.

On Tuesday the law firm Maurice Blackburn announced a class-action lawsuit on 
behalf of former juvenile detainees. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/juvenile-detainees-launch-class-action-against-northern-territory>

Juvenile detainees launch class action against Northern Territory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/juvenile-detainees-launch-class-action-against-northern-territory>
The social justice class action will allege that the then children were 
subject to abuse, battery, and/or false imprisonment while being held in NT 
correctional facilities, as recently as July last year. In the statement of 
claim filed to the federal court was a fresh allegation of improper use of 
teargas against a teenager.

One lead applicant alleged he had been assaulted and handcuffed to a fence, 
then thrown in a cell where a female officer told him to masturbate to keep 
warm.

Maurice Blackburn expects hundreds of detainees may be eligible to join the 
class action to seek compensation for mistreatment and abuse, including 
beating, stripping, denial of water and prolonged isolation.

The royal commission has been extended until August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/northern-territory-juvenile-detention-royal-commission-given-four-month-extension>
 this year, with public hearings restarting in March.
 