
After a week of listening to Donald Trump supporters defend his longstanding 
biting remarks about the supposed weight gain and personal history of a former 
Miss Universe, Alicia Machado, who nowsupports the candidacy of Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/alicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton>
, one might be forgiven for thinking that Republicans are tone-deaf about the 
experience of most women in America in 2016.

The National Republican Campaign Committee, though, is perfectly well aware 
that most women have a strongly negative response to body shaming. That’s 
probably why, in a close race for a congressional seat in Maine, it started 
runningan ad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i8huR_LQwq4> last week accusing 
the Democratic candidate of pushing legislation designed to body-shame teenage 
girls.

The problems: the Democratic candidate is a woman, Emily Cain; and the ad is 
misleading.

Alicia Machado told the truth about Trump, and the backlash is terrifying | 
Lucia Graves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/alicia-machado-donald-trump-backlash-smear>
Cain is infuriated by the NRCC ad and, in response, released one of her own 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JDvkuwylebA> on Tuesday directly addressing 
her own weight issues. “Like a lot of women, I’ve struggled with my weight,” 
she says in the ad. “It’s hard. It’s very personal.”

“The issue of women and girls, and body issues and self-esteem, is a core 
issue of mine,” she told the Guardian.

The original ad drawing Cain’s ire claims that she supported a bipartisan bill 
to start to address childhood obesity – about 30% of Maine’s children were 
considered overweight or obesein 2010 
<http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/stateprograms/fundedstates/pdf/Maine-State-Profile.pdf>
 – that would have required schools to regularly weigh children and report 
aggregate data to the state. In the ad, the legislation is derided by women, 
posing with school-age children, as “a violation of our kids’ privacy” and 
deemed an effort to weigh “our teenage girls”. The bill failed to pass in that 
session, and schools were asked to submit the data to the state on a voluntary 
basis, since many of them collect it anyway. Similar legislation passed the 
following year.

Cain called the attack ad “way over the line”, adding: “This is really 
exploiting the vulnerabilities of teenage girls and their families.”

And though she was expecting conservatives in the state to attack her about 
the legislation – they did in her first race for the seat, in 2014 – she was 
surprised that Republicans went the body-shaming route instead of sticking to 
privacy. “I don’t know why politicians want to keep talking about women’s 
weight,” she said. But she added: “I’m not going to run away and hide from this 
attack.”

Still, forcing a woman to defend her legislative efforts to identify and 
eventually reduce childhood obesity by accusing her of trying to invade the 
privacy of teenage girls is an interesting tactic for a party whose 
standard-bearer hasrepeatedly dismissed women 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2015/08/10/donald-trump-women-insults-megyn-kelly/31407363/>
 who disagreed with him as unattractive or overweight.

Trump’s statements are reportedly having an effect, though perhaps not with 
conservative-leaning women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/donald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism?CMP=edit_2221>
 who already support him.

At a Clinton rally on Tuesday, a 15-year-old girl told the nominee: “I see 
with my own eyes the damage Donald Trump does when he talks about women and how 
they look.” She asked how to “undo some of that damage”.

Clinton’s advice: “We need to laugh at it, we need to refute it, we need to 
ignore it.”
 