
I’ve been dreaming of death. Seeing pictures of death. Seeing pictures of 
bloody sheets hanging on clotheslines.

Just days before Michael Brown and his brown body encountered a white police 
officer and a gun in Ferguson, Missouri, the 18-year-old child said that to his 
stepmother.She told the world of this foreshadowing 
<http://jezebel.com/mike-brown-dreamed-of-his-own-death-before-he-was-kille-1626559498>
 during Brown’s funeral two months ago, as anger turned to tears, and this 
small community ignited a wave of protests and activism that would continue for 
more than 100 days – and will begin anew, starting right now.

In the months since, all of the leaks and all of the tweets warning that there 
would be no indictment for Darren Wilson – that instead there would be black
“violence” 
<http://www.dailydot.com/politics/ferguson-protest-grand-jury-kkk-anonymous-media-militia-nixon/>
 and a perpetual“state of emergency” 
<https://twitter.com/JamilSmith/status/534713685881524225> – have served as 
constructed preparations to manage our disappointment, for the big reveal that 
our criminal justice system was still as broken as it ever was. And now thatthe 
grand jury’s decision has arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2014/nov/24/ferguson-grand-jury-police-officer-darron-wilson-michael-brown>
 in the form of a smirking white prosecutor, all of the agony of that wait has 
culminated in nothing more than the sum of our grim expectations, to ignite 
cynicism and an old rage.

Today, Mike Brown is still dead, and Darren Wilson has not been indicted for 
his murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/24/ferguson-police-darren-wilson-michael-brown-no-charges>
. And who among us can say anything but: “I am not surprised”?

I remember sitting on a grand jury once. The state and county attorneys 
present their singular narrative, their small bits of evidence, to construct a 
case that says that the offender is guilty – or not. And when you sit on the 
grand jury, you’re not given much in terms of a complete accounting of events 
that could lead to any of the possible charges.

The 12 citizens on the Ferguson jury may have heard more “than any other grand 
jury has heard about any other case in living memory” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/15/us/ferguson-shooting-michael-brown-grand-jury.html>
, but the state owns the space, and the state does not own us. Wilson may have 
testified – he may have said he“feared for my life” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/18/us/ferguson-case-officer-is-said-to-cite-struggle.html>
 – but the state has refused to listen to the testimony of a young black man 
with his hands in the air. The story cannot end here.

A non-indictment is no absolution of guilt, but are you not angry? Are you not 
sick of being unsurprised?

Ferguson is indeed a microcosm – of the all the narratives about race and 
America that we fear and suppress. Still: it is not enough to say that, yes, of
course the promise of justice – the promise of America, of democracy – has 
failed its black citizens, again. It doesn’t make the disappointment any less 
disappointing, nor the rage any less real. But it doesn’t make the moment any 
less mighty either.

We can choose to say something else. We are choosing to protest. 

There are guidelines – for them 
<http://www.stltoday.com/news/local/govt-and-politics/with-ferguson-decision-looming-holder-issues-new-police-guidance/article_535b777a-19e9-504d-811f-d97517d8ab1f.html>
 andfor us <https://twitter.com/deray/status/535939567329632256>, for cops and 
for protesters – but there is no textbook when history unfolds in real time, 
and there are no rules for coping with a moment as mighty as this. There will 
be changes, and there is still a federal civil-rights investigation. Right now, 
though, there are only tears of rage, frustration and anger – or all three at 
once.
 Mamie Till, summer 1955. Michael Brown Sr, summer 2014. How do you console 
the inconsolable? Photograph: Chicago Sun-Times via AP (left); Richard Perry / 
AFP / Getty (right) 
To be a Negro in this country and to be relatively conscious is to be in a 
rage almost all the time.

Fifty-three years ago, James Baldwin aptly observed that devastating truth. 
Fifty-three years later, the sustained rage restarts every 28 hours, because
every 28 hours an African American is killed 
<https://mxgm.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/Operation-Ghetto-Storm.pdf> by law 
enforcement, or a security guard, or a “vigilante” claiming self-defence – or 
all three at once.

The students I teach at a community college in Manhattan – freshmen, like Mike 
Brown would have been right now, returning home to his family for Thanksgiving 
break – are relatively conscious of this regularity, of this apparent normality.

The young people know about John Crawford III, a 22-year-old black man who 
died after an Ohio police officer shot him for carrying an unloaded BB rifle in 
the pet-food aisle of Walmart, whose mothermisses her son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/30/police-officer-shot-john-crawford-walmart-lied-victims-mother-says>
 and doesn’t understand why an Ohio grand jurydid not indict 
<http://www.theroot.com/articles/culture/2014/09/grand_jury_no_indictment_for_cops_in_john_crawford_iii_walmart_shooting.html>
 the cops responsible for this death.

The young people know about Eric Garner, the 43-year-old black father of six 
who died after a New York police officer put him in an illegal chokehold, whose 
family awaits in tears of rageas a grand jury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/19/grand-jury-eric-garner-chokehold-nypd>
 still has not indicted any of the cops responsible for that death.

They know about Darrien Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/16/darrien-hunt-shot-in-the-back-by-utah-police-says-family-attorney>
 andVonderrit Myers Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/09/st-louis-police-officer-shoots-dead-black-teenager-off-duty>
, another unarmed teenager shot dead by a white law-enforcement officer with a 
gun. After this weekend, they know about 12-year-oldTamir Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/24/tamir-rice-teaching-our-sons-fear-cops-who-shoot-children>
 and 28-year-oldAkai Gurley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/21/new-york-unarmed-man-shot-dead-totally-innocent>
. They know about Amadou Diallo and Sean Bell; I am teaching them about Edmund 
Perry and the Edmund Pettus Bridge. But do they know about Ezell Ford in Los 
Angeles or Marlon Horton in Chicago andall the black and brown bodies gunned 
down by cops every day 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/09/police-killings-since-michael-brown_n_5788412.html>
 since that August afternoon when Darren Wilson killed Michael Brown after 
those 90 seconds on Canfield Drive? Does a grand jury of our supposed peers – 
an extreme version of the kind I sat on – mean to say that if the cops are 
never wrong, they never shall experience any penalty or consequences for their 
errors, especially when they prove fatal? Or do we just expect this and that 
death, do we just embrace this failure of humanity?

The African American body is still the bellwether of the health, the promise 
and the problems of the American democratic experiment. The message that the 
Missouri grand jury has now sent to young African Americans – from Ferguson to 
my classroom andthe rest of the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/21/ferguson-missouri-nation-what-now>
 – is that black lives do not matter, that your rights and your personhood are 
secondary to an uneasy and negative peace, that the police have more power over 
your body than you do yourself.

Culpability doesn’t mean much behind a wall of blue, but today, we channel 
that rage to urge for transformative reforms in law and spirit. Why should we 
accept these terms that occlude black and brown citizens in the 21st century, 
in the year 2014? Why should we put faith in our justice system, as it stands, 
when the laws appear to be so unequally applied? What the fuck is policing that 
insists on using deadly force for the most minor of offenses? How the hell can 
such deadly force be excused by the system? What kind of world is this where 
the cops have more rights than you do?
 Darren Wilson still would have fired 12 times if Mike Brown had been wearing 
a tie on Canfield Drive. Illustration byMichael McBride 
<https://twitter.com/IsMiseMick> via Black Lives Matter 
<http://blacklivesmatter.tumblr.com/> / Tumblr 
<http://fergusonresponse.tumblr.com/> 
I do not want my son’s death to be in vain. I want it to lead to incredible 
change, positive change... We live here together, this is our home. We’re 
stronger united.

Mike Brown’s father said that, in a video released on Friday 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/11/20/michael-browns-call-for-calm_n_6195526.html>
 with a message “to heal and to create lasting change”.President Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/22/ferguson-brace-for-unrest-world-waits-grand-jury>
 andattorney general Eric Holder 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/holder-frustrated-with-mo-governor-over-actions-before-ferguson-grand-jury-decision/2014/11/21/d61b43cc-717e-11e4-ad12-3734c461eab6_story.html>
 and all the rest offered healing words, too, mostly so that we would protest 
in peace, which we will – no matter how many of the battle tanks roll back in, 
no matter how many rubber bullets get fired, no matter teargas canisters are 
launched into the streets.

Meanwhile, the (white) leaders attempt to offer a smattering of words to mimic 
something akin to reform. The“insulated, isolated” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/23/us/politics/missouri-governor-jay-nixon-trying-to-keep-balance-on-ferguson-finds-its-easy-to-slip.html>
 Missouri governor, Jay Nixon, announced in advance of the decisiona commission 
to investigate why things fell apart so rapidly 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/jay-nixon-ferguson-commission>, that “they are on 
edge” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2014/nov/25/ferguson-verdict-jay-nixon-video>
. Thepreachy 
<http://www.11alive.com/story/news/nation-now/2014/11/21/st-louis-mayor-slay-full-text-speech/19356441/>
 St Louis mayor, Francis Slay, announced plans toexpand a jobs initiative 
<http://fox2now.com/2014/10/21/ferguson-1000-initiative-working-to-bring-jobs-to-the-area/>
, that “we will protect your right to peacefully assemble 
<https://twitter.com/BuzzFeedNews/status/537028409147547648>”. There will be 
all sorts of commissions and initiatives, just as there were after Los Angeles 
in 1992 and Cincinnati in 2001, just as President Johnson announced in 1968 and 
President Clinton did in ’97.

But in 2014, can any new commission or initiative or reform really provide 
very obvious and knowable answers that any other commission or initiative or 
reform couldn’t?

To offer a committee and yet another jobs program to “save” black parents from 
burying another black child is not a preventive measure when another white 
police officer will shoot and kill another big brown body on another empty 
street on another sunny afternoon any minute now. It’s important to invest in 
the economic wellbeing of communities, and certainly communities of color. And 
perhaps we do need a national civilian review board that tracks, monitors and 
investigates police shootings and excessive force cases. We should be doing all 
that anyway. Public policy changes and institutional reforms must and will 
happen after Ferguson, and many of the ideas for them will begin in these here 
pages.

But when the hands are up and the cop still shoots, reform is merely a 
Band-aid on a malignancy. When there is still no recognition of black humanity 
– when law enforcement is still so constantly projecting white fears of black 
criminality – then the answer is not just a happy political narratives. Because 
Darren Wilson still would have fired 12 times if Mike Brown had been wearing a 
tie on Canfield Drive.

The governor and other officials may have sent the message that to protest is 
to be violent, to channel anger in non-violent protest is to be tantamount to 
criminal action. But they, too, are wrong.Protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/protest> is exactly what we need.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2Fferguson-no-indictment-darren-wilson-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416857559467%2F1ce320a6-c7c8-43c8-b17a-f02384f68ac9-2060x825.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ferguson%2C%20goddamn%3A%20No%20indictment%20for%20Darren%20Wilson%20is%20no%20surprise.%20This%20is%20why%20we%20protest%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2Fferguson-no-indictment-darren-wilson-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ferguson%2C%20goddamn%3A%20No%20indictment%20for%20Darren%20Wilson%20is%20no%20surprise.%20This%20is%20why%20we%20protest%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2Fferguson-no-indictment-darren-wilson-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416857559467%2F1ce320a6-c7c8-43c8-b17a-f02384f68ac9-2060x825.jpeg>
 The black youth activism since that August day has been nothing short of 
remarkable. Illustration byChloe Cushman <http://www.chloecushman.com/> for 
Guardian US Opinion 
They had for more than a century before been regarded as beings of an inferior 
order and altogether unfit to associate with the white race, either in social 
or political relations; and so far inferior that they had no rights which the 
white man was bound to respect

That decision, 157 years ago by Chief Justice Robert B Taney, ruled that Dred 
Scott must return to slavery. It sparked rage and frustration and anger, but it 
was the fuel for an antislavery movement, for a civil war and three amendments 
to our Constitution and an overhaul of our systems to align our ideals to 
affirm that, yes, black lives do matter. And yet the hydra of white supremacy 
persistently sought measures to subvert citizenship.

The definitive moment for Missouri’s social contract with African American 
citizens manifested itself inbloody, violent race riots initiated by whites in 
1917 <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/garvey/peopleevents/e_estlouis.html>. 
Missouri’s defining moment now is what we make of unfit justice, even if it 
manifests itself in protests beyond what we saw this summer.

At some point, we can talk about answers to our questions. But right now, 
there is only and will be a righteous anger in the streets of Ferguson, and 
throughout St Louis county, and inso many places 
<http://fergusonresponse.tumblr.com/> across the nation and the globe. 
Sustained rage is the fuel – it is the best tool we have to insist for 
equitably applied justice, to compel police departments to respect the social 
contract it has with its citizens.

The black youth activism since that August day has been nothing short of 
remarkable. Since October, organizers have staged protests and creative acts of 
civil disobedience to compel the communities of St Louis County to confront the 
future of police-community relationships. It has been enough to remind anybody 
who is even slightly aware of their surroundings – of the pattern of police 
abuses, excessive force and systemic racism – that there is not a single 
community in America where people of color are not at a powerful, pernicious 
tension with their police department. That we have let another white cop who 
shot a black kid get off the hook.

And so we protest. Because it is our only recourse. We do not explode in 
violence, but we do not accept these terms that anticipate and perpetuate 
failure. We channel a sustained, clear-eyed rage, and we insist that our 
policies and our enactment of those policies ensure equal protection for the 
most vulnerable among us and accountability for officers in uniform when they 
kill unarmed youth with impunity.

We protest so that some day, some years from now, justice is not a surprise, 
nor a dream, nor deferred. So that justice just is.

 * Share your Ferguson solutions: No justice, no peace, what now? Join the 
conversation with#FergusonNext 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FergusonNext?f=realtime> and at FergusonNext.com 
<http://www.fergusonnext.com/> 
• This article was amended on 17 December 2014 to credit the illustrator 
Michael McBride <https://twitter.com/IsMiseMick>.
 