
The last time I saw Fernandinho it was at Estádio Mineirão in Belo Horizonte, 
on 8 July. It’s a date and a location that will forever be seared on to the 
memories of the 11 Brazil players who had just walked off the pitch. They had 
not only failed to reach the final of the 2014 World Cup – the tournament they 
were hosting for the first time in 64 years – but had endured a7-1 drubbing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 at the hands of the Germans, Brazil’s worst ever defeat at the World Cup. The 
midfielder gamely tried to answer questions from the scrum of journalists but, 
like the rest of his team-mates, he seemed shell-shocked.

“It was probably the lowest point of every single one of the Brazilian players 
involved and I don’t think I exaggerate when I say we will probably have to 
answer questions about that game for the rest of our lives. We will need to 
learn to live with that,” explains Fernandinho, while sipping a cup of 
Brazilian coffee at his house on the outskirts of Manchester, where he has 
lived since signing for Manchester City in 2013.

Footage of that game shows the German players swarming over the Brazilians. 
They led 5-0 at half-time and four of those goals were scored in a six-minute 
spell that is still painful to watch. It felt harder for Fernandinho, who was 
unceremoniously dispossessed by Germany’s Toni Kroos in the build-up to goal 
number four.

What happened?

“I don’t think there is one simple answer for that result. It was freakish, 
like everything the Germans did simply worked out. You look at the third goal, 
for example – Kroos hit a first-time volley that even a guy with his quality 
might send to the stands more times than actually hit the target. But we have 
to admit that we simply froze during those six minutes. And that killed the 
game for us. I am sure we could pinpoint other factors, but I have never 
watched a replay of that game and I don’t think I ever will.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuQ9bgQCRmWw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuQ9bgQCRmWw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuQ9bgQCRmWw&media=>
In the public post-mortem that followed the defeat, fans and media were quick 
to question the emotional equilibrium of the players. The debate had been 
opened by scenes of captain Thiago Silva sobbing before the penalty shoot-out 
against Chile on 28 June. Of the 23 players Brazil took to the 2014 World Cup, 
only six had taken part in previous tournaments or qualifying games (as hosts, 
Brazil were spared the fight for a place). Not only were the team 
inexperienced, but there was immense pressure to exorcise what Brazilians used 
to call “the ghost of 1950” – whenthe team were beaten by Uruguay in the final 
of the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/feb/18/world-cup-25-stunning-moments-no2-uruguay-brazil-1950-scott-murray>
.

Manager Luiz Felipe Scolari also came under fire, as did the Brazilian 
Football Confederation for the autocratic way in which it runs the game, but 
Fernandinho insists: “The buck stopped with the players and on that night we 
didn’t have the mental strength to recover from the shock of conceding an early 
goal. If anything, I just think we were not prepared to lose.”

This lack of readiness also involved the loss of their star player, Neymar, 
whoseWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> 
finished four days before the Germany game, when the Barcelona striker was 
kneed in the back by Colombia’s Juan Zúñiga and suffered a fractured vertebra.

Mercifully, individual players were not singled out for condemnation. On 
holiday in the north-eastern town of Maracaipe, shortly after the match, 
Fernandinho says he was approached by fans wanting selfies rather than 
remonstrations. “Supporters would come and try to say a few comforting words. 
Some guys said they were proud that we reached so far in the tournament and it 
was actually the first time since 2002 thatBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> managed to go past the 
quarter-finals. I don’t have a bad word to say about the fans because they 
seemed to understand that none of the players were indifferent to what happened 
in that game.”

In September, a squad containing Fernandinho, Neymar and eight other players 
from the losing World Cup team reconvened in Miami for afriendly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2014/sep/05/brazil-vs-colombia-live> 
against more or less the same Colombian team they had faced eight weeks before. 
Not a word about the “Sete a Um” – the way Brazilians refer to the Germany game 
– was spoken.

“There was no sense in reliving bad emotions,” says Fernandinho. “We all want 
to move on and, contrary to what some people might think, the feeling of 
wearing the Brazil shirt will always be special. No matter what happened in the 
World Cup, we all wanted to be back playing for our country”.

That feeling of honour trumps any regrets. “Would I have preferred not to play 
in a home World Cup for Brazil, a privilege that most people in this world can 
only dream of? Not a chance. It was heartbreaking to lose the way we did, but I 
will never regret it. Besides, it was such a beautiful tournament we hosted. 
And Argentina didn’t win in the end.”
 