
Cuba has declared nine days of national mourning to mark the death of Fidel 
Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro>, whose demise at the 
age of 90 has prompted emotional scenes in Havana and Miami, tributes and 
reflections from world leaders, and ushered the island into an uncertain era.

Fidel Castro: world reacts to death of Cuban leader – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-cuban-leader-live-updates>
The US president, Barack Obama – who two years ago brokered a deal to restore 
diplomatic ties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/17/us-cuba-talks-diplomatic-ties> 
between Washington and Havana for the first time since they were severed in 
1961 – offered his condolences and said the thoughts and prayers of the US were 
with the Cuban people.

“We know that this moment fills Cubans – in Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> and in the United States – with 
powerful emotions, recalling the countless ways in which Fidel Castro altered 
the course of individual lives, families, and of the Cuban nation,” he said. 
“History will record and judge the enormous impact of this singular figure on 
the people and world around him.”


He urged Cubans to remember that they had “a friend and partner in the United 
States of America”.

The US president-elect, Donald Trump, referred to Castro as a “brutal 
dictator” who had oppressed his people for nearly six decades.

“Fidel Castro’s legacy is one of firing squads, theft, unimaginable suffering, 
poverty and the denial of fundamental human rights,” he said. “While Cuba 
remains a totalitarian island, it is my hope that today marks a move away from 
the horrors endured for too long, and toward a future in which the wonderful 
Cuban people finally live in the freedom they so richly deserve.”

The contrasting language from Obama and his successor suggests Trump may take 
a less conciliatory line on the US’s recently renewed relationship with its 
smaller neighbour, a relationship already seen as one of the main legacies of 
Obama’s presidency.

Castro, one of the world’s best-known and most controversial leaders, survived 
countless US assassination attempts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/aug/03/cuba.duncancampbell2> and 
premature obituaries, but in the end proved mortal and died late on Friday 
night after a long battle with illness.

Given the former president’s age and health problems, the announcement of his 
death had long been expected. But when it came it was still a shock: the
comandante – a figurehead for armed struggle across the developing world – was 
no more. It was news that friends and foes had long dreaded and yearned for 
respectively.

Castro’s younger brother, Raúl, who assumed the presidency of Cuba in 2006 
after Fidel suffered a near-fatal intestinal ailment, announced the 
revolutionary leader’s death on television on Friday night. “With profound 
sadness I am appearing to inform our people and our friends across [Latin] 
America and the world that today, 25 November 2016, at 10.29pm, Fidel Castro, 
the commander-in-chief of the Cuban revolution, died,” he said. “In accordance 
with his wishes, his remains will be cremated.”

Raúl Castro concluded his address with the famous revolutionary slogan: “Ever 
onwards to victory!”

On Saturday, the Cuban government announced Castro’s ashes would be interred 
at the Santa Ifigenia cemetery in Santiago deCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> on 4 December. The cemetery is the 
resting place of 19th-century Cuban independence hero José Martí and numerous 
other leading figures in the country’s torrid history.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castros-brother-announces-death-on-cuban-state-television-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20brother%20announces%20death%20on%20Cuban%20state%20television%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castros-brother-announces-death-on-cuban-state-television-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20brother%20announces%20death%20on%20Cuban%20state%20television%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castros-brother-announces-death-on-cuban-state-television-video&media=>
Fidel Castro’s brother announces death on Cuban state television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/fidel-castros-brother-announces-death-on-cuban-state-television-video>
His death saw a raft of tributes from world leaders. 

In a telegram to Raúl Castro cited by the Kremlin, the Russian president, 
Vladimir Putin, said: “The name of this distinguished statesman is rightly 
considered the symbol of an era in modern world history … Fidel Castro was a 
sincere and reliable friend of Russia.”

The French president, François Hollande, mourned his loss but noted concerns 
over human rights under the Castro regime. “Fidel Castro was a towering figure 
of the 20th century. He incarnated the Cuban revolution, in both its hopes and 
subsequent disillusionments,” he said.

“France, which condemned human rights abuses in Cuba, had equally challenged 
the US embargo onCuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>, and France was 
glad to see the two countries re-establish dialogue and open ties between 
themselves,” the Socialist party leader added in a statement.

Meanwhile, Jacob Zuma, the president of South Africa, thanked Castro for his 
help and support in the fight to overthrow apartheid. “President Castro 
identified with our struggle against apartheid. He inspired the Cuban people to 
join us in our own struggle against apartheid,” Zuma said in a statement.

Pope Francis also sent Raúl Castro his condolences in a telegram. “I express 
my sentiments of sorrow to your excellency and other family members of the 
deceased dignitary, as well as to the people of this beloved nation,” the 
telegram read. “At the same time, I offer prayers to the Lord for his rest and 
I trust the whole Cuban people to the maternal intercession of our Lady of the 
Charity of El Cobre, patroness of this country,” he says.

Castro survived long enough to see Raúl negotiate the opening with Obama. 
After outlasting nine occupants of the White House, he cautiously blessedthe 
historic deal with his lifelong enemy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/barack-obama-cuba-visit-us-politics-shift-public-opinion-diplomacy>
 in a letter published after a month-long silence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420803198041%2Fb9eb2c4d-c2bc-4a4e-b007-af3d5db222d7-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fidel%20Castro%2C%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20revolutionary%20leader%2C%20dies%20aged%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fidel%20Castro%2C%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20revolutionary%20leader%2C%20dies%20aged%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420803198041%2Fb9eb2c4d-c2bc-4a4e-b007-af3d5db222d7-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Fidel Castro in a rare public appearance in April 2014. Photograph: Alex 
Castro/AP 
Although the news had long been anticipated in Cuba, the mood in the capital 
was one of shock, with Havana residents expressing their sense of loss. “I’m 
speechless. Many Cubans are dismayed,” said Mercedes Copa, 59. “Fidel’s death 
opens a period of uncertainty. Perhaps today is the start of a new stage in 
Cuban history,” said Irma Guzman.

The thaw in relations was crowned when Obama visited the island earlier this 
year. Castro did not meet Obama and days later wrote a scathing column 
condemning the US president’s “honey-coated” words and reminding Cubans of the 
many US attempts to overthrow and weaken the communist government.


As in life, in death Castro was deeply divisive. The announcement of his death 
was widely greeted online with celebration and condemnation of a “cruel 
dictator” and his repressive regime.


Others mourned the passing of “a fighter of US imperialism” and a “charismatic 
icon”.


In Miami, home to the largest diaspora of expatriate Cubans, people took to 
the streets celebrating his death, singing, dancing, and waving Cuban flags. As 
pots and pans were banged in jubilation, there were chants of “Cuba libre!” 
(Cuba is free) and “el viejo murió” (the old man is dead). Previous false 
reports of Castro’s death have triggered cavalcades of cheering, flag-waving 
revellers.

Cuba’s Communist party and state apparatus has prepared for this moment since 
July 2006 whenCastro underwent emergency intestinal surgery 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2006/aug/14/cuba.topstories3> and ceded power 
to Raúl <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2006/aug/01/cuba.duncancampbell1>, who 
remains in charge.

Castro wrote occasional columns for the party paper, Granma, and made very 
occasional public appearances –most recently at the 2016 Communist party 
congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/fidel-castro-farewell-speech-cuba-communist-congress>
 – but otherwise kept a very low profile.

Despite the mixed reactions to his death, one thing all could agree on was 
that this extraordinary figure had left his mark on history.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420806006527%2F012581ee-42d7-4fa5-91f9-9a444cb6844e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fidel%20Castro%2C%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20revolutionary%20leader%2C%20dies%20aged%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fidel%20Castro%2C%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20revolutionary%20leader%2C%20dies%20aged%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420806006527%2F012581ee-42d7-4fa5-91f9-9a444cb6844e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fidel Castro speaks from a makeshift balcony draped with Cuban flags in Santa 
Clara en route to entry into Havana. Photograph: Lee Lockwood/The Life Images 
Collection/Getty 
More than half a century ago, his guerrilla army of “bearded ones” replaced 
Fulgencio Batista’s corrupt dictatorship with communist rule which challenged 
the US and turned the island into a cold-war crucible.

He fended off a CIA-backed invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 as well as many 
assassination attempts. His alliance with Moscow helped trigger theCuban 
missile crisis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1962/oct/28/cuba> in 1962, a 
13-day showdown with the US that brought the world closer to the brink of 
nuclear war than it has ever been.

The US had long counted on Castro’s mortality as a “biological solution” to 
communism in the Caribbean but,since officially succeeding his brother in 2008 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/feb/25/cuba>, Raúl has cemented his own 
authority while overseeing cautious economic reforms, and agreeing themomentous 
deal to restore diplomatic relations between Cuba and the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/dec/31/us-cuba-deal-2014-diplomacy>
 in late 2014.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98He%20led%20a%20humble%20life%E2%80%99%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20biographer%20on%20the%20legacy%20of%20a%20revolutionary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98He%20led%20a%20humble%20life%E2%80%99%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20biographer%20on%20the%20legacy%20of%20a%20revolutionary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video&media=>
‘He led a humble life’: Fidel Castro’s biographer on the legacy of a 
revolutionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/he-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video>
By Raúl’s own admission, however, Fidel is irreplaceable. By force of 
charisma, intellect and political cunning, the lawyer-turned-guerrilla embodied 
the revolution. Long before his passing, however, Cubans had started to move 
on, with increased migration to the US and an explosion of small private 
businesses.

His greatest legacy is free healthcare and education, which have given Cuba 
some of the region’s best human development statistics. But he is also 
responsible for the central planning blunders and stifling government controls 
that – along with theUS embargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/20/raul-castro-cuba-faces-struggle-lift-us-embargo>
 – have strangled the economy, leaving most Cubans scrabbling for decent food 
and desperate for better living standards.


The man who famously declared “history will absolve me” leaves a divided 
legacy. Older Cubans who rememberbrutal times under Batista 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1959/jan/02/cuba1> tend to emphasise the 
revolution’s accomplishments. Younger Cubans are more likely to rail against 
gerontocracy, repression and lost opportunity. But even they refer to Castro by 
the more intimate name of Fidel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420806424716%2F8e30a659-ae0b-47ba-8d6f-cc507601575e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fidel%20Castro%2C%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20revolutionary%20leader%2C%20dies%20aged%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fidel%20Castro%2C%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20revolutionary%20leader%2C%20dies%20aged%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420806424716%2F8e30a659-ae0b-47ba-8d6f-cc507601575e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A Havana man is reflected in a mirror hanging on his wall covered with 
photographs of, left to right, Raúl Castro, Fidel Castro and Ernesto ‘Che’ 
Guevara. Photograph: Ramon Espinosa/AP 
Since largely vanishing from public view he has been a spectral presence, 
occasionally surfacing in what became a trademark tracksuit, to urge faith in 
the revolution. It was a long goodbye that accustomed Cubans to his mortality.

Latin America’s leftwing leaders mourned the passing of a figure who was 
perceived less as a communist and more as a nationalist symbol of regional 
pride and defiance against thegringo superpower. 

The Venezuelan president, Nicolás Maduro, urged revolutionaries everywhere to “
continue his legacy and carry his flag of independence, of socialism, of 
homeland <https://twitter.com/NicolasMaduro/status/802406334209675264>”, while 
the Ecuadorian president, Rafael Correa,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/MashiRafael/status/802395265344925699>: “A great man has 
gone. Fidel is dead. Long live Cuba! Long live Latin America!”


Evo Morales, the president of Bolivia and a close ally of the late Cuban 
leader, said he was deeply saddened at Castro’s death. “Fidel [was] the only 
man in the world with so many principles and so many values,” he told the Latin 
American television network Telesur. “He made so much history not only for 
Cuba, but also for the planet. That is socialism.”

He added: “There will never again be a man or comrade like Fidel, who devoted 
his life, his knowledge and his struggle not only to the Cuban people but to 
all the people of the world.”
 