
The revelation that Barcelona paid over £20m more than they originally 
declared to tempt Neymar from the Brazilian seaside town of Santosto the more 
noble shores of Catalonia in May 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/26/neymar-barcelona-santos-move> 
was noisy enough to bring down the then president Sandro Rosell and trigger an 
investigation into the finances of the striker’s father and main adviser, 
Neymar Sr.

It also shone a light on the complexity of the deal and the number of parties 
involved. In 2009, when Neymar Jr was aged 17 and was not even a regular in the 
first team, Santos already feared losing the boy’s services. To entice him to 
stay, the club put together a vastly improved contract negotiated by selling 
“chunks” of the player, accounting for 40% of his economic rights, to DIS, a 
fund belonging to a Brazilian supermarket mogul. By the time he was sold to
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>, Teisa, a group 
formed by some of the club’s directors, also owned a further 5% of the golden 
goose.

Neymar’s tale is emblematic of why Fifa’s decision to ban third-party 
ownership “within three or four years” will have a strong impact in Brazilian 
football. Without investors, Santos would have never been able to hold on to 
their biggest poster boy when big clubs, Chelsea included, came knocking – even 
though the process also included the club pretty much relinquishing any 
participation in the player’s image rights.

Worryingly, however, these types of deals are hardly restricted to top 
players. According to figures from the consultancy firm KPMG, 90% of the 
players in the Brazilian first division are involved in third-party ownership 
schemes and further reports by Brazilian media outlets show that even under-15 
players have parts of their economic rights in the hand of investors.

Needless to say, Fifa’s announcement a fortnight ago sent shockwaves across 
the sporting sphere inBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil>. 
“The impact of his decision will be huge for Brazilian football because clubs 
have been heavily relying on partnerships with investors to make their 
signings,” says Eduardo Carlezzo, a Brazilian expert in international sporting 
legislation. “There is no control on how these deals are made and this 
excessive freedom now has a time to end”.

It is quite a paradoxical situation: over the last 10 years, even before the 
country was chosen to host the 2014 World Cup, Brazilian football experienced a 
financial windfall that saw total turnover by the 20 biggest clubs increase by 
375%.

Sadly, debt rose at an even faster pace: the top 20 now collectively owe 475% 
more than 10 years ago. Protected by legislation that treats them like 
non-profit organisations, clubs have traditionally spent unwisely. Most of them 
either own decrepit arenas or nothing at all – six-times national champions and 
the club with the biggest fanbase, Flamengo, being the prime example. This 
chaotic scenario is an attractive opportunity for agents and investors looking 
for business.

DIS, for example, had a 300% return (£4.7m) for the £1.4m they paid for 
Neymar’s rights even before it came to light that Barcelona had in fact paid a 
much higher sum than they originally disclosed. At the time of the move,
Barcelona said the transfer was worth £48.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/15/neymar-nothing-illegal-barcelona-investigation>
 but, after questions were raised by a member of the club, they were forced to 
release documents showing the full cost to be more than £71m. DIS is now 
threatening court action to get a bigger slice of the transfer fee, much of 
which it has since been disclosed had been paid secretely to N&N, a company run 
by Neymar Sr, through a string of “consultancy deals” prompting tax 
investigations in both Brazil and Spain.

Apart from TV rights, sold individually, player transfers are the biggest 
source of income in Brazilian football and, according toFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa>, the country was the biggest net 
winner in the international transfer window between 2011 and 2014, pocketing 
£361m. It is quite likely that DIS and similar financial backers were left with 
the widest smiles.

“Investors are a necessary evil [for Brazilian football] because the financial 
pressures mean that few clubs can sign players without some external backing,” 
reckons Paulo Nobre, the president of Palmeiras, where 117 out of 195 players 
across first team and youth academies are not 100% owned by the club.

It looks immediately obvious that without outside investors Brazilian teams 
will be less able to attend to salary demands and therefore more vulnerable to 
poaching from overseas clubs. Fifa’s proposals could also affect the 
considerable number of repatriations that took place in the last few years.

What is certain is that Brazilian football could have done without another 
bombshell in 2014 – the year in which theSeleção were so unceremoniously torn 
apart by Germany in the World Cup semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 in front of their own fans and where the Campeonato Brasileiro – the country’s 
premier competition – currently has an average attendance of 15,844. Hardly the 
massive post-tournament jump clubs had hoped for.

There are those who see the glass half-full. “It’s actually a very positive 
step for Brazilian football,” says Amir Somoggi, one of Brazil’s most respected 
football business experts. “Clubs will obviously take a financial hit in the 
short term but Fifa’s ban on third-party ownership should instead be seen as an 
opportunity. Clubs will have to focus more seriously on youth development and 
at least they will keep the money when their players are sold.

“The ruling will force Brazilian clubs to actually become more professional 
and modernise how they work their sponsorship and supporter service operations. 
Whoever has their feet on the ground will have financial and sporting success.”

However, some clubs sense a conspiracy orchestrated by Uefa to knock down 
transfer costs for European clubs when they go shopping. The Brazilian Football 
Confederation (whose elected president, Marco Polo Del Nero, has already said 
he would rather see tougher regulation in place instead of a complete ban on 
third-party ownership), led the South American lobbying against the decision in 
vain.

Brazilian clubs have a maximum of four years to shape up. Their bubble has 
been well and truly burst.
 