
To do list: interview philandering men terrified by the Ashley Madison leaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/21/ten-questions-ashley-madison-needs-to-answer>
 and spend the afternoon trying to figure outwho the RealMarkLatham is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/17/mark-latham-quits-financial-review-claims-derogatory-tweets>
 (spoiler alert, it’s the real Mark Latham: that anonymous egg disguise doesn’t 
work so well when you christen the egg with your actual name). It’s the kind of 
real life hacking the fictional team of CSI Cyber 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/csi-cyber/episodes> (Ten) would find 
themselves bored by.

A far cry, then, from the silly tech crimes that pervade most episodes of this 
latest offshoot of the CSI franchise. I get the sense that no one behind the 
show actually knows what cybercrime is, and has instead bolted tech elements on 
to everyday analogue crime, such as when they were tracking someone down who 
could start fires over the internet. A useless skill if stranded on a desert 
island: “Just rub these two sticks together until they generate Wi-Fi.”

Better than the original? An abridged guide to recent TV drama spinoffs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/18/television-spinoffs-drama-better-call-saul>
In another episode 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/csi-cyber/season-1/episode-10>, a cyber 
criminal went to all the effort of amassing a fortune by selling fake 
medication online using a back door in the worm matrix (don’t worry, they try 
to explain with holograms from an hallucinogenic nightmare), before getting 
caught trying to get his money paid out as a cashier’s cheque. At a bank. In 
person. Surely if he’s that good, he could wire the money somewhere using, I 
don’t know, a dongle or something?

Acts of arson started by a USB? Drug dealers lurking behind a pop-up ad? 
They’re sort of cyber-ish in that they involved a piece of technology somewhere 
along the line. But then, doesn’t everything? If I electrocuted someone by 
dropping my PC into their bathtub, it would be classed as cybercrime in this 
universe.

There’s bound to be an awkward crossover for a series like this. Until now, 
the CSI franchise had relied on geographical locations as a nifty means of 
rebooting and bringing in a new cast to sexily solve crimes in between bouts of 
awkwardly high-fiving anyone within reaching distance. Locations became as 
limitless as the number of places on Earth, although I’ll admit, CSI:Foula  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/feb/21/scotland>might have struggled 
to sustain itself.

We’re in new territory now though. With CSI: Cyber, it’s suddenly gone into 
abstract concepts: it’ll be CSI: Memories next. The problem is that now all the 
crimes have to be linked via a gimmick which doesn’t work so well when it’s 
overenthusiastically mishandled. For example, to help the audience along, a 
virus placed in some code is visually represented as an actual, wriggling, 
parasitic-looking creature, probably what the flu looks like in Tron. The Deep 
Web is portrayed as a genuinely evil-looking place, like a cross between Mordor 
and MS-DOS, and every time anyone in the CSI team does some hacking, it looks 
like their hard work is being done for them by a slave class of people trapped 
in The Matrix.

Unfortunately you can’t make tracing a text message seem exciting by amping up 
the motion sickness-inspired graphics to the point that you feel like you’re 
going to throw up a puddle of binary. That’s probably why they’ve left in the 
usual CSI ingredients of punch-ups, shootouts, bringing in a crowd of extras 
for a mass high-fiving scene, and James Van Der Beek rubbing his bum on a 
variety of cars as he slides over them (the scent is how CSI agents find their 
way home). It’s a regular CSI episode with dodgy holograms. They should have 
called it CSI: Next Generation.

Adding the tech element doesn’t enrich the franchise at all (assuming you were 
a fan of it in the first place).The latest episode 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/csi-cyber/season-1/episode-11> saw the team 
tracking a criminal by checking out a kid’s gamer score and swiping through the 
apps on his tablet. Less an exciting dose of sleuthing, more like an Apple 
product launch insensitively held near the body of recently shot teenager.

The series feels like someone from an older generation trying to be cool by 
embracing hip, new gadgets to do the same old thing but ultimately looks a bit 
daft in the process, like a grandparent thinking they’re cool because they just 
used a smartphone to bid on a single Werther’s Original on eBay.
 