
Film-makers Chris Rushton and Tracy Harris have been following rough sleepers 
on the streets of Swansea over a three-year period. Thethird series  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03v2xk9>of their observational documentary 
has just started, and Benefits Street it is not.

Rather than taking a fly-on-the-wall approach, Harris is often seen in shot 
interacting with the people they are filming; giving them a hug or trying to 
help. "We had a huge emotional reaction to the people we met when we began 
going out on the streets filming," explains Rushton. "We built up a 
relationship with them and that empathy we have with the people whose stories 
we are telling comes across in the film."

He insists that this film-making style can grip viewers every bit as much as a 
more sensationalist approach. "We still tell gripping, heartbreaking stories. 
When someone is crying, the usual approach is to zoom in on them. We do that, 
too, but importantly Tracy is in shot as well."

In one scene from the current series, Barry, 34, who ends up living on the 
streets after being released from prison, struggles to understand a letter from 
the benefits office. "He can't read or write so he couldn't make head nor tail 
of it. We left the camera running while he asked for our help and Tracy read 
the letter out, which said his benefits were going to be stopped. We then 
showed him at a charity using the phone to try to call the benefits office to 
explain that it must be an administrative error."

The programme also shows Barry going on a massive drinking binge leading to a 
battle to prevent himself slipping into alcoholism. "If we'd only filmed that 
one night when he was off his head, the viewer would have a totally different 
impression of Barry, but we show him over two and half months getting off the 
drink and getting a flat with a friend."

The films also explain the characters' backstories, in order to give the 
viewer an understanding of why they are sleeping rough. A disproportionate 
number had grown up in care, or are from broken families or abusive ones.

So what made Barry consent to the film-makers' camera recording his life on 
the streets?

"I wanted people to see what it's really like sleeping on the streets," he 
says. "If you keep dry and warm you'll live, but if you get cold and wet and 
have no food you can die. I wanted people to know that."

He hopes to stay in his flat and to work. "I'd like to get a job in kitchens, 
cleaning, health and safety. I did that in prison," he says.

Rushton and Harris chose Swansea because the town's location at the end of a 
train line and the gateway to rural west Wales has made it a magnet for 
homeless people.

What has been the biggest change in homelessness in the town over the three 
years they have been filming? "Benefits are being switched off much more 
readily these days," says Rushton. "Homeless charities are now inundated with 
people appealing benefit cuts who are desperately trying to keep a roof over 
their heads."

The previous series have had a positive response from viewers. Homeless 
charities in the town, with whom the film-makers worked closely, have witnessed 
a big increase in donations and a rise in the number of volunteers for the 
night shelter. They also had good viewing figures for the late-night slot, 
Rushton points out.

So what do they hope this third series will achieve? Rushton says: "Society is 
becoming incredibly divisive and I believe we in the media have a 
responsibility to bridge that gap."

â€¢ Swansea: Return to the Streets <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03v2xk9>, 
Mondays at 10.35pm on BBC 1 Wales
 