
No one wants to be the 41-year-old woman who phones a hotel five times to ask 
if anyone has yet found her missing bear. Alas, this was the anxious situation 
in which I found myself only this week, when Rufus – the stuffed, beloved 
object of an amusing family travel tradition that photographs him on tour in 
exotic locations – somehow embarked on an individual exploration of New Haven, 
Connecticut while I’d hit the road for New York.

Room 510. I’m the Guardian journalist. Yes, the one visiting for the super 
highbrow literary festival. The bear is small, fluffy and wearing a bow tie.

 Turns out five’s a charm – the errant bear had finally been found wedged in 
the corner of a laundry chute, would be dispatched to me forthwith and no, this 
wasnot the most cringeworthy quest to recover a missing item pursued by the 
hotel, Ms Badham, it really does happen all the time.

The cult of memory: when history does more harm than good | David Rieff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/02/cult-of-memory-when-history-does-more-harm-than-good>
I can believe it. I am one of those people who lose things, and I know I am 
but one of a tribe. I have a friend named Lachlan who, in the days of scruffier 
student pasts, left a trail of single forgotten items wherever he travelled, 
his daily schedule dominated by the activity required to recover the hat, coat, 
bag or book left behind the day before. In my own time, I’ve lost mobile 
phones, wallets, keys, my glasses, an entire spare set of clothes, endless 
pairs of tweezers, umbrellas, a striking embellished cardigan and a splendid 
peacock chair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffinding-out-theres-a-forgetful-gene-didnt-make-me-feel-better-about-the-treasure-id-lost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffade2dd29e6584b4aec10d1e64389a6de863e0f7%2F0_490_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Finding%20out%20there's%20a%20forgetful%20gene%20didn't%20make%20me%20feel%20better%20about%20the%20treasure%20I'd%20lost%20%7C%20Van%20Badham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffinding-out-theres-a-forgetful-gene-didnt-make-me-feel-better-about-the-treasure-id-lost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Finding%20out%20there%27s%20a%20forgetful%20gene%20didn%27t%20make%20me%20feel%20better%20about%20the%20treasure%20I%27d%20lost%20%7C%20Van%20Badham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffinding-out-theres-a-forgetful-gene-didnt-make-me-feel-better-about-the-treasure-id-lost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffade2dd29e6584b4aec10d1e64389a6de863e0f7%2F0_490_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Rufus, once recovered, travelling on Amtrack Photograph: Van Badham for the 
Guardian 
Rarely can I explain the how but science can, at least, explain the why. 
German researchers have found 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304117904579501410168111866> 
higher incidences of distraction and forgetfulness can be explained by a 
variation of a dopamine receptor gene that occurs within 75% of people. 
Exacerbating the gene’s effects are stress, fatigue and multitasking – 
concurrent afflictions, I’d suggest, of whatever demanding logistics may cause 
one to flee a hotel room.

 Relocating lost items depends on a deliberate act of memorisation when they 
are first placed, to imprint into the neurons of the hippocampus an impression 
of the placement for the brain’s on-cue recall. This is of little use to the 
75% of us who are forgetful, who are likely to forget the advice, and find 
themselves – just one more time – unpacking their bags, emptying cupboards and 
tearing the cushions out of the furniture to see if Rufus may be hiding in a 
lost corner of the settee.

It’s not science but moral philosophy that offers the most sympathy towards 
this torturous panic-hunting for lost things. Moral philosophers argue that as 
we identify ourselves with the things we care about, so do we make ourselves 
vulnerable to a feared loss of self when memories of emotional connections are 
so entwined with objects associated with them – like my family is with the 
mass-market bear whose disappearance provoked in me a sense of shameful 
responsibility and intimate betrayal.

In the age of mechanical reproduction, we may have lost our reverence for the 
sacred power we once imbued in tools, icons and artworks created by the 
individual human hand – but we have not lost our capacity to invest in material 
things an equally potent power of personalised narrative.

It’s fitting that I write this from New York; it was here between 2009-2010 
that Joshua Glenn collaborated with writer Rob Walker from New York Times 
Magazine totest his theory that affixing narratives to objects may increase 
their economic worth 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/12/garden/at-home-with-joshua-glenn-of-the-significant-objects-project.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share>
. They hired professional writers to create stories for a collection of 
$1.50-a-piece junk objects that they sold on eBay, where “the newly significant 
objects sold for as much as 2,700% of their value”. You can, you see, 
agglomerate your own emotional detail by purchasing the material of someone 
else’s from the internet.

Clearing out my parents' house for the final time brought a certain serenity | 
Deborah Orr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/31/clearing-out-parents-house-brought-serenity>
Considering whether the psychological risk of this attachment to objects grows 
with their number in your life is also pertinent question in this particular 
corner of the world. In America, the number of individual possessions are said 
to havedoubled over 50 years 
<http://storyofstuff.org/wp-content/uploads/movies/scripts/Story%20of%20Stuff.pdf>
, the average household is now estimated to house300,000 items  
<http://articles.latimes.com/2014/mar/21/health/la-he-keeping-stuff-20140322>
and the population is spending$1.2tn annually on non-essential items 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2011/04/23/number-of-the-week-americans-buy-more-stuff-they-dont-need/>
.

Even given the likelihood of emotional neutrality towards certain forks, 
laundry buckets and pencils, there are lots of places for projected tenderness 
to be dispersed. Perhaps it’s why “you don’t want to turn into the Collyer 
brothers” yet remains in the local idiom as a warning to materialistic 
children. New York’sinfamous sibling hoarders 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collyer_brothers> were found dead in 1947 
surrounded by over 140 tons of collected items – mostly garbage – that they’d 
booby-trapped to protect.

Buddhism is not alone in its spiritual advice of practiced non-attachment to 
objects as a means of avoiding emotional possession by what one should perhaps 
merely possess. My reaction to hearing the news that the family bear had been 
found entailed immense relief and some joyous texts home to my mum, but it’s a 
reminder that the possession I’m unable to lose is my forgetfulness gene and 
the awareness is many other things but serene.
 