
There’s one question Australia can answer – deep in the innards of this global 
political upheaval – and a lot hinges on getting that answer right.


As pretty much everyone has observed by now, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, the UK’s pro-Brexit campaign 
and Australia’s own Pauline Hanson are all backed by broadly similar folk, 
voters who feel like human collateral damage in the “new” global economy and 
who are searching for both hope and scapegoats.

Their support allowed Trump to trample facts and decency to win the presidency 
of the United States and Brexiters to lure Britons to an act of extraordinary 
self-harm. In Australia the effect was significant but less spectacular – four 
One Nation seats and a smattering of other independents in the upper house.

Obama and Trump put differences aside in first meeting at the White House
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/barack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition>
There are many, many questions posed by all of this; about how to respond when 
facts no longer sway arguments; how to properly understand this roiling wave of 
grievance. But one of them is why the Australian backlash – so far at least – 
is more muted.

Tony Abbott would have us believe the answer lies in the Liberal party having 
been – and continuing to be – sufficiently right wing to represent these 
disaffected voters, assuming, it would seem, that their choices are based in 
ideology.

But as far as they were decipherable, Trump’s policies had little ideological 
consistency. His appeal was more basic – voters were angry at a system from 
which they feel excluded and saw Trump as different, not politics-as-usual, 
someone who “heard” their concerns. Clinton’s Democrat rival Bernie Sanders was 
popular in many of the same so-called “rustbelt” constituencies that delivered 
Trump the White House.

One difference in Australia is that, relatively speaking, we still have a 
system that leaves fewer people behind.

We have a minimum wage of $17.70, set by the specialist Fair Work Commission. 
In the US the federally determined minimum wage is US$7.25 (less than A$10 an 
hour) although a fierce fight to increase it to $15 has led to an increase in 
some states.

We have a relatively efficient universal healthcare system; a federally funded 
national system of unemployment payments; and universal superannuation to help 
us prepare for old age.

According to the latest figures from the OECD  
<http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm>the top 10% of income earners in 
Australia earn 8.8% more than the bottom 10%, compared with 18.8% in the US.

Will Donald Trump destroy America?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/will-trump-destroy-america> 
But the safety net of policies that has delivered us this more equitable 
nation has been unravelling and there are those who would like to unpick it 
further.

The minimum wage has declined, quite markedly, as a proportion of average 
weekly earnings.

Wages growth has also been wildly uneven – according to the Australian Council 
of Social Service (Acoss), over the 25 years to 2010 real wages increased by 
14% for those in the bottom 10%, compared with 72% for those at the top. Our 
transfer system evens out that disparity to an extent but the difference 
remains real.

The actual value of unemployment benefits has also plummeted, leaving the 
payments 30% below the poverty line and millions if families living in need. 
Despite being widely opposed in the electorate, many of Abbott’s 2014 budget 
plans to pare back benefits are still kicking around the Senate.

We don’t yet know all the ramifications of the decision US voters took this 
week. The economic and social forces that put them in the mind to make it are 
complex and not just about household income.

But it’s self-evident that people might not feel so left behind by economic 
change and globalisation if they haven’t been.

Asked about Abbott’s somewhat self-serving interpretation on Friday, Turnbull 
noted that voter disillusionment in Australia was less marked. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/11/malcolm-turnbull-says-australians-are-less-disillusioned-than-american-voters>

His departmental secretary, Martin Parkinson, made the point in a recent Lowy 
Institute speech 
<https://www.dpmc.gov.au/news-centre/pmc/pressures-globalisation>that 
Australia’s terms of trade boom had allowed it to mitigate the rise in income 
inequality seen in recent years in the US and parts of western Europe.

Whether this continued, he said, would depend on the economy, and on political 
choices.

“Rising inequality is not destiny or a necessary consequence of the forces of 
globalisation. It is a choice made by individual countries ... All governments 
have the policy apparatus at their disposal to build a more economically and 
socially equitable society that remains internationally competitive.”

Confronting the appeal of Pauline Hanson - Australian politics live podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/sep/23/confronting-challenge-pauline-hanson-australian-politics-live-podcast>
The ALP went to the last election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/a-shift-in-political-thinking-is-giving-labor-a-sense-of-purpose>
 withexplicit warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/bill-shorten-coalitions-trickle-down-economics-risks-brexit-style-alienation>
 that allowing inequality to rise could lead to Brexit-style voter alienation.

But the political debate continues to spin its wheels, and mostly argue over 
the extent to which the Abbott-era cuts should proceed rather than rethinking 
that agenda.

Parkinson is right. It is about choices. We can can choose to keep, to expand, 
the policies we have that work to reduce inequality. We can hold on to them for 
dear life, and resist all the political and economic pressures that would erode 
them.

According to the IMF this actually helps economic growth.

A recent IMF <https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=42986.0> 
discussion paper says: “if the income share of the top 20% (the rich) 
increases, then GDP growth actually declines over the medium term, suggesting 
that the benefits do not trickle down. In contrast, an increase in the income 
share of the bottom 20% (the poor) is associated with higher GDP growth. The 
poor and the middle class matter the most for growth”.

It also helps more Australians lead decent lives. 

And it might just help Australian politics avoid its own version of the Donald 
Trump nightmare.
 