
A few weeks ago, in this space, we discussed Prince William 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/21/prince-william-stands-for-everything-we-believe>
’s views on the European Union. The prince had made a few bland remarks that 
the pro-EU lobby hailed as pro-EU, while the anti-EU lobby declared them 
obviously anti-EU.

At the time, I was tickled to watch the different groups project their own 
views on to the completely blank canvas of the prince’s vague remarks. But now 
that the exact same thing is happening with the Queen, it raises a different 
question entirely.

There is dispute over a conversation between the Queen and some government 
ministers at a lunch in 2011. According to the Sun newspaper, in a story hotly 
tipped to have been leaked by the anti-EU Michael Gove, the Queen implied she 
was in favour of Brexit. But the pro-EUNick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/09/eurosceptic-rant-by-the-queen-never-happened-says-nick-clegg>
, who was also at the lunch, swears she didn’t – and his colleague, Lib Dem 
ex-minister Sir Edward Davey, says he is sure the Queen would vote to remain. 
As Sir Ed would.

So, once again, as with Prince William, the Queen’s views are in the eye of 
the beholder. That would mean that if, for example, I were to leak Her 
Majesty’s opinions to the tabloid press, I would reveal that the Queen is 
baffled by the whole European thing, worries that either route could lead to 
disaster, isn’t a clairvoyant and doesn’t have a clue one way or the bloody 
other.

What strikes me now, though, is the fact that we are discussing where the 
royal family stands on this at all. It’s so weird! Why on earth would it matter?

Don’t get me wrong, I am an ardent monarchist, but not because I think they 
know anything. Quite the reverse: my amused affection for the concept of a 
royal family is entirely based on how removed, tangential and oddly “other” 
they are. The whole point is that they live in a world where crowns are hats, 
where loos smell of fresh paint, where foreigners perform topless dances of 
welcome, where dogs are effectively people and toothpaste is applied to brushes 
by valets; a world where there are moats and bowing, and swans are pets. How 
can our own views possibly be affected by what the Queen thinks of free trade 
with Luxembourg? It’s like wanting to know what Zippy and Bungle think.

The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen> is not a real person. Not as 
far as we’re concerned. We have the same relationship with her that we do with 
Mickey Mouse or Doctor Who: we don’t empathise or relate, we enjoy the colour 
and spectacle from afar. She’s a wonderful character, nothing to do with the 
real world. When vested interests exploit the Queen’s popularity by imposing 
their views on hers, it’s like Omega putting a watch on James Bond. If you 
actually then want to wear that watch, you’re an idiot.

With that in mind, I have asked both camps whether they know of any opinions 
privately expressed by anybody else we might care about…

Alice in Wonderland

“Reading between the lines, Alice is hugely in favour of Brexit,” explains 
Peter Bone MP. “Her view is that the relaxation of border control is all very 
inviting to begin with, but you are soon overrun by grinning cats, mice in the 
teapot and caterpillars smoking their weird hookah pipes in broad daylight.”

“This is the very opposite of the case”, counters Ken Clarke. “Alice herself 
has implied to me, very strongly, that an exit vote would see us sleepwalking 
to disaster.”

Paddington Bear
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Ffirst-the-queen-now-mr-toad-snared-in--brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0035a5faa35f4f3cbf038e4e67f50c3da26dd1%2F0_0_2810_1687%2F2810.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20it%20was%20the%20Queen%2C%20now%20Mr%20Toad%20has%20been%20snared%20in%20Brexit%20%7C%20Victoria%20Coren%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Ffirst-the-queen-now-mr-toad-snared-in--brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20it%20was%20the%20Queen%2C%20now%20Mr%20Toad%20has%20been%20snared%20in%20Brexit%20%7C%20Victoria%20Coren%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Ffirst-the-queen-now-mr-toad-snared-in--brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0035a5faa35f4f3cbf038e4e67f50c3da26dd1%2F0_0_2810_1687%2F2810.jpg>
 Paddington Bear: In or Out? Photograph: Allstar/STUDIOCANAL 
“Paddington believes a jobs boom would result from being freed of EU red 
tape,” says Nigel Farage, who met him at a dinner party. “Not only that, but 
those jobs would go to actual British people, which is better.”

“Bullshit! Or should I say bear shit?” coughs Nick Clegg, who was at the same 
dinner. “The exact opposite was implied; the ursine view is that jobs would be
lost if we ceased to compete from within the EU. What Nigel forgets is that 
Paddington is, himself, an immigrant.”

Luke Skywalker

“A strong believer in national sovereignty!” Michael Gove reveals. “Luke is 
onside with us, doing everything he can to overcome the threat of a shadowy 
unelected ruling elite. I’m saying the EU is like Darth Vader.”

“I don’t know where Michael is getting his information from,” scoffs David 
Cameron. “It is Darth Vader whose attempts to suppress the rebel alliance reek 
of isolationism. I have it on good authority that Luke Skywalker wants 
increased galactic unity.”

Mr Toad

“Toad is terrified that the British people will vote ‘out’,” divulges Lord 
Mandelson. “He makes the radical point that we actually need the humanity of 
the European courts to overrule our own corrupt and horrible and stupid and 
mean judges.”

“Piffle-paffle, Toady is a great patriot!,” scoffs Boris Johnson. “I met him 
at a motor show where he clearly indicated to me that he hopes Britain grabs 
back the power to self-determine. You simply can’t be giving in, he told me, to 
these weasels.”

Elizabeth Bennett

“She’s voting no,” lets slip Bill Cash MP. “She talked to me at a quadrille 
about the beauty of Norway and Switzerland, which clearly suggested she admires 
the way those countries have thrived outside the EU.”

“Bollocks,” says Shirley Williams. “Remember, Elizabeth Bennett doesn’t even 
have the f***ing vote.”
 