
The world’s overstretched humanitarian system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/06/refugee-crisis-un-agencies-broke-failing>
 needs substantial reform, new sources of funding and greater efficiency to 
safeguard a global public good simply “too important to fail”, a new study says.

Nine experts appointed by the UN secretary-general Ban Ki-moon produced the 
report 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/whs_finance/hlphumanitarianfinancing>
on humanitarian financing to inform talks at May’sworld humanitarian summit 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/>. Officials at the meeting will be 
tasked withdevising ways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/12/people-disaster-response-aid-world-humanitarian-summit-antoine-gerard>
 to reinvigorate the aid system in a time of unprecedented displacement caused 
by multiple man-made and natural disasters.


People hit by disaster want us to do much better, says humanitarian chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/12/people-disaster-response-aid-world-humanitarian-summit-antoine-gerard>
As well as providing concrete fundraising suggestions – including micro-levies 
on corporations, a voluntary solidarity tax, and increased use of Islamic 
funding such aszakat religious contributions 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zakat> and Islamic bonds – the experts had sharp 
words for a system often riven by “turf wars”.


The world already spends roughly $25bn (£17.5bn) – 12 times more than it did 
in 2001 – to support the estimated 125 million people left destitute by war and 
natural disasters. But at least another $15bn is needed, the report’s authors 
said.

“This is a lot of money, but not out of reach for a world producing $78tn of 
annual gross domestic product,” wrote the high-level panel of experts, noting 
that the funds raised for humanitarian aid in 2014 amounted to just 0.031% of 
GDP.

The European commissioner Kristalina Georgieva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kristalina-georgieva>, who co-chaired the 
panel, told reporters in Brussels that the number of people in need had almost 
quadrupled since the beginning of the millennium.

“If they were a country … this would be the 11th largest country in the world 
– just between Japan and Mexico – and people in this country would most of the 
time be scared for their lives … They would be often out of their homes – 60 
million of them, with an average duration of displacement being 17 years,” she 
said.

Should the needs of citizens of this “invisible country” remain unaddressed, 
the world will fail to achieve thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 adopted at the UN last September, the report warned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4f00b4eb91c11e92a490ee35614ca55cb6d3a89%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fix%20the%20aid%20system%20or%20you%20will%20fail%20the%20poor%2C%20experts%20warn%20world%20leaders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fix%20the%20aid%20system%20or%20you%20will%20fail%20the%20poor%2C%20experts%20warn%20world%20leaders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4f00b4eb91c11e92a490ee35614ca55cb6d3a89%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 A Syrian woman and her child at a refugee camp in the town of Hosh Hareem, in 
the Bekaa valley, east Lebanon. Photograph: Hassan Ammar/AP 
Georgieva said fixing the aid system was possible: “This is one problem that, 
if we muster the political will, we can solve. Why? Because not only is it 
morally right, but it is also in our own self-interest. We don’t have to look 
further than Europe’srefugee crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/22/one-million-migrants-and-refugees-have-reached-europe-this-year-iom>
 to understand this.”

The report focused on reducing humanitarian needs, raising more money and 
improving efficiency.

Global political leadership was identified as key to achieving the first of 
these goals, with the emphasis on preventing conflicts and increasing 
investment in disaster risk reduction. To this end, the report recommended that 
official development assistance should focus on fragile situations. The experts 
called for a threefold increase in funds for theInternational Development 
Association’s crisis response window 
<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/11/25463496/update-idas-crisis-response-window>
 and an easing of eligibility criteria to allow middle-income countries to 
access grants and low-cost loans if needed. The experts also recommended that 
UN member states put 1% of core funding allocated to peace operations into the
UN Peacebuilding Fund. <http://www.unpbf.org/>

They also advocated the creation of a voluntary solidarity levy at the May 
summit in Istanbul, although Georgieva said the panel was unable to agree on 
specifics. Some proposed an air ticket or gasoline levy, while others were 
“dead against” any tax.

Georgieva, a Bulgarian national and former vice-president of the World Bank, 
said the panel had also looked at micro taxes on entertainment and travel. 
“Here you have concerts, you have entertainment, movies, sport, potentially 
taxi rides,” she said, adding that a working group should study the issue 
further before the summit.


Syrian refugees: World Bank and UN urge major change in handling of crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/16/syrian-refugee-crisis-world-bank-unhcr-sea-change>
Businesses must play a bigger role in the humanitarian system, helping to 
manage risk and modernise transparency, while there should be greater use of 
social impact bonds, micro-levies on corporations and Islamic social finance.

“If you take one of the Islamic financing platforms – this is zakat, mandatory 
giving – zakat is somewhere between $300bn and $500bn a year. Just 1% of zakat 
will go a long way to closing the $15bn gap,” Georgieva said, adding that 
concrete products would be piloted to show how to tap into this funding stream.

To address inefficiencies, the panel proposed a “grand bargain” under which 
“donors would not simply give more but give better, by being more flexible, and 
aid organisations would reciprocate with greater transparency and 
cost-consciousness”.

This pact would also involve the use of more cash-based aid, give a greater 
role to local organisations, and prompt donors to give more long-term, 
predictable funding.

“Right now, we have ‘competitive inefficiency’,” said Georgieva. “Something 
happens and we are like eight-year-olds playing soccer – we are all chasing the 
ball.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75d9f49de8398e0dc120e018e34e7191b4f7bf31%2F0_0_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fix%20the%20aid%20system%20or%20you%20will%20fail%20the%20poor%2C%20experts%20warn%20world%20leaders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fix%20the%20aid%20system%20or%20you%20will%20fail%20the%20poor%2C%20experts%20warn%20world%20leaders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75d9f49de8398e0dc120e018e34e7191b4f7bf31%2F0_0_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 A Yemen-based UN worker inspects emergency aid arriving at Sana’a airport. 
Photograph: Yahya Arhab/EPA 
The report praised the dedication of thousands of humanitarian workers but had 
sharp words for the “wasteful” competition between aid agencies for funds.


“While the need for joint planning is often talked about, in reality every 
organisation is an island. ‘Turf wars’ are a common occurrence, with each 
organisation trying to position itself as the best implementer,” it said.

The study was to be presented to Ban in Dubai on Sunday; the location was 
deliberate, Georgieva said. “Tragically this is the region that is now the 
example of people in need. Three out of every four appeals that exceed $1bn 
take place in the Middle East.”

The experts stressed change was urgent. If current trends continue, by 2030, 
when the SDGs are due to expire, the cost of humanitarian assistance will have 
risen to $50bn and 62% of the world’s poor could be living in fragile and 
conflict-affected countries. Despite the challenges, they said they were 
optimistic.

“The record sums being raised are a powerful signal that our collective 
humanity is a force to be reckoned with and can be harnessed to even greater 
effect. But we also need the political will to create change at scale.”
 