
Spare a thought for Anthony Martial. Perhaps because nobody bothered to 
monitor what was going on inManchester United’s youth ranks the talented young 
Frenchman was brought in at great expense to be the club’s token precocious 
forward. Then someone thought it might be a good idea to remind the powers that 
be about a lad called Marcus Rashford. And now it would seem that nurturing two 
highly-talented youngsters is certainly one job too many for renowned polisher 
of raw talent José Mourinho. Which is why he might well waveau revoir to 
Martial ifPSG come knocking with a fistful of euros and the offer of regular 
first-team football for the 20-year-old in January. If Martial scores four more 
goals he will cost United many more millions due to add-ons in his contract 
being monitored closely by his former club Monaco too.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/02/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for>
If United do sell would they just bank the money and take it easy in the 
coming transfer window? Pfft. Of course not. It says here they’ll continue to 
be ridiculous by waving £180m in the direction of Barcelona in the hope of 
airliftingNeymar away from his trouble with prosecutors in Spain, who have 
recommended hespend two years in the big house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/spain-public-prosecutor-calls-neymar-prison-sentence-two-years>
 for alleged wrongdoing related to his transfer to Barça from Santos.

Having watched his side concede their first goal in 987 years, Antonio Conte 
wants to fortify his blue wall. To do so he’ll getChelsea owner Roman 
Abramovich to write a cheque for £24m and pop it in the post c/o Napoli 
president Aurelio De Laurentiis. In return he’ll get the 25-year-old rock-solid 
Algeria left-backFaouzi Ghoulam. He may also return next summer to steal away 
centre-backKalidou Koulibaly for £50m. Conte quite likes the cut of the 
Atalanta midfielderFranck Kessie’s jib too. The 19-year-old Ivory Coast 
international has scored five goals and can run all day, which means he might 
even be able to keep up with his potential midfield partner N’Golo Kanté. He’d 
cost £15m, which is equivalent to 50p last season.

Arsenal are planning a serious move for a Real Madrid forward. But cool your 
guns Gunners, it’s not Karim Benzema; it’s not Álvaro Morata; it’s not even 
James Rodríguez, if you can call him a forward or even a footballer for that 
matter these days. No, it’sMarcos Llorente. Heard of him? Thought so. Well, 
he’s on loan at Alavés where he’s scored exactly no goals this season. But he 
does run around a lot and has smart hair.

Premier League frontrunners: who is best equipped for the Christmas rush? | 
Barry Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/01/premier-league-frontrunners-chelsea-liverpool-manchester-city-arsenal>
And finally, both Jürgen Klopp and Slaven Bilic have been alerted to Polish 
forwardLukasz Teodorczyk’s impressive Soccerbase page 
<http://www.soccerbase.com/players/player.sd?player_id=61069>. The 25-year-old 
has scored 17 times in 22 games this season at Anderlecht, where he is on loan 
from Dynamo Kyiv.West Ham may hold the advantage over Liverpool in attracting 
Teodorczyk though, because they would probably play him due to the fact that 
they actually need a striker who isn’t injured or rubbish. He’d cost £12m, 
whatever his preferred destination.
 