Which team finished champions of England in 1970?  Leeds United  Liverpool  
Chelsea  Everton How much did Kevin Keegan cost Liverpool when they bought him 
from Scunthorpe in 1971?  £3,500  £33,000  £100,000  £175,000 How old was Brian 
Clough when he guided Derby County to the First Division title with Derby 
County in 1972?  33  37  40  42 Name the Sunderland player holding the FA Cup 
aloft in 1973?  Ian Porterfield  Bob Kerr  Dennis Tueart  Jimmy Montgomery Who 
scored the winning goal in the 1974 World Cup final?  Johan Cruyff  Paul 
Breitner  Gerd Müller  Franz Beckenbauer What was the score in the 1975 
European Cup final?  Bayern Munich 1-0 Leeds  Bayern Munich 2-0 Leeds  Bayern 
Munich 3-0 Leeds  Bayern Munich 2-1 Leeds Which NASL team did George Best score 
15 goals in 24 games for in 1976?  Los Angeles Aztecs  New York Cosmos  San 
Jose Earthquakes  Fort Lauderdale Strikers Port Vale and Chester met in the 
final of the Debenhams Cup in 1977. What was it?  A playoff trophy in which the 
third bottom-placed team in Division Three was given a one-off chance of 
survival by playing the third-top team in Division Four  A money-spinning 
competition competed for between the two sides from outside the top two 
divisions of the Football League to have progressed furthest in the FA Cup  A 
summer competition for lower league northern clubs in which the winnerwas 
rewarded by having their kit, tracksuits, matchday suits and football boots 
paid for by the department store for the next three seasons  The fisrt 
incarnation of what is now known as the EFL Trophy Archie Gemmil scored two of 
Scotland's goals against Holland in their 3-2 World Cup group stage win in 
1978. Who scored the other one?  Joe Jordan  Kenny Dalglish  Lou Macari  Bruce 
Rioch What was the score in the 1979 European Cup final?  Nottingham Forest 2-1 
Malmo  Nottingham Forest 2-0 Malmo  Nottingham Forest 1-0 Malmo  Nottingham 
Forest 3-2 Malmo  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  