
On the verge of a return from a spell on the sidelines with injury, John Terry 
could see out his dotage in China, with the trio of Super League clubs 
Guangzhou Evergrande, Shanghai Shenhua and Shanghai SIPG all reported to be 
forming an orderly queue to snap up theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> defender. The London Evening 
Standard reports that the 35-year-old is considering taking the Shenhua yuan 
come season’s end.

Despite signing a contract handcuffing him to Barcelona until 2021 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/21/neymar-signs-contract-to-stay-at-barcelona-till-2021>
 in October,Neymar is wanted by Manchester United, according to Scotland’s 
Daily Record. He’ll cost them a few bob– the Brazilian’s contract has an 
eye-watering buyout clause fixed at €200m (£178.2m) for its first year, €222m 
(£197.8m) for the second and €250m (£222.8m) for the remaining three years.

Football transfer rumours: Mesut Özil and Ángel Di María back to Real Madrid?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/football-transfer-rumours-mesut-ozil-angel-di-maria-real-madrid>
Italian daily the Corriere dello Sport says Manchester City target Kasper 
Dolberg is also on the radar of Napoli and Juventus. The callow 19-year-old 
Dane made headlines in the Netherlands with a hat-trick inside 37 minutes 
against NEC Nijmegen last month that catapulted him to joint top place of the 
Eredivisie scoring charts with eight goals in 12 matches. Elsewhere in the Low 
Countries, teenage Genk defenderWilfred Ndidi is wanted by Leicester City.

The Sun says Southampton are “resigned to losing” their impressive central 
defensive pairing ofVirgil van Dijk and José Fonte over the next two transfer 
windows. Liverpool have been repeatedly linked with a move for the former, while
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> are 
reported to be after the latter. Reports from Scotland suggest Liverpool are 
also teeing up a bid for Celtic strikerMoussa Dembélé, who has been banging 
them in for fun north of the border this season. Glasgow Live says Liverpool 
will offer £10m up front and the same amount in add-ons for the 20-year-old 
French striker who has already scored 17 goals for the Scottish champions since 
moving to Glasgow from Fulham in the summer.

Manchester United’s Argentinian defender Marcos Rojo could be off to Bayer 
Leverkusen, following in the footsteps of Mexican strikerJavier Hernández, 
whose move from Old Trafford to the Bundesliga club was a great success. Rojo 
has made 13 appearances for United this season and started Wednesday night’s
League Cup quarter-final win over West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/manchester-united-west-ham-united-efl-cup-match-report>
.

Out of favour at Chelsea, Mikel John Obi could head for Valencia in January, 
although his agent says it’s “50-50” whether he’ll leave for a fee during the 
transfer window or see out the rest of his contract and move on for a free in 
the summer.

And finally, the ongoing saga of Barcelona’s search for a new right-back could 
end with the Spanish club signing Shakhtar Donetsk’sDarijo Srna. The veteran 
former Croatia captain will be available on a free transfer in January and has 
been in talks with Barça club secretary Robert Fernández. The Catalan side are 
desperate to add more strength in depth to a position they’ve struggled to fill 
since the departure of Brazil’sDani Alves to Juventus after eight seasons, 21 
goals and a staggering 71 assists.
 