
West Ham are determined to keep hold of their star man and will not let him go 
even ifMarseille come knocking with a fist full of notes to the tune of £30m. 
Now you might think I’m talking about Pedro Obiang, a player who’s gradually 
growing into the club’s most steady performer, but no, I’m on aboutDimitri Payet
. It says here that with Marseille convinced the player wants to return to the 
club he left just over 18 months ago for £12m, they’re willing to throw in 
France’sLassana Diarra as part of the deal. But whoah, hang on! Who’s this 
apparently ready to steam over the hill waving a nice little late-career 
contract in the direction of the Marseille midfielder? It’s José Mourinho, the 
man who once thought Diarra so useful he flogged him to Portsmouth for £2m in 
2007. And any potential transfer toManchester United might see Morgan 
Schneiderlin – Mourinho’s Diarra de jour – end up at the Stade Vélodrome 
blinking in wild confusion while wondering whatever happened to 2016. It would 
almost certainly torpedo Marseille’s chances of getting Payet too. Cheers José.

Transfer window January 2017: all the latest moves and news – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Meanwhile, David Moyes has batted West Ham’s £6m bid for Jermain Defoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/jermain-defoe-sunderland-reject-6m-bid-west-ham>
 out into the North Sea, a dark, cold and depressing place similar to the one 
where Sunderland will inevitably end up if they do fail to hold on to their one 
good thing this season. Stoke will also tell West Ham to do one if they come 
knocking with £1m and the offer of a one-way ticket to London forGlen Johnson. 
While Brentford have already told West Ham where to go after they dangled £10m 
outside the Griffin Park office windows in the hope of tempting the club into 
parting with strikerScott Hogan. 

After some furious chatter in 2015 about how the boy from Barcelona had 
rediscovered his mojo in the Potteries, it’s all gone sour forBojan Krcic, 
really. It’s now gotten so bad that Mark Hughes has activated the Operation 
Pulis button and even Peter Crouch, at 114 years old, is being preferred to 
poor Bojan. In fact, his nadir came when he was made to play in the EFL Trophy. 
The EFL Trophy! For Pete’s sake! Aitor Karanka, a man who desperately needs 
something, anything, to add a little pizzazz into his lifelessMiddlesbrough 
strikeforce, will see how much Hughes cares about the forward with an imminent 
offer.

For some reason the Rumour Mill can’t fathom, Wolfsburg, Everton and 
Southampton have joined Stoke in the chase for Napoli striker Manolo Gabbiadini
, who has scored only three times in 17 appearances this season and has looked 
about as hot as a penguin. He’s yours for £24m – £24m! – folks.

Alexis Sanchéz is ready to pick up a league title or two again. According to 
some fluff-generator or other he’ll do this in Serie A withJuventus who will 
offer ArsenalMiralem Pjanic as part of any deal to lure Sanchéz away from the 
Emirates. Makeweights eh?

Chelsea will let Ruben Loftus‑Cheek experience some lively sea air and 
probable promotion to the Premier League by sending him on loan toBrighton 
until the end of the season. Meanwhile, Liverpool will start their Melwood 
spring clean earlyby getting shot of Tiago Ilori to  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/tiago-ilori-reading-liverpool-loan>
Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/tiago-ilori-reading-liverpool-loan>
.And word is that Lucas is wanted by Milan now, as well as Internazionale, so 
sipping espresso at San Siro awaits one way or the other. 

Looking for a Silva lining: the big problems facing Hull’s new manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/looking-for-a-silva-lining-the-big-problems-facing-hulls-new-manager>
Claudio Ranieri is determined to keep hold of his barrel-chested cameo man 
Leonardo Ulloa despite interest from West Brom, Sunderland and Hull because 
Islam Slimani is off to the Africa Cup of Nations and Ulloa may need to do a 
little more dutiful covering in the forward line.

And finally, Manchester City’s Stevan Jovetic (yes, he’s still Manchester 
City’s Stevan Jovetic until the end of the season when Inter are obliged to pay 
€14m for him) is on the verge of inking a contract at Sevilla while Juventus’s 
Patrice Evra has fuelled talk of a move back to Manchester United after saying 
he wants to go home. Won’t somebody just let him go home? Over to you José.

 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window withour Facebook Messenger alerts 
<http://m.me/theguardian?ref=football_transfers>. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at 
the bottom of the screen to receive the latest alerts.  