
The former Newcastle United footballer Derek Bell breaks for one of many 
pauses during several hours discussing “horrendous” sexual abuse to which he 
was subjected at his local boys football club in the late 1970s. Then he 
gathers himself again, to relate the incident 20 years later which finally 
provoked him to report the paedophile, George Ormond, to the police.

The latest footballer to waive anonymity and speak out publicly, which he says 
he has wanted to do during decades of trauma and “living a lie” ever since, 
Bell was groomed and violated between the ages of 12 and 16 by Ormond, his 
coach at the well‑respected Montagu and North Fenham boys football club.

In the late 1990s, he discovered that Ormond had become involved with the 
youth coaching at Newcastle United. He informed one of the coaches about 
Ormond’s past abuse and the executives currently at the club, owned since 2007 
by Mike Ashley, are still trying to establish the precise circumstances in 
which Ormond left, which they believe was in October 1998.

Ormond is thought to have worked his way into the Newcastle set-up in various 
roles for approximately three years before that, including frequenting a small 
hotel a mile from the ground, where aspiring players stayed. One man who was 
formerly a player in the Newcastle United youth system is known to have 
notified Northumbria police last week, alleging that he was abused by Ormond 
while he was attached to the club.

Bell fears that in the more than 20 years that Ormond was a senior coach at 
the boys club, and the three years at Newcastle, he could have abused many more 
boys before he was convicted of indecent assaults on the evidence of seven, all 
of whom maintained their anonymity, in 2002.

Bell escaped Ormond’s control when he signed for Newcastle as a rising 
16-year-old midfield star in 1979, played for a first team which included the 
former England captain Kevin Keegan in 1983, but his dreams were shattered 
weeks later by a serious knee injury sustained in a reserve match against 
Manchester United. After that, he played semi‑professional football for 
Gateshead, while building a career in Newcastle city council’s housing 
department, never speaking about his abuse through years of torment, anger, 
drinking and broken marriages.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fderek-bell-abuse-coach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc5c1643554b41a772436e1202c0734e0820a0d0%2F0_0_2731_4096%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Former%20Newcastle%20player%20on%20being%20abused%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20horrific.%20He%20thought%20it%20was%20normal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fderek-bell-abuse-coach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Former%20Newcastle%20player%20on%20being%20abused%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20horrific.%20He%20thought%20it%20was%20normal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fderek-bell-abuse-coach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc5c1643554b41a772436e1202c0734e0820a0d0%2F0_0_2731_4096%2F2731.jpg>
 Derek Bell in action for Newcastle United against Shrewsbury Town in September 
1982. Photograph: Peter Robinson/Empics Sport 
Then, when his work for the council involved helping asylum seekers to settle 
in Newcastle, including “very, very vulnerable” refugee teenagers with no 
parents, he saw a man in the hostel grounds, hiding behind a tree. When he went 
to investigate, he found that it was Ormond.

“My mind went berserk,” recalls Bell, now 52. “I thought: he is here to groom 
these vulnerable kids, to pick up kids; they didn’t speak the language, they 
were in a foreign country: how vulnerable are they? And he’s hiding behind a 
tree.”

They called the police, he says, but Ormond had melted away. Bell went home to 
the hell of sleepless nights and sweats, and “intrusive thoughts” of the abuse 
he had suffered himself. It began at the boys club, with Ormond, only 24 
himself, in the changing rooms, telling the boys to expose and touch themselves.

But he targeted Bell for more serious sexual acts, imposing control with 
threats and blackmail, that he could block the boy’s football progress if he 
did not conform. He won the trust of Bell’s parents and began to drive him 
home, stopping in car parks to sexually abuse him. Then he started to stay over 
at Bell’s home.

“He was suddenly right in my house. It was horrendous, horrific, absolutely 
horrific,” says Bell, a well-built man who prided himself on being a formidable 
physical presence on the football field. “He would make all sorts of excuses 
saying he had to stay the night; then he blackmailed me to do these explicit 
acts. My mam and dad were so innocent.”

His brother, two years older, had two single beds in the bedroom next door to 
that of Bell’s parents. Ormond would sometimes stay there when Derek’s brother 
was away with his girlfriend.

“He would force me into bed with him, to perform sexual acts,” Bell says in a 
soft voice, shaking a little, his eyes repeatedly welling with tears. “He tried 
to get me to consent. I just found it horrendous.

“It was pure, unbelievable heartache. Thinking my mam and dad were next door 
and he was performing these sexual acts. He had groomed us for a couple of 
years and … he thought it was normal. Deep down in my mind I knew it wasn’t 
normal, but I was so scared to speak and come out and say it wasn’t right. It 
was just, horrendous.”

Through the “double whammy” of his injury-ruined football career and legacy of 
abuse, Bell, worried about shame and stigma, had not talked about Ormond for 
many years until he warned the Newcastle United youth coach about him many 
years later. But after seeing him in the grounds of the asylum hostel, Bell did 
confide in a close group of friends, and decided that he should finally try to 
have Ormond convicted. Bell went round to his house early one Sunday morning, 
with a concealed tape recorder in his jacket, an old-fashioned, quite bulky 
one, he recalls. Ormond invited him in, then Bell tried to secure enough 
incriminating admissions on to the tape.

“It was difficult,” he remembers. “I said: ‘What you did to me years ago, 
George, why did you do that?’

“He said: “You are not going to tell the police, are you?’ Straight away. He 
didn’t apologise, he didn’t say sorry, he was just worried about me going to 
the police. I said: ‘No, for my own sake, I just want a reason why: why did you 
feel the need to sexually assault us, bribe us about not playing, that you 
would tell clubs’ scouts I was crap and want to ruin my career? Why did you 
threaten us to have sexual intercourse with you: why?’”

He recalls that while Ormond did not apologise, he said enough to take to the 
police. Bell played the tape to a couple of friends, and they were “just 
astounded”.

He made contact with Northumbria police, took the tape, and worked with the 
force for 18 months to gather further witnesses and bring the prosecution. He 
recalls that the police did talk to Newcastle United but all the witnesses in 
court gave evidence of abuse only at Montagu and North Fenham. Ormond denied 
the charges, but after a week’s trial, at which all the witnesses gave evidence 
on condition of anonymity, he was convicted and sentenced to six years in 
prison.

The trial judge, Esmond Faulks, said in his sentencing remarks that Ormond had 
been “wholly preoccupied with sex” and that: “The evidence demonstrates you 
were a predatory abuser of young boys. You used your position as a football 
coach to target vulnerable young children. You ingratiated yourself with their 
parents and prevented disclosure by the power you wielded over them as their 
coach.”

He also said that Bell, the principal witness, needed help, and now Bell 
reflects that he did not receive any of the support he needed. He felt that 
Newcastle United then wanted the abuse “pushed under the carpet” and to 
minimise its impact on the club’s reputation, and feels “let down” that nobody 
from the club’s hierarchy even called him throughout or afterwards. Northumbria 
police, too, he says, did not follow up with any support.

The conviction of Ormond did not ease the psychological burden on his victim. 
Bell wells up again when recalling his three suicide attempts and many more 
times he contemplated it; his three marriages all ended in divorce. In 2009 he 
was convicted himself of violence against his then wife, who obtained a court 
order which prevented him seeing her or his son and stepdaughter for two years. 
He would drink till he dropped, he says, and was like “an exploding train”, 
boiling with anger.

“I have done things I am thoroughly ashamed of, and I am not saying it as an 
excuse, but there was a rationale, a reason behind it: that I could not cope 
with daily life, with the abuse I suffered. And I didn’t talk to anybody about 
it, because I felt I couldn’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fderek-bell-abuse-coach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37d2cf61a555741eb68147bd0de925051b4b96a6%2F343_343_5417_3497%2F5417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Former%20Newcastle%20player%20on%20being%20abused%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20horrific.%20He%20thought%20it%20was%20normal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fderek-bell-abuse-coach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Former%20Newcastle%20player%20on%20being%20abused%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20horrific.%20He%20thought%20it%20was%20normal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fderek-bell-abuse-coach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37d2cf61a555741eb68147bd0de925051b4b96a6%2F343_343_5417_3497%2F5417.jpg>
 Derek Bell, photographed at St James’ Park, Newcastle. Photograph: Murdo 
MacLeod for the Guardian 
He has taken the decision to speak out publicly since other footballers have, 
partly for his own reputation as a well-known person in the north east, so 
people can better understand the troubles he has had. He also firmly believes 
that suffering in silence has made his trauma worse; that he has “lived a lie”, 
for example in not openly telling people that after 25 years working for the 
council, he had to retire on medical grounds. That came after his job in 
housing involved him for a year in working to resettle paedophiles, which 
triggered his own trauma again.

After his last suicide attempt, he was sectioned under the Mental Health Act, 
was in a secure unit for two months, and began to receive psychiatric help. 
Still a football man who likes a laugh, with a partner of six years and wide 
circle of friends, he has been diagnosed with post traumatic stress disorder 
and borderline personality disorder, and been through years of cognitive 
behavioural therapy and other psychiatric treatment.

He hopes that speaking out will prompt more people who have been abused to 
feel that they can come forward, but having experienced the pressures on the 
National Health Service’s mental health provision, urges the clubs, Football 
Association and Professional Footballers Association to have support in place 
for the traumatised people who will need help. Newcastle United have supported 
him since he made contact last week, listened to him and helped him to tell his 
story, and they are preparing to assist with any new investigation by the 
police or other authority.

Of Ormond’s 25 years, including three at Newcastle United, after he first 
became a coach at the boys club, Bell says: “I would be amazed if nobody else 
was abused. If people were, I am trying to say: don’t be in silence, because 
they must be in absolute torment. Don’t be afraid or ashamed: come forward.”

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and ChildLine for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 
0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 