
Former ABC managing director Brian Johns has died of cancer aged 79.

The outgoing managing director, Mark Scott, paid tribute to his predecessor 
<http://about.abc.net.au/press-releases/brian-johns-ao/>, saying Johns was “a 
man ahead of his time” for his anticipation of the rise of digital news and 
entertainment.

“[M]uch of the work we still do is a direct result of the innovation he 
brought to the broadcaster,” Scott said of Johns, who filled the role from 1995 
to 2000.

“He is remembered by ABC staff as a leader who steered the broadcaster through 
challenging times and positioned it for the digital age. He saw quite clearly 
that traditional broadcast platforms would converge and essentially future 
audiences would seek out and demand content when and where they needed it.”

Johns had a storied career in government, media and cultural institutions. As 
well as running the ABC, he was at various times a director at Penguin Books, 
founding chairman of the Copyright Agency Limited, chief executive of SBS, 
principal adviser in the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet under both
Malcolm Fraser <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-fraser> and 
Gough Whitlam, and chief political correspondent for the Sydney Morning Herald 
and the Australian.

He also served on the board of Melbourne University Press. Publisher Louise 
Adlertold the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-01/former-abc-managing-director-brian-johns-dies-aged-79/7062934>
 on Friday Johns was “a tremendously generous colleague”.

“One of my very early memories of him was him telling me ... it was really 
important to regularly walk down to the warehouse and talk to the guys because 
they would give me honest feedback about what was selling and what wasn’t – and 
he was so right,” she said.

Former Sun-Herald journalist Alex Mitchell wrote on Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/alex.mitchell.7965692>that Johns was “a great 
Australian”.

“What a life!” he wrote. 

“The best response? Follow his example and remain engaged. Become an activist 
for culture, education, health or human rights. We’ve lost a great Australian 
and to me, personally, one of my oldest and dearest friends. I’ll miss the 
phone calls which always started with: ‘What are you reading?’”

Scott gave the inaugural Brian Johns lecture 
<http://about.abc.net.au/speeches/the-future-of-the-australian-story/> in 
September, in which he said digital innovation would continue to challenge the 
viability of Australian storytelling on the “burning platform” of TV.

Johns attended the lecture, at which he was roundly praised, but ABC producer 
David Salter,writing in Crikey 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2015/09/16/mark-scott-free-from-constraining-shackles-of-his-contract-still-has-nothing-new-to-say/?wpmp_switcher=mobile>
, said he “did not speak” and “did not look well”.

Writers and journalists paid tribute to Johns on social media, many stressing 
the breadth of his contribution in numerous disciplines.
Anne Summers (@SummersAnne) 
Vale Brian Johns champion of Aust culture. Tributes paid to former ABC 
managing director who has died aged 79https://t.co/sDhH3P5Wfg 
<https://t.co/sDhH3P5Wfg>
 <https://twitter.com/SummersAnne/status/682719034668785666> January 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SummersAnne/status/682719034668785666> David Dale 
(@Thetribalmind) 
My first boss in my first job, scary, inspiring, showed me journalism is a 
form of madness:https://t.co/3MVyBYZXRU <https://t.co/3MVyBYZXRU> @Colvinius 
<https://twitter.com/Colvinius>
 <https://twitter.com/Thetribalmind/status/682711017705439232> December 31, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/Thetribalmind/status/682711017705439232> Stephen 
Murray (@smurray38) 
The passing of Brian Johns - publisher, broadcaster. One of those who enriched 
the Australian story. Valehttps://t.co/XVrKV8h92R <https://t.co/XVrKV8h92R>
 <https://twitter.com/smurray38/status/682700079027716096> December 31, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/smurray38/status/682700079027716096>  