
Sky Atlantic’s £25m series Fortitude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/fortitude> launched with just over 
700,000 viewers on Thursday night – the four-year-old channel’s biggest 
audience to date for a UK originated drama.

Fortitude averaged 722,000 viewers and a 3.5% audience share from 9pm – nearly 
20 times the normal ratings for thatSky Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic> slot. Only Game of Thrones 
regularly attracts a similar or bigger audience for the channel.

The heavily-marketed Arctic circle murder mystery features an impressive 
international cast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/26/new-sky-scandinavian-drama-fortitude>
, including Stanley Tucci, Sofie Gråbøl, Michael Gambon, Christopher Eccleston 
and Jessica Raine.

Fortitude is expected to be the most watched show in pay-TV homes on Thursday 
and came within a whisker of beating the 9pm competition on BBC2 and Channel 4.

Channel 4’s Russell T Davies drama Cucumber averaged 800,000 viewers, down 
from 1.1 million for last week’s opening episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/23/channel-4-cucumber-russell-t-davies>
, as did BBC2’s 9pm offering, the revived Modern Times documentary strand’s 
first offering The Vikings are Coming.


Cucumber’s E4 companion show Banana averaged 305,000 viewers from 10pm, 
compared to 408,000 for last Thursday’s first outing.

BBC1’s Death in Paradise continued to rule the 9pm roost, averaging 7 million 
and a 29.9% share, against the concluding episode of ITV documentary series 
Bring Back Borstal (1.9 million) and Channel 5’s Celebrity Big Brother (3 
million).

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk> overnight figures, including 
live, +1 (except for BBC channels) and same day timeshifted (recorded) viewing, 
but excluding on demand, or other – unless otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, 
BBC2, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 generally include ratings for their HD 
simulcast services, unless otherwise stated



 