
The number of British universities divesting from fossil fuels has leaped to 
43, a quarter of the total. The surge means the UK leads the world in campus 
action to pull university funds from oil, gas and coal.

Financial institutions and charities are also divesting and at least $2.6tn 
(£2.1tn) of assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/leonardo-dicaprio-joins-26tn-fossil-fuel-divestment-movement>
 are covered by such pledges around the world. Scientists have shown that most
fossil fuel reserves cannot be burned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says>
 without dangerous climate change. Campaigners argue this makes fossil fuel 
companies bad investments on both moral and financial grounds.

The total number of UK universities that are divesting was published on 
Tuesday by the student group, People & Planet. It found 16 new institutions 
have committed to divestment, taking the total funds affected to more than 
£10bn.

Most committed to sell off all fossil fuel investments, including the 
University of Kent, University of Lincoln, Cardiff Metropolitan University and 
Manchester Metropolitan University. Others committed to divest the most 
polluting investments – in coal and tar sands – including the University of 
Sussex, Aston University and Goldsmiths University of London.

Many leading universities had already pledged to divest, following student 
campaigns, includingOxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/18/oxford-university-rules-out-investing-in-coal-and-tar-sands>
,Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/26/university-edinburgh-divest-fossil-fuel-student-protestors>
 and the London School of Economics. Kings College London initially rejected 
divestment calls, despite the intervention of Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a former 
student, whosaid in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/10/desmond-tutu-anti-apartheid-style-boycott-fossil-fuel-industry>
: “People of conscience need to break their ties with corporations financing 
the injustice of climate change.” In September,KCL agreed to drop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/kings-college-london-diverts-fossil-fuel-endowments-to-clean-energy>
 its most polluting investments.

“UK universities are world leaders on cutting-edge research into climate 
solutions and have a particular responsibility in shaping our future society’s 
sustainability,” said Amoge Ukaegbu, at People & Planet. “So it’s not 
surprising they have realised that to safeguard civilisation, they must turn 
their backs on a morally and financially bankrupt industry.

“The Fossil Free <http://gofossilfree.org/> movement has grown exponentially 
with students and universities at its core, pioneering a new way for public 
institutions to be truly independent of the fossil fuel economy and in doing 
so, trailblazing a path for wider society to follow.”

The fossil fuel divestment campaign began in the US, where 35 educational 
institutions have joined, but it has now been overtaken. “UK universities are 
now world leaders in divestment,” said Andrew Taylor at People & Planet. “We 
have an advantage over our friends in the US as the British public hasn’t been 
targeted to the same extent by big-oil-funded climate denial.”

However, only one in four UK universities are on track to meet their carbon 
reduction targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/22/universities-green-goals-environmental-targets-people-planet-league>
 by 2020. Teams leading environmental initiatives are being cut and 
sustainability strategies have not been renewed, according to the results of the
2016 People & Planet University League 
<https://peopleandplanet.org/university-league/table>, with the lack of 
government funding also blamed for the stalling of energy-saving schemes.
 