
Four members of a Latvian organised crime gang who used vulnerable fellow 
migrants to launder stolen money and offered their indebted female eastern 
European workers as brides for hire have been sentenced to a total of 23 years 
in prison at Huntingdon crown court.

The gangsters on England's doorstep | Felicity Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/11/gangsters-on-our-doorstep> 
Juris Valujevs, 37, Ivars Mezals, 30, Oksana Valujeva, 35 and Lauma Vankova, 
27, were convicted in March of laundering stolen money through other migrants’ 
hijacked bank accounts for their own profit. They had successfully laundered 
over £50,000 from fraudulent cheques and hacked Paypal accounts when they were 
stopped.

Valujevs, his wife, Valujeva, and Vankova were also convicted of conspiracy to 
commit immigration offences by arranging sham marriages between Latvian women 
and Asian men so that the men could apply for UK visas. Mezals was acquitted of 
the sham marriage charge at an earlier trial.

The gateway to the group’s criminal activities was an illegal unlicensed 
gangmaster operation run from Wisbech in Cambridgeshire by Valujevs and Mezals. 
They recruited Latvian and Lithuanian migrants for other licensed gangmasters, 
who in turn sent them to work across the Fens on farms and in factories 
supplying the UK’s main supermarkets.

Sentencing the four, Judge Jonathon Cooper said their “cynical and 
manipulative behaviour towards workers and the wider public was wholly 
unacceptable”.

Valujevs was the ringleader and he, together with Mezals, abused their 
position of power by setting up a series of frauds targeting innocent victims, 
“using hijacked bank accounts from poorly paid migrant workers you were 
purporting to help”, he said.

Valujevs and the two women then recruited some of their most vulnerable female 
workers as brides for hire, threatening one with violence and prostitution if 
she did not go to India to marry a man so he could apply for UK residency. 
Another women was told she would end up likeAlisa Dmitrijeva 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-norfolk-28774484>, a young Latvian woman 
from Wisbech who had been found murdered, if she did not do what she was told.

The gang offered work to migrants on condition that they rented rooms in 
houses they controlled and paid for transport to the jobs in cars they owned. 
Witnesses described paying £50-£60 a week for shared rooms in overcrowded and 
squalid houses, with up to four people sleeping in a room, sometimes on 
mattresses on the floor. The jobs provided were unreliable so that they quickly 
fell in to debt, giving the gang a hold over them. They were then threatened 
and pressurised into taking part in criminal activity.

The two convicted women, Valujeva and Vankova, took new workers, who often 
spoke little English, to open bank accounts so that they could hijack online 
codes and PIN numbers. Vankova was the active recruiter of the brides for hire, 
targeting young single mothers and those who were in debt. They were coerced 
into committing serious immigration crimes while the gang “sheltered in the 
background”.

The gang introduced the workers to a bigger transnational criminal syndicate 
arranging the illegal immigration, which appeared to be centred on a Russian 
organised crime group operating in London.

Noting that sham marriages were endemic in the eastern European community in 
Wisbech, Cooper said it was important to impose sentences reflecting the 
seriousness of the offences and to send a strong message to others tempted to 
make money by the same route.


Valujevs received a sentence of eight and a half years, Valujeva and Vankova 
six years each and Mezals three years.



 