
Stories about the declining bee population and its effects on the environment 
trickle through the news cycle nearly every day. To keep track of the latest 
bee news and make sense of the issues,we're highlighting the major bee stories 
each week, with analysis from the Guardian's Alison Benjamin, co-author of A 
World Without Bees 
<http://www.amazon.com/World-Without-Bees-Allison-Benjamin/dp/B006CDGQKW>, Bees 
in the City: The Urban Beekeepers' Handbook 
<http://www.amazon.com/Bees-City-Urban-Beekeepers-Handbook/dp/0852652313> and 
Keeping Bees and Making Honey 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Keeping-Bees-Making-Honey-2nd/dp/1446303551/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1375193993&sr=1-2>
.

Buzzfeeds Q&A

This week, we've launched the Buzzfeeds Q&A 
<http://q-and-a.theguardian.com/qanda/1507001>. It's a place for you to ask 
your bee-related questions, post links for us to include in our weekly updates 
and for the beekeepers among us to share tips.Alison Benjamin will pop in every 
week and answer your questions.

Beekeepers abuzz over mosquito spraying 
<http://www.salemnews.com/local/x86509946/Beekeepers-abuzz-over-mosquito-spraying>

What happened: The insecticide being sprayed throughout towns in Massachusetts 
to combat West Nile Virus and other mosquito-borne illnesses this summer also 
hit an unintended target: honeybees. Hundreds of thousands died this summer, 
infuriating local beekeepers who are unable to protect their hives from the 
harmful spray.

West Nile can be fatal, but health officials estimate that fewer than 1% of 
people infected develop severe illness. Beekeepers say the decision to spray 
entire towns with the bee-killing insecticide is an overreaction.

Key quote: 

'Bees are like our barometer. If there are bees, we know it's a healthy 
environment,' said beekeeper Kim Klibansky. 'That [mosquito] spray wipes out a 
lot of flying insects, not just mosquitoes. I just don't think the risk is 
worth it.'

Why it matters:  In the United States, from the 1940s, large volumes of DDT 
were sprayed outdoors to kill mosquitoes and pests on crops. Government 
propaganda films show the friendly DDT man coming to 'safely' spray your town. 
But in 1972 it was banned after building up in the food chain and nearly wiping 
out bald eagles, pelicans and other birdsas documented by Rachel Carson in A 
Silent Spring <http://www.nrdc.org/health/pesticides/hcarson.asp>. 

And a variety of human health effects have been discovered, including reduced 
fertility, genital birth defects and breast cancer.

Due to the insecticide now being used in government-run spraying programs to 
combat West Nile virus in US towns has been given the all-clear but some 
scientists and health organizations say the chemicals' health and environmental 
impact has been underestimated, including effects on sensitive people and on 
non-target species such as honeybees. Honeybees can fly up to three miles in 
search of food, so beekeepers need to be given enough notice of the spraying, 
so they have the chance to move their hives well away from town. Although 
people are instructed to stay indoors with their pets, if the chemical is 
harmful to bees and other insects important in the food chain, you have to 
wonder how long before it too is shown to have detrimental effects on the 
ecosystem and human health.

Honey, I'm just popping out for some pollen. I may be some time … 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/nature/honey-im-just-popping-out-for-some-pollen-i-may-bee-some-time-8778948.html>

What happened:  Some bees must travel more than a mile to find food, according 
to a study led by the University of East Anglia in Norwich.

Scientists took samples from more than 3,000 bees, grouped those bees into 
2,000 colonies and mapped the colonies against the landscape to see how far the 
bees traveled.

Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> moved between 880ft to 
1,800ft on average, but bees living in areas with less flowers had to fly more 
than 1.12 miles.

Key quote: 

'We hope that, by providing detailed insights into how bumblebees move around 
landscapes, our results will lead to improved interventions for bees so that 
wildflowers and crops can continue to benefit from their pollination services,' 
said professor Andrew Bourke, a behavioural ecologist and evolutionary 
biologist at the university.

Why it matters: Honeybees fly up to three miles in search of a good food 
source and this study shows bumblebees can forage more than a mile from their 
nest if food is scare nearer home. But no bee wants to exert that much energy 
collecting the nectar and pollen they need to bring home to feed the colony. 
While they collect their food they are pollinating plants and crops, which 
provide food for birds, animals and humans. This research shows that more 
forage needs to be planted in the areas where bumblebees are flying further 
than other areas. If this is farmland, then the research could encourage 
farmers to plant more wildflowers on their land to attract bumblebees who will 
pollinate their crops. There are a number of studies being conducted in the UK 
on how we can better manage our land for pollinators including theUniversity of 
Bristol's urban pollinators project. 
<http://www.bristol.ac.uk/biology/research/ecological/community/pollinators/>

EPA thinks a piece of paper will save bees from pesticides 
<http://www.care2.com/causes/epa-thinks-a-piece-of-paper-will-save-bees-from-pesticides.html>

What happened: Last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/21/bees-buzzfeeds-pesticides-food-prices>
 we wrote about how the EPA is introducing a new label for pesticides in an 
effort to better protect pollinators. This week, people are asking whether 
simply adding a label to pesticides will help preserve the bee population.

Key quote: 

Factory farms make their money by producing a huge volume of product. That 
means everything about the planting, fertilizing, watering and harvesting needs 
to happen exactly on schedule. What are the chances that, on the day of a 
scheduled pesticide application, they're going to stop everything to figure out 
whether the wind is going to carry the poison to a bee population?

Why it matters:  Adding a new label to a bee-toxic pesticide is unlikely to 
reduce bee deaths, because farmers can and will ignore labels and are unlikely 
to be found out or prosecuted for negligence. Moreover, farmers use a range of 
chemicals on their crops including fungicides, pesticides and herbicides. 
Research has shown that the toxicity of these chemicals can increase 1,000-fold 
if they are mixed.

The EPA needs to impose more rigorous tests on the impact pesticides have on 
bee colonies and bee brood, before they approve their use in the field. Earlier 
this year, it approved another highly bee-toxicinsecticide called sulfoxaflor 
<http://www.epa.gov/oppfead1/cb/csb_page/updates/2013/sulfoxaflor-decision.html>
 without these studies on colony and brood health being madeavailable to the 
public 
<http://ecowatch.com/2013/epa-approves-new-pesticide-highly-toxic-to-bees/>.

Stung by fraudsters: how cheap honey is being sold as 'liquid gold' manuka 
variety at £45 a jar 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2401884/Manuka-honey-How-cheap-honey-sold-liquid-gold-variety-45-jar.html>

What happened: The Food Standards Agency has issued a statement alerting 
people to fraudsters who are selling fake versions of manuka honey – a New 
Zealand honey that is claimed to have medicinal qualities – can sell for up to 
£45 a jar.

The main honey supply organization in New Zealand said it thinks 1,700 tons of 
the honey are produced in the country each year, yet the group also estimates 
10,000 tons of "manuka" honey are sold globally each year.

Key quote: 

John Rawcliffe, from the Unique Manuka Factor Honey Association, said: 'There 
is potentially huge fraud. 'There are higher and ever-increasing volumes of 
honey being labelled as manuka that are not manuka.'

Why it matters: Manuka honey, made by bees feeding on the manuka bush in New 
Zealand, has been cleverly marketed as a cure-all, but all types of honey have 
anti-bacterial and antiseptic qualities. Put any honey on a burn and you won't 
scar, gargle with any honey and it will ease a sore throat. Honey throughout 
the ages has been used to threat an A-Z of ailments from arthritis to ulcers. 
Even the Qur'an extols honey's medicinal properties. All that sets Manuka honey 
apart from other varieties are the empirical studies, research, accreditation 
and certification it has undergone which has allowed it to be sold at inflated 
prices. No wonder fraudsters are flogging fake versions.

Hopefully, this will make people switch to buying locally produced honey 
instead, which is usually available in your local deli. It has some major 
advantages over manuka – it hugely saves on food miles, and, although not 
medically proven, can help hay fever sufferers because the honey will contain 
minute quantities of the pollen to which they are allergic. Oh yes, and it 
doesn't cost £45 a jar.
 