
Areva, one of the French companies at the heart of the controversial Hinkley 
Point C <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> nuclear project, 
has unveiled plans to break itself up into three parts in a bid to stem huge 
losses.

The 87% state-owned atomic engineering and uranium mining company is hoping to 
raise €9bn (£7bn) from the government and from selling off assets after running 
up losses of €2bn last year.

Areva, a 10% equity participant in the £18bn planned new Hinkley scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/19/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-plant-future-doubt-areva>
, is also using the split to isolate financial commitments to a hugely delayed 
project at Olkiluoto in Finland.

“The two [restructuring of the group and the Hinkley scheme] are not 
intrinsically linked,” said a spokeswoman for Areva. “The company’s 
restructuring programme, which includes the sale of [Areva] NP’s operations to 
EDF, is a positive step forward that will make the whole business and industry 
stronger.”

EDF, which is also part-owed by the French state, has its own massive debt 
problems and had refused to buy part of Areva, as ministers wanted, unless it 
could take the business without any financial commitments for the Olkiluoto 3 
scheme.

Areva, which is providing the same European pressurised water reactor for 
Olkiluoto as is planned for Hinkley, is currently in a standoff over competing 
legal claims with the Finnish utility TVO relating to the project in Finland.

Areva said it was fully committed to sorting these issues out and completing 
the reactor, which is currently nine years behind schedule. The problems in 
Finland and the financial issues facing Areva and EDF have been seized on by 
Hinkley’s critics as reasons why the British government should pull the plug on 
the Somerset scheme.

They are unlikely to draw much comfort from the latest restructuring, which 
they may feel only points up once again the scale of the difficulties being 
faced by Areva and EDF.

A formal decision to go ahead with the investment at Hinkley has been put off 
until September amidinternal opposition at EDF from unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/27/hinkley-point-c-french-union-opposition-casts-fresh-doubt-on-project>
 and others about the wisdom of taking on such a major financial commitment.
 