
A varsity jacket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/may/03/how-to-dress-varsity-jacket> 
covered in patches. Jeans frayed to their wearer’s liking. Trainers with their 
owner’s initials printed on the heel – customisation was one of 2016’s 
strongest trends in fashion. It’s set to take flight in 2017 as the consumers – 
once dictated to by the industry’s all-powerful designers – becomes the 
designers themselves.

Customisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jul/30/made-for-you-pradas-customised-shoes-rise-personalised-fashion>
 used to mean the details: monogramming a bag or changing the colourways of 
some sneakers. Brands ranging fromPrada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada> and Louis Vuitton to Nike, Gap and 
Whistles allowed consumers to add or adapt existing designs to their own 
specifications. But, now, smaller startups are developing something that tends 
towards the bespoke, moving away from adding something to an existing design, 
to creating it in the first place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d0dc2c3b5a795d0d296cc0e01d9444d8aefd757%2F0_0_1200_1200%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20customisation%20to%20DIY%20handbags%20%E2%80%93%20how%20customers%20became%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20customisation%20to%20DIY%20handbags%20%E2%80%93%20how%20customers%20became%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d0dc2c3b5a795d0d296cc0e01d9444d8aefd757%2F0_0_1200_1200%2F1200.jpg>
 A Mon Purse bag design. Photograph: Mon Purse 
Take Mon Purse <http://uk.monpurse.com/>, a bag company set up by Australian 
Lana Hopkins at the end of 2014. Using the same 3D technology as gaming, Mon 
Purse allows consumers to design their own bag, from the colour and texture of 
the leather to the lining and metal details. There are 6bn potential designs 
that could be created. Hopkins, who previously worked in media, partly based 
her idea aroundBuild-A-Bear <http://www.buildabear.co.uk/>, the shop where 
children are able to create their own teddy bear, which the brand believes is 
“the most fun you’ll ever make”. “I spent a good hour building a bear for my 
nephew,” recalls Hopkins. “It was kind of like a come-to-Jesus moment – if I 
could get that excited designing a bear, imagine how my girlfriends would feel 
if they could design the perfect handbag?”

Build-A-Bear was valued at more than £157m 
<http://fortune.com/2016/05/03/build-a-bear-sale/> in May 2016 and Hopkins, 
while not quite reading those numbers, is certainly financially on to a good 
thing. After Mon Purse was stocked in Australia’s Meier department stores last 
year, it was the bestseller across all handbags in a matter of weeks. 
Selfridges, says Hopkins, wouldn’t let her leave a meeting until they she 
agreed a deal that had the store stock the brand in London and Manchester. This 
year saw the brand grow 800%, suggesting that people love the ability to bypass 
the designer and do it themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69e114da1c7d2e66417ff3817b090dd1b8cdeb91%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20customisation%20to%20DIY%20handbags%20%E2%80%93%20how%20customers%20became%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20customisation%20to%20DIY%20handbags%20%E2%80%93%20how%20customers%20became%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69e114da1c7d2e66417ff3817b090dd1b8cdeb91%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Everybody designers Iris Alonzo and Caroline Crespo. Photograph: camraface 
If Mon Purse is a consumer personalising the bag they wear, other brands are 
channelling consumer input into products they then sell on to other people.
Everybody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/21/is-everybody-the-natural-successor-to-american-apparel>
, founded by two ex-American Apparel alums Iris Alonzo and Caroline Crespo this 
year, selects individuals to design “what’s missing in their life” with 
everything from a T-shirt to a Mac the result. Eventually, the plan is to take 
ideas from anyone contributing to the website. “The only rule that we have is 
that we have to know how to make it,” says Alonzo.

Away to Mars <https://www.awaytomars.com/>, set up by Alfredo Orobio at the 
end of 2015, it calls itself “the world’s first 100% user-created fashion 
brand”. The website allows contributors to submit designs, with a community of 
5,000 potentially working together. The most popular designs – from minimal 
T-shirts with a twist, to silver shirts – get put into production.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f01f4b8ecd63be457f900368c1d88b014c41a95%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20customisation%20to%20DIY%20handbags%20%E2%80%93%20how%20customers%20became%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20customisation%20to%20DIY%20handbags%20%E2%80%93%20how%20customers%20became%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdiy-style-how-fashion-went-backwards-customisation-designer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f01f4b8ecd63be457f900368c1d88b014c41a95%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 Away to Mars designs. Photograph: Gleeson Paulino 
Orobio, who is 28, is targeting a 14-25-year-old audience, often through 
Facebook groups and social media, and user numbers are doubling every month. 
This next generation of consumers have grown up in a world where they can 
tailor everything from an Instagram account to a Spotify playlist, ready to 
share with others. For them, the idea of doing the same with clothes is a 
no-brainer – it’s fashion that needs to catch up. “It’s a paradox because, in 
some ways, fashion is all about novelty, with things changing every six months 
– but, in other ways, it’s very conservative,” says Orobio. The industry is 
starting to pay attention – Away to Mars now has support from the Centre for 
Fashion Enterprise, which works with young fashion businesses in the UK.

Maks Fus Mickiewicz, senior journalist at trend analyst the Future Laboratory, 
believes this shift to consumer power is only going to get more pronounced. 
“Fashion brands are realising that to stay ahead of the game they need to move 
away from imposing their aesthetic on others,” he says. “That’s not how the 
world works anymore. There’s a new dialogue with consumers.” Mickiewicz says 
it’s the tech industry that should be studied for next steps. “Technology 
companies develop software but there’s an openness to it being updated and 
changed,” he says. “It’s about fashion companies letting go of the idea of the 
creative genius at the top.” The most fun you’ll ever make? That’s a slogan 
that could go beyond teddy bears.
 