
Erica Garner – the brave daughter of Eric Garner, who died this July when 
police officer Daniel Pantaleo restrained him in anillegal chokehold 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/12/context-for-the-punishment-free-killing-of-eric-garner/383413/>
 –staged a “die-in” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/12/erica-garner-leads-protests-eric>
 last week outside the storefront where her father said his last words: “I 
can’t breathe.” The phrase, which Eric Garner repeated 11 times as Pantaleo 
refused to release his grip, has become an international rallying cry for 
protesters,celebrities 
<http://www.nba.com/2014/news/12/09/lakers-i-cant-breathe-shirts.ap/> and 
students 
<http://www.wsbt.com/news/local/notre-dame-womens-basketball-team-wear-i-cant-breathe-shirts/30217604>
 alike.

And Erica Garner has, like a lot of women have, been at the forefront of much 
of the New York-based protest movement advocating for changes in system or law 
and order – and how we as a society view black lives. She is, like a lot of 
women are, supported by organizers working tokeep momentum going 
<http://www.thisstopstoday.org/11daysofaction> for tangible, systemic change, 
even in the wake of such collective, ongoing pain.

Saturday afternoon in New York, a diverse crowd of over 50,000 people 
<http://www.bustle.com/articles/53822-millions-march-nyc-attracts-50000-people-turning-out-for-a-city-that-cant-breathe-photos>
 marched through the city expressing frustration with a system that continues to
let black die people without justice 
<http://gawker.com/unarmed-people-of-color-killed-by-police-1999-2014-1666672349>
. TheMillions March NYC <http://www.millionsmarchnyc.org/>, characterized as 
much by deep affirmation of black life as collective outrage over that 
injustice, brought together people of all backgrounds to protest ongoing state 
violence.

But the latest successful moment of the post-Ferguson movement wasn’t the work 
of an established civil rights organization 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/13/march-on-washington-ferguson-movement-al-sharpton>
 or well-funded non-profit: like the protests and organizing in Missouri and 
beyond, it wasdriven chiefly by the efforts of young black women 
<http://www.theroot.com/articles/culture/2014/12/the_fierce_urgency_of_now_why_young_protesters_bum_rushed_the_mic.html>
 and brought to fruition by a coalition of young multi-racial activists. Umaara 
Elliott and Synead Nichols, thelead organizers of Saturday’s march 
<http://www.millionsmarchnyc.org/#!the-issue/c142s> noted that they are part of 
a new generation of activists “willing to take up the torch” and “demand that 
action be taken at every level of government to ensure that these racist 
killings by the police cease.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Fferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26a49badea77121c6eba4cccf6116a36ebf526c0%2F0_1872_2622_1574%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Ferguson%20to%20New%20York%2C%20women%20are%20leading%20protests%20because%20all%20%23BlackLivesMatter%20%7C%20Hannah%20Giorgis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Fferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Ferguson%20to%20New%20York%2C%20women%20are%20leading%20protests%20because%20all%20%23BlackLivesMatter%20%7C%20Hannah%20Giorgis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Fferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26a49badea77121c6eba4cccf6116a36ebf526c0%2F0_1872_2622_1574%2F2000.jpg>
 Protesters march on 5th Avenue during the Millions March NYC on 13 December 
2014 in New York. Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images 
Like the young women of Ferguson, women like Elliott and Nichols are on the 
front lines of the fight against racist state violence. It isyoung black women 
being teargassed 
<http://www.ebony.com/news-views/ferguson-forward-when-i-close-my-eyes-at-night-i-see-people-running-from-tear-ga>
, providing jail support for comrades arrested during protests, andholding up 
signs <https://twitter.com/Awkward_Duck/status/543927179688820736> that assert 
our shared humanity alongside male comrades. “NYPD ARE THE BROKEN WINDOWS” read 
one sign I passed as I marched withfellow young – and female – organizers 
<http://thegrio.com/2014/12/14/black-women-lives-matter/>, a nod to the 
discriminatory policing policy thaterroneously suggests 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2014/12/broken_windows_policing_doesn_t_work_it_also_may_have_killed_eric_garner.html>
 taking a harshly punitive stance on “quality of life” crimes will somehow 
reduce the rates of violent offenses.

The most recent dynamic leadership of black women 
<http://thefeministwire.com/2014/10/fergusonfridays-black-freedom-fighters-men-interview-black-women-front-line-ferguson/>
 on thefront lines in Ferguson 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/women-hold-the-front-lines-ferguson> and cities 
across the US reflects what black women understand intuitively by virtue of our 
own experiences: theradical power of black women-led activism 
<http://www.nylon.com/articles/brittany-ferrell-interview> lies not in token 
representation for the sake of optics, but in deep, meaningful attention to
intersecting oppressions 
<http://socialdifference.columbia.edu/files/socialdiff/projects/Article__Mapping_the_Margins_by_Kimblere_Crenshaw.pdf>
 and the solutions that emerge from understanding them. It maintains that we 
are all affected differently by injustice and must address its multiple 
iterations simultaneously– that“nobody’s free until everybody’s free” 
<http://www.jacksonfreepress.com/news/2011/apr/15/fannie-lou-hamer/>.

A commitment to understanding the overlapping vulnerabilities that different 
black people face – that is what’s behind our common quest to defend all black 
lives. When humanity is defined not solely by proximity to whitenessor manhood, 
all black people are closer to freedom and justice.

“The dream is to be able to exist in this space with everyone else and push 
our entire community forward as black women,” Brittany Ferrell, co-founder of 
Ferguson’sMillennial Activists United <https://twitter.com/millennialau>, tells 
me. The grassroots organization, formed in the wake of Michael Brown’s shooting 
death at the hands of officer Darren Wilson, is led largely by young black 
women.

The names and stories of black women and girls who lost their lives 
<http://www.rolereboot.org/culture-and-politics/details/2014-08-black-unarmed-women-girls-without-weapons-killed-law-enforcement/>
 at the hands of law enforcement oftenfall out of the public narrative 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/08/24/black_women_are_killed_by_police_too_partner/>
, underscoring the need for black women’s leadership in movements dedicated to 
ending state violence against black bodies. Uplifting and supporting activism 
from the margins is what enables us tokeep saying these women’s names 
<https://twitter.com/sandylocks/status/543896598162735104> as we protest the 
injustice in the names of our Erics, our Michaels, ourTamirs 
<http://stacialbrown.com/2014/11/24/for_tamir/>. It is what honors Rekia 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/chi-trial-date-set-for-cop-charged-in-womans-death-20140915-story.html>
,Aiyana 
<http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/wayne/2014/10/03/weekley-trial-aiyana-stanley-jones/16636179/>
, Deshawnda,Nizah 
<http://www.blackgirldangerous.org/2014/12/whose-lives-matter-trans-women-color-police-violence/>
,Tanisha 
<http://www.cleveland.com/metro/index.ssf/2014/11/cleveland_woman_with_mental_il_1.html>
,Gabriella 
<http://elixher.com/lesbian-woman-of-color-killed-by-sacramento-county-police-officers/>
, and countless other black women killed by the police.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Fferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb69ffafa9fb03cfdad74b60b82d462f44c278f2d%2F1024_542_2476_1485%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Ferguson%20to%20New%20York%2C%20women%20are%20leading%20protests%20because%20all%20%23BlackLivesMatter%20%7C%20Hannah%20Giorgis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Fferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Ferguson%20to%20New%20York%2C%20women%20are%20leading%20protests%20because%20all%20%23BlackLivesMatter%20%7C%20Hannah%20Giorgis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Fferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb69ffafa9fb03cfdad74b60b82d462f44c278f2d%2F1024_542_2476_1485%2F2000.jpg>
 Women protestors raise their hands in solidarity near the location where 
18-year-old Michael Brown was shot dead in Ferguson, Missouri on 29 November 
2014. Photograph: Adrees Latif/REUTERS 
For instance, one of the most visible groups in the Ferguson-based protests 
was Black Lives Matter – “an ideological and political intervention in a world 
where Black lives are systematically and intentionally targeted for demise 
<http://thefeministwire.com/2014/10/blacklivesmatter-2/>” – and it was formed 
by three black women. Its inaugural project in Ferguson, a national call for 
organizers from around the country toride down and quite literally show up 
<http://colorlines.com/archives/2014/09/get_on_the_bus_inside_the_black_life_matters_freedom_ride.html>
 in solidarity with residents, was organized by queer black leaders Patrisse 
Cullors and Darnell Moore.

“What feels different now is that who’s at the forefront of the conversation 
is no longer the old vanguard of primarily cisgender, heterosexual black men,” 
Cullors told me. “There is a qualitative difference in whose leadership is 
being visibilized, and black women are forcing ourselves into the forefront.”

As we all grapple with racist state violence 
<http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/26986-amid-shootings-chicago-police-department-upholds-culture-of-impunity>
 in the context of a deeply patriarchal society, black women organizers 
continue to put their bodies on the line to bring forth justice where it has 
yet to take root. They are supported by the men who stand in solidarity and 
community, like Moore,Deray McKesson of Ferguson <http://twitter.com/deray> and 
countless others who areamplifying their work 
<https://twitter.com/deray/status/543856664051740672>. We are in this thing 
together <http://www.counterpunch.org/2014/11/25/75039/>, and our resistance 
will flourish as we envision a world where both our collaborative work and 
unique contributions are celebrated.

“I hope these protesters accomplish a lot,” Erica Garner said in an interview 
last week <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPft3VtIQ8Q>. “I hope it shows 
people that we’re very passionate about this and that we are not going to stop 
until we get justice.”

 * #FergusonNext: No justice, no peace, what now? Share your solutions 
<http://www.fergusonnext.com/>  