
During the first half of this decade, if you looked hard enough, any man with 
an interest in style was dressed like a Scandinavian. Fast-forward to this 
winter, and it seems that we are all Scandinavians now. When Topman launches a 
“Malmö collection”, it’s the same cosy aesthetic that helped makeThe Killing’s 
Sofie Gråbøl <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sofie_Gr%C3%A5b%C3%B8l> a star that 
has clearly achieved total hegemony on the British high street.

From chains like River Island to more upmarket retailers like Matches and Mr 
Porter, to a display at Harvey Nichols based on the lifestyle of the modern 
Nordic male, “Scandi” is everywhere. Clothes of sturdy simplicity are summoning 
up the spirit of “hygge”, the Danish candidate for word of the year which 
translates as warm conviviality in a cold climate.

The shift from alternative to mainstream has been on the cards for the past 
few years, given our fetishisation of the place, or rather places. After all, 
“Scandi” is a narrow term for a broad look reflecting the taste of three 
countries: Sweden, Norway and Denmark.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fscandinavian-style-takes-over-uk-fashion-retailing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4560fa723bd2e6c27d1de5b566658bbd84ff349f%2F815_1289_2798_3496%2F2798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Nordic%20noir%20to%20hygge%20hype%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Scandi%20style%20took%20over%20the%20high%20street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fscandinavian-style-takes-over-uk-fashion-retailing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Nordic%20noir%20to%20hygge%20hype%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Scandi%20style%20took%20over%20the%20high%20street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fscandinavian-style-takes-over-uk-fashion-retailing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4560fa723bd2e6c27d1de5b566658bbd84ff349f%2F815_1289_2798_3496%2F2798.jpg>
 The lifestyle of the modern Nordic male is now everywhere. Photograph: REX 
Ubiquity might also be leading to some degree of confusion. Topman’s 
collection, for example, makes reference to Scandinavian style in the loosest 
sense (textured trainers and a lot of navy). Kristian W Andersen, creative 
director of theCopenhagen International Fashion Fair <http://ciff.dk/>, told the
Observer: “Personally, I associate skinny jeans with [French fashion designer] 
Hedi Slimane more than something Nordic. When some Scandinavian brands are 
doing extremely well internationally, people will automatically associate all 
of Scandinavia with just those brands.” To Andersen it’s less about fashion and 
more about function and expression: “Denmark has an old design tradition that 
came in the wake of industrialism. It was the idea of combining simplicity and 
functionality.

“I think it’s a part of the hype surrounding Scandinavia,” explains Andersen. 
“Our way of life is on the radar internationally at the moment. Many countries 
look to us when it comes to our values, our systems, and our successful work 
life. We are not only successful in fashion but in also architecture, furniture 
and design. I think people right now are really buying into the tales of Nordic 
countries.”

Our way of life is on the radar internationally at the moment
Kristian Andersen, director of the Copenhagen fashion fair 
A more mundane reason for the new mass appeal of “Scandi” is that the 
outerwear is designed for the cold. “It’s meant for the climate of those 
territories,” explains Mr Porter’s buying director, Fiona Firth. Martha 
Evans-Roden, menswear PR at Harvey Nichols, agrees on the importance of 
comparable climates. “It’s unsurprising that this look has become normal in a 
country whose winters last longer than its summer. It’s about time everyone 
started wearing it.”

“We launched with Acne Studios on the site in 2011,” said Firth, “and our 
roster has grown to include other Scandinavian brands including Nudie Jeans, 
NN07, S.N.S Herning*, and Our Legacy.”

Acne, meanwhile, widely considered the godfather of Scandinavian fashion, has 
since evolved from slick, traditional basics to something “more 
designer-minded”, in a bid to capitalise on its global success.

It has also paved the way for an influx of cheaper high-street brands like 
Weekday and Tiger of Sweden.

Until now, for the self-consciously stylish, luxe sportswear has been the more 
fashionable option and Scandinavian style has been more closely associated with 
an older market.

Firth at Mr Porter agrees the look has gone mass market, and that this is no 
bad thing: “I would tend to agree, as the style is very accessible to men of 
any age. The pieces are often the building blocks of casual wear.”

Evans-Roden thinks the full impact of Scandi’s breakout into the world of mass 
consumption is yet to be seen, “although I suppose that basic style is more 
easy to spot, more based on trends than labels, so men tend to come in and look 
for a shearling jacket rather than ‘something from Dior’.”
 