
Frustration got the better of Rory McIlroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> on moving day and by the end 
of it he had to find time to head over to the Nike truck by the driving range 
and get the head fixed back on to the fairway wood he crashed into the ground 
at the 16th causing the club-head to fly off.

The R&A will fine McIlroy for the misdemeanour, which happened after the world 
No4 pushed his second shot on to the pathway short and right of the green. 
There was some light jeering from the knowledgeable gallery, who saw the 
Northern Irishman’s fit of temper. McIlroy’s caddie, JP Fitzgerald, gathered up 
the two bits of the broken club and stuffed the shaft what would have been 
headfirst into the bag.

Henrik Stenson dedicates Open victory to late friend Mike Gerbich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/open-champion-henrik-stenson-dedicates-victory-mike-gerbich>
“The club head came loose on it earlier in the week,” McIlroy said afterwards. 
“I had to get it reglued so it was probably partly to do with that and partly 
the throw as well. I’ll get it reshafted tonight. The truck’s here, and all 
will be well in the morning.”

McIlroy had played a similar shot to that which riled him at the previous 
hole, trying to fly a three iron to the green and pushing it into the gallery 
short of the green and right. It cost him the fourth, and final, bogey of his 
two-over-par round.

Afterwards he said the repeat error was a factor in his behaviour rather than 
the overall frustration of a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/15/rory-mcilroy-open-championship-round-two-royal-troon>
 when he, upon returning to the Open after missing a year with injury, found 
himself on the wrong side of the draw weather-wise, and could not find his best 
game.

“It was basically just a bad swing,” the 2014 champion said. “No one likes to 
make the same mistake twice, and that’s what happened.”

The 1st hole set the tone for McIlroy’s miserable afternoon and the Northern 
Irishman opened up with a bogey, added another at the 3rd – where a two‑foot 
putt rattled around the cup – and he three‑putted the 5th for the third dropped 
shot of his front nine, although they were at least partly offset by birdies at 
the 4th and 6th.

The back nine was covered in par after par as he and his South Korean playing 
partner, KT Kim – who finished with a 77 for a five-over total after hitting 
out of bounds at the last and taking seven – played through the wind and 
squally light rain, with the only blemish being that rick at the 15th. McIlroy 
had managed to give himself chance after chance of making birdie but his putter 
was stone cold.

The Open 2016: third round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/16/the-open-2016-day-three-live>
In total he used the club 30 times, the same number as he had in the 
second-round buffeting by the weather and two more than he used it on Thursday, 
when his two-under-par 69 made for his best 18 holes of the tournament. “When 
you’re putting into 25mph winds and the greens are a lot slower than you’re 
used to, these things happen,” he said after his third round.

“When they don’t cut or roll the greens, they can get a little bit, not bumpy 
– they’re decent surfaces – but the two putts I missed early on, I just wasn’t 
comfortable over them. I sort of read them, then I’m thinking: ‘Do you factor 
the wind in, do you not?’ So I was a little indecisive.”

The Northern Irishman was referring to the R&A’s decision to leave the surface 
of the greens alone after Friday’s deluge to keep them playable, given the 
previous year’s loss of most of the Saturday’s play due to high winds that 
meant the Open had to beextended until the Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/20/bbc-golf-fans-open-bargain-hunt>
. He felt the idea to leave well alone was a good one.

Jordan Spieth admits he is struggling with expectation to match stellar 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/jordan-spieth-the-open-royal-troon>
“You don’t want balls oscillating on the greens and you don’t want the same 
thing as happened at St Andrews last year, so I thought it was a good call. 
Obviously you want to get the round completed and done. I think they made the 
right call.”

As for Sunday’s final round, he intends to give it his best shot and try to 
improve on his placing of tied 18th as he sets out on level par and way off the 
lead.

“I really don’t know what the weather’s going to be like, but I’m going to try 
to get off to a good start again. And it looks like Henrik [Stenson] and Phil 
[Mickelson] are sort of playing their own tournament right now. So I’ll go out 
and try to shoot a good score and try to finish as high as I possibly can.”
 