
The federal environment minister, Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>, has granted full 
approval to the controversial Port Melville development on the Tiwi Islands.

The decision, revealed on Thursday afternoon, appears to apply even less 
stringent conditions than were set by the commonwealth following its review 
into the development earlier this year.

The $140m port was developed without any environmental approval 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/05/deep-sea-port-reportedly-built-on-tiwi-islands-with-no-obvious-official-approval>
, sparking condemnation and legal challenges by environmental groups.

Josh Frydenberg to work with Port Melville operators over struck-down approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/23/josh-frydenberg-to-work-with-port-melville-operators-over-struck-down-approval>
While Frydenberg has made no official announcement, the company, Ezion 
Offshore Logistics Hub, has informed the Singapore stock exchange of the 
decision,the Australian reported on Thursday 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/port-melville-development-setback-for-environmentalists/news-story/368a55c1b5e4f30b4ca4517678294feb#itm=taus%7Cnews%7Caus_authors_index%7C1%7Cauthors_storyBlock_headline%7CAmos_Aikman%7Cindex%7Cauthor&itmt=1481786585944>
.

Guardian Australia has confirmed the department on Wednesday formally declared 
the project to be “not a controlled action” under the Environmental Protection 
and Biodiversity Conservation Act.

The company said the decision meant it was therefore approved “to operate a 
marine supply base at Port Melville, Melville Island,Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory>, for the 
shipment of equipment and supplies for projects such as the construction and 
operation of offshore oil and gas fields, up to a maximum of 233 vessel berths 
[annually]”.

The government had acknowledged an error in a previous decision by a delegate 
of the former environment minister, Greg Hunt, to approve the port under 
certain conditions. In Octoberthe federal court overturned the delegate’s 
decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/22/approval-of-port-melville-supply-base-near-darwin-quashed-by-federal-court>
, finding the exercise of power was “uncertain” and referring the matter back 
to Frydenberg.Frydenberg said at the time he would work with the operators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/23/josh-frydenberg-to-work-with-port-melville-operators-over-struck-down-approval>
.

However, under the approval revealed on Thursday, even those conditions seem 
to no longer apply, according to the head of the NT environmental defenders 
office, David Morris.

It now seems the project “doesn’t have any conditions and it doesn’t require 
any environmental approval whatsoever, because the Northern Territory decided 
it didn’t and the commonwealth decided it didn’t because of the conditions it 
put on it,” Morris said.

“Those conditions were broad and some vague, uncertain and unenforceable, the 
EDO argued, and the minister conceded that in an agreed set of facts accepted 
by the federal court.”

“They said it was a controlled action but for those conditions, but now 
they’re saying it’s not a controlled action at all.”

Late last month the company wrote to the department of environment and 
requested a variation to its original proposal.

Citing “revised operational and market conditions” it requested to halve the 
number of annual boat movements. It noted this would also result in “a 
reduction in potential impacts on matters of national environmental 
significance in comparison with the original proposal.”

Morris said while the boat numbers had been reduced, the other elements, 
including 30m-litre fuel-tank farm and a deepwater port, and their associated 
risks, remained.

“Their likelihood is just reduced because of the smaller scale of the amended 
project which reduces significantly the number of ships allowed to use the port 
per year,” Morris said.

“But for all intents and purposes this is still a major oil and gas hub 
constructed and now permitted to operate without any environmental assessment, 
oversight or approval.”

Frydenberg’s office has been contacted for comment.
 