
The vice-captain

The first thing that happened at the inaugural Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> in 1927 was the team captains 
played each other. Back then there was no doubting the importance of the 
captain, leaders on and off the course. But since 1963, when Arnold Palmer 
became the last to also wield his clubs, the role has become partly tactical, 
partly motivational and largely about turning up to press conferences and 
flirting with sponsors. Perhaps it was because the captains started to feel a 
little unimportant that the role of vice-captain was invented, because only 
exceedingly important people have multiple assistants. Over the first couple of 
days each match will get its own vice-captain, leaving one left over whose job 
is, in the words of the official website, “to dispense advice and provide 
assurance to the quartet of players omitted”. He is, essentially, vice‑captain 
of getting the pints in. This is not an actual job.

Ryder Cup 2016: five key holes at the Hazeltine showdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/ryder-cup-2016-five-key-holes-hazeltine-showdown>
Ambassadors

Another relatively new innovation, since 2012 ambassadors have blossomed like 
so many azaleas at Augusta National. This year’s roster includes Peter 
Schmeichel, Kevin Pietersen and Niall Horan from One Direction. The Ryder Cup 
is the most famous event in golf; while the active involvement of 23-year-old 
pop stars may open it up to a new demographic – albeit one whose interest is 
unlikely to be sustained once the likes of Sam Torrance become involved – it is 
hard to see how it can possibly benefit from an association with 52-year-old 
Danish former goalkeepers. “Seeing guys who fight against each other on a 
weekly basis being best friends for a week, it’s great to see,” Horan says. “I 
can understand from being in a band, the brotherhood, the friendship.” Horan’s 
band are on an extended break amid rumours of fractured relationships, while 
Horan has declared his need to “go away, become a mad old recluse, then come 
back again with a giant beard”, perhaps explaining his willingness to spend 
time with Darren Clarke.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91632b8d4110f9405face026786dd1d5938d79f4%2F96_26_3599_2160%2F3599.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eiffel%20Tower%20hats%2C%20golf%20'fashion'%20and%20clubhouse%20fish%3A%20the%20worst%20of%20the%20Ryder%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eiffel%20Tower%20hats%2C%20golf%20%27fashion%27%20and%20clubhouse%20fish%3A%20the%20worst%20of%20the%20Ryder%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91632b8d4110f9405face026786dd1d5938d79f4%2F96_26_3599_2160%2F3599.jpg>
 Bill Murray, Huey Lewis, Niall Horan and Paul O’Connell: giving it some Ryder 
Cup. Photograph: ddp USA/Rex/Shutterstock 
The fashion

Team captains are responsible for choosing the uniforms their team will wear, 
a tradition that continues despite Ben Crenshaw’s infamously hideous design for 
the final day of the 1999 Ryder Cup that featured photographs of past 
victorious USA teams and which Tiger Woods declared he “threw into the 
fireplace and burned” because “it was so ugly”. They certainly brought luck to 
the team, whose stunning if aggressively celebrated comeback from a 10-6 
deficit on that last day was surely assisted by their opponents being paralysed 
by aesthetic horror.

The merchandise

Property prices may have spiralled in recent years but only at the Ryder Cup 
has the cost of keyrings kept pace with that of the houses for which they 
assist entry. In 2014 a Ryder Cup keyring, handmade in Scotland, cost £40. For 
a keyring. This year organisers expect to sell 100,000 hats at the rate of one 
every 2.4 seconds, and the online shop thus lists 77 varieties. If the 
organisers’ claim that “less than 5% of what is offered in the store will be 
sold online” is reflected in hat designs, there will be 1,540 options available 
for those who actually go to Hazeltine. Also available will be official Ryder 
Cup hockey sticks, which seems wilfully confusing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd198919aa2e84b66e6ab9753932651415d735b75%2F96_262_4827_2897%2F4827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eiffel%20Tower%20hats%2C%20golf%20'fashion'%20and%20clubhouse%20fish%3A%20the%20worst%20of%20the%20Ryder%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eiffel%20Tower%20hats%2C%20golf%20%27fashion%27%20and%20clubhouse%20fish%3A%20the%20worst%20of%20the%20Ryder%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd198919aa2e84b66e6ab9753932651415d735b75%2F96_262_4827_2897%2F4827.jpg>
 Roll up, roll up. Photograph: Scott Halleran/PGA of America via Getty Images 
The Ryder Cup Trophy Tour

If you’ve missed the Ryder Cup Trophy Tour, it’s probably because it didn’t 
come anywhere near you. The European leg started in Northern Ireland, took in 
France, Germany and Italy and then left again, having visited the homelands of 
precisely two members of the 12-man team. The US leg was a little more 
extensive but still 80% of states didn’t get a visit. It was, overall, like an 
Olympic torch relay for people who can’t really be bothered organising an 
Olympic torch relay.

Hype

The official Ryder Cup website splits its news stories into a variety of 
categories. Most of them are hard to quibble with: history, behind the scenes, 
team, corporate partners, but then there’s a section labelled “trophy and 
hype”. An event as storied and celebrated as the Ryder Cup surely needs little 
hyping, though the page at least allowed fans to follow the Trophy Tour as it 
made its way around a handful of extremely distant locations.

Fish

In 2005 Paul McGinley ended the year ranked the 21st best golfer in the world. 
Nine years later, as Europe’s team captain, he got to choose the fish for the 
dressing-room fish tank. This is what modern-day Ryder Cup-taincy entails. “It 
was my idea for the fish tank and it worked great,” he crowed. “It was the 
colours I was interested in rather than the breed. It was just a little, small 
touch.” In 2014 the European team played under a blue and yellow flag, wore 
blue and yellow clothes, and saw only blue and yellow fish. Buoyed by their 
piscine proponents, they swept to victory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31bb381982a768141706304596eaaec583c5b356%2F466_58_1822_1094%2F1822.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eiffel%20Tower%20hats%2C%20golf%20'fashion'%20and%20clubhouse%20fish%3A%20the%20worst%20of%20the%20Ryder%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eiffel%20Tower%20hats%2C%20golf%20%27fashion%27%20and%20clubhouse%20fish%3A%20the%20worst%20of%20the%20Ryder%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31bb381982a768141706304596eaaec583c5b356%2F466_58_1822_1094%2F1822.jpg>
 Paul McGinley was allowed to choose the Europe team’s fish. Photograph: Alamy 
Teamwork

As Horan points out, the “brotherhood” forged between teams of sportsmen used 
to competing only as individuals can be inspiring but this is a difficult path 
to tread.An excess of team spirit, as at Brookline in 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/sep/17/rydercup2004.rydercup3>, is 
grating but an absence of it is nearly as bad. Phil Mickelson’s criticism of 
Tom Watson after USA’s defeat in 2014 was awkward, while the fallout from Nick 
Faldo’s captaincy of Europe in 2008 was still continuing two years ago when the 
Englishman declared Sergio García arrived at Valhalla with a “bad attitude” and 
proceeded to be “useless”, prompting Torrance to suggest that if he wanted to 
find someone with no idea how to work in a team he should “look in the mirror, 
pal”.

Politics

Great Britain once competed alone in the Ryder Cup but they found life in 
isolation unforgiving and success hard to achieve. More recently they have 
discovered working together with the rest of Europe has increased their chances 
of making an impact on the global stage and that for all the disparate 
languages of their home continent there is something – some kind of inherent 
common outlook on life – that bonds its people. (This common outlook may well 
be the one articulated by Paul Casey in 2004, who revealed “we want to beat 
them as badly as possible” on the grounds “Americans can be bloody annoying”.) 
Of course, there are likely to be British golfers who feel frustrated when some 
Spaniard comes along and takes their place in the team, but blah blah Brexit 
yadda yadda.

Fans with funny hats

In 2008 Lee Westwood accused the USA captain, Paul Azinger, of “inciting” the 
US’s “shameful” and “abusive” fans. There is something about the Ryder Cup that 
transforms the normally staid golf enthusiast into a screaming, baying fiend. 
Worse, it brings out their inner fancy-dress enthusiast, and stars-and-stripes 
onesies and comedy outsized Eiffel Tower-themed headgear duly abound. It is 
quite possibly the sight of the latter that drives people to the shop in search 
of more sober alternatives at the rate of one every 2.4 seconds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68170e1eac03e4403e46dd4369545895f7d56524%2F0_203_5143_3086%2F5143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eiffel%20Tower%20hats%2C%20golf%20'fashion'%20and%20clubhouse%20fish%3A%20the%20worst%20of%20the%20Ryder%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eiffel%20Tower%20hats%2C%20golf%20%27fashion%27%20and%20clubhouse%20fish%3A%20the%20worst%20of%20the%20Ryder%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ffunny-hats-golf-fashion-clubhouse-fish-worst-ryder-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68170e1eac03e4403e46dd4369545895f7d56524%2F0_203_5143_3086%2F5143.jpg>
 Some fans, yesterday. Photograph: ddp USA/REX/Shutterstock  