
A Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> coroner 
could recommend new charges against Gable Tostee if his investigation into the 
death of New Zealand tourist Warriena Wright triggers an inquest, according to 
police familiar with the case.

The state coroner, Terry Ryan, has reopened his investigation into Wright’s 
death, two months after Tostee was found not guilty of her murder or 
manslaughter by a supreme court jury.

Ryan is expected to take several months examining the circumstances of 
Wright’s fatal fall from the balcony of Tostee’s Gold Coast unit in 2014after 
the pair met via Tinder for a date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/15/fateful-night-a-young-woman-is-dead-her-tinder-date-charged-with>
.

Gable Tostee 60 Minutes interview: I didn't know what else to do … I wanted it 
to stop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/14/gable-tostee-60-minutes-interview-warriena-wright-death-tinder>
A jury rejected the prosecutors’ case that Tostee was responsible for Wright’s 
death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/gable-tostee-caused-warriena-wrights-death-as-much-as-if-hed-pushed-her-court-told>
, leaving her terrified by locking her on his balcony after subduing her in a 
struggle. Prosecutors claimed she fell while trying to escape, in fear of her 
life.

However, the jury accepted Tostee’s version of events, that a 139-minute phone 
recording of their date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/gable-tostee-trial-played-warriena-wrights-screams-before-balcony-fall>
 showed he was responding after Wright, having grown increasingly erratic under 
the influence of alcohol, attacked and threatened him.

While Tostee was acquitted of the homicide charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/gable-tostee-cleared-over-death-of-warriena-wright-during-tinder-date>
, some police have flagged that an inquest could see him face the prospect of 
other less serious charges over the night, such as deprivation of liberty.

However, Tostee’s lawyer Nick Dore said there was no certainty that the 
coronial investigation would lead to an inquest.

“I do not want to pre-empt whether there will be an inquest. They are 
certainly very rare in Queensland,” Dore told Channel Seven network on Monday.

Gable Tostee showed no sympathy to Warriena Wright's family on my advice, 
lawyer says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/21/gable-tostee-showed-no-sympathy-to-warriena-wrights-family-on-my-advice-lawyer-says>
Dore said of the matter: “We have been to trial and it has already been 
decided by a jury.”

A senior police investigator told Guardian Australia that Ryan would likely 
consider holding an inquest at which police would be called to give evidence.

If Ryan did hold an inquest, “he’ll look at any possibility of criminal 
charges, any less serious charges”, the investigator said.

The high-profile case has divided public opinion. It provoked criticism of 
police from some quarters for laying the murder charge, and also of Tostee for 
accepting a reported $100,000for an interview with 60 Minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/11/60-minutes-payout-to-gable-tostee-for-story-of-death-and-dating>
 after the trial in October.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fwarriena-wrights-family-request-privacy-after-tostees-not-guilty-verdict-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warriena%20Wright's%20family%20request%20privacy%20after%20Tostee's%20not%20guilty%20verdict%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fwarriena-wrights-family-request-privacy-after-tostees-not-guilty-verdict-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warriena%20Wright%27s%20family%20request%20privacy%20after%20Tostee%27s%20not%20guilty%20verdict%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fwarriena-wrights-family-request-privacy-after-tostees-not-guilty-verdict-video&media=>
Warriena Wright’s family request privacy after Tostee’s not guilty verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/oct/21/warriena-wrights-family-request-privacy-after-tostees-not-guilty-verdict-video> 