
It’s not every day you meet a freedom fighter in the garden at the Four 
Seasons hotel in Beverly Hills, politely telling an assistant he needs more 
water, and to take his meetings outdoors instead of in that stuffy 
air-conditioned suite, but here he is, Che Guevara. All right, so it’s actually
Gael García Bernal <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gaelgarciabernal>, the 
actor who has played Che twice; once in a TV miniseries, and then in the more 
famous filmThe Motorcycle Diaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101700/motorcycle.diaries> – but he 
does have something of the charming revolutionary about him in real life. He is 
immediately warm and welcoming, with an enormous smile and a friendly, gentle 
hand on my arm that steers me to my seat.

I could write myself straight into Pseuds Corner trying to do justice to 
the penetrating depth of his green eyes, so let’s just say the man has 
presence, as you may have noticed if you saw him inY Tu Mama Tambien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90497/and.your.mother.too>, the Mexican 
coming-of-age movie about two boys on the road with an older woman. That film 
threw him into the global spotlight when it was nominated for best original 
screenplay at the Academy Awards in 2001.

Gael García Bernal: ‘I feel hopeful and naively optimistic for the future’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/07/gael-garcia-bernal-interview-film-latin-america>
He is also deeply political: within minutes of beginning the interview he is 
talking, softly, about uprisings in Monterrey, in his home country ofMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, directed at government corruption, 
and the documentary he made about the deaths of exploited women at the border.

The 37-year-old is here really, though, to talk about his TV show, the second 
season of which is streaming on Amazon Prime now 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Jungle-Season-1/dp/B00IG95NGS>, in which he 
plays a different kind of freedom fighter: the classical music sort. That might 
sound initially unlikely, but the history of music is the history of 
revolutions too, and Mozart in the Jungle contains a whiff of that.

In essence, it’s a hipster comedy, set in New York, where Bernal plays 
Rodrigo, the mysterious Latin American conductor who takes over the helm of the 
fictional New York Symphony orchestra and sets the town alight with gossip and 
overturned conventions.

He brings a parrot to work, plays Mahler on wine glasses, shags his assistant 
behind the stage and misses a meeting because he’s lost in deep thoughts about 
musical genius. The classical music community is instantly divided between 
those who love him and those who loathe him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F912823401e705f27c919252be9517f633b72e0cb%2F0_121_4240_2546%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Mexicans%20rapists%20and%20drug%20dealers.%20%E2%80%8BIt%E2%80%99s%20hate%20discourse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Mexicans%20rapists%20and%20drug%20dealers.%20%E2%80%8BIt%E2%80%99s%20hate%20discourse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F912823401e705f27c919252be9517f633b72e0cb%2F0_121_4240_2546%2F4240.jpg>
 Bernal as the conductor Rodrigo in Mozart in the Jungle. The character is 
based on Gustavo Dudamel. Photograph: Ali Goldstein/Amazon 
The show doesn’t take itself too seriously, though, and is also full of 
Brooklyn parties, and sexy late-night hook-ups. Bernal has just been nominated 
for the best TV actor Golden Globe, while the all-star cast also includes 
Saffron Burrows, Malcolm McDowell and Lola Kirke, with Roman Coppola and Jason 
Schwartzman writing much of the script.

The lead character is based on the conductor Gustavo Dudamel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gustavo-dudamel>, who rose through the 
Venezuelan Sistema youth orchestras to lead the LA Philharmonic, and to be 
nicknamed the Dude. There’s no tension between the real conductor and the 
actor, though – the pair met up during the filming and even shot a scene, 
conducting together at the Hollywood Bowl, for series 2. Bernal seems genuinely 
excited that he had to learn so much classical music for the part – he has two 
small children, Lazaro and Libertad, with his ex-partner, Argentinian actor
Dolores Fonzi <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0285135/>, and now plays them 
Beethoven’s 9th symphony every week. “The kids run around, and I draw them the 
place in the air where the bass comes in – it’s so much fun. Tchaikovsky is 
great for kids, too; very playful. I really do recommend this to all parents in 
the world,” he says, his broad smile growing ever broader. He has also started 
listening to Khachaturian, Bartók and Rautavaara, “but I haven’t even started 
on Bach yet. I’m saving him up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31a86ce4d95528b4fb1599e9470b85383a65ec4f%2F0_92_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Mexicans%20rapists%20and%20drug%20dealers.%20%E2%80%8BIt%E2%80%99s%20hate%20discourse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Mexicans%20rapists%20and%20drug%20dealers.%20%E2%80%8BIt%E2%80%99s%20hate%20discourse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31a86ce4d95528b4fb1599e9470b85383a65ec4f%2F0_92_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 As Che Guevara in 2004’s The Motorcycle Diaries, with Rodrigo de la Serna. 
Photograph: Allstar/Focus Features 
In Mexico, Bernal was famous long before the rest of the world cottoned on. 
His mother,Patricia Bernal <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0076094/>, was an 
actress and a model, and his father,José Ángel García 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0306236/>, an actor and director. Soon he had a 
stepfather, too – the cinematographer Sergio Yazbek.

The young Gael first appeared on TV as a baby, and at 11 he got a part in a 
telenovela (soap opera) starring Salma Hayek. Three years later, he made a 
kids’ show withDiego Luna <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0526019/>, who would go 
on to be his co-star in Y Tu Mama Tambien, where drugs and lust and repressed 
feelings led their characters to discover each other in a very different, more 
adult, light.

Mozart in the Jungle review: awful title, but hits many of the right notes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/23/mozart-in-the-jungle-amazon-show-review>
But between the soap operas and that movie, Bernal came to London to study 
acting at the Central School of Speech and Drama at the age of 19, the first 
Mexican accepted on to the programme. Things quickly got complicated, giving 
him his first taste of being a poor foreigner. He shared a bedroom and worked 
illegally by night at a bar in Islington, “which is what everybody does – the 
system makes you do things that are illegal. You can’t be happy in a place like 
London when you don’t have money.”

He had been an excellent scholar in Mexico City, gaining an international 
baccalaureate. But in London he felt his teachers were more interested in 
trying to make him sound British than in actually teaching him to act. “They 
were concerned a lot about the way that I delivered the words, and I was like, 
‘This is not my first language.’

“There was an assumption that you were there because you wanted to work on the 
British stage – but I’m not able to do a British accent on stage. Theatricality 
is a concept. It’s not a specific language.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F185de120e19ce8c746ebbf8b62d368fda1d1dbc8%2F0_299_1994_1195%2F1994.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Mexicans%20rapists%20and%20drug%20dealers.%20%E2%80%8BIt%E2%80%99s%20hate%20discourse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Mexicans%20rapists%20and%20drug%20dealers.%20%E2%80%8BIt%E2%80%99s%20hate%20discourse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F185de120e19ce8c746ebbf8b62d368fda1d1dbc8%2F0_299_1994_1195%2F1994.jpg>
 As Angel in Pedro Almodóvar’s Bad Education. Photograph: Allstar/Sony Pictures 
He did learn some useful tools, though, and headed home, from where he would 
work with directors Pedro Almodóvar, Michel Gondry and Alejandro González 
Iñárritu, and sing on theDevendra Banhart song Cristobal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cbq1K2dGqhA>. He took on parts in 
English-language films, and was nominated for a Bafta in 2005. In short, he 
became hugely successful, on a level that drama school had not prepared him for 
at all. His instructors were later forced to agree that they had been wrong.

Bernal remembers getting into conversation with them six or seven years after 
he had left the school. “[One of the directors] said: ‘Man, we have to 
apologise.’ I was like, ‘Why?’ ‘Yeah, because we were failing you because of 
who you were. And we were not teaching you theatre. We were teaching you how to 
act in English.’ And I was like, ‘Yeah, you bastards!’ I was getting bad grades 
and almost not passing, really.”

Yet he never moved to Los Angeles, something I find quite telling, because 
most actors who make it in Hollywood tend to give in and base themselves there 
eventually. Although the new show was shot in New York, Bernal is still based 
between Buenos Aires, with his children, and Mexico City. I ask if he minds 
that the show seems to give his character a rather generalised Latino identity 
– sometimes he’s in a Venezuelanarepa <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arepa> bar 
in New York, sometimes there are Mexican tacos, sometimes he’s soundtracked by 
Brazilian samba. Should an enormous continent be lumped together like that?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F383162dd7a732a0a50a28e142ab4aae82dd2e097%2F0_0_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Mexicans%20rapists%20and%20drug%20dealers.%20%E2%80%8BIt%E2%80%99s%20hate%20discourse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Mexicans%20rapists%20and%20drug%20dealers.%20%E2%80%8BIt%E2%80%99s%20hate%20discourse%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-donald-trump-mexicans-hate-discourse-mozart-in-jungle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F383162dd7a732a0a50a28e142ab4aae82dd2e097%2F0_0_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
 With Maribel Verdu in his 2002 breakthrough film, Y Tu Mama Tambien. 
Photograph: Allstar/MGM 
“Well, in the second series you find out that he’s Mexican, which clarifies 
it. But I wanted all that colour – it was my idea to go to an arepa bar. He 
drinks mate <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mate_(beverage)> [tea], and he is a 
very Latin American character. And these young cosmopolitan characters travel 
the whole world anyway,” he insists.

Bernal has long been politically active – he took part in peaceful protests in 
the Chiapas uprising as a child, he works with Amnesty International, he 
directed the documentary Who Is Dayani Cristal?, about a difficult immigrant 
journey. He has said that immigration is “the essence of being human”. So I 
wonder how he feels about the treatment of Mexicans overseas. Because the truth 
is that, in swanky LA hotels such as this, they are usually the ones cleaning, 
cooking and labouring behind the scenes, not getting the VIP treatment. 
California is propped up by its half-invisible Latino underclass, who are still 
the butt of Hollywood jokes.

I tell him that, only the night before, I had been to a standup comedy night 
down the road, organised by Judd Apatow, where one of the acts joked about 
telling her kids that if they did badly in school they’d have to work alongside 
the Mexicans. He shrugs, his face glossed over diplomatically, like he’s heard 
it all before and can’t say anything. But then Donald Trump comes up in 
conversation, and he admits that he can’t shrug about that any more.

“I mean, he called Mexicans rapists and drug dealers. How closed-minded and 
fucking ignorant is that? At first, you don’t listen, but then it reaches 
a point where you go, OK, now he’s created exactly what he maybe wanted to, 
which is that people are angry. I’m upset. I’m upset if I listen to anybody 
talk like that. We started to give Donald Trump so much space, and we started 
to validate his opinion, as if it’s like, ‘You know, it’s a valid opinion.’ No, 
it’s not valid. It’s hate discourse, and what follows next is genocide or civil 
war. I mean, that’s how it begins.”

I ask if he really means genocide, and he nods. Yet he is also still, somehow, 
smiling, perhaps because he is so proud of his country, and enjoys talking 
about it.

“Have you been to Mexico?” he asks me. “It’s so much fun. So much fun. Yes, 
the politics is corrupt, and I used to think it was machiavellian too – astute 
and with malice. No, it’s actually just inept. There’s no justice. But the 
government doesn’t represent Mexican society, which is very heterogeneous, and 
which is, right now, building up a strong critical mass. There is something 
very exciting happening. People feel very able to change things.”

He says he can prove this with the responses to the documentary film festival 
he set up 10 years ago,Ambulante <http://ambulante.com.mx/es>, which travels 
through 16 Mexican cities for a few months each year, and which has shown him 
that there is a huge appetite for intellectual debate. He doesn’t just screen 
them – with Diego Luna, his longtime co-star, he set up Canana Productions, to 
produce them. He says he didn’t miss a day of Ambulante for the first five 
years, “because it’s unlike any festival of its kind. I go to an outdoor 
screening and see hundreds of thousands of people who have come to them, and 
all of their questioning, and I just think, which country goes and sees 
documentaries the way that we do?”

Not a country run by Donald Trump, that’s for sure. Perhaps America would like 
to take on a more considerate revolutionary, such as Gael García Bernal, 
instead.

Mozart in the Jungle is available on Amazon Prime.
 