
Channel Nine’s Gallipoli  <http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/gallipoli/episode-2/>
opened with a daringly quiet, almost non-event of a beach landing in its first 
episode. “There was no slaughter on the beach. Just scattered Turkish sentries 
firing down on us,” Thomas “Tolly” Johnson (an excellently cast Kodi 
Smit-McPhee) timidly relates to us.

It was an important tonal statement, the non-threatening crackle of distant 
gunfire countering the expectations of those of us who were seeking an 
action-packed burst of jingoistic valour.

And “scattered” is how the conflict continues into episode two 
<http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/gallipoli/episodes/season-1/episode-2/my-friend-the-enemy/>
. There are meditative periods of inactivity, top brass strolls on the beach, 
fireside chats punctuated by a good old bit of fart humour. It’s confrontingly 
slow, but all the better for it. Here is a TV show willing to pace itself, to 
invest in its story and cast of characters, when they could easily have been 
outshone by a patriotic fireworks display.

Gallipoli and The Secret River: TV set to challenge Australia's foundation 
myths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/17/gallipoli-and-the-secret-river-tv-set-to-challenge-australias-foundation-myths>
Gallipoli’s confidence in its own calm makes the show’s sporadic moments of 
violence more effectively jarring, as when Tolly smashes the head of a Turkish 
soldier against the rocky innards of a trench. These young men are portrayed as 
precisely that – barely more than boys, and certainly no mythological heroes. 
It makes their situation and deeds all the more pitiably horrific.

In amongst the bloodshed of the second episode is a touching pause as soldiers 
from both sides mingle on the battlefield to clear the dead. Photographs are 
shared; spots of language exchanged. There’s humour here also, as a Turkish 
soldier concludes that “bastard!” (the Australians’ shout as they charge), must 
be the name of their god.

Human moments like these, in stark contrast to the cold detachment of command, 
raise the stakes of the series by focusing on what happens between the gunfire, 
rather than the gunfire itself. Sadly, theratings  
<http://www.tvtonight.com.au/2015/02/gallipoli-tumbles-to-580000.html>haven’t 
reflected Gallipoli’s understated maturity with numbers dropping by half for 
the second episode. Worse for us, perhaps this accurately reflects our wider 
viewing appetites.

It’s understandable in some respects. With six episodes still to go, this is 
not strap-in, rollercoaster television, but rather a thoughtful reflection 
that’s often as bleak as the desolate landscape that fills the screen. It’s a 
series that’s not afraid to demand investment from the viewer, but the payoff, 
I hope, will be immensely rewarding.

For a drama such as this, leading in with the reality reno show The Block 
<http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/theblock/triplethreat/> might not have been the 
best scheduling decision from Channel Nine. Transitioning from people 
enthusiastically talking about taps and light fixtures to boys caked in blood 
hunched in a baking hot ditch is an awkward manoeuvre for any viewer to make, 
unless episode three involves the Anzacs doing a fabulous job of renovating 
their trench by installing a marble wetroom.

Gallipoli airs Mondays at 9pm. Alternatively you can catch it on Nine’s 
catch-up service <http://www.9jumpin.com.au/>. If committing for another five 
weeks sounds like too much, then you can take in the whole series on streaming 
service Stan.
 