
The games I enjoy most are the ones that allow you to make of them what you 
will, rather than be dictated to by a linear progression. The Witcher 3 has 
just come out and I already know I’ll be shunning the main story andbountiful 
shagging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/28/sex-witcher-3-grand-theft-auto-of-fantasy-games>
 in favour of days spent in the wilderness picking flowers and bathing under 
waterfalls. Once hooked, I won’t be getting any work done in the real world, 
nor in the Witcher’s virtual Northern Kingdoms, effectively creating Inception 
for sloths by procrastinating twice.

For the same reason, Vivid Sydney’s Game On interactive event was an 
engrossing experience with a similar “sandbox” appeal: there was just enough 
variety and freedom in the expansive Australian Technology Park to allow most 
people to go along and carve out their own experience among all the consoles, 
pinball machines and people pottering around in an Iron Man costume.

It was an important and necessary contribution to Vivid, given gaming’s 
growing cultural impact and its Hollywood-rivalling scope. But if you’d gone 
along as a novice to gaming, you might have stumbled on a few bugs.

A range of impressive workshops took place throughout the day, guiding those 
with an interest in the industry with a step-by-step guide through things such 
as 3D modelling, green screen and game level design. It was almost depressing 
to see the amount of care that goes into digitally sculpting creatures I don’t 
give a second’s thought to dispatching with a massive shotgun. It’s like having 
Da Vinci paint the Mona Lisa only to use the masterpiece as a firing range.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fgame-on-played-to-the-in-crowd-more-prescription-less-description-please%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433823502840%2F6982a5ba-441f-4b2c-bfad-e13e8948089a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20On%20Sydney%20played%20to%20the%20in-crowd.%20More%20games%2C%20less%20YouTube%20please&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fgame-on-played-to-the-in-crowd-more-prescription-less-description-please%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20On%20Sydney%20played%20to%20the%20in-crowd.%20More%20games%2C%20less%20YouTube%20please&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fgame-on-played-to-the-in-crowd-more-prescription-less-description-please%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433823502840%2F6982a5ba-441f-4b2c-bfad-e13e8948089a-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Cosplay: a Game On Sydney participant. 
If getting into the games industry sounds a bit niche, there were plenty of 
talks on how the games industry is getting into us. Carolyn Mee , principal of 
health-focused gaming company Cmee4, spoke on how the gamification of health is 
turning each of us into our own Tamagotchi. It makes sense: I’ve often found 
myself jogging against my own will, simply to score more points on some health 
tracking app. I hear if you exercise regularly, you can even unlock a bonus 
stage where your body ceases to look like a caffeinated shipwreck.

Bloodborne review: dark fantasy does not disappoint
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/30/bloodborne-review-dark-fantasy-does-not-disappoint>
Street marketing is also being gamified: little challenges set in real life, 
such as treasure hunts, will unlock commercial rewards; we’ll soon be able to 
tap objects in real space, such as the back of bus seats or a poster, to buy 
things online. Even cafe tabletops in shopping centres will become interactive 
(or “enabled”), meaning you could accidentally go on a spending spree by 
knocking over a coffee. The vision of the future painted here was a dystopia of 
utter convenience.

Clear from the variety of workshops, talks and stalls was the sheer 
malleability and applicability of gaming. It was a slight shame, then, that the 
actual games on show didn’t reflect this.

A giant section was given over to eSports – gaming’s competitive multiplayer 
arm – where teams of telepathic youths communicated in a hive-mind in order to 
eviscerate their opponents. I’ve never quite managed to get to grips with 
eSports myself. Gaming is something I do at home to relax, so the idea of 
turning my quiet hobby into an adrenalin-pumped competition is as baffling to 
me as competitive book reading.

Beyond this, there were a couple of racing games on display, as well as action 
horror RPG Bloodborne which, due to my repeated failed attempts at playing it, 
must have seemed to onlookers to be some sort of dying simulator.

Ash Flanders on Meme Girls and the strange world of YouTube culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/24/ash-flanders-meme-girls-youtube-culture>
Game On’s whole player-facing experience appeared to be anchored to an idea of 
what gaming used to be – right down to the pinball machines – rather than the 
multifaceted, inclusive entity the speakers and sessions were working so hard 
to prove that gaming has become. It would have been great to see some 
introductions to gaming for non-traditional gamers, such as a stall easing the 
uninitiated (parents) into first-person shooter (FPS) games for the elderly, or 
indeed a demo of the health apps mentioned earlier in the day.

Another feature that might not have enticed the casual visitor was the focus 
on YouTube celebrities. YouTube fame isa fascinating phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/24/ash-flanders-meme-girls-youtube-culture>
 and very much deserving of exploration at events like this: it’s still an 
emerging medium and, like gaming, is challenging traditional media. However, 
the multiple sessions handed over to these click-created celebs again spoke to 
the day’s bias towards an in-crowd, and could easily have been offset by 
plumping up the promo of other, more obscure presentations.

I did stumble on an indie game called Evergreen <https://youtu.be/oUj9N4hIgEM>
, best described as a tree sim. The graphics were great, the controls intuitive 
and its Zen-like gameplay surprisingly engrossing (but then, I am the kind of 
person who playsSkyrim <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/skyrim> and 
Witcher 3 entirely for horticultural purposes). It was a peaceful, non-violent, 
non-competitive gaming experience ideal for anyone who wants to try gaming 
without acting as a beacon for the ammunition of the well-coordinated 
youngsters filling the venue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoUj9N4hIgEM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoUj9N4hIgEM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoUj9N4hIgEM&media=>
Games like this, along with the simple-but-thrilling Kieru 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mKb2KwzHuRU>, could have been highlighted and 
exploited better as a draw for visitors who may have found the focus on eSports 
and YouTube a tad alien. It’s one of the many reasons I’m enjoyingthe Pocket 
offshoot of ABC’s Good Game <http://www.abc.net.au/tv/goodgame/pocketedition/> 
so much: its coverage of triple A games is countered nicely by forays into 
indie productions that are often more exciting, revelatory and inclusive.

Game On was an enjoyably ambitious presentation of gaming culture, from apps 
and competitions to careers and cosplay. I’d love to see it return to the next 
VividSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney>, perhaps with 
the confidence to provide a prescriptive treatment of gaming’s potential, 
rather than this year’s (ever-so-slightly) descriptive affair.
 