
A Kent-based gangmaster couple have agreed to a landmark settlement worth more 
than £1m in compensation and legal costs for a group of migrants who were 
trafficked to work on farms producing eggs for high street brands.


The deal reached with six Lithuanian chicken catchers is the first settlement 
of a claim against a British company in relation to modern slavery, and came 
after the group became frustrated at the lack of a criminal prosecution.

Ten other claimants are now expected to bring similar cases against DJ 
Houghton Chicken Catching Services, of which Darrell Houghton and his wife, 
Jacqueline Judge, are the sole directors.

The couple agreed to the compensation deal after a high court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/10/court-finds-uk-gangmaster-liable-for-modern-slavery-victims-kent-chicken-catching-eggs>
 this year found that they had failed to pay the national minimum wage, had 
made unlawful deductions from wages and had failed to provide adequate 
facilities to wash, rest, eat and drink.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fmigrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20migrants%20were%20trafficked%20to%20work%20on%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20free-range%20egg%20farms%20%E2%80%94%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fmigrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20migrants%20were%20trafficked%20to%20work%20on%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20free-range%20egg%20farms%20%E2%80%94%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fmigrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video&media=>
How migrants were trafficked to work on Britain’s free range egg farms — video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/aug/10/migrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video>
The claimants alleged to the court that they had been threatened and assaulted 
by Lithuanian supervisors who intimidated them with fighting dogs, and that 
they were housed in appalling conditions.

They said they were forced to work back-to-back eight-hour shifts for days at 
a time and were denied sleep and toilet breaks, forcing them to urinate in 
bottles and defecate in carrier bags in minibuses as they travelled between 
jobs on poultry farms around the UK.

 A Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/oct/29/workers-chickens-allegedly-trafficked-beaten>
 in 2012 revealed that one of the businesses that regularly used the Houghton 
company for casual labour was Noble Foods, the leading producer of eggs to 
supermarkets and owner of the Happy Eggs brand.

The legal case has raised questions about the extent of Noble’s information 
about the conditions endured by the Lithuanian workers it was using.

In his defence filing, obtained after a Freedom of Information request, 
Darrell Houghton said Noble had required him to install a GPS tracking system 
in his minivans so that it could monitor where the chicken-catching gang were 
at any time. Noble has admitted in correspondence that it received tracking 
data but told the Guardian it was not aware of the workers’ conditions.

Noble Foods is the UK’s largest egg company and both the firm and its former 
chairman, Peter Dean, have been major donors to the Conservative party. The 
company helicopter was on occasion loaned to David Cameron for election 
campaigning. The company has recently been restructured and is under new 
management.

Noble Foods said: “The welfare and treatment of all employees of Noble Foods, 
or those working for the company via a third party, is of paramount importance. 
The condition under which certain contracted staff employed by DJ Houghton 
Catching Services had been working in 2012 was not known to Noble Foods and 
resulted in the immediate and permanent cessation of DJ Houghton Catching 
Services’ contract.”

The Lithuanians were sent to work in supply chains producing premium free 
range eggs for McDonald’s, Tesco, Asda, M&S and the Sainsbury’s Woodland brand. 
The farm sheds they cleared of chickens also produced eggs sold under the 
Freedom Food brand.


The migrant workers were trafficked to the UK from Lithuania by a man whom the 
Houghtons admitted paying to find workers for their chicken catching business. 
As poultry production has become more intensive and large-scale in recent 
decades, the job of catching the egg birds when they have come to the end of 
their laying life has been outsourced to specialist travelling teams of 
catchers. Houghtons was one of a tiny pool of agencies offering the service to 
UK producers.

The plight of their Lithuanian workers was uncovered when some of the men 
turned to a Citizens Advice Bureau for help. In 2012 Kent police, the 
Gangmaster Licensing Authority and what was then the Serious Organised Crime 
Agency conducted joint raids on houses owned by the Houghtons to liberate more 
than 30 men believed to be victims of human trafficking for labour exploitation.

The supermarket companies said at the time that they were shocked by the 
allegations and would take action to ensure their ethical standards were met 
fully.

Laurynas Kelpsa, one of the Lithuanian workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/10/fear-hunger-dirt-lithuanian-migrants-chicken-catchers-dj-houghton>
 who brought the claim for compensation, said he was happy that a civil 
settlement had finally been reached after four years, although he remained 
disappointed that the police had not brought charges.

“It has been a really hard time for me, not just physically but mentally, and 
for all of us victims. I am really excited that we have got justice at last,” 
he said. He plans to use his share of the compensation award to set up his own 
car valeting business.

The legal action was led for the Lithuanians by solicitors Leigh Day on a 
mixed basis of no-win, no-fee and legal aid. Shanta Martin, a Leigh Day 
partner, said the award should act as a deterrent to others who planned to 
exploit migrant workers.

“We are extremely pleased to have achieved this result for our clients as it 
will go a huge way towards helping them rebuild their lives. The large bill 
faced by the defendants is also a salutary lesson to other who might seek to 
profit from modern slavery,” Martin said.

Noble Foods said it had instigated “a major review of its existing systems to 
ensure strict protocols were in place to protect all employees and enable any 
wrongdoing to be identified at the earliest opportunity”.

Houghtons did not respond to requests for comment. The Guardian understands 
that it has settled the claims relating to threats and assault without 
admitting liability.
 