
Almost every group with a financial, intellectual or ethical interest in 
salvaging a workable climate policy is now deep in an urgent debate about how 
Australia can break a decade of policy paralysis. Everyone except the Turnbull 
government, that is.


The debate, involving big business, small business, investors, the 
government’s own independent climate advisers, academics, environmentalists, 
the welfare lobby and the unions, is predicated on the obvious conclusion that 
our policy – as it stands – cannot deliver the cuts to greenhouse emissions 
that are domestically necessary and which Australia has promised 
internationally.

But like the emperor with no clothes, continuing with the grand parade even 
after the whole crowd has finally declared him naked, thenew environment and 
energy minister, Josh Frydenberg, still insists Australia is “transitioning 
successfully with the policies we already have in place”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/australia-needs-two-emissions-trading-schemes-climate-change-authority-says>

Every stakeholder is hoping – based on plenty of nudges and winks from 
Frydenberg’s predecessor Greg Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/election-2016-greg-hunt-coalition-emissions-trading-scheme>
 – that a review scheduled for next year will turn the existing Direct Action 
policy into a workable policy, probably a type of emissions trading scheme. 
Labor’s election policy edged closer to what the Coalition’s policy could 
eventually become, offering, according to the Business Council of Australia, a 
“bridge to bipartisanship”.

Australia needs two emissions trading schemes, Climate Change Authority says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/australia-needs-two-emissions-trading-schemes-climate-change-authority-says>
But Frydenberg has now described the 2017 review as a “sit rep” (situation 
report), insisting no major changes are under consideration. His language is 
stuck back in the “climate wars”, like the late night rerun of a particularly 
bad movie. This week he revived the long-discredited claim that Labor’s 
proposed higher greenhouse gas reduction target would increase electricity 
prices by 78%.The supposed authors have described that calculation as 
“incorrect” and “weird and misleading”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/why-coalition-climate-scare-campaign-is-not-credible-and-makes-no-sense>

It was just another example of the gaping chasm between the government’s lines 
and the argument everyone else is having.

The government’s own independent advisory body, the Climate Change Authority, 
released a report on Thursday, which was also based on the premise that policy 
will have to change very significantly, and it has recommended a version of 
emissions trading for the electricity sector and a much more rigorous “Direct 
Action” style policy for high-polluting industry.

This was not the musing of what conservative warriors like to deride as the 
“green left” but rather the first report from the authority sinceTony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> made several 
appointments to its board, including John Sharp, a former Nationals minister; 
Wendy Craik, a former National Farmers Federation executive director; Kate 
Carnell, a former chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry; and Danny Price, the economist who modelled Malcolm Turnbull’s old 
climate policy and was on Greg Hunt’s advisory panel.

In the real world, the report sparked a furious discussion about whether the 
recommendations were aiming for sufficiently ambitious targets. The Business 
Council of Australia (BCA) and other business groups welcomed it, but as 
Guardian Australia revealedtwo CCA board members, Clive Hamilton and David 
Karoly, will release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/climate-change-authority-splits-over-ets-report-commissioned-by-coalition>
 a dissenting report arguing that its recommendations were inadequate to meet 
Australia’s international obligations.Many other respected analysts and some 
environment groups made similar criticisms. 
<https://theconversation.com/the-climate-change-authoritys-gamble-on-political-pragmatism-64745?utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Latest%20from%20The%20Conversation%20for%20September%202%202016%20-%205533&utm_content=Latest%20from%20The%20Conversation%20for%20September%202%202016%20-%205533+CID_6557c80e56cf4887f5662e7a7c065ff8&utm_source=campaign_monitor&utm_term=The%20Climate%20Change%20Authoritys%20gamble%20on%20political%20pragmatism>

Hunt plays the long game on his glaringly obvious emissions trading scheme | 
Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/election-2016-greg-hunt-coalition-emissions-trading-scheme>
But while this argument raged, Frydenberg implied there was no need for any 
change at all, insisting the report was just something the government had been 
forced to commission to get the votes of the Palmer United party for its 
“Direct Action”, a policy that was working just swimmingly.

Meanwhile, the “climate roundtable” – an unprecedented alliance of business, 
welfare and environmental groups, and trade unions, which began secret meetings 
in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/29/australian-climate-policy-paralysis-has-to-end-business-roundtable-says>
to try to break the political impasse over climate policy and emerged publicly 
in 2015 – is again actively lobbying both major parties.

The group, which includes the BCA, the AI group, the Australian Aluminium 
Council, the Climate Institute, the Australian Council on Social Service, the 
Investor Group on Climate Change, the Australian Conservation Foundation, WWF, 
the Australian Energy Council and the ACTU, has recently written toMalcolm 
Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> and Bill 
Shorten, reminding the leaders that a bipartisan workable policy is more urgent 
than ever, and that they will not give up their efforts.

That line-up would provide pretty useful backing (and cover) for both big 
parties if they wanted to reach a compromise – if, of course, the impediment to 
that compromise was actually public opinion.

But, as with so many policy areas flummoxing this government, the real 
impediment to reaching what Turnbull calls the “sensible centre” is the 
rightwing of his own party.

With so many voices telling them, Turnbull and Frydenberg obviously know that 
Direct Action in its current form is no longer even passable as a fig leaf.

But on this, above all other issues, Turnbull also understands the threat from 
the conservative right.

And in case the horrors of 2009 were fading in his memory, Tony Abbott emerged 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/26/tony-abbott-urges-turnbull-to-pursue-reform-to-counter-populist-politics>
 with a speech reminding Turnbull what was expected.

“I’m sure the government will strongly support the coal industry which will 
provide base load power here and abroad for decades to come – and continue to 
employ tens of thousands of Australians. I’m sure it will work hard on the 
Queensland government to ensure that green sabotage and law-fare doesn’t stop 
the Adani mine: a $20bn investment to create 10,000 jobs here and power the 
lives of tens of millions in India,” he said.

The former minister Eric Abetz has attacked Turnbull’s election strategy for 
not “going harder” on Labor’s proposed carbon tax (that would be the policy 
that was actually very similar to the one the experts are hoping will emerge as 
a bipartisan consensus).

Why Coalition climate scare campaign is not credible and makes no sense
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/why-coalition-climate-scare-campaign-is-not-credible-and-makes-no-sense>
The Queensland senator Ian MacDonald, who famously addressed the Senate 
wearing an “Australians for Coal” boiler suit, berated154 scientists who signed 
an open letter calling for urgent climate policy action 
<https://theconversation.com/154-australian-scientists-demand-climate-policy-that-matches-the-science-64359>
 in muddle-headed fashion.

“I … wonder how many of those 150 scientists rely on government research 
grants for their ongoing livelihoods? And those who do should be declaring any 
grants they receive directly or indirectly. Both these scientists, and the 
media who happily report their predictions, need to take a dose of reality. I 
keep asking and keep waiting for an answer to the question: why it is that 
Australia which emits less than 1.2% of the world’s carbon emissions, can 
possibly do anything to limit the emissions from the rest of the world,” he 
asked in a press statement, demanding that the scientists “get real”.

Meanwhile, a climate change denier, Craig Kelly, has been appointed chair of 
the Coalition backbench environment and energy committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/climate-sceptic-mp-appointed-chair-of-environment-and-energy-committee>
, which is consulted on policy changes, and began his tenureby questioning 
subsidies for solar and wind power. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/coalition-environment-committee-chairman-takes-aim-at-solar-subsidies>

In the real world, in which business, financial, environment, welfare, 
academic and union leaders argue about exactly how radicallyCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> policy needs to change 
to start Australia’s economic transition, the implicit assumption is that 
Turnbull and Frydenberg will soon be forced to face their inevitable day of 
reckoning with the right, and that the wisest lobbying stance is to give them 
as much backing and room to win it.


But the climate-change denying right resides somewhere else altogether.

With 2017 approaching and nothing obvious changing, the assumptions that have 
resulted in so many lobbyists giving the government the benefit of the doubt 
and calculating that it is better to work behind the scenes, is being sorely 
tested. In the fairytale, the emperor never did admit he was starkers.
 