
Divorced, beheaded and died; sacked, disgraced, resigned. Not forgetting, of 
course, seduced by sheikhs, humiliated by an emerging volcano‑nation and bought 
and sold for a pint of wine and a keynote-speaker gig. Like doomed Tudor wives, 
this seems to be the lot ofEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> football managers now, 
remembered more for the frenzied drama of their departures than any tangible 
success on the pitch.

With this in mind welcome, finally, to the dawning of the age of Gareth. After 
a trial period that ended just short of matchingSam Allardyce’s 67-day reign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
, Gareth Southgate has finally been appointed England manager. At the end of 
which the Football Association has at least given us something new. England 
managers have traditionally fallen into two groups: those in the process of 
being jeered out of the job and those about to be jeered out of the job, just 
as soon as everyone gets round to it.

Gareth Southgate confirmed as new England manager on four-year contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/gareth-southgate-confirmed-new-england-manager-football-contract>
In his temp-to-perm role Southgate has created a third category, the first 
England manager to face the prospect of losing the job before he had actually 
got it. And the first to begin rather than end his England reign with an 
apology, Southgate kicking things off last September with a series of 
ashen‑faced mea culpas:for the mess left by his predecessor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/gareth-southgate-england-mess-point-slovenia-joe-hart>
, for simply being there in the first place; and most memorably for football’s 
basic existence as a sporting industry. Get in there, Nord! Go, The Gate!

So here we are. No bells will be rung, no flags fluttered, no fond, beaky 
tattoos commissioned at the news. Instead Southgate becomes England’s 14th 
proper manager to a kind of anti‑fanfare, a shared yawn of indifference. The 
only real note of fascination seems to have been the lo-fi nature of his 
appointment, it’s austerity‑era detailing. No England manager has ever been so 
inexperienced at club level. No England manager has won so little silverware. 
No England manager since the turn of the millenniumhas been paid as little 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/gareth-southgate-england-manager-offered-job>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc898b1cbf6d1078d3999da73c07904fcb86ade38%2F0_0_2618_1745%2F2618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gareth%20Southgate%3A%20no%20star%20power%2C%20no%20magic%20bullet%2C%20but%20a%20man%20for%20the%20times%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gareth%20Southgate%3A%20no%20star%20power%2C%20no%20magic%20bullet%2C%20but%20a%20man%20for%20the%20times%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc898b1cbf6d1078d3999da73c07904fcb86ade38%2F0_0_2618_1745%2F2618.jpg>
 Gareth Southgate gets his instructions across during England’s friendly 
against Spain. Photograph: Nick Potts/PA 
Beyond this sympathy for a popular and decent coach has been tempered by the 
slightly grudging sense of a closed-shop promotion. Shortly afterRoy Hodgson’s 
departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/roy-hodgson-facing-end-england-manager-iceland-euro-2016>
, it was put to Harry Redknapp that at least Southgate knew the FA system. 
“What system?” Redknapp asked. “The losing system?”

Does any of this actually matter? Here’s a fun statistic. The FA has spent 
£55m on England managers’ salaries since the turn of the century. Since then 
the team have reached three quarter‑finals, and failed to win a knockout game 
at any time in the past decade. Go back further and in knockout matches against 
major tournament winners England have beaten only Denmarksince the 1966 World 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/from-the-archive-blog/2016/jul/29/england-world-cup-1966-football-50-years>
 and have reachedone semi-final away from home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/03/world-cup-25-stunning-moments-gazza-cries-1990>
 in 66 years of tournament football.

David Squires on … Gareth Southgate's pitch for the England job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/nov/22/david-squires-on-gareth-southgates-england-job-interview>
There is a pattern. And it isn’t to do with managers, or even the oddly tender 
idea of discovering some magical but hitherto lost national identity. The basic 
disjunct remains the same. England continues to produce quite‑good players who 
arrive at tournaments tired, insular and incurious, whose careers are consumed 
instead by the unceasing Mammon of English club football.

There is a structural blockage here. No other major European nation has two 
distinct entities running its football league and national teams, as has been 
the case with England since the 19th century, hot-housed now by the brutally 
focused success of the Premier League. Whoever wears the blazer may pick the 
players and ask them to play. But the FA will only ever be borrowing a set of 
parts, whatever frazzled and stretched domestic outliers can make it through 
the haze. Meanwhile, there goes another England manager: fall guy, patsy and a 
wonderful piece of misdirection for the structural flaws beneath.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13f87055bc10c8690699b0fa8e30a2fa8367c4b2%2F0_8_2209_1325%2F2209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gareth%20Southgate%3A%20no%20star%20power%2C%20no%20magic%20bullet%2C%20but%20a%20man%20for%20the%20times%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gareth%20Southgate%3A%20no%20star%20power%2C%20no%20magic%20bullet%2C%20but%20a%20man%20for%20the%20times%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13f87055bc10c8690699b0fa8e30a2fa8367c4b2%2F0_8_2209_1325%2F2209.jpg>
 Gareth Southgate managed England at the European Under-21 Championship in the 
Czech Republic in 2015. Photograph: Carl Recine/REUTERS 
Chuck in the wider dying-back of international football, an England programme 
where the most urgent encounter of the next year is a home game against 
Slovenia, and the weariness around Southgate’s appointment looks like part of 
an end point being reached, a role that has found its own receding limits.

Which is a shame because for all the caveats, the existential crisis of 
England-dom, there are some good reasons why Southgate may be just the right 
man for this job. Much of the snark at his appointment has centred on his lack 
of obvious charisma, an absence of A-list heft and flash. And yet it is this 
celebrity obsession that has helped hold English football back, the hankering 
after some magic bullet, a manager whose star power can somehow fix a century 
of failed systems and clogged arteries, like Superman zooming around the world 
to turn back time.

Instead Southgate presents an earnest, bookish figure carrying out his public 
duties with the air of an ambitious young geography teacher hurrying into class 
three hours early to set up his papier mache sedimentary rock bed. In one old 
Aston Villa club videoJohn Gregory can be seen suggesting the nickname “Nord” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kqYQm6oLgWs> is an oddly specific reference to 
the 1980s TV presenter Denis Norden, who, like Southgate, “always knew 
everything”. Knowing everything. Quietly climbing the ladder while gaining 
relevant technical experience. Goes against the grain this kind of thing.

He has the air of a young geography teacher hurrying to class early to set up 
his papier mache sedimentary rock bed

If Southgate looks the safe choice, this is perhaps because he’s also the 
right choice. As has already been pointed out, of the six peoplesat around the 
table at his interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/england-gareth-southgate-interview-manager>
 – the others were Greg Clarke, Martin Glenn, Dan Ashworth, Graeme Le Saux and 
the 73-year-old Howard Wilkinson – only one was actually qualified to hold 
forth on the precise qualities required to manage this England team. Luckily he 
was the one that got the job.

Southgate played for England 57 times, captained his club in a European final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/may/10/minutebyminute.sport>, played 
under Terry Venables, Glenn Hoddle and Sven-Goran Eriksson, cares about 
development and coaching structures and has been in charge of the under-21s for 
the past three years. What more is he supposed to have done? Wallowed around 
the Premier League picking up funny habits and moaning about international 
friendlies for the last 20 years like his much‑trumpeted predecessor?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9362cb60e9d7beb07603413bdee68559f87c78fb%2F0_172_1988_1193%2F1988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gareth%20Southgate%3A%20no%20star%20power%2C%20no%20magic%20bullet%2C%20but%20a%20man%20for%20the%20times%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gareth%20Southgate%3A%20no%20star%20power%2C%20no%20magic%20bullet%2C%20but%20a%20man%20for%20the%20times%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9362cb60e9d7beb07603413bdee68559f87c78fb%2F0_172_1988_1193%2F1988.jpg>
 Gareth Southgate shows the strain after missing in the penalty shootout in the 
Euro 96 semi-finals. Photograph: PA 
There has been something very English about the urge to play down Southgate’s 
success with the under‑21s, who lost in thegroup stage at the 2015 Euros to a 
Portugal team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/18/england-portugal-european-under-21-championship>
 with four European champions-in-waiting, but came back to beat the same 
opponents en route towinning the Toulon tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/29/england-france-toulon-tournament-final-match-report>
 this past summer.

As under-21s manager Southgate won 27 of 33 matches. He picked Jack Butland, 
John Stones, Luke Shaw, Eric Dier, Dele Alli, Raheem Sterling, Marcus Rashford 
and Harry Kane. The team played several ways, switching between a possession 
game and deep counterattack. Remind me: what part of this are we supposed to 
find drab and colourless, or dismiss as just a company man on the rise?

From here Southgate will be seen looking studious in various Premier League 
stands before the March double-header against Germany (in a friendly) and 
Lithuania. The challenges on the field are clear enough. The question ofwhether 
Wayne Rooney makes the best XI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/10/dropping-wayne-rooney-england>
 must be resolved. Ideally Southgate will make this decision on form over the 
next three months.Joe Hart’s position in goal will be under scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/joe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition>
. The combinations in central midfield need attention, with craft currently 
losing out to muscle and running power.

Either way, for the first time, England have a manager who has actually played 
in a tournament semi-final 
<http://www.uefa.com/uefaeuro/season=1996/matches/round=224/match=52916/postmatch/lineups/>
, and who radiates an understated decency at a time when the weather around the 
FA is likely to have less to do with lukewarm qualification matches and plenty 
to do with welfare and governance and leadership.

Southgate may or may not end his England days with an echo of his uneasy 
start, a reign bookended by apologies. But he seems like a man for the times.
 