
Doctors have discovered a new genetic disorder that robs children of the 
ability to walk normally and makes it hard for them to control their other 
limbs.

While the condition has never been defined before, researchers found that 
patients with the faulty DNA can benefit enormously from a medical treatment 
that uses electrical pulses to stimulate the brain.

. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=c8b78875-5e71-4146-a2da-8081cf14d976>
In most cases, children who had the procedure regained better control of their 
arms and legs, and some improved so much they could walk again without help.


The team at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London made the discovery when 
they scoured the genomes of 27 patients with debilitating movement disorders 
which had left doctors baffled.


The analysis revealed that the patients had mutations in a single gene called 
KMT2B which is thought to play a central role in switching on other genes 
needed for the proper control of body movements. The corruption of the gene 
leads to what doctors call dystonia, when muscles contract involuntarily.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUoanCT9CKws&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUoanCT9CKws>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUoanCT9CKws&media=>
Patients who had faults in the KMT2B gene had similar problems to people with 
cerebral palsy, and some had even been diagnosed with the condition. The 
children typically had trouble walking, had an abnormal posture, and struggled 
to move their arms and hands as they wanted. As they grew up, their symptoms 
tended to get worse. “Even though it looks like cerebral palsy, it’s not 
cerebral palsy,” said Manju Kurian , a specialist in movement disorders who led 
the research.


Kurian found that in all but three cases, the genetic mutation had appeared 
spontaneously in her patients, an unlucky glitch in their early development. Of 
the three children who had inherited the mutation, only one of the six parents 
had any dystonia symptoms. “This is going to be a common cause of childhood 
dystonia,” she said. Details of the research are published in the journalNature 
Genetics <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/ng.3740>.

Doctors can already refer people with dystonia for what is called deep brain 
stimulation (DBS), but the treatment is a last resort, used only when drugs 
have failed. The procedure requires a major operation to insert two wires into 
the brain which run under the skin to a pulse generator implanted under the 
collarbone. It has long been used to alleviate movement problems in adults with
Parkinson’s disease <https://www.theguardian.com/society/parkinsons-disease>.


Genes linked to rare cancer affecting children and young adults uncovered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/04/genes-linked-to-rare-cancer-affecting-children-and-young-adults-uncovered>
When it is used to treat all forms of dystonia, DBS works well in some, but 
not in others. But Kurian noticed that the ten patients in her group who had 
been given DBS all improved. The younger ones seemed to fare best, to the point 
that some regained the ability to walk unaided. “So far all of the children we 
have seen seem to have a positive response,” she said.

One of the children in the study, 12-year-old Katie, is now due to have the 
DBS operation in January. Her mother, Sarah, said there was no sign of the 
disorder until Katie was aged two. “She seemed to trip over thin air,” Sarah 
said. “She was falling over so much.”


Katie was referred to a podiatrist who said the problem was down to her narrow 
gait. But by the age of five, Katie had not improved. It was several years 
later before Katie was referred to Great Ormond Street Hospital. There, it was 
clear to Kurian that Katie’s condition was getting worse. “It was hard for me 
to see the progression, but when you look back at photos it is really quite 
shocking,” Sarah said. “She used to run in sports day but can barely walk 10 
steps now. She could ride a bike, but not any longer. She could hold a knife 
and fork, but now she can’t,” she said.


The diagnosis means an end to the uncertainty and the prospect of a treatment 
that has already helped other children. “The operation is obviously not 
something you want to put your child through,” Sarah said. “But when you look 
at where she started, and where she is now, you know you have to intervene.”
 