
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> is being 
warned by close political allies that he will need to rebuild his reputation 
with Tory MPs after watching his second budget in a row run into trouble.

Friends and allies, who stood by the chancellor during repeated mishaps in the 
last parliament, said in private that Osborne has been damaged by the 
resignation ofIain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> over planned cuts to 
disability benefits.

In a devastating resignation letter, Duncan Smith said the cuts were “not 
defensible” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/18/iain-duncan-smith-resigns-from-cabinet-over-disability-cuts>
 in a budget that had benefited higher rate taxpayers.

The suggestion by Duncan Smith that the chancellor is failing to act as a one 
nation Conservative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/david-cameron-heaps-praise-george-osborne-commons-budget-defence>
, by apparently showing little interest in non-Tory voters, has raised concerns 
about Osborne’s political touch. Allies also fear that Downing Street’s 
aggressive tactics on the EU referendum are alienating many Tory MPs.


The unease among usually loyal MPs will be highlighted in the House of Commons 
on Tuesday when Chloe Smith, the former Treasury minister, voices support for 
Duncan Smith. Speaking on the last day of the traditional post-budget debate, 
where Osborne will take the rare step for a chancellor of summing up for the 
government, Smith will agree with Duncan Smith that the cuts to personal 
independent payments should not have been included in the budget.


Smith, who won sympathy when she was made to defend the “omnishambles” budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2012/jun/27/chloe-smith-difficult-deployment>
 on Newsnight as a junior Treasury minister in 2012,told the Eastern Daily Press
 
<http://www.edp24.co.uk/news/politics/former_treasury_minister_sent_out_to_defend_2012_omnishambles_budget_backs_honourable_iain_duncan_smith_1_4465122>
: “I don’t think it [personal independence payments] was the right measure to 
include in the budget, that is what I will be saying in my speech tomorrow.”

She added: “You have to be able to stand back and look at the bigger picture 
and balance the books and be confident that you are both delivering the 
promises you made, whilst being as fair as possible. The manifesto I stood on 
made clear we would spend less on welfare, but do so by protecting the most 
vulnerable.”

Allies say that Osborne, who takes great pride in his reputation as the 
government’s master strategist, is proving increasingly accident prone. In his 
autumn statement in November the chancellor was forced toretreat on planned 
cuts to tax credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-u-turn-scrap-tax-credit-cuts-autumn-statement>
 outlined in his summer budget.

The chancellor is understood to be aware of the concerns and realises he is 
entering a difficult period. Osborne thought hard whether he should have 
responded to an urgent question in the Commons by the shadow chancellor, John 
McDonnell. In the end he decided toleave it to David Gauke, the third most 
senior member of his Treasury team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/labour-slams-george-osborne-dodges-budget-urgent-question>
, after deciding that it would set an unhelpful precedent for a chancellor to 
respond to an urgent question.


Osborne was also wary of appearing in the Commons amid concerns in the 
Treasury that pro-Brexit Tory MPs could have tried to ambush him. Gauke, a 
popular figure who is admired for a light but authoritative touch, received a 
relatively warm reception from Tory MPs.

Philip Davies, the pro-Brexit Tory MP for Shipley, asked the only mildly 
awkward question when he said that the need for cuts showed the time had come 
to “end the ludicrous ringfencing of the international aid budget”.

One old friend thought the chancellor had made a mistake by not appearing in 
the Commons. “This was his moment to show us a new George and he has missed his 
chance,” the friend said. “If he wants to be prime minister he should be able 
to turn round a moment like this.”

One ally thinks Osborne is in trouble. “This is damaging for George. He has 
misjudged a budget again. He has lost a lot of support. You can feel it. He 
will need to rebuild.”

The chancellor’s old friend believes he is experiencing a bumpy period though 
the minister fully expects him to bounce back. “This is not terminal for 
George. Things come and go. There are waves. Better to have a bout of scarlet 
fever now than in 2018.”


At least one part of the government operation was running smoothly. The 
government whips’ office, under the chief whip, Mark Harper, took the trouble 
to dream up 22 “planted” questions for loyal MPs to put to the new work and 
pensions secretary, Stephen Crabb.

A leaked copy of the “suggested questions”, outlined over two pages of A4, 
revealed that Tory MPs were encouraged to ask Crabb whether his “own personal 
life experience” shows that a “compassionate and fair welfare system” is not 
just about numbers. Crabb says his support for welfare reform was inspired by 
his mother, who was forced to flee from his violent father and relied on 
welfare as she returned to the workplace.
 