
There is a lot to catch up on: a 93 year-old composer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Walker_(composer)> with one of the most 
remarkable lives in the music of the 20th and 21st centuries, and I’ve only 
just discovered his music properly.George Walker  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gjp84IDB0ic>was the first African American to 
win a Pulitzer prize for music (in 1996, for his Walt Whitman song-cycle,Lilacs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ScgQUzMqhg>), and his career as a pianist and 
composer is, especially in his early decades, a story of firsts. He was the 
first black graduate of the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia in 1945, the first 
black musician to play New York’s Town Hall in the same year, the first black 
recipient of a doctorate from the Eastman School in 1955 (you can hear his 
remarkable performance of Brahms’s Second Piano Concerto, conducted by the 
composer Howard Hansonhere <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zhl9-z83ivA>), the 
first black tenured faculty member at Smith College in 1961 – and many more.

Those achievements tell their own story of the prejudices, lack of 
opportunities, and segregated cultural life of those decades in America, and 
are also part of larger narrative in which black performers and composers have 
been silent or ignored over the decades and centuries. Think of theChevalier de 
Saint-Georges <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chevalier_de_Saint-Georges>, the 
so-calledBlack Mozart 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Black-Mozart-Chevalier-Saint-Georges/dp/1418407968>
, who composed string quartets, symphonies and concertos in the late-18th 
century, and who influenced Mozart in Paris – Wolfgang pilfered one of 
Saint-George’s ideas in his Sinfonia Concertante K364, as Chi-chi Nwanoku’s 
recentRadio 4 documentary revealed <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b05wkkrf>. 
He was also one of the era’s greatest violinists and orchestra leaders, who 
catalysedHaydn’s Paris Symphonies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N20Q7gRtmLQ>
. As if that were not enough, he was also one of the most accomplished 
gentlemen anywhere in Europe, a famed fencer and socialite, but his music isn’t 
performed anything like enough now. It’s fitting George Walker has honoured him 
in his flighty, angular, swashbucklingFoils for Orchestra: Homage à Saint George
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TSIWt92FYpE>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fgeorge-walker-african-american-composer-pulitzer-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440669962093%2F6571be3d-e9ae-4c68-b45d-9dbc6a6145c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Walker%3A%20the%20great%20American%20composer%20you've%20never%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fgeorge-walker-african-american-composer-pulitzer-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Walker%3A%20the%20great%20American%20composer%20you%27ve%20never%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fgeorge-walker-african-american-composer-pulitzer-prize%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440669962093%2F6571be3d-e9ae-4c68-b45d-9dbc6a6145c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The “Black Mozart” The Chevalier de Saint Georges takes part in a fencing 
match with the cross-dressing French secret agent Charles d’Eon de Beaumont. 
Photograph: Mansell/TimePix/Rex Features 
But from interviews that Walker has given recently 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tYnEXI3WyRQ>, including one this week in the 
Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/music/2015/08/20/d6e9e6c2-3beb-11e5-9c2d-ed991d848c48_story.html>
, it’s clear that while the story of overcoming cultural prejudice is part of 
Walker’s life story and is enfolded into his work, far more important to him is 
his ceaseless and rigorous focus on the craft and quality of the music he 
writes. According to the Washington Post, Walker is working on a symphony at 
the moment, a piece that will follow his catalogue of four Sinfonias, the last 
entitledStrands <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7_QpR3ZnesQ> and composed in 
2012. Walker’s recent music – like Strands, the turbulentSinfonia No 3 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NCsDPpRqWto>, or the teemingly energetic and 
mercurialMovements for Cello and Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zrXXAwuoT9k> – has a sharp-edged clarity in 
its modernist dissonances and angularity, and yet you feel his essential desire 
to communicate with his audiences throughout.

Ten black composers whose works deserve to be heard more often
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jun/02/ten-black-composers-whose-works-deserve-to-be-heard-more-often>
Amid the turbulence and vivid, dissonant drama, there is always a sustaining 
structural line that makes Walker’s music compelling and coherent. His most 
famous and most performed work is from much earlier in his career, theLyric for 
Strings <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdVnHrXWku8> from 1946 (originally 
part of his String Quartet No 1), a warmly yet unsentimentally nostalgic song 
for string orchestra, and that seam of lyricism is still there half a century 
later inLilacs 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLdBmNPZATi4xJ-5iSf7vNLfmErvsoOsP1>, 
albeit filtered through a much greater expressive richness and complexity. 
While there are traces of Walker’s musical heroes – such as Hindemith and 
Stravinsky – in his musical language, he has created a distinctive world that 
is modernist and multifaceted yet richly communicative. It’s music that 
deserves to be celebrated and performed in this country – his music has never 
appeared at the Proms, for example. I’ve only, belatedly, begun my journey into 
his output, which also includes a large catalogue ofchamber music 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S6pRXxyrgxw>; if you haven’t already, I 
suggest you start now!

Five essential George Walker works

Lyric for Strings <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdVnHrXWku8> (1946): 
Walker’s most performed piece – and you can immediately hear why, with its 
immediacy and warmth.

Lilacs  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ScgQUzMqhg>(1996): Walker’s 
Pulitzer-winning setting of Walt Whitman.

Sinfonia No 4, Strands <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7_QpR3ZnesQ> (2012): a 
compact, 10-minute symphony.

Movements for Cello and Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zrXXAwuoT9k>
 (2012): music of vivid, expressionistic power.

Sinfonia no 3 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NCsDPpRqWto> (2003): another 
concise, tempestuous orchestral essay.
 