
The world’s tallest animal is at risk of extinction after suffering a 
devastating decline in numbers, with nearly 40% of giraffes lost in the last 30 
years, according to the latest “red list <http://www.iucnredlist.org/>” 
analysis.

The authoritative list, compiled by the International Union for the 
Conservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> of Nature 
(IUCN), has also added more than 700 newly recognised bird species, but 13 of 
these are already extinct.

It says wild relatives of important food crops, such as mangoes and 
sunflowers, are now in danger of extinction, cutting the ability to safeguard 
food supplies by breeding new varieties resilient to drought and disease.
Decline in giraffe numbers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-07T15:38:43/embed.html>
But there is a little hopeful news in the list as well with the rediscovery of 
a few species thought to have been lost, such a Madagascan freshwater fish 
which had not been seen since the 1960s, and the recovery of the Seychelles 
white-eye bird after conservation efforts.

The natural world is in the midst of a mass extinction as wild places are 
destroyed by conversion to farmland, mining and pollution, and animals are 
hunted in huge numbers. In October, a major analysis found the number of wild 
creatures was on track tofall by two-thirds by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
, compared to 1970. Recent red list updates have found theeastern Gorilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/04/eastern-gorilla-critically-endangered-illegal-hunting-iucn-red-list?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 andwhale shark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/08/whale-and-winghead-sharks-move-step-closer-to-extinction?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 moving closer to extinction, while the prospects of the giant panda are 
improving.

World on track to lose two-thirds of wild animals by 2020, major report warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
The number of species assessed by the red list now totals more than 85,000, 
with more than 24,000 at risk of extinction, but many more species remain 
unstudied. “Many species are slipping away before we can even describe them,” 
said Inger Andersen, IUCN’s director general.

“This red list update shows that the scale of the global extinction crisis may 
be even greater than we thought,” she said. “Governments gathered at theUN 
biodiversity summit <https://www.cbd.int/cop/> [at which the update will be 
presented on Thursday] have the immense responsibility to step up their efforts 
to protect our planet’s biodiversity – not just for its own sake but for human 
imperatives such as food security and sustainable development.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3c05eeff6734f2a4710f6633d4904bc0005e13%2F0_0_5293_3529%2F5293.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%20after%20devastating%20decline%2C%20experts%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%20after%20devastating%20decline%2C%20experts%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3c05eeff6734f2a4710f6633d4904bc0005e13%2F0_0_5293_3529%2F5293.jpg>
 Giraffes grazing in the Nairobi national park. Photograph: Grayling Kenya 
Photo/Stuart Price/MEAACT Kenya 
The new red list found the giraffe population had plummeted from about 157,000 
to 97,500 in the last 30 years and the species had jumped two IUCN categories 
from “least concern” to now “vulnerable”. As the human population in Africa 
rises, habitat loss from farming and deforestation, illegal hunting and the 
impact of civil wars are all pushing the creature towards extinction.

“Whilst giraffes are commonly seen on safari, in the media and in zoos, people 
– including conservationists – are unaware that these majestic animals are 
undergoing a silent extinction,” said Julian Fennessy, co-chair of the IUCN’s 
giraffe and okapi specialist group. “It is timely that we stick our neck out 
for the giraffe before it is too late,” he said.

Sir David Attenborough said in June: “These gentle giants have been 
overlooked. It’s well known that African elephants are in trouble and there are 
perhaps just under half a million left. But what no one realised is there are 
far fewer giraffes, which have already become extinct in seven countries.”

Researchers discover there are not one - but four species of giraffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/researchers-discover-there-are-not-one-but-four-species-of-giraffe>
The updated red list also includes a reassessment of all bird species, 
bringing the number analysed to over 11,000. More than 700 of the species were 
newly recognised, including the Antioquia wren from Colombia which was listed 
as endangered because more than half of its habitat could be destroyed by a 
single planned dam.

Thirteen of the newly listed bird species are already extinct, including the 
Pagan reed warbler, having been wiped out by predators such as snakes 
introduced to their island homes. “As our knowledge deepens, so our concerns 
are confirmed: unsustainable agriculture, logging, invasive species and other 
threats – such as illegal trade – are still driving many species towards 
extinction,” said Ian Burfield, global science coordinator at BirdLife.

The African grey parrot is one of the species at grave risk from hunting as it 
is prized as a talkative and long-living pet. In some regions, numbers have 
plunged by 99% but all international trade in the bird wasbanned in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/02/african-grey-parrot-has-cites-global-summit-thank-protected-status>
. The cage bird trade in Asia is also driving many feathered species towards 
extinction, including the spectacular sunset lorikeet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93d314fdd3935092b2c62a6acd34f04745709488%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%20after%20devastating%20decline%2C%20experts%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%20after%20devastating%20decline%2C%20experts%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93d314fdd3935092b2c62a6acd34f04745709488%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 African grey parrots in Odzala-Kokoua national park, the Republic of the 
Congo. The species is at risk from hunting for the pet trade. Photograph: Pete 
Oxford/Minden Pictures/Alamy 
However, conservation efforts are cutting the risk to some of the rarest birds 
on Earth, including theSeychelles white-eye 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seychelles_white-eye>, which was once thought to 
be extinct but now numbers about 500 thanks to reintroduction programmes.

The new red list includes, for the first time, assessments of 233 wild 
relatives of crop plants. It found many were threatened by the expansion of 
farms into wild areas. The wild relatives are a crucial source of genetic 
material for breeding new varieties that can withstand climate change and pests 
and which may be needed to help feed the world’s fast-growing population.

Mangoes are a vital crop around the tropics but scientists found four wild 
mango species are endangered – the Kalimantan mango has already become extinct. 
Also in trouble are wild relatives of the sunflower, such as the Anomalus 
sunflower, the chickpea and asparagus. “This only erodes future options for new 
crop resources under changing climates,” said Thomas Lacher Jr from Texas A&M 
University.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc09cb0f2a2064480cc610b65b9dbdabe1f72a27c%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%20after%20devastating%20decline%2C%20experts%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giraffes%20facing%20extinction%20after%20devastating%20decline%2C%20experts%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgiraffe-red-list-vulnerable-species-extinction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc09cb0f2a2064480cc610b65b9dbdabe1f72a27c%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
 The Kalimantan mango (Mangifera casturi) has already become extinct. 
Photograph: TopTropicals.com/IUCN 
Separate new research lays bare the influence of humanity in transforming the 
planet, with scientists finding that over 50% of the world’s land area is now
dominated by human activity 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/conl.12295/full>, with 9% of this 
change happening in the last 25 years alone.

While 1.7m sq miles (4.4m sq km) of wild habitat was lost in the last 25 
years, the researchers found that protected areas increased by 2.7m sq miles, 
almost doubling to cover 14% of all land.

But the protected areas are often not in the most vital regions, said James 
Watson of theWildlife Conservation Society <https://www.wcs.org/> and the 
University of Queensland. “Nations tend to place protected areas in remote 
locations, where nobody else is vying to convert the land. This does not help 
save threatened biodiversity and we must urgently start placing new protected 
areas in places that will be destroyed without conservation action.”
 