
Theresa May is being urged to set out her plans for Brexit in more detail or 
risk losing the backing of moderateConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>.

No 10 reiterated plans for May to set out her negotiating aims after the 
resignation of Sir Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
, Britain’s top diplomat in Brussels, intensified fears that the government is 
ill-prepared for the complex talks due to begin by the end of March.

But backbench MPs say they would like to see something more than a broad-brush 
statement about prioritising immigration control, or aiming at the “best deal 
for Britain”, if they are to support the government’s stance.

“People want detail. People need detail. If the prime minister does what she 
did as home secretary and not say much then she’s going to really find it 
difficult to keep the party with her,” saidBath MP Ben Howlett 
<https://www.ben4bath.co.uk/>, who backed May’s leadership campaign. 

He called for the prime minister to set out clearly where she stands on issues 
including membership of the customs union and the single market – and, where 
she cannot offer more detail, give reasons.

Anna Soubry <https://www.annasoubry.org.uk>, the former business minister, and 
informal convener of a group dubbed the “new bastards”, who are calling on May 
to maintain a close relationship with the European Union, said: “She needs to 
show she’s prepared to stand up to the hardline, fall-off-a-cliff Brexiteers 
and say, ‘no, we’re not going to do it your way’”.

Soubry said she and her backbench allies were keen to support May if the 
supreme court ruled later this month that the government must pass legislation 
before triggering article 50, the formal process for Brexit. But she said they 
hoped to see much more detail first.

Moderate MPs have been concerned by personal attacks launched by senior 
Brexiters on Rogers since he resigned earlier this week with a letter to 
colleagues criticising “muddled thinking” and urging them to “speak truth to 
power”.

Theresa Villiers, the former Northern Ireland secretary, yesterday accused 
Rogers 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/europe/eu-policy-agenda/brexit/news/82103/top-tory-lays-emotionally-needy-sir-ivan-rogers-after>
, a long-serving diplomat, of being “emotionally needy,” while Iain Duncan 
Smith said on Wednesday thathe could not be trusted 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/sir-ivan-rogers-could-not-be-trusted-by-politicians-claims-iain-duncan-smith_uk_586cb498e4b0f24da6e9c63c>
.

The fresh attacks on Rogers came as Norway’s prime minister warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/uks-lack-of-negotiating-experience-may-lead-to-very-hard-brexit>
 that Britain’s four-decade membership of the EU has left it lacking experience 
in international negotiations, which will hamper it in trade talks and may lead 
to “a very hard Brexit”.

Erna Solberg, speaking to Reuters at a meeting of Bavaria’s centre-right CSU 
party in Germany, said that the UK worked slowly in discussions due to a lack 
of recent experience of entering talks alone. “We do feel that sometimes when 
we are discussing with Britain, that their speed is limited by the fact that it 
is such a long time since they have negotiated,” she said.

Solberg said she hoped the UK would be able to negotiate an agreement that 
kept it close to the EU, but it would not be easy. “I fear a very hard Brexit, 
but I hope we will find a better solution,” she said.

Her remarks reinforced those made by Rogers, who  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
besides attacking “ill-founded arguments” in his resignation email, warned of 
the lack of negotiating experience in the British civil service compared with 
EU institutions.

“Serious multilateral negotiating experience is in short supply in Whitehall, 
and that is not the case in the [European] commission or in the council,” he 
wrote.

Jonathan Marland, a former trade envoy for David Cameron who chairs the 
Commonwealth Enterprise and Investment Council, also said he did not think 
Whitehall had the skills to conduct successful Brexit talks.

“My fear is that Whitehall as a whole has really not got the skill set to 
deliver a really hard-nosed negotiation,” he toldBBC Radio 4’s Today 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04ndwr3> programme. “And I think we have 
really got to up-skill in that area to do it.”

The European commission handles trade and many other negotiations on behalf of 
the EU’s 28 member states. Some reports have suggested that when Britain, which 
joined the bloc in 1973, voted to leave it had no trade negotiators of its own.



Norway is not part of the EU but contributes to the bloc’s budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/can-the-uk-adopt-the-norway-model-as-its-brexit-solution>
 in exchange for membership of the single market, for which it is also obliged 
to accept the EU’s fundamental principles, including free movement.

Meanwhile, two civil service unions, the FDA and Prospect, have called for an 
end to the 1% pay cap, claiming their members are having to work much longer 
hours in the run-up to Brexit.







 