
On a wooden gantry 30 metres above Glasgow’s busy city centre, specialist 
masons are preparing to remove the first layer of stonework from the west wall 
of the Mackintosh library.

After months of preparation and detailed research, work is now beginning in 
earnest on the restoration of the Mack library which, along with the rest of 
the west wing of Glasgow School of Art’s Mackintosh building, was engulfed by 
flames as students were preparing for their final-year degree show in May 2014.

About 90% of the grade A-listed building, which was completed by Charles 
Rennie Mackintosh in 1909 and is still considered his masterwork, was saved. 
But the library, one of the world’s finest examples of art nouveau design, 
which housed many rare and archival materials as well as original furniture and 
fittings, was almost entirely destroyed.

Within the library itself, a forest of steelwork is securing the external 
structure before two massive stone window piers are removed for assessment. The 
banks of debris and blackened wood have been cleared to make room for tidy 
scaffolding poles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fglasgow-school-of-art-mackintosh-library-fire-restoration-begins-in-earnest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa541d329abc806915facf41ee81df2358b2c9e8%2F0_286_5568_3342%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glasgow%20School%20of%20Art's%20library%20restoration%20begins%20in%20earnest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fglasgow-school-of-art-mackintosh-library-fire-restoration-begins-in-earnest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glasgow%20School%20of%20Art%27s%20library%20restoration%20begins%20in%20earnest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fglasgow-school-of-art-mackintosh-library-fire-restoration-begins-in-earnest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa541d329abc806915facf41ee81df2358b2c9e8%2F0_286_5568_3342%2F5568.jpg>
 Joiners work in the professors’ studios at Glasgow School of Art. Photograph: 
Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
At the height of the fire, the building’s stonework endured temperatures of up 
to 1000C (1832F), and was then cooled down very quickly by the gallons of water 
used to douse the flames. This has left some of the stone shattered and 
fissured and and too weak for reuse.

Every stone is individual, made with skilled tooling and subtle carved 
profiles, and will be numbered when it comes out for testing

Since the summer of 2014, work in the library and throughout the Mackintosh 
building has been in constant progress, beginning with debris removal, then the 
painstaking salvage process conducted by specialist forensic architects, and 
the diligent drying out of the building to ensure against future difficulties 
with rot.

The restoration project’s main contractor, Keir Construction Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, expects involve up to 30 different 
trades and craftspeople, from horse hair plasterers to lead glaziers, many 
working with original materials that have been salvaged and preserved.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fglasgow-school-of-art-mackintosh-library-fire-restoration-begins-in-earnest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe6ed5e5852905556a578c71c970ea56b1b97fe4%2F0_85_5089_3053%2F5089.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glasgow%20School%20of%20Art's%20library%20restoration%20begins%20in%20earnest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fglasgow-school-of-art-mackintosh-library-fire-restoration-begins-in-earnest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glasgow%20School%20of%20Art%27s%20library%20restoration%20begins%20in%20earnest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fglasgow-school-of-art-mackintosh-library-fire-restoration-begins-in-earnest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe6ed5e5852905556a578c71c970ea56b1b97fe4%2F0_85_5089_3053%2F5089.jpg>
 Stonemason Leon Hay works on the Mack library. Photograph: Jeff J 
Mitchell/Getty Images 
For example, forensic archeologists rescued 620 individual pieces of brass 
plate lamp fittings from the ash and debris in the library. The fragments were 
then sorted into “light kits”, dependent on their location in relation to the 
48 original light fittings that had been hanging on the day of the fire, and 
enough useable material has been saved to remake 29 complete lights.

Restoration of the roof is also under way, using a replacement for the 
original southern yellow pine timber. This particular wood is not indigenous to 
Scotland but has been sourced from a mill in Massachusetts.

Things we found in the fire: Glasgow School of Art’s restoration brings 
surprises
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/apr/20/glasgow-school-of-art-new-library-charles-rennie-mackintosh>
The restoration team has also had to import tulip wood, the original timber 
used for the library’s internal fittings. Liz Davidson, senior project manager 
for Mackintosh Restoration, explains: “One of the major differences that people 
will notice on visiting the restored library will be the colour of the wood.

“It will be much lighter than it was in 2014 which had been darkened by over a 
century of use. The original timber was lightly stained to allow the grain of 
the wood to clearly show through – Mackintosh maintained this approach to the 
honesty of the materials he used throughout the building and it is an approach 
we are committed to honouring in the restoration.”

The GSA estimates that the cost of restoring the building could reach £35m. 
Alongside a simultaneous upgrade of the east wing of the Mackintosh building, 
the project is being supported by the £32m Mackintosh Campus Appeal, £18m of 
which has been raised to date including support from both the UK and Scottish 
governments. Trustees of the appeal include Brad Pitt and former GSA student 
Peter Capaldi.

Restoration of the Mackintosh building is expected to conclude by the end of 
2018, with undergraduate students back in the building in 2019.
 