
The video expert 

David Mogendorff – Artist content and services, YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> and Google Play Music

I am seeing a broad group of self-starting artists who are finding an audience 
on YouTube, and building careers before they get mainstream awareness. They 
might have started doing covers, but are now moving into original material, and 
they have a powerful, direct relationship with their fans.Dodie Clark 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/doddleoddle> has a huge following – she has just 
released a brilliant EP and still does a lot of vlogging.Bry 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/BriBryontour> just supported Twenty One Pilots on 
tour – he has 390,000 subscribers and has made loads of different types of 
videos; his fans have a really deep connection with him. When artists 
communicate through video in unique ways that suits their personality, it can 
be a creative outlet like touring or artwork. I think more people are going to 
start doing it in a really interesting way.

There’s an interesting artist called Poppy 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/thatPoppyTV>. She has a strong J- and K-pop 
influence, and has started making her own music. Her vlogs are like social 
commentary, and touch on the anxieties of modern life; for example,Am I okay? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y4nHLHDtyVA> is a video about the pressures on 
kids from social media. It’s a really interesting way of communicating, 
personal but strange. There’s also a US singer calledLP, whose song Lost on You 
really exploded <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hn3wJ1_1Zsg>. A lot of the 
initial views came from Greece and Turkey, where there are massive online 
audiences, and it’s also spreading globally from there. UK grime is evolving 
and spreading globally, from Nadia Rose tothe Blackpool grime scene that Noisey 
documented <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AXFQsnbN0NQ>, and it will be 
fascinating to see what happens next with general hip-hop such as Loyle Carner, 
Dave and Stefflon Don.

One to watch 

An artist called Jesse Reyez; she is an awesome singer with tonnes of 
personality. I think she’s still unsigned, but if that’s the case it won’t be 
for long.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxLUj1Mrars&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxLUj1Mrars>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxLUj1Mrars&media=>
The DJ


Clara Amfo – Radio 1 presenter

Last year was a massive year for traditional black music genres. I heard so 
much progressive and amazing, non-insipid R&B and it was obviously a big year 
for grime music. I think that will carry on into this year in more hybrid 
forms, especially in terms of producers. I expect we will see people crossing 
over a bit more. I remember when grime was supposedly dead and now you see 
mainstream pop artists and rock bands who would give their left arm to get any 
decent grime MC as the feature on their song. That wouldn’t have happened a few 
years ago.

In pop music, you can have guys and girls who all look amazing and they might 
have brilliant songs, but if they can’t bring it to life, if they haven’t got 
the spunk to bring what they’re supposedly trying to sell to interviews, or on 
the radio or online, I’m not going to be interested.Christine and the Queens 
keeps pop music interesting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/04/christine-and-the-queens-heloise-letissier-interview>
. With her, and someone such as Syd tha Kid, who has a solo album out this year 
that I am excited about, you have very uncompromising artists; nothing about 
them is forced. I hope this is the year of the truly enigmatic pop star.

One to watch 

I know he’s been around for ages, but Sampha’s album is already in my top 5 of 
the year. And Raye is wicked.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_oM1DFL43Lk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_oM1DFL43Lk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_oM1DFL43Lk&media=>
The trendsetter


Finn Mactaggart – Former creative director of PC Music, now performing as Pig

I don’t know if it’s going to happen in 2017 or 2030, but I’m sure there’s 
going to be a big crossover Asian act who will sweep the floor in the global 
music market. In 2015, I worked witha Chinese musician called Chris Lee 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WfRByws6l6o>, and the ambition and money 
behind her project was incredibly exciting because China’s creative industry is 
very new. I became fascinated by their pop market and can imagine an Asian star 
or group with enough awareness of a western audience totally dominating. I had 
a meeting with Syco, Simon Cowell’s label, and I know he’s very interested in 
the Korean boyband market.

I think we are probably going to see a powerful sense of struggle among a lot 
of artists. It’s been a dull past five years culturally, and I think we’re 
going to hear what a few years of a neoliberal approach to cultural management 
sounds like when people get very frustrated and angry. I think there will be 
artists who come through who are in their very existence political without 
having to attach themselves to any specific agenda. Just being present 
musically or even being alive is a political act in itself.

One thing I’m worried about is a “new rock revolution”. In 1999, Billy 
Childish insisted painting was the only true form of art: it suddenly birthed 
the stuckist art movement, a contemporary conformist aesthetic. It’s where this 
bearded hipster idea came from, and bands such as the Libertines. It was so 
conservative compared to what was going on with Aphex Twin and the other 
fantastic art in the early 00s. I’m worried about a conservative backlash, in 
which someone demands we go back to playing guitars and banjos because that’s 
the only true form of expression.

One to watch

Serpentwithfeet’s Blisters EP was one of the first moments in a good five 
years where I had to not pay attention to anything but closing my eyes and 
listening. His music consumes me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5a4N_lOAieA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5a4N_lOAieA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5a4N_lOAieA&media=>
The hitmaker 


Charli XCX – Pop star, hit songwriter and founder of Vroom Vroom Records 

More than ever, to become a successful artist, you have to have an opinion and 
know what you want. There’s no space for people who play inside the box any 
more. I don’t believe listeners want that and I don’t think the internet or 
media in general allows much space for artists who aren’t outspoken, whether 
that’s verbally or visually.

In terms of political awareness in music this year, I think it depends on the 
kind of artist: some artists create brilliant political music that is really 
important and there is definitely a lot of material to draw from last year, so 
I’m sure we’ll hear that this year.

In 2017, I think dancehall-infused pop music will remain prominent and I feel 
like hip-hop will still be dominant, especially songs that are atmospheric and 
emotional. Dancehall and sounds from Jamaica are infiltrating the mainstream 
more than ever, while it’s an area of culture that artists and producers have 
been drawing inspiration from for ages, it’s being pushed into the mainstream 
in a big way with Popcaan/Diplo/Major Lazer being so successful over the past 
few years. That’s really exciting.

One to watch

Raye and also Stefflon Don. Both of them are superstars and such incredible 
writers. They’re going to take over the world.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0fcbJzKmTm0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0fcbJzKmTm0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0fcbJzKmTm0&media=>
The esoteric expert


Xanthe Fuller – Head of communications, Mixcloud

Ambient has always been hugely popular on Mixcloud. Our chillout curators – 
such asGelka <https://www.mixcloud.com/gelka/> from Budapest, Low Light Mixes 
<https://www.mixcloud.com/lowlight/> from Wisconsin and Chris Coco 
<https://www.mixcloud.com/chriscoco/> from London – are some of the stars of 
the platform. When people come to Mixcloud, they often listen for hours while 
they work or have people round in the evening, which could explain the rise of 
the ambient and chillout genres, as they can create an interesting atmosphere.

In conjunction with the rise of mobile listening and constant expansion of 
digital music, vinyl is making a comeback, with record collectors benefiting 
from the wealth of old and rare Asian curios, which,according to Seoul 
Community Radio <http://www.seoulcommunityradio.com/>, are so in demand in 
eclectic western record shops. We might see an increasing number of artists 
shaping their albums to fit that format again in the future.

Red Light Radio <http://redlightradio.net/> in Amsterdam upload a wealth of 
experimental and unusual shows and they have commented that people seem 
increasingly open-minded and curious. They are not just demanding to hear what 
they know. They feel that niche is gaining popularity, as seen with the success 
of festivals such asStrange Sounds From Beyond 
<http://strangesoundsfrombeyond.com/>.

There has definitely been a rise in African-inspired electronic music. One of 
last year’s biggest successes for Manchester’sReform Radio  
<http://www.reformradio.co.uk/>was a show called South of the Boredom made by 
an artist in South Africa called ANG. They have seen a rising interest in not 
just the traditional sounds from that region, but more contemporary electronic 
styles. Station controller Sam Oliviera thinks it’s only a matter of time until 
we start to hear more UK-produced, African-inspired bass and grime. Our jazz 
curatorsJazzcat <https://www.mixcloud.com/maxvibes/> from Italy and Dubbel Dee 
<https://www.mixcloud.com/DubbelDee/> from Belgium continue to perform really 
well, and I’ve noticed the return of broken beat, and new interesting twists on 
grime – check out YGG’s recent NTS show – and the continuing expansion of 
footwork from labels such as Hyperdub and Planet Mu.

One to watch 

Sampa the Great brings a breadth of cultures and influences to her work. She 
has the perfect blend of strong, meaningful lyrics, unusual and original 
rhythms and fantastic production.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFwGtxcFvrgg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFwGtxcFvrgg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFwGtxcFvrgg&media=>
The promoter

Tom Baker – Founder of Eat Your Own Ears

Streaming services such as Apple and Spotify allow people to discover so much 
that the demand in cities for gigs and clubs is amazing at the moment. It’s 
definitely harder for bands to become really big, and it’s also hard booking 
festivals now – events don’t have that identity that they once had, because 
people’s tastes are so broad. To stand out, I think festivals need to bring 
their own identity in other ways – at Field Day this year, we’re using a huge 
steel structure for Aphex Twin, in terms of PA and lights, so it’s going to be 
the perfect environment for him.

There are still emerging styles in the bands we are booking, though, such as 
the psych-rock scene that Tame Impala triggered, with Pond and King Gizzard 
evolving that sound. Then you’ve got an electronic sound that Disclosure 
pioneered. I think popwise a lot has and will be influenced by what Skrillex 
did with Justin Bieber – well produced, very self-aware songwriting with 
whispery vocals. In terms of new genres, I’ve noticed there’s an influence of 
trip-hop and acid jazz in a lot of bands we are booking. I can’t imagine groups 
have been sitting there saying “We really want to sound like Jamiroquai with 
Dubstar” – they have just chanced upon a sound from that era. We are also 
seeing a lot more groups reforming, making new albums, and that fanbase is 
continuing to grow – either people are discovering bands for the first time, or 
they are nostalgic for when that group appeared the first time. I think that’s 
exciting.

One to watch

Aine Cahill is a brand new, unsigned songwriter who has a natural passion. 
This year could be a good year for her – a slow build, but when it goes, I 
think it could pop!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYUP3Dy9IcPQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYUP3Dy9IcPQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYUP3Dy9IcPQ&media=>
The talent scout

Caroline SM – A&R Manager at XL 

UK rap is going to continue to shine through in a big way. As well as the New 
Gen album, we have albums coming from some of the country’s biggest underground 
rappers: Stormzy,Nines <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iSInJlKobUQ> and J Hus. 
Amazing young R&B artists such asRay BLK 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SfpgMkZ8vk8> and Jorja Smith will do big 
things in 2017, too – they’re really important for the growth of this genre in 
the UK. These artists are totally uncompromised stylistically and really 
understand their audiences and feed them what they want. They are all 
consistent with good quality music, headstrong in their attitudes and trying to 
push musical boundaries for their genre.

While the genres have been around for a long time, I think African and 
Caribbean styles and stars such as Wizkid and Popcaan are having a huge effect 
on the hits we see in the charts and will continue to, from Drake and Rihanna 
to Justin Bieber, right through to the underground rap scene here in the UK, 
with artists such asStefflon Don <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fcbJzKmTm0>, 
Belly Squad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gHZfws8UBDQ>, Abra Cadabra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onNwWAAE4Kg> and Yxng Bane 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8HjeuKFKXw>.

With streaming platforms such as Spotify, Apple Music and YouTube getting 
bigger and bigger, the fans are really in control of what they listen to, and 
not the radio or TV any more. So, where people used to be forcefed their 
musical tastes, they can now discover for themselves. Self discovery and having 
that “I found it first” impulse towards new artists is the greatest way for new 
sounds and styles to emerge.

One to watch

Nines’ One Foot Out sounds like one of the most triumphant bodies of UK rap 
I’ve heard in a long time. The success of it is going to be very important to 
the UK.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiSInJlKobUQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiSInJlKobUQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiSInJlKobUQ&media=> 