
Every evening, as twilight falls over London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, sharp shafts of light will plunge down 
from the night sky like apocalyptic laser beams, zapping the city’s bridges one 
by one while an ominous rumbling noise fills the air. “Just as the chiming of 
church bells once served to gather villagers,” says American architect Liz 
Diller, “the civic-scale lighting ceremony will celebrate a new form of urban 
collectivity.”

Her proposal 
<https://competitions.malcolmreading.co.uk/illuminatedriver/shortlist/synchronizing-the-city-its-natural-and-urban-rhythms>
 is one of the six shortlisted schemes in the mayor of London’sIlluminated River
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/07/six-schemes-for-lighting-up-london-bridges-shortlisted-illuminated-river>
 competition, a £20m plan to bring nocturnal sparkle to the dull, grey Thames. 
Whittled down from 105 entries from across the world, the schemes range from 
connecting central London’s 17 bridges with linear ribbons of light, to gently 
illuminating their dark vaulted underbellies with a golden glow.

A recurring theme among the designs is an ambition to revive the natural 
rhythms of the river that have apparently been lost, as if Old Father Thames 
has somehow been suffocated by the pace of modern life. “We want to reveal the 
river as a breathing pulsating organism,” declaresthe entry by Amanda Levete 
<https://competitions.malcolmreading.co.uk/illuminatedriver/shortlist/the-eternal-story-of-the-river-thames>
. “The river and its tidal changes remind us that our lives play out, not in 
the urgent context of minutes or hours but in the slower deeper context of 
thousands of centuries.”
 The Eternal Story of the River Thames … the proposal by Amanda Levete, Asif 
Kapadia and Simon Stephens. 
Her proposal, developed with filmmaker Asif Kapadia and playwright Simon 
Stephens, would line the banks of the Thames with one continuous thread of 
light, designed to illuminate the foreshore of the river at low tide – so 
mudlarkers can see what they’re stepping in. Whether it is advisable to call 
attention to the tidal detritus of shopping trolleys and swollen cadavers is 
moot, but there’s a certain eerie charm to the scheme. As the tide rises, the 
lighting would shift from the underbellies of the bridges to the sides, and 
there is a suggestion that this “magical five-mile long cinematic experience” 
could be “accelerated for special occasions”. You can imagine a high-speed 
river of light for New Year’s Eve, or a throbbing riparian strobe for the next 
royal baby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Filluminated-river-london-thames%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8e96279c379affe1ac6a7615a21cdc8ebe68ca8%2F0_0_7016_4393%2F7016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glow%20with%20the%20flow%3A%20big%20names%20float%20big%20ideas%20to%20light%20up%20Thames%20at%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Filluminated-river-london-thames%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glow%20with%20the%20flow%3A%20big%20names%20float%20big%20ideas%20to%20light%20up%20Thames%20at%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Filluminated-river-london-thames%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8e96279c379affe1ac6a7615a21cdc8ebe68ca8%2F0_0_7016_4393%2F7016.jpg>
 Concept artwork for Sam Jacob and Dutch artist Simon Heijdens’s design, 
pictured at London Bridge. Photograph: MRC and Sam Jacob Studio and Simon 
Heijdens 
Sam Jacob and Dutch artist Simon Heijdens have taken the bridges as launching 
points for a newhovering river of light 
<https://competitions.malcolmreading.co.uk/illuminatedriver/shortlist/thames-nocturne>
, which would stretch from bridge to bridge, forming a ghostly doppelganger of 
the Thames itself, suspended in the air. Composed of thin slivers of light, 
this rippling volume would be choreographed by live data read from the river’s 
movement, “creating an ethereal display that ebbs and flows in register with 
the Thames”. It’s one of the more poetic of the schemes but, judging by the 
images, it would effectively create a wall of light between the banks of the 
river, obstructing the view of the city by night. As with Diller Scofidio + 
Renfro’s armageddon show, you can imagine it would make for a fun occasional 
spectacle, but as a permanent feature of the night-time landscape it would 
grate.

It’s a feeling you get from many of the entries, that the designers have 
jumped at the opportunity to entertain with a ritzy night-time display, rather 
than quietly shed light on what is already there. Underpinning them, there 
appears to be a desire for the kind of novelty show embodied inDubai’s dancing 
fountains <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vM59vw8KA_s>, which gyrate every 
night beneath the Burj Khalifa to strains of Celine Dion, betraying an urge to 
reconfigure the city as a site of spectacular happenings with tourists in mind.
 Blurring Boundaries … the proposal by David Adjaye and 16 international 
artists. 
David Adjaye has hatched a cunning ruse and turned himself into the curator of 
his ownlinear light gallery 
<https://competitions.malcolmreading.co.uk/illuminatedriver/shortlist/blurring-boundaries>
, inviting a host of international artists to tackle each of the bridges. Chris 
Ofili plans to project a design of swirling, vaguely African patterns on to 
London Bridge, Joana Vasconcelos proposes to bolt some illuminated doilies on 
to Waterloo Bridge, while Cai Guo-Qiang appears to want to blow up Tower Bridge 
each night with a barrage of Chinese firecrackers. Adjaye, meanwhile, has 
carved out more of a masterplanning role, proposing to design a series of 17 
pavilions alongside the bridges “to enhance the curatorial vision” and add more 
clutter to the streetscape.

In one of the more straightforward entries, Leo Villareal (who created the Bay 
Lights in San Francisco) has teamed up with Lifschutz Davidson Sandilands to 
come up with apulsating pastel palette of lights 
<https://competitions.malcolmreading.co.uk/illuminatedriver/shortlist/current> 
designed to “unify the bridges under a single artistic vision”. Throbbing 
through a cycle of pinks, purples and oranges, it would turn the Thames into a 
giant linear lava lamp.

Six schemes for lighting up London's bridges shortlisted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/07/six-schemes-for-lighting-up-london-bridges-shortlisted-illuminated-river>
Finally, the most gnomic entry 
<https://competitions.malcolmreading.co.uk/illuminatedriver/shortlist/a-river-aint-too-much-to-light>
 comes from French lighting designers Les Éclairagistes Associés (LEA), working 
with artist Federico Pietrella, who seem to be proposing a series of lampposts 
stuck in the riverbed. In a welcome rebuttal of the UK’s increasingly 
isolationist stance, they note that the lights would be faithful reproductions 
of different lampposts from around the world, as a symbol of London as “the 
capital of exchanges between different cultures”.
 Synchronising the City … the proposal by Diller Scofidio + Renfro. 
There are some diverting ideas, but, in sum, the whole thing is a very odd 
endeavour – particularly given that most of these bridges already have lighting 
schemes of their own, from the twinkling fairytale bulbs of Chelsea Bridge to 
the bascules of Tower Bridge illuminated as majestic purple rockets. Hannah 
Rothschild, chair of theIlluminated River Foundation 
<http://illuminatedriver.london/>, describes the Thames by night as “a ribbon 
of darkness … at odds with the ambition to make London a 24-hour city,” but 
that’s simply not true. The river already shines with a series of conflicting 
colour schemes that speaks more of London’s chaotic character than a curated 
nightly show.

The project also raises questions about mayor Sadiq Khan’s priorities for the 
city at a time when there is uncertainty over how long-delayed plans forfurther 
crossings in the east of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/jun/30/bridge-east-london-missing-link-transport-relaunch>
 will be funded, a battle over a proposed pedestrian bridge at Nine Elms (which 
only one side of the river seems to want 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/25/public-fury-as-new-bridge-across-the-thames-announced-at-nine-elms>
), and the previous mayor’s vanity scheme for thegarden bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/21/london-garden-bridge-may-need-taxpayer-bailout-once-built-report-says>
 still to be properly interrogated. Khan is keen to stress that his lighting 
project will be privately funded (so far £5m has been donated by Peter Baldwin 
and Lisbet Rausing through the Arcadia Fund, £5m by the Rothschild Foundation 
and £500,000 by the City of London Corporation, leaving almost £9.5m still to 
raise), but the garden bridge also began as a low-budget, privately funded 
endeavour, before it galloped out of control – and there are signs in these 
entries that the project will expand well beyond buying some bulbs.

 