
What would you say if I told you that I’ve booked myself a smoking holiday for 
the summer? A relaxing fortnight during which I will do nothing but sit in a 
chair, sucking on Silk Cuts and mainlining Marlboros, with the odd fragrant 
Camel to follow. Not a holiday on which I will occasionally smoke. A holiday on 
which I will exclusively smoke.

I’ll set alarms in the morning to ensure I’m sparking up nice and early. I’ll 
aim to get a good few hours’ smoking done before lunch. If I pause for a bath, 
I’ll lie there making plans for the next day’s smoking. Puff puff puff.

I expect you’d find the idea bizarre. Depending on what sort of person you 
are, and how much you smoke yourself, your reaction would be somewhere between 
bemusement and outrage. Well, that’s how I feel when you tell me you’re going 
skiing.

Perhaps you’re going this very week? I believe it’s the February half-term, a 
period when many Brits head off to snap their tendons and crush their skulls on 
the slopes of Europe. What better timing? If you’re going to embrace a high 
risk of serious injury, God forbid your school-age children would be left out.

If you’re staying at home, perhaps you’re watching Channel 4’s The Jump 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-jump>, a programme about celebrities 
receiving hospital treatment in cold countries. (In theory, it’s a “winter 
sports” reality show, but rarely for long.) The current series has been notable 
for injuring some of our top Olympians:Rebecca Adlington  
<http://www.standard.co.uk/stayingin/tvfilm/the-jump-2016-rebecca-adlington-taken-to-hospital-after-dislocating-her-shoulder-a3169691.html>
dislocated her shoulder,Linford Christie 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/02/11/the-jump-2016-linford-christie-has-now-quit-after-suffering-a-hamstring-injury-5677121/>
 damaged a hamstring andBeth Tweddle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/10/the-jumps-beth-tweddle-walks-a-few-steps-after-neck-surgery>
 is recovering from major surgery after basically breaking her neck.

Dear me, is anyone as needy and exploitable as a retired athlete? These poor 
creatures rattle around, abrim with nervous energy, yearning to compete, braced 
at all times for the clang of the bell and the crack of the starting gun, never 
knowing peace. WhenFrank Bruno 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/sportsnews/article-3426343/Frank-Bruno-return-ring-heavyweight-boxing-legend-announces-comeback-aged-54.html>
, that great and much-loved national hero, said recently that he wanted to 
stage a boxing comeback, many people (including his own brave and loving 
daughters) chalked it up to a difficult phase in his bipolar disorder. Yet 
that’s only the same inclination as Beth Tweddle going onThe Jump. All ageing 
athletes overflow with unused strength and competitive spirit; they never 
really know when to stop. And it’s not just athletes. Also on this year’sThe 
Jump, actress Tina Hobley 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3432769/Tina-Hobley-exits-Jump-dislocating-elbow-ski-practice-Channel-4-admits-crew-failed-clear-way.html>
 left with a broken arm and “reality star”Mark-Francis Vandelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/09/mark-francis-vandelli-leaves-the-jump-after-fracturing-ankle>
 broke his ankle.

In previous series, Melinda Messenger 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2548208/Melinda-Messenger-forced-pull-The-Jump-suffering-concussion-training.html>
 suffered a concussion,Henry Conway 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/press/news/joe-mcelderry-joins-the-jump-for-injured-henry-conway>
 shattered a bone in his thumb,Ola Jordan 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2872338/Ola-Jordan-suffers-potentially-career-changing-damage-leg-hips-accident-training-Jump.html>
 seriously damaged her hip (“It’s the worst thing I’ve ever been through,” she 
said) and SirSteven Redgrave 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2549858/Sir-Steve-Redgrave-overcomes-bad-fall-training-semi-final-The-Jump-despite-broken-hand-sore-ribs.html>
 broke his hand.

Watching this year’s carnage, comedian Marcus Brigstocke 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3440173/Marcus-Brigstocke-admits-couldn-t-work-YEAR-injuring-Jump-two-years-ago.html>
, who snapped his cruciate ligaments while making the show in 2014, said: “I’d 
doThe Jump again.” Christ, what’s wrong with these people?

What is this eagerness to rush somewhere freezing, pull on a Day-Glo onesie 
and smash into a tree? What is it about not spending two months in traction 
that they so despise? Are they all just trying to get expensive new teeth 
courtesy of Channel 4’s insurance company?

Just as you can’t chalk it up entirely to the restlessness of ex-sportsmen, 
neither can you say it’s all about the desperate attention-seeking of 
performers. That wouldn’t explain the millions of other people who go skiing, 
scuba-diving, bungee-jumping, skydiving, free climbing, horse riding, 
snowboarding, base jumping and all the other stupid things that they call 
“life-affirming”, meaning they were happy afterwards not to have died – a 
happiness made possible only by the pretty high chance that they would.

Do I sound defensive? For my entire adult life I have faced the disapproval of 
people who think that my own hobby, gambling, is wrong. They think it’s 
reckless, seedy, self-centred and dangerous. They consider skiing, meanwhile, 
to be wholesome. This simply demonstrates the preposterous elevation of money 
over what is real and important in life. Why is losing cash so controversial 
when losing blood and bone is not? Gamblers merely risk ending up skint, not 
paralysed. Your legs are an actual thing. The pound is not a thing. Our 
slippery slope is only metaphorical.

Yet when Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> showed 
tournament poker (poker! not even the really mad stuff like roulette), it had 
to be after midnight. You’ll never see it in prime time because rules forbid 
setting a bad example to the young.

But games that flirt with paraplegia and death? Well that’s fine! That can go 
out at tea-time on a Sunday! It’s life-affirming! Wholly appropriate to 
encourage children! Tonight, you’ll find,The Jump is on straight after Mr 
Popper’s Penguins.

When I was at school I was forced to play lacrosse, a game in which tiny 
rock-hard missiles fly at your head and you must catch them with a stick to 
avoid a brain haemorrhage. I was regularly punished for not taking part more 
wholeheartedly. School is supposed to civilise us, to tame our wilder instincts 
and teach us how to be more sensible, more knowledgeable and cleverer. And yet 
I was in trouble for being violent-death-averse. That was a tendency that 
apparently needed punishing out of me.

Right from the off, we’re encouraged to buy into notions of bravery around 
physical risk. That makes sense if you’re trying to save someone’s life. It 
does not make sense as the basis for a holiday.

The thrilling proximity of danger is supposed to help make skiing exciting and 
fun. This is “living life to the full”. By the same logic, of course, so is 
shooting up. And the paraphernalia doesn’t take up nearly so much space in the 
attic.
 