
The power of the hard men of God is one of the great political puzzles of this 
country. They are the only opponents of equal marriage. They don’t remotely 
have the numbers. But they have log-jammed reform.

 I’ve been tracking the power of these people most of my professional life. 
It’s no wonder. When I was a kid journalist, sex for men like me was a crime 
nearly everywhere in Australia.

 Kissing was assault. One year in the early 1980s, a Sydney magistrate fined a 
man $50 for tongue-kissing another on the dance floor of an Oxford Street club. 
Fucking carried a prison sentence of 14 years.

 In that lost world, hardly anyone was thrown behind bars. The point was the 
threat and the shame. The upshot was corruption and violence. Lives were ruined.

 And just as they are fighting today against equal marriage, warriors of the 
cloth battled with everything they had to keep it that way.

They fought from the pulpit, in the press and along the corridors of every 
parliament in the land. They fought in the name of children – and, yes, some of 
these men turned out to be protecting paedophiles. They vilified homosexuals. 
They declared the fate of western civilisation was hanging in the balance.

The faiths remain the most resilient, most respected and the best-connected 
lobby in the nation

Australians wanted these cruel laws changed. We are not a profoundly 
conservative country. Support for keeping sodomy a crime had collapsed here 
just as it had in the rest of the western world.


What made reform such an agonising business in Australia wasn’t overcoming 
public reluctance but defeating the preachers. They can’t promise votes. They 
can threaten mayhem.


Politicians are terrified of them. Grappling with churches is about the most 
distasteful contest they can imagine. The faiths remain the most resilient, 
most respected and the best-connected lobby in the nation.


Whether the issue is homosexuality, divorce, abortion, euthanasia or equal 
marriage, religion has the power to shatter party discipline.


Neville Wran <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neville_Wran>, an atheist premier 
with a fat majority, shilly-shallied over the change for the best part of a 
decade. He could count absolutely on the people of New South Wales. Their 
support for decriminalising homosexuality was never in doubt. But he feared 
humiliation at the hands of his caucus.


Sydney Mardi Gras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2015/feb/20/sydney-mardi-gras-2015-top-picks>
 was already touted round the world before Wran acted. That was in 1984. 
Already over the line were South Australia, Victoria and the ACT. Tasmania was 
the last state to stare down the preachers in 1997.


The battle for equal marriage brings back to the field the same old rhetoric, 
the same fears, the same tactics and the same combatants.


This is not a pitched battle between Christian and secular Australia. Many 
Christians find the fight against equal marriage embarrassing, even barbaric. 
Their voices are hardly heard.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4ce836b407b9a26d5ccc4d5be142fa1fd2d24d6%2F0_0_839_596%2F839.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=God's%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=God%27s%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4ce836b407b9a26d5ccc4d5be142fa1fd2d24d6%2F0_0_839_596%2F839.jpg>
 A letter from the Catholic Bishops of Australia arguing against same-sex 
marriage and marriage equality. Photograph: Catholic Bishops of Australia 
Politicians fear the defenders of the citadel: Catholic and Orthodox bishops; 
evangelical Anglicans; Presbyterians and other protestants who shunned the 
Uniting Church; mighty Hillsong and those who gather under the umbrella of the 
Australian Christian Lobby. Their (mostly) silent partners in the struggle are 
Muslims and conservative Jews.


Miraculously they are holding the line. 

Much deeper than bigotry

I know many of these warriors. I’ve debated them, read their work and reported 
their campaigns. To call them bigots is too simple. Though without the loathing 
of homosexuality, there would be far fewer recruits to their crusades.

Disgust comes gorgeously packaged these days. “God made every person unique 
and irreplaceable as His beloved images in this world,” theCatholic Archbishop 
of Sydney, Anthony Fisher, preached this past winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/12/archbishop-tells-catholics-resist-being-bullied-supporting-gay-marriage>
. “If God loves people with same-sex attraction, so must the church.”


Fisher said nothing that cold night at St Mary’s Cathedral about his church’s 
rule that these men are bound for hell if they ever have sex with one another. 
Perhaps he didn’t need to. The teaching is so familiar.

Disgust comes gorgeously packaged these days

And though he spoke of the “justice and compassion” Catholics offer 
homosexuals, he forgot to mention the exemptions his church – and most faiths – 
demand from anti-discrimination laws so they can go on refusing to employ 
lesbians, transsexuals and homosexuals or sack any they discover on the 
payrolls of their schools, charities and hospitals.

The faiths call this just discrimination. As Fisher said so piously that 
night: “All forms of unjust discrimination must be opposed.”

This goes much deeper than bigotry. It’s about claiming the most intimate 
power over believers, the power to forbid any sex without the blessing of the 
church. That means never before marriage; never outside marriage; and, of 
course, never with the same sex.

These ancient rules were law for centuries. Judges and police were supposed to 
jump to the aid of bishops and preachers. The noose and the stake sent the 
worst offenders to hell. Shame did the rest.


Nearly every one of these laws is dead and gone after titanic brawls we tend 
to put out of our minds because they seem, in retrospect, so absurd. This is a 
mistake. The lesson is that we’re fighting the one battle here, over and over 
again.


And because the warriors of the faiths know the tide of popular opinion is 
running strongly against them, they fight for keeps. They realise no defeat 
will ever be reversed. It’s once and forever.


So they dig in with a particular and at times comic ferocity. The example of 
the world counts for nothing in their eyes. Though equal marriage has been 
embraced by nearly every Western nation, the warriors are fighting to the last 
– just as they fought no-fault divorce, the morning-after pill, IVF for 
lesbians, smut on television and sparing gays the useful terror of prison.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff188a08dc7269781444722e8614af1da03658e1c%2F256_58_3664_2198%2F3664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=God's%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=God%27s%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff188a08dc7269781444722e8614af1da03658e1c%2F256_58_3664_2198%2F3664.jpg>
 George Brandis, the attorney general, criticised ‘an alarming emergence of 
intolerance of religious faith’. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP 
Australia is the land of the warriors’ last resort.


But the troops are deserting them. The faithful are no longer as willing as 
they were to obey the ancient Christian sex rules. They have shrugged off the 
power of their bishops and preachers.


Just like the rest of us they live together before they marry. They use the 
pill. They have abortions. They divorce. They remarry without annulment. They 
aren’t much troubled by their homosexual brothers and children. And most back 
equal marriage.


When Crosby Textor asked Australians in 2014 if they supported or opposed 
allowing same-sex couples to marry 
<http://www.crosbytextor.com/news/record-support-for-same-sex-marriage/news/record-support-for-same-sex-marriage/>
, they found support high across the faiths as well as Australia:


Total support: 72%.


 Catholics: 67%.

 Christians generally: 59%.

 Anglican and Uniting: 57%.

 The bishops aren’t speaking for their flocks. And while the Australian 
Christian Lobby blasts marriage reform with startling ferocity, pollsters make 
it clear these preachers speaks for few of us.

 According to Crosby Textor only 21% of Australians oppose equal marriage. For 
every opponent there are three or more Australians who support equal marriage. 
Success should be a lay down misère.

 It isn’t. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c437f184179d0547ffac92c75822ea8d3a108fb%2F0_0_4435_5906%2F4435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=God's%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=God%27s%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c437f184179d0547ffac92c75822ea8d3a108fb%2F0_0_4435_5906%2F4435.jpg>
 A composite image of Australian same-sex couples. A Crosby Textor poll found 
that 72% of people supported marriage equality. Photograph: Getty Images 
Crying liberty

The Catholic Bishops’ Conference issued a pastoral letter earlier this year 
calledDon’t Mess with Marriage 
<http://www.cam.org.au/News-and-Events/News-and-Events/News/Article/19281/Australian-Catholic-Bishops-Dont-Mess-with-Marriage#.Vmj80xOqqko>
. The pictures are gorgeous. Disdain for homosexuals is buried beneath the 
usual gauzy rhetoric about love, respect and justice.

 “We wish,” say the bishops “to engage with this debate.” There’s no debate. 
They simply assert in various ways on page after page that marriage can only 
ever be “an institution designed to support people of the opposite sex to be 
faithful to each other and to the children of their union.”

 A complaint about Don’t Mess with Marriage has been taken to the Tasmanian 
Anti-Discrimination Board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/28/catholic-anti-gay-marriage-booklet-condemned-as-immeasurably-harmful>
. This is ludicrous. Homosexuals don’t need to run to tribunals for protection 
from the insults of the clergy.

 And the case is a gift to Christian hardliners. They are crying liberty. 

 “Same-sex marriage ideology is incompatible with freedom,” the head of the 
ACL thundered. “All of the debate of the past five years has been about forcing 
people of conscience to bow to the new definition of marriage.”

 News Corp columnists have taken up this line with extraordinary passion. In 
prose that wouldn’t disgrace the King James Bible,Paul Kelly 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/author/Paul+Kelly> warns of “a calculated 
strike by parliaments and anti-discrimination boards using the cover of 
same-sex justice to achieve a quantum reduction in religious freedom and a 
pivotal change in the norms of our society.”

 In early November, the attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, spoke of “an 
alarming emergence of intolerance of religious faith” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/05/george-brandis-catholics-and-other-devout-people-victims-of-intolerance>
 by some of the most voluble elements in the community” when he opened the 
Human Rights Commission’s “roundtable” on religious freedom.

 “It is the work of the roundtable,” Brandis said, “to develop strategies and 
understandings which promote a spirit of tolerance and mutual respect within a 
culture of freedom.”

 Australians have grown cynical about claims that the faiths are the true 
guardians of families and children. That’s looking, after a couple of years’ 
evidence to the royal commission into institutional responses to child sexual 
abuse, a little shop soiled.

 But we care about religious freedom. We remain tolerant of churches. We 
loathe interfering in their affairs. As much as possible we want to leave them 
to themselves. We are oddly reluctant even to name them as opponents – often 
the only opponents – in political contests of this kind.

 This is an asset for the faiths that gives them strength beyond their 
numbers. And they are even stronger because this secular, respectful country 
doesn’t have much appetite for interrogating their claims. We say: that’s just 
them.

 But as the fight over equal marriage takes this turn, it has to be asked what 
the hard men of God mean when they say liberty of faith is under threat in 
Australia? Is there anything at stake here other than them wanting to go on 
belittling homosexuals at maximum volume?

Two fundamental claims lie behind the rhetoric of freedom imperilled.

First, the warriors say abuse is forcing them into the shadows. They want to 
be loved as they pursue their ancient quarrels. Men who might once have faced 
lions for their faith are whinging about ridicule.


 Here is Fisher a few weeks ago: “When people like me … enter the fray on 
marriage we now expect to be tagged ‘ultra-conservative’, ‘tedious imbecile’, 
‘delusional nutter’, ‘evangelical clap-trapper’ and even ‘nauseating piece of 
filth’ not just in the anti-social media but even in the mainstream.

 “What is new is that such ad hominem hails not just from fevered activists 
and net trolls but from respected journalists and public figures.”

 The warriors of the cloth ought not to be abused. But men like Fisher are 
strangely unwilling to grasp why their opposition to equal marriage might stir 
ugly passions. Right or wrong, they seem unable to acknowledge the profound 
change of heart in this country to both homosexuality and marriage.

Men like Sydney Anglican priest Peter Kurti 
<https://www.cis.org.au/experts/research-scholars/peter-kurti> see themselves 
not as collateral damage in a great shift of values but targets of an 
“aggressive secularism that wants to drive religion out of the public square”.

“This campaign seeks completely to drive away religion, particularly 
Christianity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>, from the social 
and cultural realm where faith is practised, to the private and confined realm 
of the mind.”

That deserted public square is a key image in this debate. But men like Kurti, 
Fisher andLyle Shelton <http://www.acl.org.au/author/lyle-shelton/> are as 
active as ever in that space. They have all the platforms they have ever had to 
pursue their causes. They may not have the airtime they would like, but in a 
year or so there is to be a national debate on same-sex marriageon which 
Canberra has promised to spend $160m 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-09-17/senate-backs-parliamentary-conscience-vote-on-same-sex-marriage/6781992>
.

They aren’t victims. They just don’t have the traction they once had. They 
aren’t as respected. They aren’t as believed. They have lost their veto.

Abusing them is inexcusable, but what has happened to Christian fortitude? 
Aren’t the warriors of the faith supposed to boast rather than complain that 
standing against the zeitgeist earns them no applause?

I have read thousands of words trying to identify any freedom at stake that 
doesn’t involve demeaning homosexuals

The second fundamental is the claim allowing equal marriage would mean the 
inevitable loss of religious liberty.

It’s apparently a zero sum game for the warriors: freedom won is freedom lost. 
When two blokes are allowed to marry, the faiths are no longer free.

I have read thousands of words over the last weeks trying to identify any 
freedom at stake in this exchange that doesn’t involve demeaning homosexuals in 
the name of their God.

Alas, in the words of the old song, that’s all there is. 

Fisher promotes a grim dystopian future should equal marriage ever become the 
law of the land. It’s easy slippery slope stuff: allow this, and what other 
horrors – like forcing churches to pay tax – might follow?

Of this mythical Australia of 2025 he said: “Already one Catholic bishop has 
been briefly jailed for refusing to apply the state-approved ‘LGBTIQQ safety 
protocols and awareness program’ to the schools in his diocese; and parents at 
Jewish and Muslim schools have been advised that they may not withdraw their 
children from such programs.

“Many clergy and teachers in faith-based schools have been cowed with threats 
of prosecution for ‘hate speech’ if they teach that divine law limits marriage 
to people of opposite sex.”

Disdain for homosexuals is key to these fears, but they go deeper than 
bigotry. Allow men to marry each other, and what happens to church teaching 
that marriage is the sacred gateway to sex?

Opposition to same sex marriage isn’t about freedom, it’s about privilege. 
It’s a last ditch stand to keep the most fundamental of the sex rules of 
Christendom entrenched in law.

 Fisher and his kind know they will never be forced to perform same-sex 
marriages themselves. Nor would any Australian government compel them to allow 
their churches to be used for such ceremonies. Yet in a world that accepts same 
sex-marriage they see such “niggardly exemptions” as not enough to guarantee 
their freedom.

 This is where they talk of small town martyrs in North America: men and women 
of profound faith compelled to bake wedding cakes, take wedding photographs and 
offer double beds to honeymooning gay couples.

 Fisher is calling for these “ordinary believers and their businesses” to be 
exempted from anti-discrimination laws. Hardliners across the board want the 
legal privileges enjoyed – and fiercely protect – by their religious 
organisations to be extended to the faithful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc501c8d3204de09d0a59779f8e2f7bb002fe330e%2F0_141_2568_1541%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=God's%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=God%27s%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc501c8d3204de09d0a59779f8e2f7bb002fe330e%2F0_141_2568_1541%2F2000.jpg>
 Bob Katter refused to allow publicly homophobic candidates run for his party. 
Even a man running a breakaway party based in rural Queensland could see this 
was poison at the ballot box. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP 
 As each month passes, this astonishing demand to bust anti-discrimination 
schemes across Australia is looking more and more like a deal being offered by 
the faiths to government.

 “The terms of their defeat are up for grabs,” says David Glasgow 
<http://www.law.nyu.edu/publicinterestlawcenter/aboutpilc/staff-bios>, an 
Australian lawyer working at New York University Law School. He has watched the 
same demands being made by the faithful across America since the supreme court 
approved equal marriage in June.

 “Many religious people object to all homosexual activity and relationships, 
not just marital ones. If baking a cake makes a business owner complicit in the 
sin of same-sex marriage, a wide range of activities could make them complicit 
in the sin of same-sex relationships.

 “What’s to stop an architect from claiming that it violates his or her faith 
to build a home for a same-sex couple, or a police officer saying the same when 
asked to keep the peace at a pride march … this is religious liberty on 
steroids.”

The end is nigh

 I won’t be rushing to marry. It didn’t turn out so well the last time. And I 
reckon that after nearly 20 years, my partner and I are as married as two 
people can be. No kids of course, but absolutely married.

 How Australia has changed even in those years. One marker I love of that 
transformation was Bob Katter’s refusal a couple of years agoto allow two 
candidates for his Katter Australia Party to fly the flag of homophobia 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/katter-dumps-two-candidates-over-gay-slurs-20130124-2d8wi.html>
.

 One tweeted he would never allow a gay person to teach his children. The 
other equated homosexuals with paedophiles. Both were dumped. Even a man 
running a breakaway party based in rural Queensland could see this was poison 
at the ballot box.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead27da68da36e74d03027cc0feb14742b08969e%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=God's%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=God%27s%20warriors%20are%20locked%20in%20a%20barbaric%2C%20futile%20battle%20against%20marriage%20equality%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgods-warriors-are-locked-in-a-barbaric-futile-battle-against-marriage-equality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead27da68da36e74d03027cc0feb14742b08969e%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A rally for marriage equality in May, attended by Christine Forster, the 
sister of Tony Abbott, and her partner Virginia Edwards. Photograph: Lisa Maree 
Williams/Getty Images 
 So why do politicians take it seriously when it’s delivered from the pulpit? 

The politics of salvation are always on the boil in this country. But this is 
not an entirely bleak story. Within the churches, fine men and women continue 
to struggle against the forces of punitive Christianity. Christians everywhere 
have joined the fight for equal marriage.

And the wishes of the people can’t be denied forever. That’s the lesson from 
the brawls of my youth over gay rights. Good, secular sense wins out in the 
end. It always does.

Equal marriage will happen. There are more rounds to fight. But even the most 
hardline contenders know it will happen. God’s work is in the delay, in making 
change as painful as possible.

 But Australia will get there in the end. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fwe-need-to-tell-our-kids-its-ok-to-be-who-they-are-queenslanders-stand-firm-on-marriage-equality-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F23%2F1448242036733%2FKP_600520_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20need%20to%20tell%20our%20kids%20it%E2%80%99s%20OK%20to%20be%20who%20they%20are%E2%80%99%3A%20Queenslanders%20stand%20firm%20on%20marriage%20equality%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fwe-need-to-tell-our-kids-its-ok-to-be-who-they-are-queenslanders-stand-firm-on-marriage-equality-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20need%20to%20tell%20our%20kids%20it%E2%80%99s%20OK%20to%20be%20who%20they%20are%E2%80%99%3A%20Queenslanders%20stand%20firm%20on%20marriage%20equality%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fwe-need-to-tell-our-kids-its-ok-to-be-who-they-are-queenslanders-stand-firm-on-marriage-equality-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F23%2F1448242036733%2FKP_600520_crop_640x480.jpg>
Queenslanders stand firm on marriage equality at a rally in Ipswich last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/nov/23/we-need-to-tell-our-kids-its-ok-to-be-who-they-are-queenslanders-stand-firm-on-marriage-equality-video> 