
“We have a situation,” says Nic Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2010/jan/14/nic-green-trilogy-theatre>
 at the start of The Situation Room, the first of a series of quarterly 
interventions organised byFuel <https://www.fueltheatre.com/home>. The event, a 
mixture of performance and debate that took place at Somerset House in London 
on Thursday night, responded to our political landscape in the wake of the EU 
referendum result and Trump’s victory in the US. We certainly do have a 
situation – and the issue for theatre is how to react swiftly to world events 
when programmes are often nailed down months in advance and it takes time to 
create plays and performances.

The original “situation room” is located in the White House 
<https://www.jfklibrary.org/JFK/JFK-Legacy/Situation-Room.aspx> and was created 
after the failedBay of Pigs invasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/23/bay-of-pigs-survivors-veterans-betrayal-cuba-us>
 in 1961. It was designed to be a place where crisis can be responded to 
according to current intelligence. The intelligence in Fuel’s Situation Room, 
on the theme of prejudice and perception, comes from artists and psychologists, 
writers and political thinkers.Audre Lorde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/18/my-hero-audre-lorde-jackie-kay>, 
Octavia Butler andDavid Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough> are all invoked 
in the slogans around the room and we are exhorted to “listen to people we 
disagree with”.

That’s good advice but the difficulty here is finding anybody in this achingly 
cool room, with its ironic bowls of cheesy Wotsits and itslive illustrations 
<http://amberanderson.co.uk/hawk-mouse-live-scribingvisual-translation/> and 
installations, who isn’t like-minded. Only the unscripted presence of a baby in 
the room keeps in view what is at stake: the future. Otherwise the evening 
plays to the usual suspects.


The performances are all of interest, among them Jay Johnson 
<http://www.jayjohnson.co.uk/> on acoustic guitar; Jess Thom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/dec/23/i-have-tourette-syndrome-and-heres-why-i-want-you-to-laugh-video>
, brilliant as ever doing part of her set about the prejudice she encounters as 
someone with Tourette’s – and most fascinatingly of all, Royal Holloway 
psychology researcherManos Tsakiris 
<https://pure.royalholloway.ac.uk/portal/en/persons/manos-tsakiris(a1da6a46-e489-456e-b50f-0037747ef226).html>
, demonstrating how the brain processes information and how prejudice 
influences how we react to images, including one of a black man holding a 
mobile phone. The evening could do with more than these kind of interventions – 
it doesn’t challenge us enough.


Putting Words in Your Mouth review – LGBT lip-synch show will leave you 
tongue-tied
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/27/putting-words-in-your-mouth-review>
Fuel’s instinct to want to respond more quickly to current events strikes me 
as a good one. Others have had a similar response after the Brexit vote. 
Annette Mees’s on-goingFuture Assembly 
<http://www.disabilitylambeth.org.uk/news/imagine-the-future-of-london-the-uk/> 
project brings together teenagers and the over-60s to talk and devise a future 
together. The National Theatre’s listening projectMy Country 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/my-country>, a work in progress, is 
inspired by a verbatim archive of conversations from across the UK. Scottee’s 
recent, brilliantPutting Words in Your Mouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/27/putting-words-in-your-mouth-review>
, also inspired by a series of real-life conversations, laid bare racism in the 
context of the LGBT community.


But unlike The Situation Room, those projects are not just responses, they are 
also processes that consider the absence of some voices on our stages and 
explore how they might be heard. They are trying to tackle the fact that the 
arts can feel exclusive, rather than inclusive. In the end if the arts, and 
theatre in particular, wants to genuinely respond and enter into meaningful 
dialogues with those who feel excluded and disenfranchised, it needs to look 
outward not inward. Maybe getting out of the closed, protected environment of 
The Situation Room and into the real world would be a start.

 