
When does President Trump take office?

At noon on Friday, 20 January 2017. Until his inauguration, neither Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, his family or his 
staff can take possession of the property or offices of the federal government 
(other than the transition spaces provided by the General Services 
Administration).

Obama and Trump put differences aside in first meeting at the White House
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/barack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition>
Isn’t that a really long time from now?

Yes, compared to parliamentary systems, but it used to be much longer. When 
the US constitution was written, the inauguration date and the first day that a 
new Congress could be seated were set as 4 March because the difficulties of 
travel – and particularly travel during the winter months – made an earlier 
start date for the incoming administration inconceivable to the drafters. It 
wasn’t until the20th amendment was ratified in 1933 
<https://prologue.blogs.archives.gov/2016/03/04/the-not-so-lame-amendment/> 
that the president’s inauguration was moved forward to 20 January and the 
seating of Congress changed to 3 January.

That amendment was introduced 
<http://history.house.gov/Historical-Highlights/1901-1950/The-20th-Amendment/> 
by Nebraska senator George Norris in 1923 in an effort tocrack down 
<http://www.npr.org/2010/12/21/132225120/20th-Amendment-Sought-To-Do-Away-With-Lame-Ducks>
 on what was then a common and widely disliked practice of legislating by 
lame-duck Congresses. In that, the amendment was entirely unsuccessful, as 
lame-duck sessions of Congress still often pass legislation not expected to be 
approved in a succeeding legislative session.

What happens in the meantime?

While each administration-to-be is slightly different, it’s standard practice 
for the president-elect to announce his cabinet choices during the transition 
and for the new Senate (which will be seated on 3 January) to hold confirmation 
hearings prior to the inauguration to allow for seamless transitions in the top 
roles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
They will also vet potential nominees and appointees, trying to identify 
whether there are potential conflicts of interest that could scuttle 
nominations, and help prepare nominees for the security clearance process.

Trump's cabinet: likely shortlist is a roundup of his campaign loyalists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-cabinet-giuliani-christie-reince-priebus>
The transition team is said to have delivered lists of three potential 
nominees for each of 15 cabinet positions last week, when each of the 22 
transition team department heads submitted their transition plans to Trump.
Politico reports 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/who-is-in-president-trump-cabinet-231071>
 that they were asked to work off Trump’s public statements and give strong 
preferences to nominees with business experience as well as longstanding 
supporters of Trump’s campaign.


They were also asked to identify executive orders Trump could easily rescind 
or issue and relevant items that Obama had refused to approve, like the 
building of the Keystone XL pipeline. One of the departments,according to the 
Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-transition-team-planning-first-months-in-office-1478699360>
, is exclusively developing a plan for how Trump can quickly act on his 
signature campaign issue: the border wall. Other teams are reportedly examining 
how to re-open the terms of the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), 
which entered into force in 1994, and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which has 
been signed by the United States but not ratified by the US Senate.

Trump and his top aides will also receive the same national security briefings 
asBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> in the coming 
weeks.

Who is in the transition team?

The team is currently headed by New Jersey governor Chris Christie and Alabama 
senator Jeff Sessions, and former Utah governor Mike Leavitt is an adviser.CNN 
reports <http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/09/politics/donald-trump-transition/> 
former George W Bush officials and former Mitt Romney staffers are working for 
the team, as well as “advisers from the Hill” and several governors.

CNN also reports 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/09/politics/donald-trump-transition/> that Trump’s 
transition team is smaller than in past years, comprising only 80 employees who 
are said to be consulting 200 experts, though that number is likely to grow as 
campaign staff moves to the transition team.

The Wall Street Journal suggests 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-transition-team-planning-first-months-in-office-1478699360>
 they may have trouble recruiting other members for the team, since Trump has 
announced that anyone working on the transition team will be prohibited from 
lobbying the administration for five years, essentially eliminating anyone who 
has agency expertise and is currently using that expertise professionally.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20and%20Obama%20have%20%E2%80%98excellent%20conversation%E2%80%99%20at%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20and%20Obama%20have%20%E2%80%98excellent%20conversation%E2%80%99%20at%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video&media=>
Trump and Obama have ‘excellent conversation’ at White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video>
Former New Jersey state senator Rich Bagger, who worked for Christie in New 
Jersey, is executive director. Publicly identified members include former 
Heritage Foundation president Ed Feulner, former US navy officer and longtime 
adviser to the Boston Consulting Group Ron Nicol, private equity fund chairman 
William Walton, former chief economist at Bear Stearns David Malpass, former 
House member Mike Rogers, retired army lieutenant general Joseph Keith Kellogg, 
former Ohio secretary of state Ken Blackwell, Reagan attorney general Ed Meese, 
George W Bush’s director of the office of personnel management Kay Coles James, 
former George HW Bush economic adviser and Romney transition alumnus William 
Hagerty, former George W Bush liaison to health and human services and Romney 
alum Jamie Burke, and former Dick Cheney domestic policy aide Ado Machida.

The immigration team is reportedly exclusively made up of staffers with ties 
to Senator Sessions.

How many posts will Trump have to fill? 

There are about 4,000 positions in the executive branch 
<https://ourpublicservice.org/publications/download.php?id=845>, including the 
White House, that are filled by appointment. About1,200 of those positions 
<http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R41872.pdf> (not including federal judges) 
requireconfirmation by the Senate <http://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL30959.pdf>, 
including cabinet nominees and agency heads.

It generally takes between six and nine months to fill all the positions 
requiring Senate approval, and well over a year to fill the mid-level positions 
not requiring confirmation.

What challenges will Trump face?

Very few members of Trump’s transition team will have any familiarity with the 
post-election transition process. Vetting nominees is an often-fraught process 
in which administrations quite regularly miss or think unimportant parts of 
their preferred appointees’ backgrounds that may be disqualifying – thinkZoë 
Baird’s undocumented nanny 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/01/23/opinion/the-lesson-of-zoe-baird.html>, Tim 
Geithner’s tax mistakes <http://abcnews.go.com/Business/story?id=6704526> and 
Bernard Kerik’s undocumented nanny, mistresses and gift-taking 
<http://nymag.com/nymetro/news/people/features/11618/>.

Though the transition is allocated $5m from the federal budget, it often costs 
more to complete – Obama’s cost $9m, and he relied on his donor base to fund 
the costs above and beyond that which was allocated by the government.

And, while the external focus is often on the nominees and policy planning 
process, there are hundreds of quotidian tasks that need to be accomplished, 
like setting up the technological infrastructure of an administration, 
assigning office space and equipment, ordering stationary and the like, which 
can easily be lost in the shuffle. In 2009, the first 50 Obama staffersfound 
themselves 
<http://www.govexec.com/management/2015/10/top-obama-aide-recalls-tensions-2008-presidential-transition/122473/>
 with no computers or paper on which to start their jobs after the inauguration.

What happens if there are any difficulties with appointments?

Barack Obama’s Twitter account is soon to be in the hands of @realDonaldTrump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/nov/09/barack-obamas-twitter-account-is-soon-to-be-in-the-hands-of-realdonaldtrump>
Because of the Democrats’ decision in 2013 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2013/11/harry-reid-nuclear-option-100199> to 
eliminate the ability of the minority party to filibuster nominations, Trump is 
likely to encounter little effective opposition in the Senate to confirming his 
nominees.

It is nonetheless standard practice for all of an administration’s 4,000-plus 
appointees to tender their resignations on inauguration day. In many cases, 
their jobs will be done by career agency staff on an interim basis until the 
positions are filled. It’s unclear whether the Trump administration’s reported 
intention to make it easier to fire non-appointed government employees will 
enter into effect while those employees are tasked with making his government 
function.

Has it always run smoothly in the past?

In addition to problems with appointees and the well-documented Travelgate 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/27/hillary-clinton-bill-clinton-scandals>
 of the Clinton administration, the outgoing Clinton administration removed the 
letter W from many of the White House’s computer keyboards in addition to the 
more standard memento-taking by rogue staffers, earning them opprobrium from 
the General Accounting Office 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/12/us/white-house-vandalized-in-transition-gao-finds.html>
 in 2002. George W Bush and Obama bothwarned 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Politics/The-Vote/2009/0115/no-practical-jokes-for-obama-says-bush-white-house>
staffers 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/09/29/memo-to-obama-aides-dont-prank-trump-or-clinton-on-your-way-out/>
 not to play pranks on the next administration’s staffers in subsequent years.
 