
Official advice on low-fat diet and cholesterol is wrong, says health charity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/22/official-advice-to-eat-low-fat-diet-is-wrong-says-health-charity>
Few things scared Alfred Hitchcock as much as eggs. He was so revolted by 
their texture, and so afraid of oozing yolks (bafflingly, he would have 
preferred them to be red 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=dU4B-E94rWAC&pg=PA61&lpg=PA61&dq=alfred+hitchcock+eggs+red+yolk&source=bl&ots=KJiIbWGJTk&sig=-fvsWY-Be9Ql4NYDogWqDRlZTxc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiD76yP9IzQAhVHNhoKHUvnAH8Q6AEIQzAK#v=onepage&q=alfred%20hitchcock%20eggs%20red%20yolk&f=false>
) that you might suspect The Birds was originally going to be The Chickens. 
Still, he wasn’t alone. Since the 1950s, especially, eggs have been one of the 
most divisive foodstuffs in culinary history, see-sawing between health scares 
and health joys, and culminating inthis week’s news 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2016/11November/Pages/Eating-one-egg-a-day-may-lower-risk-of-stroke.aspx>
, from the Journal of the American College of Nutrition, that eating an egg a 
day can cut the chance of a stroke.

Vindication! Let’s all have an egg and sleep easy. Still, I don’t need this as 
encouragement. I am very keen on eggs, stroke-defying or not, and their 
reputation as anything other than perfect has long baffled me. I eat between 20 
and 25 a week. I have most of them for breakfast (boiled, a little salt, a 
slice of toast). The rest I carry in my bag, which now permanently smells like 
a Ziploc full of frittata. Even for those less monomaniacally inclined, though, 
the news does raise a wider question: where are we with eggs? Are these little 
ovoids in the ascendant? Are they shortening our lives or prolonging them?

I realise that 20-plus a week might not be not a reasonable amount of eggs to 
eat, socially speaking. But nutritionally it is, apparently, “fine”, according 
to Lucy Egerton, of theBritish Egg Information Service 
<https://www.egginfo.co.uk/>, who floats the idea that 12 a day (84 a week!) is 
the kind of intake worth worrying about. Eg(g?)erton reassures us that, as long 
as you remember you cannot live on eggs alone, they’re a very healthy food. And 
anyway, eating 12 eggs a day is not humanly possible – something I learned the 
hard way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fgood-eggs-the-health-news-that-vindicated-my-25-a-week-habit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed218d9c445232a924e07b1d35e28f4d9150db5b%2F0_411_1889_2361%2F1889.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20eggs%3A%20the%20health%20news%20that%20vindicated%20my%2025-a-week%20habit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fgood-eggs-the-health-news-that-vindicated-my-25-a-week-habit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20eggs%3A%20the%20health%20news%20that%20vindicated%20my%2025-a-week%20habit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fgood-eggs-the-health-news-that-vindicated-my-25-a-week-habit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed218d9c445232a924e07b1d35e28f4d9150db5b%2F0_411_1889_2361%2F1889.jpg>
 Edwina Currie launching British Egg Week in 2004 – but in 1989 she briefly 
made eggs public enemy No 1. Photograph: Julian Makey/Rex/Shutterstock 
My ardour for eggs began for health reasons. A few years ago, wanting to try a 
protein-heavy breakfast, I switched to eggs, because: 1) they are the perfect 
protein, containing all the amino acids we need, along with various other 
minerals and vitamins B and D; 2) they are relatively cheap; and 3) they have 
the lowest carbon footprint of any animal protein. (This was not a factor for 
me, really, but I still use it as in my defence.) Suffice to say that my life 
changed immeasurably. I felt better, slept better and the change dovetailed 
with my getting my first work contract. I’m not saying the two were linked, but 
it’s feasible. This reliance has become, at times, a prison – or cage, if you 
will – since I need them every day, to the point that I once smuggled a box on 
board a flight to China in case China didn’t have eggs (it did). But generally, 
as one of the most globally ubiquitous foods, they are rarely hard to find, so 
I’m usually OK.

Happily for me, 2016 has been a good year for the egg (if existentially 
threatening in most other ways), in that we are eating more of them: sales were 
up again in the first quarter of 2016, following several years of growth. 
Sophie Missing, co-author of The Little Book of Brunch, suggests a piqued 
interest in the provenance of food as one reason: “I think it’s fair to say 
that people are more interested [in provenance today], and that might mean 
eating meat that is ethically reared and costs more, [and eating it] less 
often.”Eggs <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/eggs>, she says, are an 
excellent substitute.

Still, past vilifications have meant that, until recently, eggs had become a 
very British scapegoat. It wasn’t their fault; or rather, it was – owing to 
their physical composition, you can measure things such as cholesterol in eggs 
more efficiently than in other foods. They were hoisted by their own petard (or 
canard, if duck eggs are your bag). In the past, it was thought that people 
should limit the number of eggs they eat because they contain cholesterol, but 
according to Egerton “current evidence suggests that dietary cholesterol does 
not increase the risk of heart disease in most healthy people”. Since then, 
recommendations on limits have been relaxed.

Then there was the salmonella scare of the late 1980s, which you can, of 
course, trace back to Edwina Currie. Some28 years ago 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/december/3/newsid_2519000/2519451.stm>
, she raised alarm over the link between salmonella and eggs, which prompted 
one of the biggest health scares in recent British history. I gave her a ring, 
and asked her how she feels about it now: no regrets, she said. “I had no 
choice. The public wasn’t aware of it. And as a health minister, I had to.” 
Currie’s declaration that most British egg production was infected with 
salmonella led to the slaughter of more than 2m chickens and, a fortnight 
later, her resignation. Sales in eggs went down 60% overnight, according to the 
British Egg Industry Council, which you could forgive for still being a bit 
touchy about it.

Whatever their feelings, by 1989 it had been established that there was some 
truth in Currie’s fears; a subsequent investigation led to a change in hygiene 
and storage and, later, the introduction of theBritish Lion 
<https://www.egginfo.co.uk/british-lion-eggs> safety mark, which now applies to 
almost 90% of UK-produced eggs. “Do I take credit? No. The egg industry worked 
incredibly hard. You could say they did a cracking good job,” Currie said with 
a laugh. “My only wish is that they would do the same for chicken.” Currie 
still enjoys eggs, “mainly eggs Benedict, which I’ll have at the weekend or at 
a hotel when I can stare into the eyes of a waiter and confidently order them”. 
She also wonders whether my intake prompts a need for some sort of laxative.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fgood-eggs-the-health-news-that-vindicated-my-25-a-week-habit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2acaeed686e8f47a5524e0810ce73210a17acee%2F0_0_1867_2984%2F1867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20eggs%3A%20the%20health%20news%20that%20vindicated%20my%2025-a-week%20habit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fgood-eggs-the-health-news-that-vindicated-my-25-a-week-habit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20eggs%3A%20the%20health%20news%20that%20vindicated%20my%2025-a-week%20habit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fgood-eggs-the-health-news-that-vindicated-my-25-a-week-habit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2acaeed686e8f47a5524e0810ce73210a17acee%2F0_0_1867_2984%2F1867.jpg>
 A 1957 advert by the British Egg Marketing Board. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo
In the 1950s, the UK Egg Marketing Board coughed up £12m on advertising, 
including an inspired slogan chosen by no less a figure than Fay Weldon, which 
told us to “go to work on an egg 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2014/09/22/go-to-work-on-an-egg/>”. The 
child in one of the ads is eating two, fried, but I routinely go to work on 
three, boiled; or rather, I eat three at work – a routine apparently so 
laughable to my colleagues that I am now forced to go and eat them in the 
office canteen because of the smell. But I continue, defiant, and have no 
intention of stopping.

My previous career in food journalism taught me that posh kitchens use Burford 
Browns. These cost about 40p an egg – peanuts, really, when you think of the 
nutritional content, and cheap in comparison to some of the other big players. 
Eggs from Riverdog Farm in California’s Capay Valley cost around £1 per egg, 
and you’re not allowed to buy more than a dozen at a time. At the farmers’ 
market there, there is a reliably long queue for them. According to Country 
Living, some of the best eggs come from Light Sussex hens, a breed prone to 
foraging, which makes for an especially creamy yolk. I have yet to try them, 
but the day is young.

It’s easy to become bookish about eggs, but to me, they symbolise more than 
just nutrition. They are readymade gifts from nature. In 2009 the Japanese 
author Haruki Murakami used the egg as a metaphor for the human spirit, in his 
acceptance speech at the Jerusalem Prize for the Freedom of the Individual in 
Society: “Each of us is an egg, a unique soul enclosed in a fragile egg.”

A memorable Garfield sketch shows Garfield and Jon, his owner, staring blankly 
at a cooked egg before disposing of it after thinking too much about where it 
came from. But it is precisely this – its rich paradox in existing as both 
foodstuff and embryo – that has allowed the egg to become a cultural marker. At 
least two egg-centric restaurants – Bad Egg and The Good Egg – have opened in 
London in recent years, and then there’s Instagram, where more than 40% of food 
pictures feature an egg, or so the BEIC claims. It’s staggering to think that, 
as a millennial, I have never posted such an image.

Should I eat more eggs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/29/should-i-eat-more-eggs> 
The only risk of a return to peak egg vilification is posed by the rise in 
veganism. Still, as Missing explains, “vegganism” might split the difference: 
“I think people will make their own choices, but the positives of eggs – 
relatively cheap, accessible, filling, good for you – are pretty overwhelming.” 
As to how that pans out, time will tell.

For me, though, the thought of children never knowing the joy of an omelette 
is worrying. Incidentally, Hitchcock had never even eaten an egg when he lashed 
out at them. The poor fool.

•This article was amended on 4 November to state that sales of eggs declined 
by 60% (not 40%) overnight after the 1988 salmonella scare.
 