
The culture secretary is expected to announce further consultation on press 
regulation in an attempt to stop the issue derailing the investigatory powers 
bill, or snooper’s charter.

The move by Karen Bradley is likely to be welcomed by the newspaper industry, 
which is opposed to an amendment in the bill that would introduce legal costs 
protection for phone-hacking victims.

Opening up one of the two remaining issues left unresolved by the Leveson 
inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> on press 
misbehaviour, that of costs protection, will, however, infuriate campaigners 
for victims of press intrusion, such as Hacked Off.

Bradley, a former home office minister, is to make a statement to the House of 
Commons at lunchtime on Tuesday, announcing the plans for further debate on 
press regulation. In a recent appearance before the Commons culture select 
committee, she raised the concerns of the local newspaper industry about the 
proposals.

Some Tory rebels were set to join the Labour party whip in favour of the 
proposed amendment to the law, which would implement one aspect of a key 
recommendation of theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>: that the victims of phone 
hacking should be protected from paying the costs of bringing their claims 
against newspapers in the civil courts.

Major newspaper groups and organisations, such as the Society of Editors, 
believe the legislation could erode their freedom to publish. It has already 
won the support of the House of Lords after Baroness Hollins put through an 
amendment to the investigatory powers bill, which would bring about cost 
protection for the victims of phone hacking.

Tom Watson, the shadow culture secretary and deputy leader of the Labour 
party, is expected to oppose Bradley’s move.

 