
Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> should resign 
from the cabinet if he briefed the Sun newspaper that the Queen is a staunch 
Eurosceptic, Tom Watson has said.

In a move to flush out the justice secretary as the source of a Sun front-page 
story that the Queen supports Britain’s exit from the EU, the Labour deputy 
leader said Gove might be guilty of breaching the privy council’s oath of 
confidentiality and of involving the Queen in a politically controversial 
matter.

“Surely any member of the privy council who was a source of this story, or 
whose special adviser or ally was, stands in contempt of his privy council oath 
and should be removed from office if he won’t honourably resign himself,” 
Watson said in a Commons urgent question.

Tom Watson urges Gove to end speculation over 'Queen backs Brexit'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/13/tom-watson-urges-gove-to-end-speculation-over-the-sun-queen-backs-brexit>
Watson piled the pressure on Gove after the justice secretary failed over the 
weekend to deny that he was the source of the Sun’s front-page headline last 
Wednesday which said Queen backs Brexit. The newspaper reported that the Queen 
had “let rip” at Nick Clegg during a “bust-up” onEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> at a lunch at Windsor Castle in 
2011.

In a carefully crafted statement, Gove said on Saturday 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-35793773>: “I don’t know 
how the Sun got all its information and I don’t think it’s really worth my 
adding anything to what’s already been said.” His remarks appeared to be 
designed to leave open the possibility that he may have been responsible for 
providing the Sun with some of its information about the Queen’s views on the 
EU.

Under the arcane rules of Commons, Watson was not able to ask a question about 
the Queen. John Bercow, the Commons speaker, read from the ancient Erskine May 
rulebook to ensure that Watson asked a narrow question to the Commons leader 
Chris Grayling on whether the privy council’s rules on confidentiality have 
been amended during the referendum campaign.

Grayling, who is also lord president of the council and one of five cabinet 
members who have joined Gove in supporting a UK exit from the EU, said the 
rules had not been changed. He added that the government saw no need for 
action, beyond a complaint over accuracy by Buckingham Palace to the 
Independent Press Standards Organisation, because Clegg had dismissed the Sun’s 
account of a Windsor Castle lunch as nonsense.

The leader of the Commons said: “The members of the [privy] council … swear an 
oath to maintain the confidentiality of these briefings. None of that has 
changed because of the current circumstances.”

First it was the Queen, now Mr Toad has been snared in Brexit | Victoria Coren 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/13/first-the-queen-now-mr-toad-snared-in--brexit>
Grayling added: “Last week a national newspaper published a story allegedly 
based on a conversation that took place at a lunch following a privy council 
meeting. However, my predecessor, the then lord president [Nick Clegg], has 
said very clearly that the story was categorically untrue. Buckingham Palace 
has referred the matter to Ipso. Given all of this, I do not believe that there 
is any need for further action here.”

Watson had earlier warned that Gove might be guilty of breaching the rules of 
the privy council after issuing a “hardly categoric” statement to distance 
himself from the Sun story.

Labour’s deputy leader told Grayling: “The sovereign’s constitutional 
impartiality is an established principle of our democracy. It is incumbent on 
those in political office to ensure that this remains the case. Such a breach 
would be particularly serious and significant.

“If the justice secretary were to have disclosed this information, he would 
have breached the principle of confidentiality andprayed in aid 
<https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pray_in_aid> [of] the monarch in a politically 
controversial manner. But he would also have undermined his role as the 
minister responsible for upholding the rule of law. Does the minister therefore 
agree that the public have a right to know whether or not the justice secretary 
was a source of this story and please will he now urge his colleague to confirm 
or deny such allegations?”
 