
There are stories that we like to tell ourselves to account for large systemic 
imbalances in our society, myths that we employ to feel comfortable in our 
analysis of social problems. Melanin makes you violent is a stupid, strange 
fiction; it absolves society from ever confronting the prejudice that is 
inextricable from policies; it perpetuates legal segregation without ever 
admitting that segregation is deliberate; it masks our complicity in allowing 
the growth of the carceral state by suggesting it must always be so.

On Wednesday, a new stud <http://whopaysreport.org/key-findings/>y by Ella 
Baker Center for Human Rights <http://ellabakercenter.org/>, Forward Together 
<http://forwardtogether.org/> and Research Action Design <http://rad.cat/> put 
the lie to our self-serving fictions. The disproportionate criminalization of 
African Americans has served to reinforce segregation and income inequality 
over generations, and African American men are not its sole victims.

The study found that on average families with an imprisoned relative paid 
$13,607 in court-related costs. In addition, one in five families who 
participated in the study reported that they had to take out a loan to cover 
these costs. One in five families were unable to afford housing expenses due to 
the loss of income from their loved one’s incarceration. Two out of three 
families had difficulty meeting basic needs as a result of their loved one’s 
conviction and incarceration. 83% of family members primarily responsible for 
these costs were women.

There are over 2.2 million Americans currently in the prison system, 
accounting for 25% of the world’s prison population, the highest of the 
industrialized nations. It is estimated that 58% of the nation’s incarcerated 
are black and Latino men. 
<http://%20http://www.naacp.org/pages/criminal-justice-fact-sheet>

Black families are and have always been imperiled by aggressive criminal 
justice policies and demonized for their effects; the disintegration of black 
families then blocks the formerly incarcerated from accessing basic necessities 
for survival. That hardship only perpetuates systemic income inequality, and 
this hardship is shouldered disproportionately by black women.

In the latest cover story by Ta-Nehisi Coates, out in the October issue of the 
Atlantic,The Black Family in the Age of Mass Incarceration 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/10/the-black-family-in-the-age-of-mass-incarceration/403246/#Chapter%20V>
, Coates makes a case that a dystopian fairy tale about African-American family 
structures has accompanied the rapid rate of incarceration of African Americans 
as far back as 1965. At the height of the civil rights movement, then Assistant 
Labor Secretary Daniel Patrick Moynihan releasedThe Negro Family 
<http://web.stanford.edu/~mrosenfe/Moynihan's%20The%20Negro%20Family.pdf>, a 
report intended to address black urban poverty yet intentionally omitted 
tangible policy recommendations. Instead, it built the base of the 
family-centered magic fix rhetoric ubiquitous in our ongoing discussions and 
implementation of vast urban public policy from housing, schools and finally, 
the unprecedented rise of mass incarceration that disproportionately affects 
poor black families.

The Moynihan narrative is one of the reasons why the government created 
racist, classist policies that incentivized the dissolution (or non-formation) 
of black families, then problematized black people for not having them. In an 
interview, Joyce Ladner – a student at Washington University in 1964 –recalled 
her experiences working as a research assistant for a National Institute of 
Health funded study that focused on the lives of women and girls in public 
housing: “The welfare department had a rule that no able bodied man could be in 
the house if a woman received aid for dependent children.”


Moynihan’s myth that African-Americans are incapable of building and 
maintaining family structures was so persuasive that, to this day, it’s used to 
justify the warehousing of people from derelict and underserved communities. It 
is also employed to justify moves todivest 
<http://gawker.com/philadelphia-closes-23-schools-lays-off-thousands-bui-513577680>
 from urban centers that would produce opportunities for the people of ‘poor 
moral character’, who only have ‘poor moral character’ because they were born 
poor.

The zeal in which society sought to address violence and poverty pervasive in 
urban black communities by actively destroying families is evidenced by state 
and federal laws creating greater punitive measures for the incarcerated from 
New York State’s Rockefeller drug laws of to the Clinton Administration’s 1994 
Crime Bill compounded by layers of rules within the bail bond system 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/magazine/the-bail-trap.html?_r=0> that 
ultimately fuels recidivism.


As the Black Lives Matters movement has striven to show, the absence of black 
men fills many of our institutional origin stories, but the problem isn’t our 
insufficient commitment to traditional family structures. The idea that black 
people fill our prisons because they are inherently violent and have flawed 
family structures has never been true. It is time to acknowledge the deliberate 
destruction of our family structures and stop peddling harmful, racist myths.

 