
The Australian golfing great Greg Norman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/14/greg-norman-hand-chain-saw-accident>
 is believed to have helped Malcolm Turnbull become one of the first world 
leaders to talk to Donald Trump after his US presidential election victory.

The prime minister praised Norman as a great Australian on Thursday but did 
not directly confirm reports about how the US-based golfer helped connect him 
to the president-elect.

“He is a great advocate for strengthening the Australian-American alliance,” 
Turnbull told reporters at Kirribilli House in Sydney.

Was golf Trump’s secret weapon? | Will Buckley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/golf-donald-trump-presidential-elections-golfer>
Some of the country’s greatest assets were Australians, such as Norman, who 
lived overseas, he said.

“He has been a great help,” Turnbull said. “Sure, it depends on good relations 
between leaders and ministers and so forth but, above all, it’s based on 
millions of people-to-people links.

“All I can say is we have great networks, great connections and Greg Norman is 
a great Australian.”

Norman and Trump are near neighbours in Palm Beach, Florida, and are also 
closely connected through the president-elect’s love of golf. Norman, who has a 
range of business interests outside golf, designed theTrump National Golf Club 
course in Charlotte, North Carolina. 
<http://www.gngcd.com/course_detail.php?course_id=19>

The double major winner said it had been an honour to facilitate the 
connection between the prime minister and president-elect.

“I have great respect for both men who have been voted in by the people of 
their respective countries and I am fortunate enough to call Mr Trump a 
friend,” Norman told the ABC. “So I was happy to put them in touch to further 
the incredible long-standing relationship the two countries have experienced.”

Australia’s ambassador to the US, Joe Hockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey>, reportedly contacted 
Norman asking for Trump’s private mobile number.

The two leaders had a 15-minute telephone talk the day after Trump defeated 
Hillary Clinton,with the prime minister describing the discussion as “very warm”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/10/australian-pm-turnbull-says-trump-will-project-enhanced-military-power-in-asia-pacific>
.

The federal government already has begun talks with Trump administration 
advisers as the new president prepares to take over the White House in January.
 