
A reversal of the greyhound racing ban in New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> is looking 
increasingly likely and the office of the premier, Mike Baird, is refusing to 
contradict reports he is preparing to back down on the decision.

The ban, passed by the NSW parliament in August, is to come into effect in 
July. The deputy premier, Troy Grant, has borne the brunt of the internal
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> backlash and 
is expected to face a leadership challenge at a Nationals party room meeting on 
Monday.

Baird’s office would not deny the story, published in Sydney’s Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/greyhound-ban-insiders-say-mike-baird-seriously-considering-reversal-could-make-announcement-before-the-keniry-report/news-story/6723fdc7b41d274637df3eed96d20af2&memtype=registered>
, instead saying the premier was on leave until Monday and “the ban remained in 
place”.

An NSW Liberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party>
 source said the premier was wavering and a reversal of the ban seemed likely 
by the end of the month, and another said Baird had let the issue fester for 
too long and while a reversal was expected, the self-inflicted damage to the 
government had already been done.

We can’t change leaders like we change underpants … the public has lost 
complete confidence in that
Chris Gulaptis 
There was speculation Baird’s backdown could come before the delivery of a 
report on how to manage the shut-down, in an attempt to save Grant’s leadership.

The report by John Keniry, coordinator general of the Greyhound Transition 
Taskforce, is expected in mid-October, and will deliver a transition package 
including animal welfare and owner compensation plans.

Grant would not comment on the expected backflip or his leadership of the 
Nationals, saying only that he was looking forward to Keniry’s report.

Last month, Grant was forced to deny reports 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-27/troy-grant-faces-leadership-pressure-over-greyhound-racing-ban/7882358>
 he had told colleagues he would step down if the party lost the Orange 
byelection in November, amid fears regional anger over the racing ban would 
contribute to a huge swing against it.

A 2014 report from industry consultants IER found that about 1,600 people were 
involved in the greyhound racing industry, which supported about 2,800 
full-time equivalent positions.


Of the 34 greyhound racing tracks in NSW, 21 are in regional areas. The August 
vote created a damaging split in theNational party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/national-party>, with three members 
crossing the floor to vote against it.

Chris Gulaptis, Nationals MP for Clarence, said he had not backed off his 
support for the greyhound racing industry but was united behind the current 
leadership.

New South Wales to ban greyhound racing from next year after live-baiting 
scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/new-south-wales-to-ban-greyhound-racing-from-next-year-after-cruelty-investigation>
“I think the Keniry report provides an ideal opportunity to either reverse the 
ban or certainly to soften the impact the ban will have on the industry, and 
the small towns affected,” he told Guardian Australia.

Gulaptis said he did not believe there would be a spill on Monday.

“For me this is not about the leadership. This is simply about a bad decision. 
As far as I’m concerned we have got a very good leadership in this state and 
the fact the state leads the nation from being a basket case to a powerhouse is 
testament to the fact we’ve got good leadership,” he said.

“We can’t change leaders like we change underpants … The public has lost 
complete confidence in that.”

Friday’s report sparked strong reaction from both sides of the argument - 
industry allies were supporting a backflip while animal rights activists were 
urging the premier to stay resolved.

The ban was sparked by a report from the special commission of inquiry into 
the state’s greyhound racing industry,which found widespread illegal activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/new-south-wales-to-ban-greyhound-racing-from-next-year-after-cruelty-investigation>
, including live baiting, as well as high rates of dog slaughter – or “wastage” 
– and “catastrophic” injuries.

The report, by the commissioner Michael McHugh, is facing legal challenges 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/greyhound-racing-industry-launches-legal-challenge-against-shutdown-20160729-gqgt6r.html>
 in the supremeand federal courts 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/greyhound-racing-federal-court-challenge-to-overturn-baird-government-ban/news-story/e541aa888fd86ef2b19f769669f488c6>
, brought by the greyhound racing industry.

The chief executive of the NSW Greyhound Breeders, Owners and Trainers’ 
Association, Brenton Scott, was unaware of any changes in the Baird 
government’s position, but said there was growing public sentiment that its 
reaction to the McHugh report was “proportionally well out of line”.

'Let 'em run!' Greyhound racing – an audiovisual essay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2016/jul/18/let-em-run-greyhound-racing-an-audiovisual-essay>
Scott said the industry was willing to engage with the government and confront 
the issues but “the go forward needs to be a good faith agreement between the 
industry and the government”.

“That means something that was unfair has to be taken off the table. The ban 
has to be reversed.”

The chief investigator for Animals Australia, Lyn White, said the prospect of 
an overturn “reeks of political opportunism” and would be a “pyrrhic victory” 
for the politicians seeking it.

“For short term political gain, they are betting their political futures on a 
leopard changing its spots,” White told Guardian Australia.

She said the ban was the only appropriate course of action following the 
McHugh report, and accused anti-ban politicians of defending an industry with 
“numerous participants” who were willing to engage in criminal activities.

“To suggest that this will change whilst prize purses remain on offer is 
ludicrous,” White said.
 