
Guardian and Observer readers have raised more than £500,000 in less than a 
week for charities supporting child refugees.

The 2016 appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/guardian-and-observer-charity-appeal-2016> 
is raising money forthree charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
 working with young refugees and migrants based mainly in continental Europe 
and the UK: Help Refugees, Safe Passage and the Children’s Society.

The charities praised the generosity of readers and said the contributions 
would make a huge difference to the lives of young people driven from their 
homes by war and persecution in Syria and elsewhere.

Although the charities predominantly provide aid, care and advocacy in Europe, 
Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
 has contributed funds to Syria-based aid projects, including £20,000 towards 
the cost of a mobile children’s hospital to be based near Aleppo, and a grant 
to buy two ambulances for the White Helmets aid group.

Please help us help #childrefugees survive the winter - Guardian/Observer 2016 
Appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
Matthew Reed, the chief executive of the Children’s Society 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/donate/help-child-refugees-fleeing-war-and-violence>
, said: “We’ve been overwhelmed by the wonderful generosity of Guardian and 
Observer readers. The shocking stories and pictures that we’re seeing from 
Syria right now are daily reminders of the horrific experiences that many of 
the children and young people seeking safety in the UK have gone through.


“Now, more than ever, we need your support to help us make sure that they get 
the help, protection and warm welcome they desperately need once they get here, 
and we are incredibly grateful to everyone who has donated so far.”

Neil Jameson, the executive director of Citizens UK, the parent charity of 
Safe Passage, said: “We have been overwhelmed by the Guardian and Observer 
readers’ response to this year’s appeal. The atrocities we have seen in Aleppo 
this week serve as a stark reminder of why people are fleeing; that they should 
have to risk their lives trying to reach sanctuary is an unnecessary cruelty.


“Readers’ generous donations will help us continue to fight for safe routes 
and a warm reception for refugees in the UK.”

Josie Naughton, a co-founder of Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, said: “We are delighted to hear 
this news and could not be more grateful to everyone who has donated. Thank you 
for being part of the movement, choosing love over hate. We would also like to 
thank the Guardian for its incredible support and for this opportunity. 
Together we will improve the lives of some of the most vulnerable people 
affected by the refugee crisis this winter.”


It is the second successive year that the Guardian and Observer have chosen 
refugee charities for their annual appeal.Launching this year’s campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
, the Guardian and Observer editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, described the 
plight of refugees as “the great humanitarian crisis of our times”.

On Saturday, Guardian and Observer journalists will hold the annual charity 
telethon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charity-appeal-2015-blog/2015/dec/12/guardian-and-observer-refugee-appeal-telethon-raises-80000-in-one-day>
 to boost funds for the appeal. Viner, Polly Toynbee, Owen Jones, Marina Hyde, 
Gary Younge and John Mulholland, the Observer editor, will be among those on 
hand to take telephone donations from readers.

The Guardian and Observer 2016 charity appeal runs until the new year.

• Support child refugees by donating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
 