
Does capitalism have a future? What about the eurozone? Is Greece doomed – and 
who will be next?

If you're interested in the global economy - and, let's face it, we all should 
be - then come along to the first-everGuardian Open Weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend?INTCMP=ILCMICTXT7858I> on 24 and 25 
March.

It's a two day festival featuring more than 200 talks, workshops and 
activities in and around the Guardian's home in King's Cross, where speakers 
around the world will join editor Alan Rusbridger and many of the paper's 
leading writers and columnists to debate a wide range of topics.

You'll be able to discuss the big economic issues of the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend/series/economics> with top economists 
and members of the Guardian's economics and business team. On Saturday, 
there'll be aQ&A session on the future of capitalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend/question-time-what-is-the-future-of-capitalism>
 (assuming it has one). The Observer's economics editor Heather Stewart will 
chair the panel, and she'll be joined by economist Javati Ghosh, Guardian and 
Observer columnist Will Hutton and the journalist and novelist John Lanchester. 
Come armed with your questions - the session starts at 12.30pm and you canbook 
your tickets here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend?INTCMP=ILCMICTXT7858I>.

Also joining us on the Saturday will be the US economist Jeffrey Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend/the-us-economist-jeffrey-sachs-talks-to-larry-elliott>
 – Bono's favourite economist - who'll be talking to Guardian economics editor 
Larry Elliott aboutthe global economy, the eurozone crisis and ethics.

Bring your sandwiches along on Sunday for a brown-bag lunch on how to tackle 
global poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend/brown-bag-lunch-how-do-we-tackle-global-poverty>
 with Abhijit Banerjee, co-author of the acclaimed Poor Economics. Or you can 
spend lunchtime discussing the world's most unpopular profession – banking. Is 
the public ignominy heaped on bankers justified? Are they really responsible 
for the financial crisis? And are they paid too much? Speakers at the session -
Everything you wanted to know about banking but were too angry to ask 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend/everything-you-wanted-to-know-about-banking-but-were-too-angry-to-ask>
 – are Nils Pratley, the Guardian's financial editor, the writer and journalist 
Joris Luyendijk and Deborah Hargreaves, chair of the High Pay Commission.

In the afternoon we'll turn our attention to the euro crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend/the-euro-crisis> with speakers 
including Costas Douzinas, law professor at Birkbeck, University of London. The 
session starts at 3pm.

Later on there'll be a chance to help shape the Guardian leader line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend/the-leader-room-economics> with 
Aditya Chakrabortty, economics leader writer and columnist at the Guardian; 
City editor and banking specialist Jill Treanor, and economics correspondent 
Phillip Inman.

We won't just be covering economics – there are sessions on sport, society, 
science and technology, politics, environment, food and culture. There will 
also be sessions dedicated to the future of the newspaper and its role in major 
stories including WikiLeaks and the phone hacking scandal.

We're looking to welcoming thousands of readers to the weekend for an 
extraordinary mix of debates, talks, workshops, music, comedy, poetry, food and 
fun. We'll be using numerous spaces in the award-winning Kings Place in London, 
with its canalside concert halls, galleries, restaurants … and newsroom.

You can book tickets and see a full list of events here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend?INTCMP=ILCMICTXT7858I>.
 