
A record number of charities entered this year's Guardian Charity Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/charity-awards-2013>
 for small and medium-sized social welfare organisations in the UK. More than 
1,300 vied to be one of the five winners in 2013. Now in its 21st year, the 
awards, in association withZurich <http://www.zurich.co.uk/>, for innovative UK 
social welfare charities and have become a byword for excellence.

David Brindle, the Guardian's public services editor and chair of the judges, 
said: "We were overwhelmed by the number of entries and could have made the 
awards many times over. So the five winners had to be making an utterly 
outstanding contribution to society in austerity Britain, which is exactly what 
each of them is doing in a wholly distinctive way."

Speaking at the awards ceremony in London yesterday, Paralympic medallist and 
broadcaster,Ade Adepitan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ade-adepitan>, 
said: "Without the intervention of a small charity it's unlikely I would have 
played wheelchair basketball. The UK is all the better for the invaluable 
contribution small charities make".

The Guardian Charity Awards 2013 were supported by the FSI 
<http://www.thefsi.org/>, which helps to build the capacity of small charities, 
and theMedia Trust <http://www.mediatrust.org/> â€“ both are providing tailored 
packages of support for the winners; theNational Council for Voluntary 
Organisations <http://www.ncvo.org.uk/>, which is providing a year's free 
membership; and technology companyJigsaw24 <http://www.jigsaw24.com/>, which 
has given an iPad Mini to each winner. The judges included Joe Irvin, chief 
executive ofNAVCA <http://www.navca.org.uk/>, Lynne Berry, deputy chair of the 
Canal and River Trust <http://canalrivertrust.org.uk/>, and Jane Asher, 
president of theNational Autistic Society. <http://www.autism.org.uk/>

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network>, join our community. 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 