
Donations to the Guardian and Observer 2016 charity appeal 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
 in support of child refugees have passed the £250,000 mark in just four days.


The appeal is raising money for three charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
 working with child refugees in continental Europe and the UK: Help Refugees, 
Safe Passage and the Children’s Society.

Launching the appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
 last Friday, the Guardian editor-in chief, Katharine Viner, said the plight of 
refugees was “the great humanitarian crisis of our times”.

She added: “The political solutions to the refugee crisis may be complex, but 
that does not mean we should abandon our humanity. We should not close our 
hearts, retreat behind walls, real or imagined, or ignore the pressing moral 
imperative to provide assistance and sanctuary for some of the world’s most 
desperate people.”

The bright start to the appeal comes as Guardian and Observer journalists 
prepare for theannual charity telethon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charity-appeal-2015-blog/2015/dec/12/guardian-and-observer-refugee-appeal-telethon-raises-80000-in-one-day>
 on Saturday. Polly Toynbee, Owen Jones, Marina Hyde and Gary Younge will join 
Viner and John Mulholland, the Observer editor, as well as other writers and 
editors to take telephone donations from readers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fkids-refugees-questions-whats-it-like-to-have-no-home-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%2C%20refugees%2C%20questions%3A%20'What%20is%20it%20like%20to%20have%20no%20home%3F'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fkids-refugees-questions-whats-it-like-to-have-no-home-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%2C%20refugees%2C%20questions%3A%20%27What%20is%20it%20like%20to%20have%20no%20home%3F%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fkids-refugees-questions-whats-it-like-to-have-no-home-video&media=>
Kids, refugees, questions: ‘What is it like to have no home?’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/dec/09/kids-refugees-questions-whats-it-like-to-have-no-home-video>
The charities provide a range of vital services for child refugees, from 
emergency aid in the form of clothes, food, tents and medicine, to expert 
advice to help them legally find sanctuary in the UK, and social support to 
help them settle.

Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
, set up by a group of friends 16 months ago, has grown into one of Europe’s 
biggest distributors of aid to refugees, supporting more than 50 local projects.

Safe Passage provides legal support to enable unaccompanied refugee children 
fleeing war and persecution to find safe and legal sanctuary, often by uniting 
them with family already in the UK.

The Children’s Society runs projects across the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/11/childrens-society-observer-guardian-christmas-charity-appeal>
 providing one-to-one support to child refugees including legal and housing 
advice, mentoring and befriending, language skills, social and creative 
activities, and life skills.

Last year the Guardian and Observer’s 2015 charity appeal, in support of 
refugees,raised over £2.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/15/readers-generosity-charity-appeal-success-thank-you>
 in donations and gift aid.

• Support the three chosen charities by donating here 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
 