
Guinea-Bissau’s Bijagós islands look like a tourists’ paradise – the 88 mostly 
uninhabited islets are filled with palm trees and white, sandy beaches. But the 
archipelago has been best known as a smugglers’ paradise.

Described by the UN as a narco state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/mar/09/drugstrade>, Guinea-Bissau has 
long been a drug trafficking hub for South American cocaine cartels. And 
although this illegal trade appears to be declining thanks toUS and UN 
counter-narcotic policies 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=50113#.VnAB52ThByp>, the country 
still bears the scars and remains dogged by the same poverty and institutional 
weaknesses that allowed the drugs industry to take hold in the first place.

On Bubaque, the main inhabited island, there are no roads, just dirt tracks. 
People live in mud-brick homes, and pigs and dogs meander in the streets. Most 
of the small guesthouses are empty; despitenascent efforts to promote the 
islands’ rich biodiversity 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/11/30/guinea-bissaus-green-development-takes-root-starting-with-biodiversity-conservation>
, tourism has yet to take off. At Bubaque’s airstrip on a November day, the 
small terminal was empty and men on bikes rode along the “runway”, hacked out 
of the grass and scrub.

On Guinea-Bissau's Bubaque island, women rely on oysters for food and money – 
in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jan/09/women-guinea-bissau-oysters-in-pictures>
This isolation was one of the elements that attracted drug traffickers to this 
area in the heyday of west African drug trafficking in the first decade of the 
millennium.

The UN Office on Drugs and Crime <https://www.unodc.org/> (UNODC) says it 
became clear around 2005 that drugs worth billions of dollars were being 
shipped through west Africa.Between 2005 and 2007 
<https://www.unodc.org/documents/toc/Reports/TOCTAWestAfrica/West_Africa_TOC_COCAINE.pdf>
 (pdf), more than 20 major seizures were made in the region, most at sea but 
some on land. Hundreds of commercial air couriers were detected carrying 
cocaine from west Africa to Europe.

The UNODC noted that the same period saw coups, attempted coups and even the 
assassination of a president inGuinea-Bissau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guinea-bissau>. “While the conflict appears 
to have occurred along well established political faultlines, competition for 
cocaine profits raised the stakes and augmented tensions between rival groups,” 
it said.

After the US Drug Enforcement Administration arrested 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/16/world/africa/us-sting-that-snared-guinea-bissau-ex-admiral-shines-light-on-drug-trade.html>
 Guinea-Bissau’s former navy chief, José Américo Bubo Na Tchuto, in 2013 for 
trafficking cocaine into the US, smuggling briefly slowed.

The ambassador of a European country in Bissau, who did not want to be named, 
said drug smuggling had declined since Na Tchuto was arrested. “Before this, 
local smugglers were brazen, driving around in expensive cars,” he said. “But 
after the arrest of Na Tchuto, people became scared. They thought US drones 
were flying above the country.” There is no evidence that US drones came 
anywhere near Guinea-Bissau.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fguinea-bissau-global-drugs-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7ba2f30eafa3cfc6e93343a9ae249db8421f289%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guinea-Bissau%20struggles%20to%20end%20its%20role%20in%20global%20drugs%20trade%20%7C%20Antony%20Loewenstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fguinea-bissau-global-drugs-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guinea-Bissau%20struggles%20to%20end%20its%20role%20in%20global%20drugs%20trade%20%7C%20Antony%20Loewenstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fguinea-bissau-global-drugs-trade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7ba2f30eafa3cfc6e93343a9ae249db8421f289%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Cocaine is displayed to journalists after being seized by Guinea-Bissau’s 
police in 2012. Photograph: Joe Penney/Reuters 
The former justice minister Carmelita Pires denied Guinea-Bissau was a narco 
state but acknowledged that smuggling occurred. “We don’t produce drugs and 
people here don’t have enough money to consume drugs,” she said. During her 
last period in government in 2014 and 2015, only 15 locals and foreigners were 
in jail for drug trafficking and 13.5kg of cocaine was intercepted. She 
realised this made only a small dent, but added: “We don’t have money and drug 
smugglers have so much of it.”

In November, UNODC told a press conference in Bissau that about 34,000kg of 
cocaine and 22,000kg of marijuana had been seized in Guinea-Bissau since 2011, 
with 58 traffickers prosecuted. However, limited resources meant constant 
monitoring was impossible, and drugs inevitably got through.


One factor behind the drop in trade is the West African Coast Initiative 
<http://unowa.unmissions.org/Default.aspx?tabid=841>, a joint project between 
UN agencies, Interpol and the regional bloc Ecowas, which began in 2009 to 
fight drug smuggling, organised crime and drug use in Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, 
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Ivory Coast.

But the defence minister, Adiato Djaló Nandigna, said 
<http://prensa-latina.cu/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&idioma=1&id=4395981&Itemid=1>
 in December that the Bijagós islands were still the “most vulnerable” region 
in terms of drug smuggling. Portugal recently gave Guinea-Bissau two boats to 
plug surveillance gaps. According to multiple defence sources in Bissau, the 
country has no operational boats to fight the trade and no reliable police 
outposts outside the capital.

Fernando Jorge Barreto Costa, the deputy director of judicial police, said: 
“We have a lack of means to fight drug smugglers.Drugs 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/society/drugs> are arriving more by sea than by 
plane and it’s very hard for us to investigate it. We don’t have the capability 
to intercept boats. If we receive news about drugs at sea, it takes two to 
three days to get an answer from authorities for action. This is too slow, and 
by then the drugs and people may have moved on.”


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fguinea-bissau-global-drugs-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdce9e21999826a5c0e1dff26b7df660bbe921c0e%2F0_0_4188_2800%2F4188.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guinea-Bissau%20struggles%20to%20end%20its%20role%20in%20global%20drugs%20trade%20%7C%20Antony%20Loewenstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fguinea-bissau-global-drugs-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guinea-Bissau%20struggles%20to%20end%20its%20role%20in%20global%20drugs%20trade%20%7C%20Antony%20Loewenstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fguinea-bissau-global-drugs-trade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdce9e21999826a5c0e1dff26b7df660bbe921c0e%2F0_0_4188_2800%2F4188.jpg>
 Shoppers and vendors in Bissau crowd the street at Bandim market. Political 
instability means challenging the country’s reputation as a narco state is 
difficult. Photograph: Rebecca Blackwell/AP 
Guinea-Bissau is one of the world’s poorest countries, ranking 178 out of 188 
<http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/HDI> in the UN’s human development index. 
Political instability has blighted the lives of its 1.8 million people; since 
independence in 1974, no leader has served a full term, and the nation is still 
recovering from a 2012 coup. In August, President José Mário Vazsacked his 
government <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-33903396>.

In March, international donors pledged more than €1bn (£726m) to support a 
10-year development plan meant to attract tourists and investors, according to
Reuters. 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-bissau-economy-donors-idUKKBN0ML2CK20150325>

“Every effort must be deployed so that Guinea-Bissau will no longer be a 
burden on the international community but will instead become an example to be 
followed,” President Vaz said. Growth is expected to have risen to 4.7% in 
2015, compared with 2.6% a year earlier, according to the International 
Monetary Fund.

Mario José Maia Moreira, UNODC’s representative in Guinea-Bissau, is leading a 
programme to support a transnational crime unit and the state’s first 
drug-testing lab. “Stability is the greatest issue facing Guinea-Bissau,” he 
said. “All the evidence shows that there’s a large quantity of drugs [still 
entering the nation], and whenever a political crisis comes you see [more].”


 