
Eight years ago, in the basement at Stade de France, a 33-year-old scrum-half, 
still splattered with mud, let fly at the conservative world of rugby, telling 
anyone prepared to listen that Argentina could be ignored no longer. Gus 
Pichot’s side had just completed seven weeks of tweaking the nose of world 
rugby, firstbeating France on the opening night of their own World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/sep/08/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup20079> 
in Paris before completing the embarrassment witha second win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/20/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup20078> 
that night in the play-off for third place.

A day later South Africa beat England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/21/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup200710> 
to take the Webb Ellis Cup but the heroes of France 2007 were clearly the South 
Americans and on Sunday Pichot, still very much a man who speaks his mind, will 
take his seat among the great and good at the Millennium Stadium hoping his 
country defeat Ireland,another of the sides embarrassed by the 2007 Pumas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/sep/30/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup20074>, 
and makes another World Cup semi-final.

The firebrand captain that night in Paris is now his country’s voice on the 
most august of the many bodies he harangued eight years ago, then the 
International Rugby Board, now World Rugby. And he is just as passionate about 
speaking of his country’s achievements, particularly the way they are playing 
their rugby.

Argentina warm up for World Cup last eight with nine tries on Namibia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/11/argentina-namibia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
Argentina, revamped off the field as well as on it, go into the quarter‑finals 
as the tournament’s leading points scorers. In a pool that included New 
Zealand, Georgia and Tonga, the Pumas scored 22 tries in four games, impressing 
at rugby hot spots such as Gloucester and Leicester as well as a then rugby 
world record crowd at Wembley.

For a country that was once more than happy to keep the ball among the big 
men, arguing that a good scrum was just as satisfying as a win, it is a change 
in ambition and adventure almost as big as the one Pichot engineered off the 
field, not just convincing the world that Argentina were worth a place at their 
top table but successfully arguing the case to diehards at home.

“After 2007 we were third in the world but all our players were playing 
abroad,” says Pichot. “We were suffering because amateur rugby at home wasn’t 
looking good and we were controlled by French or English clubs. We didn’t have 
much of a say.” So he set aside ambitions to become a coach and began the 
process that eventually led to Argentina joining New Zealand, Australia and 
South Africa in the Rugby Championship, the southern hemisphere version of the 
Six Nations, as well as masterminding his country’s first professional side, in 
Super Rugby.

“What took other countries 20 years to adapt, in Argentina we took three 
years,” says Pichot, explaining he and the other architects had drawn 
inspiration from Ireland and the NFL.

First though, Pichot went to the Six Nations with a proposal for an 
Argentinian team based in Spain and two professional sides in the Celtic 
League. “They said no immediately. It took 30 seconds,” says Pichot, before 
adding: “I’m very happy that we went south now. There was a problem with the 
calendar. For the market it could have been brilliant but I’m happy that it 
didn’t happen.

“They said no and Sanzar opened the door” – and Argentina signed up to the 
Rugby Championship from October 2011. “After four years of convincing the world 
that we were doing the right thing, I could convince Rugby Argentina that we 
were going to have a franchise and professional rugby in 2016.”

It was not easy. When rugby went professional Argentina turned its face the 
other way, resolutely remaining amateur, players such as Pichot, Felipe 
Contepomi, Juan Martín Hernández, Horacio Agulla, Rodrigo Roncero, Mario 
Ledesma and the brothers Ignacio and Juan Fernández Lobbe heading for Europe to 
earn a living.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgus-pichot-argentina-puma-ireland-rugby-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0c41e01f9513429e2a53d13d2593fcd640a2348%2F36_763_2337_1401%2F2337.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gus%20Pichot%2C%20architect%20of%20the%20new%20Argentina%2C%20revels%20in%20a%20rugby%20sea%20change%20%7C%20Mike%20Averis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgus-pichot-argentina-puma-ireland-rugby-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gus%20Pichot%2C%20architect%20of%20the%20new%20Argentina%2C%20revels%20in%20a%20rugby%20sea%20change%20%7C%20Mike%20Averis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgus-pichot-argentina-puma-ireland-rugby-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0c41e01f9513429e2a53d13d2593fcd640a2348%2F36_763_2337_1401%2F2337.jpg>
 Argentina’s Gus Pichot celebrates victory in the World Cup third-place match 
against France in 2007. Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images 
Now, most have either signed to play at home or will do so once the World Cup 
is over. “Everyone was saying go to professional rugby with its high costs, but 
we took a completely different approach. We copied a system from Ireland and 
the NFL and we created a system that was very good for us, as is shown because 
we are in the eight best teams in the world.

“All our players are back home so we are very happy. It was a lot of hard work 
and a lot of team work, from the players as well. They trusted us.”

Pichot also explains the turnaround in Puma playing styles. It seems that 
Santiago Phelan, before the current coach, Daniel Hourcade, was the first to 
ask for help, so Pichot called in Fabien Galthié and then Graham Henry, New 
Zealand’s 2011 World Cup-winning coach, who pressed the all important button. 
“Graham I respect a lot,” says Pichot, explaining the rationale for Argentina’s 
sea change with disarming dignity. “Graham came and spent two years with us, 
giving us a very simplistic way of playing better rugby.

“I said: ‘Tell me the magic All Black potion,’ and he said we were not going 
to do it the All Black way, we were going to do it the Argentinian way.

“He said: ‘You have to score more tries.’ I told him: ‘Graham, please tell me 
there is more to it than that.’ Why didn’t I think that way?”

It seems the man is fallible after all.
 