
Let’s talk about Brexit. It won’t do. I have to favour Bremain. Marginally. 
It’s not an ideal situation – but making choices between imperfect options is 
what the business of politics and diplomacy, not to mention the politics and 
diplomacy of business, is all about. Bremain has got the “r”, you see. The 
overlapping “r” makes some sense of the conflation of words. Grexit has the 
shared “e”, and the added bonus of assonance with the French word for Greece.

But Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/14/brexit-what-would-happen-if-britain-left-eu-european-union-referendum-uk>
: what’s the logic? Two letters from Britain and then the entire word “exit”? 
Why? If you don’t have to have even one shared character between the fused 
words, then why not “Bexit”, “Britexit”, “Britainit”, “Bit”, “Britaxit”, 
“Exitbrit” or “Extain”? It’s no wonder those who came up with the word Brexit 
find it hard to believe that separate entities can be united to their mutual 
benefit.

Of the leading Brexiteers, the main two, and the two who seem least like Batman
 villains, namelyMichael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>
 andBoris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, have something 
in common. I need to pause for a second there, to reflect on the amazing fact 
that a group of real people has been assembled of whom Michael Gove and Boris 
Johnson seem theleast like Batman villains. I reckon Michael Gove might be more 
like aBatman villain than the Riddler is – but Nigel Farage and George Galloway 
have got him beat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fboris-johnson-back-brexit-instinct-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F680ef0d8ef96b66ec968ed5407678878740d30ff%2F0_0_2418_3436%2F2418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gut%20instinct%20not%20heartache%20made%20Boris%20back%20Brexit%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fboris-johnson-back-brexit-instinct-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gut%20instinct%20not%20heartache%20made%20Boris%20back%20Brexit%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fboris-johnson-back-brexit-instinct-david-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F680ef0d8ef96b66ec968ed5407678878740d30ff%2F0_0_2418_3436%2F2418.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Gove and Johnson, the great bringers of credibility to Brexit, both came to 
prominence as newspaper columnists. Since there’s been so much discussion of 
their big new anti-EU opinion, this is worth bearing in mind. Because, for 
columnists, opinions aren’t quite the same thing as they are for other people. 
Columnists not only have to hold more opinions than everyone else – up to one 
new one every week – but it’s also extremely important that these opinions are 
interesting. Much more important than that they are, for example, right. Right 
is a bonus. Interesting is a living.

While for most people opinions are a matter of self-definition within a peer 
group, self-interest or, in extreme cases, conscience, for columnists they’re 
the medium for their art. They’re the paint with which they daub pleasing 
shapes on the canvas of the status quo. It takes a peculiarly self-restrained 
artist to choose a paint that’s the same colour as the background. And I don’t 
think “peculiarly self-restrained” is a phrase that has ever been applied to
Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>.

“Nakedly careerist” is much nearer to most politicians’ view of the man. 
That’s what everyone reckonedDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> was getting at when he 
pointedly told the House of Commons: “I am not standing for re-election. I have 
no other agenda than what is best for our country.” I thought that was quite a 
cynical thing for an ostensibly democratic politician to say – that, since he 
was no longer being held to account by the prospect of an election, he was now 
free to do the right thing, rather than all the daft things the stupid 
electorate will vote for; that all the tedious “having to get voted in” just 
ties a statesman’s hands and limits the good he can do. I’ve long supposed that 
Cameron despises the public, but I didn’t think he’d just come out and say it. 
It also seemed a particularly perverse point to make in the same breath as 
announcing a referendum.

Johnson doesn’t strike me as the Tory right’s natural leader – they tend to go 
for freaky intense party loyalists

Of course, I’m joking. Cameron only accidentally rejected the whole basis of 
parliamentary democracy – so eager was he to slag off a rival. The fact that 
his control and understanding of the connotations of his own remarks are so 
feeble is, ironically, a much more eloquent condemnation of the system in which 
he has thrived than his own inadvertently expressed disdain for it.

But what the prime minister actually meant to imply was that Boris, by jumping 
so ostentatiously into the Leave camp, has self-servingly positioned himself at 
the head of a huge wing of the Tory party – nearly half the MPs and more than 
half the membership – and made himself their candidate to replace him. That’s a 
likelier way for Boris to secure the top job, the theory goes, than taking his 
chances against George Osborne to be the Bremainsters’ choice of successor. 
This, rather than a sincere desire to leave the EU, is, according to his 
critics, why Boris acted as he did last weekend. And anyone who plays that sort 
of political game when a decision of such importance is at stake is an arsehole.

This Machiavellian interpretation doesn’t convince me. Johnson doesn’t strike 
me as the Tory right’s natural leader – they tend to go for freaky intense 
party loyalists. The sort of stringy nerd who gives a shit about the grassroots 
campaigners (always well to the right of the parliamentary party) and is made 
in their wonky image. You know, John Redwood, Iain Duncan Smith, Peter Bone, 
that lot. Boris has never been particularly popular with the actual 
Conservative party. His saving grace is that he’s quite popular with the 
country because he’s a recognisable human being. Whatever his politics, he’s 
much more of a Ken Clarke than a Norman Tebbit and, whatever his image, he’s 
clever enough to realise that.

Then again, I don’t buy Johnson’s own explanation either – that his conscience 
forced him to the decision after “a great deal of heartache”. I don’t think 
it’s got anything to do with his heart, and everything to do with his gut. He 
did it because it felt right. Because the media drum roll before he announced 
the decision demanded it. Because the spotlight was shining and he had to step 
into it. Because politics is a game and, in games, when in doubt, you do what 
your opponent least wants you to do – and for Boris, it’s David Cameron, rather 
than Jeremy Corbyn, who’s his opponent. Because it meant that his Monday column 
practically wrote itself.

Nobody absolutely knows whether Britain will be better off inside or outside 
the EU. Everyone’s guessing based on instinct, experiences on holiday, previous 
voting patterns and who’s on which side. The liars are those who claim to be 
certain. We all have to take a punt, based on how we feel.

That’s what Boris did – perhaps forgetting or perhaps glorying in the fact 
that, as a mayor and MP and not just a columnist, his opinion is now as 
influential as it is entertaining. So he went with his gut. Going with my gut, 
that’s what I reckon. And, as a columnist, that’s as hard as I’m expected to 
think.
 