
Doctors treating the asylum seeker Hamid Kehazaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/hamid-kehazaei> inside the Manus 
Island detention centre debated giving him gentamicin – an antibiotic that 
might have countered the rare bacteria that had infected him – but decided it 
was too dangerous because the laboratory equipment needed to monitor its use 
was broken.

Kehazaei, 24, died in a Brisbane hospital in 2014 after he developed sepsis 
from a small infection in his leg that was contracted inside the Manus 
detention centre. His transfer to hospital was postponed a full day by 
bureaucratic delays and his body went into septic shock. He suffered three 
heart attacks and ultimately died because of a lack of oxygen to his brain.

Much of the coronial inquest into his death, being held in Brisbane before the 
Queensland state coroner Terry Ryan, hasfocused on the delays in moving 
Kehazaei to a hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/immigration-officials-routinely-ignore-medical-advice-on-detainees-inquest-told>
, and the decision to take him to Port Moresby rather than Brisbane as his 
doctors recommended.

But several doctors who treated Kehazaei have been asked about prescribing him 
gentamicin while he was still on Manus. The medical clinic in the detention 
centre had a limited supply of the broad spectrum antibiotic.

The day my friend Hamid Kehazaei died | Behrouz Boochani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/the-day-my-friend-hamid-kehazaei-died>
Kehazaei’s initial infection was ultimately found to be chromobacterium 
violaceum. Gentamicin is regarded as effective in treating the rare water-borne 
bacteria, but the drug is potentially toxic to kidneys, and is usually 
prescribed only in a setting where its effect can be monitored with blood 
chemical testing.

The Piccolo Xpress blood chemistry analysing machine inside the Manus Island 
detention centre was broken. Kehazaei was prescribed several different 
antibiotics – though not gentamicin - during the 68 hours he was in theManus 
Island <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> detention 
centre medical clinic.

The emergency doctor Leslie King said she and her colleagues debated 
prescribing gentamicin.

 “I specifically remember having a long conversation about it,” King told the 
coroner.

 “We decided against it just at the time, because we had no labs, we had no 
chemistry. We could not monitor his renal function.

 “We knew he was dehydrated, we knew he was febrile, we were really afraid for 
his kidneys ... if we used that drug. I thought we needed to be careful with 
that particular medication.”

King said the analyser in the detention centre medical clinic was broken and 
could perform only a basic white blood-cell count, not any of the functions 
needed to monitor gentamicin’s effect.

Hamid Kehazaei inquest: doctors faced 'political pressure' over patient 
transfers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-doctors-faced-political-pressure-over-patient-transfers>
“The entire time I worked there it did not function,” she said.

The required equipment at a laboratory within Lorengau hospital, on the other 
side of Manus Island, which the detention centre medical clinic sometimes used, 
was also broken at the time.

The senior medical officer on Manus, Dr Marten Muis, said he found some 
gentamicin in a cupboard in the Manus Island clinic, but he had never 
prescribed the drug. He said it was a therapy he was more familiar with being 
prescribed in a hospital setting, where its effects could be monitored.

The inquest heard on Friday that when the critically-ill Kehazaei was finally 
moved from Manus Island – by then in septic shock – he was left lying in the 
sun at the island’s airfield, had torn out the IV lines in his arm and did not 
have an oxygen mask on.

The inquest continues.
 