
In the early days of Obama’s historic presidency, there were signs that a more 
and more plural America would be represented – her many identities and 
ethnicities. Art and poetry that had existed for time at the edges would be 
moved to the center.

In February 2009, Stevie Wonder was given the Gershwin award for lifetime 
achievement from the Library of Congress and the White House hosted a concert 
in the East Room. Later, the paintings of abstract expressionist painter Alma 
Thomas graced the walls of the White House after a call was issued to curators 
to seek work by contemporary artists, and more specifically those of African 
American, Latino, Native American and Asian American backgrounds. I followed 
these developments with rapt attention. But it was with theWhite House Poetry 
Jam <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cUfekqAJHeI&list=PLEA5F2A55B7AE9F16> in 
May 2009 that I finally understood the extent of howlit 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Lit> this era of cultural 
programming at the White House would truly be. For me, the Poetry Jam in 
particular underscored how much of my own American experience is rendered 
visible because of who gets to sit in the Oval Office.

How did Hamilton become Broadway's breakout hit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
“I have wanted to do this from day one – the notion of standing in this room 
and hearing some poetry and spoken word,” Michelle Obamatold 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/video/President-and-Mrs-Obama-Open-White-House-Poetry-Jam#transcript>
 guests in 2009. The couple hosted artists from around the country, many of 
whom were of color. Performances included poetry slam veteransMayda Del Valle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WCZTlXb4w3Y> and Joshua Bennett. James Earl 
Jones performed a soliloquy from Othello, drawing the line of connection 
between spoken word, poetry and theater.

At this very same Poetry Jam showcase was the world’s earliest introduction 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WNFf7nMIGnE&list=PLEA5F2A55B7AE9F16&index=8> 
to Lin-Manuel Miranda’sHamilton 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamilton_(musical)> – that race-bending, 
genre-flipping, true American storyin musical form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
. Yesterday, seven years later, near the end of the Obama presidency, Miranda, 
with director Thomas Kail and the Broadway cast, returned to White House with a 
very special #Bam4Ham extravaganza for area high school students. “We wanted to 
open the doors really wide to a bunch of different folks who usually don’t get 
access to this place,” the first lady told high school students yesterday. “We 
also wanted to highlight all different kinds of American art – on all the art 
forms: paintings, music, culture – especially art forms that had never been 
seen in these walls.”

And here we know that it matters just as much who sits in the East Wing as 
much as who sits in the Oval Office. First lady Michelle Obama’sremarks 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/video/President-and-Mrs-Obama-Open-White-House-Poetry-Jam#transcript>
 in 2009 helped shape the vision for the cultural legacy of this family’s time 
at the White House. She proclaimed that the event was another vehicle to open 
up that building, and “and once again make it the People’s House – to invite 
people from all different backgrounds to come and share their stories and speak 
their minds … For it is one thing for people to tell their stories in their own 
spaces, and quite another for those stories to be welcomed in this space.”

Enter Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton>. This musical 
biography of one of our founding fathers, an unlikely Broadway hit, has made 
parts of our history that were once inaccessible or off limits to some 
digestible and available to all. It couldn’t have come at better time – a time 
when our sense of the American story has faltered, our political discourse 
broken down, a time when clarity and empathy are much needed.

However, the significance of yesterday’s #Bam4Ham (which included a Rose 
Garden Freestyle 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhiteHouse/videos/vb.63811549237/10154187512879238/?type=2&theater>
, y’all!) is in the way it emphasised the work of the artist-educator and the 
importance of nurturing communities. Miranda’s playful genius harnessed the 
transcendent nature of Alexander Hamilton’s life story, a story powered by the 
exhaustive research and muscular writing of the Ron Chernow biography on which 
it is based. All in all, it’s a creative educator’s dream. (I can explain to my 
students the significance of the Prison Martyr Ships monument in Brooklyn’s 
Fort Greene Park with the songRight Hand Man 
<http://genius.com/Lin-manuel-miranda-right-hand-man-lyrics>.) 

Cultural changes precede policy shifts. For a citizenry to act, it must 
envision what is possible. Art is critical to the health of an engaged and 
thinking society. Yesterday, Michelle Obama told students that Hamilton is “the 
best piece of art in any form that I have ever seen in my life”.

Hamilton audiobook aims to satisfy those who can't get tickets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/10/hamilton-the-revolution-book-broadway-musical>
She’s so lucky. I haven’t seen the show live yet. I only have the cast album 
to sustain me. And still, I can hear how much of a love letter it is to all the 
things I hold dear: a love letter to visionary immigrants, a love letter to 
poetry, a love letter to New York, a love letter to hip-hop, a love letter to 
America, a love letter to women obscured from our great story, a love letter to 
our multitudes. I can hear my own New York and American story in it: I, too, 
was “only 19” and a student at King’s College (Columbia) when Mobb Deep’s Shook 
Ones – the source of that line in the Hamilton numberMy Shot 
<http://genius.com/7860629> – dominated the radio. 

The best art makes you feel seen. The best art makes the shadows and oblique 
lines of human experience visible. The Obamas’ cultural legacy at the White 
House will be the fact that they attempted to democratize a space most of us 
imagined was out of bounds. When we consider the field of likely successors it 
must be with sadness – that connection to the culture and art of Americans of 
color may be pushed to the sidelines again. Michelle and Barack put us back 
into the narrative – and perhaps this is what I’ll miss most about their time 
there. The world will never be the same.
 