
The Balearic Islands are raging against the dying of the light and 
endeavouring to boost the health, wealth and happiness of the archipelago by 
keeping on summer time as the rest ofSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> prepares to turn back its clocks an 
hour this weekend.


On Tuesday, the islands’ parliament will approve a measure asking the central 
government to let it hang on to the extra hour of daylight, arguing that as 
Spain’s most easterly region, it suffers most from the annual change.

Given their location, the Balearics see the sunset almost an hour earlier than 
western parts of the peninsula.

The motion, proposed by the Més per Menorca coalition, claims that keeping the 
islands on the same time as mainland Spain is based on “obsolete industrial” 
concerns. It calls for a “rational, logical and natural” system, adding: 
“Modern society needs the hours of daylight to adapt to its leisure time.”

According to the Illes amb Claror <http://www.illesambclaror.com/> (Bright 
Islands) campaign – which sports the slogan “more light, more colour, more 
life” – sticking to the summer schedule would deliver a wide range of benefits 
to the islands and their inhabitants.

They say it would help those with insomnia and depression, cut the amount of 
television watched and get people outside to exercise for longer. On the 
economic front, adds the campaign, it would reduce electricity consumption, 
boost the takings of small and medium businesses by keeping people out in the 
streets longer, and help make the islands’ economies less rigidly seasonal.

What’s more, claims Illes amb Claror, it would improve people’s quality of 
life by allowing families to spend more time together outside.

Spain is used to grappling with the oddities of its timezone. Until 1942, when 
Franco put the country on Central European Time to show solidarity with Hitler, 
Spain was on Greenwich mean time. Three years ago,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/26/spain-working-hours-ending-siesta>
a parliamentary commissionrecommended that Spain turn its clocks back an hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/26/spain-working-hours-ending-siesta>
 and adopt the shorter working day favoured by its neighbours.
 