
Hari Nef is a 24-year-old American actor, model and activist, and is the first 
transgender model to be signed to a major modelling agency (IMG), and the first 
to land a glossy British cover (Elle).

“I was not the right girl. I was the lucky one in the right place at the right 
time. But people have been blazing this path for me for more than 50 years,” 
she says. She describes herself, and her peers, as the new generation – 
“because when we talk about previous generations, we’re referring to people 
only five or 10 years ago”.

Nef is not the first trans model (Barneys’ SS14 campaign cast 17 transgender 
models 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/fashion/article/18690/1/barneys-casts-17-transgender-models-for-ss14>
, andAndreja Pejić 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/aug/11/-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion>
 transitioned mid-career) but her signing has marked a cultural shift in 
trans-visibility. In 2014, when Nef was still in college,Laverne Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/14/laverne-cox-orange-new-black-transgender>
 became the first trans actor to be nominated for an Emmy forOrange is the New 
Black; <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/orange-is-the-new-black> the 
following year,Caitlyn Jenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/caitlyn-jenner> came out.

After graduating from Columbia, Nef received two calls: one from modelling 
agency IMG, and one from the makers of Amazon Prime drama, Transparent, 
offering her a role. She accepted both jobs and promptly quit her off-Broadway 
play.

In Transparent, Nef plays Gittel, a transgender woman in Berlin during the 
Weimar-era when sexologist,Magnus Hirschfeld 
<http://www.stonewallsociety.com/famouspeople/magnus.htm> coined the term 
“transsexual”. Her casting was an act of “transfirmative action”, a programme 
that aims to use as many transgender crew members as possible, but her 
impressive performance squashed any sense that she might not have otherwise 
been cast. Nef was rejected by three agencies before signing to IMG, a galling 
period during her college years when she also hosted club nights and performed 
in a drag act (they disbanded around the same time that she started taking “the 
’mones’” – or hormones). She had already modelled for Selfridges’ unisex brand 
but, since signing to IMG, has walked in NY fashion week, modelled forHood by 
Air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/17/nu-lads-on-the-block-post-hipster>
, beenprofiled in Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.com/13273361/hari-nef-transgender-model-img-interview/> and 
is now the face of eyewear companyLuxottica. Its  
<http://www.luxottica.com/en/put-your-glasses-new-class-2016-ready-start>class 
of 2016 campaign, which has her wearing glasses for the first time, is a twist 
on the traditional American high-school yearbook.

“It was accidental, being an activist,” she says. “But I am outspoken. I am 
not passive [about] the injustice that I’ve seen.” Even so, she says, she still 
lets a lot of things slide. “Look. I could write a tweet that would send loads 
of negative media attention towards the brand who cancelled a model after 
finding out about her gender. I could talk about people in the industry who 
have said gross things. I could create a second of radical positive change. But 
eventually that witch-hunting might jeopardise my role.” While she won’t 
speculate over a singular “transmoment” when trans rights became a mainstream 
priority, she thinks the link between social media and progress was pivotal: 
“For me, Instagram had become a place where I could image myself the way I 
found myself. Visibility is not in itself always a good thing, but when it is 
in the hands of those who need positive visibility, it can be.”

To some extent, Nef has berated the industry, the system – and herself – with 
wit but still gets “flak for not being outspoken enough”. She thinks the 
emphasis on gender is at risk of turning the trans community into “a freak 
show”. The situation is, she says, “a liberal wankfest ... on my Wikipedia 
page, one of the first things is my identity. I hate that. It’s not irrelevant, 
I know some of my exposure has been due to my identity, but I believe in more 
than that. I think that often my work is obscured by my gender identity. I 
don’t want it to be a big deal. This is not what I want to talk about anymore. 
Identity is a dead end. It’s a snoozefest.”

For all that she hates discussing identity politics, her take is still 
pertinent to the bigger debate. “My identity will always inform my experience 
and shape my perception. But I am an unremarkable person. The more we fixate on 
it the less we, as a community, [will] feel normal and safe in our day-to-day 
lives. I just want to grab a meal and, you know, go on a date.”
 