
Harry Kane believes Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> have turned a corner, 
partly because the team’s attacking midfielders have been contributing more 
heavily in front of goal.

The striker scored his 10th goal of the season in the 4-1 win at Southampton 
on Wednesday night, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/28/southampton-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-live>
 glancing home from a corner on 52 minutes after he had seen little of the ball 
in the first half. The goal highlighted Kane’s predatory instincts, although he 
subsequently blazed a penalty over the crossbar.

The team’s collective performance was up there with their best of the season 
and was defined by excellent displays from Dele Alli, who scored twice, and 
Christian Eriksen, who has hit a rich vein of form. Eriksen was granted the 
No10 role at the outset of the game by Mauricio Pochettino, a move that seemed 
to recognise the central role he has played in recent games.

Harry Kane can become a Tottenham legend, says Mauricio Pochettino
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/tottenham-harry-kane-2022-contract>
Alli started off the left, although he swapped into the middle at the 
beginning of the second half, and he got into dangerous areas throughout, as he 
took his season’s goal tally to seven in all competitions. Eriksen has seven, 
as well, and so has Son Heung-min, who came on as a substitute to score 
Tottenham’s third.

Pochettino’s team have won five of their last six matches in all competitions 
and they will travel to Watford on New Year’s Day in optimistic mood, before 
turning their attention to the visit of Chelsea on Wednesday – which has the 
feel of a season-defining game for them.

Kane has come to shoulder a goalscoring burden. When he scored 28 in all 
competitions last season – 25 of them in the Premier League – the club’s next 
best scorer was Erik Lamela, with 11 in all competitions. For a team with 
title-winning aspirations, it is clear that greater productivity is needed from 
the players in the line behind Kane, and so far this season the numbers have 
come to look more encouraging.

“It is a great boost for confidence in a squad when there is not just one or 
two players scoring goals but the whole team is contributing,” Kane said. “That 
is what we have at the moment. We have been scoring a lot of goals recently, we 
feel confident and to score four at Southampton is a good achievement.”

Tottenham beat 10-man Southampton as Dele Alli hits double to lead fightback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/southampton-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
Southampton had previously conceded only five league goals at home all season 
and Tottenham’s victory, which came from a goal down and a sticky first 15 
minutes or so, has set them up to launch the same kind of run they enjoyed at 
around this time last season.

Back then a sequence of nine wins and a draw in 11 league fixtures – which 
began with a 2-0 victory at Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/19/southampton-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 – lifted them into title contention. It was the manner of the win at St 
Mary’s, though, which was as important. Tottenham played like the team that won 
so many admirers last season.

They lag 10 points behind the leaders, Chelsea, but know that they can eat 
into that margin with a home victory over Antonio Conte’s side. Nobody at the 
club wants to look beyond the Watford game but the derby against Chelsea 
promises a tantalising opportunity.

Kane maintained that Tottenham’s positive performance in the first half at 
Chelsea on 26 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/26/chelsea-v-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-live>
, in a 2-1 defeat, “shows that we are definitely capable of beating them,” but 
what is clear is that they no longer have any margin for error.

“We can’t have too many off-days,” Kane said. “We have put together a good run 
and we need to keep winning. Chelsea have won 12 in a row and hopefully we can 
put that run to a stop. But it is hard to focus on other teams. We know what we 
have to do.

“We are focused on Watford, getting another win there, and then it’s a big 
game against Chelsea. We don’t want to fall too far behind them. We’ll need to 
use our atmosphere at home. We’ve been very good at home this season. Would our 
title challenge be over if we dropped points? I can see why people might think 
that. But we are here to try to stop that from happening.”
 