
A few weeks had passed when Harry Arter summoned the strength to look inside 
the memory box that would unlock so many emotions. Rachel, his fiancée, had 
been gently encouraging him to do so for a while, yet Arter was mentally unable 
to take that step as he wrestled with the devastating loss of the stillborn 
daughter he had never set eyes on. Now, in a quiet moment at home, he felt 
ready.

“I looked in the box without Rachel knowing because I wanted to look on my 
own,” Arter says. “I remember I was sobbing – it was the strangest feeling that 
I’ve ever had in my life, looking at a picture of a little baby that I’ve never 
seen but loving her so much at the same time. I just saw a beautiful little 
girl, who I felt so proud of straight away.”

Harry Arter: ‘Every single game now I go out to play for her’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/harry-arter-bournemouth-interview-loss-daughter>
On Saturday, when Arter runs out for Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> at Burnley, it will be 
exactly a year to the day since Renée was born. The date – 10-12-2015 – is 
tattooed on his right wrist and makes this interview, which Arter has 
requested, particularly poignant as he reflects on the past 12 months and the 
loss of a daughter who is never far from his mind.

“Every day I think of her,” Arter says, smiling. “And it’s strange because 
there are days when I feel like a normal person, or how someone who hasn’t lost 
a baby would feel. But then it will just hit you, driving along and suddenly 
you see something that triggers your mind. It’s such a weird feeling and one 
that I don’t mind any more. Even when I’m sad I enjoy that feeling.”

Listening to Arter talk so openly and bravely about everything that he has 
been through, it is obvious he has endured some extremely difficult moments 
since we last met, back in January,when he spoke about Renée for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/harry-arter-bournemouth-interview-loss-daughter>
. Arter admits he was in a dark place for a while, in particular towards the 
end of last season, when the grieving process threatened to overwhelm him.

The good news is that the 26-year-old is much more upbeat now, determined to 
see Renée as a positive influence on his life, enjoying his football at 
Bournemouth and thrilled to bits that Rachel is pregnant and due to give birth 
in February. “We’re having another little girl, which is very exciting and 
something that both Rachel and I are happy about,” Arter says. “Of course we 
would have been happy with a boy but it’s nice for Renée to have a little 
sister.

“I just hope everyone doesn’t think that because we’re having a new baby that 
we’ll forget about Renée, because that’s totally not the case. Rachel is still 
so sad about the situation, so I need to make sure that she stays strong now – 
which she is doing.”

Rachel has been Arter’s priority for the last year. He saw the pain in her 
face every day and felt the need to “go into survival mode” to give her someone 
to lean on. By doing that Arter now realises he was bottling up his own 
emotions and holding back the grief that would manifest itself in a way that 
made him difficult to be around at Bournemouth in the final two months of last 
season.

“I wasn’t in a good place around that time,” Arter says. “Physically I wasn’t 
great – I think stress takes a lot out of your body and I was always picking up 
little injuries – while mentally I was completely in the wrong place. I was 
very angry towards people, which I now think was the sense of loss taking over. 
I was lashing out and the closest people were those at work. I never got angry 
with Rachel. I was probably storing up so much at home because I was looking 
after Rachel that I didn’t grieve in my own way.

“I can reflect on this now because I feel like I’m in a much better head space 
than I was then, but at that time I honestly didn’t think anything was wrong 
with me. I just thought it was everyone else. All it took was one person to say 
something to me and I was ready to kill the world.

“I probably should have been a little bit more professional and decided I 
needed a little bit of time off to get my head straight. But I never asked for 
a day. I got upset, I did shed tears but probably nowhere near as many as I 
should have and all of that came out in the wrong way some three or four months 
afterwards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fharry-arter-bournemouth-daughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F949d23d764366e6821f3fa9fe12553479d006265%2F0_0_4461_3035%2F4461.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Arter%3A%20%E2%80%98Some%20days%20I%20feel%20like%20a%20normal%20person.%20But%20then%20it%20will%20just%20hit%20you%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fharry-arter-bournemouth-daughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Arter%3A%20%E2%80%98Some%20days%20I%20feel%20like%20a%20normal%20person.%20But%20then%20it%20will%20just%20hit%20you%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fharry-arter-bournemouth-daughter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F949d23d764366e6821f3fa9fe12553479d006265%2F0_0_4461_3035%2F4461.jpg>
 Harry Arter briefly considered leaving Bournemouth for a fresh start but says: 
‘I’m glad I never made that decision.’ Photograph: James Marsh/BPI/the Guardian 
“To be honest, at times I felt a bit envious when I’d see the lads with their 
families – a lot of them had babies around that period, which was just a 
coincidence. It was strange – if I heard them talking about things to do with 
their children, for example, someone saying, ‘I haven’t had any sleep tonight, 
it’s doing my head in,’ I would think: ‘I’d do anything to have a restless 
night.’

“I think at that time – and this obviously wasn’t the case – I just felt 
everyone had forgotten my situation and no one was really bothered, when in 
reality they were bothered and they probably just didn’t want to say every day: 
‘How are you doing, Harry?’”

Looking back now, Arter acknowledges he was probably “reaching out” when he 
tweeted on 10 June that “six months feels like six years”. Everything seemed to 
be unravelling for him at that time. He had just withdrawn from the Republic of 
Ireland squad through injury, ruling him out of Euro 2016, and a few weeks 
earlier he broke down in tears in front of his Dad.

Arter mentions Jake Livermore, who tested positive for cocaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/15/hull-jake-livermore-cocaine-ban>
 12 months after his son died during birth, and says he can empathise with the 
Hull City player’s depressed and desperate state of mind. “All I kept thinking 
was: ‘Nothing can be worse than how I’m feeling now,’” Arter says.

It was as if his life had reached a crossroads and there was a brief moment in 
the summer when Arter contemplated whether he should head in a new direction 
and leave Bournemouth. “I wanted something to change in my life because I was 
that unhappy; I needed something just to change my mindset and thankfully it 
wasn’t getting a move from Bournemouth because I feel that would have been the 
worst thing for me,” Arter says. “I love it here and I’m very lucky that I’ve 
got a manager like Eddie Howe, so I’m glad I never made that decision.”

The one chink of light within a really tough period was the auction that Arter 
organised in April to raise money for4Louis <http://www.4louis.co.uk/>, the 
charity that provided the memory box that means so much to him and Rachel. For 
the first time, Arter and his fiancée had something positive to focus on in 
relation to Renée.

“That was a massive help,” he says. “With the charity, which was started by a 
family who had been through the same situation as us, they take pictures of the 
baby, they take the baby’s handprints, they do other little bits, and I 
remember saying to Rachel after I looked in the memory box that I’d like to do 
something for them because the feeling that they’ve given me is something that 
I wouldn’t be able to physically return. To donate some money was a small way 
of saying thank you to them.”

With the help and support of his Bournemouth team-mates and the staff at the 
club, as well as players from elsewhere, Arter raised just under £14,000 for 
the charity and it was a special moment for him when he walked into the 
neonatal department at Southampton hospital a few months later to donate a 
cuddle cot.

“They put a little plaque on it, saying in memory of Renée Arter, which makes 
me proud of her,” Arter says. “It’s a special cot where, if a baby dies, it’s 
set at a certain temperature to allow families to spend the night with their 
baby. I wish I’d been able to do that at that time, that’s probably one of my 
biggest regrets to have not seen Renée in real life. But I also know, given how 
I was feeling then, that I physically could not have done it.”

It is deeply moving hearing Arter talk so candidly about his emotions and his 
affection for Renée, yet he is aware that some people may find it hard to 
understand exactly what he has been through and the extent of his grief. 
“Wrongly so, I think some people look at it and think: ‘Well, you haven’t got 
to meet the baby so it’s easier than if you had, or if you lost your child at a 
later age.’ I can understand why people might think that. But I can tell you 
now that I don’t feel it would be any different,” he says.

One thing that Arter never considered back in January was that he was helping 
others as much as himself when he first spoke about Renée. With 11 babies 
stillborn every day in the UK, he now recognises the importance of raising 
awareness around a traumatic and sensitive subject. “On social media I get a 
lot of messages from people thanking me for telling my story, saying that it 
helped them a lot,” he says. “In a selfish way, when I did that first interview 
with you, I was just saying how I was feeling to get things off my chest. But 
now I’m really happy that I can help people and I’d be prepared to speak to 
anyone to make them feel better in their situation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fharry-arter-bournemouth-daughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cf87f0ffbc1661264ab2680bc8feaf1021c2993%2F58_244_3149_1889%2F3149.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Arter%3A%20%E2%80%98Some%20days%20I%20feel%20like%20a%20normal%20person.%20But%20then%20it%20will%20just%20hit%20you%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fharry-arter-bournemouth-daughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Arter%3A%20%E2%80%98Some%20days%20I%20feel%20like%20a%20normal%20person.%20But%20then%20it%20will%20just%20hit%20you%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fharry-arter-bournemouth-daughter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cf87f0ffbc1661264ab2680bc8feaf1021c2993%2F58_244_3149_1889%2F3149.jpg>
 Harry Arter celebrates the goal by Nathan Aké that gave Bournemouth a 
remarkable 4-3 win over Liverpool last Sunday. Photograph: 
JASONPIX/Rex/Shutterstock 
There is such a long list of people who have done so much to help Arter, 
including close family, Howe and his team-mates, that it would be impossible to 
go through them all. But Arter would like to make a special point of expressing 
how grateful he is to Scott Parker, his brother-in-law, who has “always been at 
the end of the phone and showed me how strong you can be when he played for 
West Ham in 2011, the day after his Dad passed away”, and to Richard Hughes, 
Bournemouth’s first-team technical director, and Hughes’s partner, Alina.

“Richard and Alina have been unbelievable. No matter what, they’ve always been 
there for us,” Arter says. “They stored all Renée’s things, all her clothes – 
we actually picked them up the other day for the new baby. So we’re really 
thankful for all their help.”

As for Arter himself, everything started to get back on track just before the 
new season got under way. The news that Rachel was pregnant gave them both a 
huge lift. Not long after that Arter opened his own football academy in 
Bournemouth and took great enjoyment from looking at the smiles on the 
children’s faces. More than anything, though, he came to see Renée as a source 
of inspiration and someone that should spur him on in every aspect of his life.

“I’d say since August I’ve not really looked back,” Arter says. “I’ve used 
Renée as my motivation to come in every day and work as hard as I possibly can. 
That self-drive to want to be the best was always there. But my drive now is to 
become a better person and a better player, that’s the difference. So, much as 
I would love for Renée to be here, the best thing now is for me to just try to 
do her proud.”

He knows it will be an emotional moment when he returns from Burnley on 
Saturday evening and heads to church with Rachel to light a candle for Renée. 
Yet it is a measure of Arter’s positive mindset these days that he talks about 
“celebrating her birthday” and cherishing those memories that he unlocked, 
rather than feeling sombre and keeping them hidden away.

“Having Renée on my mind doesn’t fill me with depression any more. It fills me 
with a bit of happiness,” Arter says, smiling. “I enjoy talking about her like 
any dad would talk about their little girl. That’s probably down to feeling a 
lot better in myself and seeing Rachel a little bit happier, because we both 
know that Renée wouldn’t want us to be sad. She’d want us to be happy and to 
make sure that we look after one another, and that’s certainly what we’re doing 
now.”
 