
Last week I had a package delivered to my desk containing a lightbulb 
suggesting I may prefer to have sex with it on because it is dimmer than the 
average bulb.

It was not a piece of fanmail, but a PR push that began with “research” about 
how many women felt self conscious about their body during sex.

“We hope this helps you start seeing yourself in a new light – to love how you 
look and love how you feel,” it said.

Why is women’s body image anxiety at such devastating levels?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/14/women-body-image-anxiety-improve-body-confidence>
The product it was promoting? Weight loss. Specifically, Weight Watchers.

First the weight loss industry came for our enjoyment of the beach intoning 
“bikini body” from the last day of winter onwards, and now they are coming for 
the bedroom.

I was inclined to tweet a photo and forget about it. But a week later I am 
still getting furious responses from women, a visceral reaction which shows 
this is still something women want to talk about ... despite it being something 
they are sick of talking about.
Bridie Jabour (@bkjabour) 
How many people thought this was an okay idea before it arrived on my desk as 
a piece of PRpic.twitter.com/7tH37yyqsS <https://t.co/7tH37yyqsS>
 <https://twitter.com/bkjabour/status/786749639307300864> October 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bkjabour/status/786749639307300864> 
This wasn’t just one of the numerous petty insults we are used to every day 
but something that was thought out for months, strategised, okayed by multiple 
people.

What is there to be said about weight loss campaigns that hasn’t already been 
said? Reams have already been written. We know insecurities are exploited for 
financial gain.


We know there is a relentless and unrealistic pressure put on women to look a 
certain way from when they were girls.

We know that more often than not, the product being sold just doesn’t work. 
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> either do not lose 
weight, or a much smaller number lose the weight and then discover all of their 
problems are not solved by being thin.

And yet, it is 2016 and I am still receiving a lightbulb in the mail 
suggesting I might prefer to have sex with the lights off for fear that my 
partner might, shockingly, see my body.

It’s almost embarrassing to have to write such an obvious point – overweight 
people enjoy sex, it is not just the domain of the thin. But this campaign 
isn’t just saying overweight people may not be inclined to show their bodies, 
it’s also saying any woman could, and perhaps should, be self-conscious taking 
her clothes off.

No matter your size you are susceptible to this campaign, whether you think 
you should lose 10kg, 30kg, or 2.5kg there is something in here for everyone. 
It’s not just about being overweight, it’s about every woman who has ever 
wished something about their body was different. Which is pretty much all women.

It’s so boring.

This is the thin edge of the Donald Trump wedge, the insidious everyday 
misogynistic messaging we are telegraphed about how we should look, how it 
matters. It is the other end of the sexism spectrum to Trump who trumpets it, 
says bluntly:“She is a fat piglet.” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/entry/donald-trump-khloe-kardashian_us_5800e4c6e4b06e0475943e67>

If there is any silver lining, it is that more and more women are not putting 
up with this any more. Trump is actually losing votes over his comments and 
treatment of women. Weight Watchers was forced to respond to the backlash – it 
hasn’t pulled the campaign but Weight Watchers’ senior marketing manager, 
Rebecca Melville, conceded it could cause offence.

Fat-shaming is as disgusting as any other prejudice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/29/morbid-obesity-anorexia-disorder-fat-shaming>
“We launched in stages and that has fuelled the conversation without context,” 
she told Mumbrella 
<https://mumbrella.com.au/weight-watchers-night-light-dubbed-dim-idea-402490>. 

What context do we need? We already know the context: the company commissions 
the research that says we have a problem with our bodies during sex and, 
surprise, that company has the product to solve our problem.

It feels like we are stuck in this infinite loop, doomed to keep trying to 
tell the world our bodies are fine, we are fine.

We are tired. Tired of the commentary on how desirable we are, tired of being 
warned about summer bodies, tired of being told hair removal and makeup is a 
statement no matter what our decision on it. We’re tired of all that because 
there are so many more interesting things we could be talking and thinking 
about. We have better things to do.
 