
The relationship between footballers and the media is usually a very 
simplistic one. Before a match a player is asked what their hopes are for the 
challenge ahead. Their answer invariably has them looking forward to the game 
while perhaps including a little deflection when steered towards a subject that 
could lead to controversy. In post-match interviews players are asked how they 
feel about the result and perhaps something they did in the match. Through lack 
of time, fatigue or media training, we often learn little beyond what emotion a 
player is experiencing at that moment. This is often no fault of the footballer 
or even the interviewer. Thoughtfulness is not encouraged in football. 
Consequently, it is rare to truly understand how a player does what they do.

What are they thinking when they are moving their body in a way that enables 
them to open up space where a millisecond ago there appeared to be none? We 
take for granted, whether sat high up in the stands or when watching on 
television, how quickly a footballer is able to calculate movement and time. 
Our perspective is a false one. The difficulty of what they are doing is skewed 
by distance. When a truly remarkable goal is scored, such asMesut Özil’s 
exquisite winner against Ludogorets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/arsenal-ludogorets-razgrad-champions-league-match-report>
, it is often accompanied by hyperbole or platitudes. When deeper thought is 
given to how a piece of footballing brilliance is crafted, the player’s take on 
it is usually overlooked, perhaps because we’re not used to hearing anything 
from them that tells us something new. Even after reading a 75,000-word 
autobiography we can be left wondering, beyond fitness, technique or tactical 
understanding, what it is that a player contains that gives them an advantage 
over others. Relationships, challenges, achievements and altercations help 
build narrative within their life story, not introspection. There are 
exceptions of course, such as Andrea Pirlo’s I Think Therefore I Play, which 
knowingly plays up to Pirlo’s reputation as a cerebral midfield maestro.

Andrea Pirlo: the night Pep Guardiola tried to sign me for Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/15/andrea-pirlo-pep-guardiola-tried-to-sign-me-barcelona-autobiography>
On the subject of passing he paints a picture of a playing arena that isn’t so 
much a fraught mass of moving limbs and testosterone but a series of 
shapeshifting gaps of which it is his job to thread the ball through.

I’ve understood that there is a secret: I perceive the game in a different 
way. It’s a question of viewpoints, of having a wide field of vision. Being 
able to see the bigger picture. Your classic midfielder looks downfield and 
sees the forwards. I’ll focus instead on the space between me and them where I 
can work the ball through. It’s more a question of geometry than tactics.”
Andrea Pirlo

Dennis Bergkamp, one of the game’s great thinkers, has alluded to exhaustive 
modern-day coaching as one of the reasons players don’t use their own powers of 
perception enough. “They don’t have to think for themselves any more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/18/dennis-bergkamp-arsenal-british-coaching>
”, he told Amy Lawrence. “It is all done for them. It’s a problem. If they get 
a new situation, they look to someone as if to say, ‘What do I have to do 
now?’” And while Bergkamp was talking specifically about the ability to think 
critically in the midst of a game, his comments give us a clue as to the lack 
of faith footballers have in their own ability to self-reflect.

Throughout his more youthful years, Wayne Rooney was pigeon-holed as an 
instinctive street-footballer, fearless and reliant on playing off the cuff. 
He’d have been the last person you would have picked to give careful 
consideration to how it is that he has been capable of doing things on a pitch 
that are beyond the vast majority of other professionals.But in a revealing 
interview with David Winner 
<http://www.espnfc.co.uk/england/story/1071240/beautiful-game-beautiful-mind> 
he explained that he relies heavily on visualisation to prepare for matches and 
his thoughts as moves develop can often stray into the future. Winner opened up 
that rarest of things: a window to the in-game footballer’s mind and gave us a 
fascinating glimpse of how the cogs move.

I go and ask the kit man what colour we’re wearing – if it’s red top, white 
shorts, white socks or black socks. Then I lie in bed the night before the game 
and visualise myself scoring goals or doing well. You’re trying to put yourself 
in that moment and trying to prepare yourself, to have a ‘memory’ before the 
game. I don’t know if you’d call it visualising or dreaming, but I’ve always 
done it, my whole life. When I was younger, I used to visualise myself scoring 
wonder goals, stuff like that. From 30 yards out, dribbling through teams. You 
used to visualise yourself doing all that, and when you’re playing 
professionally, you realise it’s important for your preparation. It’s like when 
you play snooker, you’re always thinking three or four shots down the line. 
With football, it’s like that. You’ve got to think three or four passes where 
the ball is going to come to down the line. And the very best footballers, 
they’re able to see that before – much quicker than a lot of other footballers 
… you need to know where everyone is on the pitch. You need to see everything.”
Wayne Rooney
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fheres-a-thought-how-do-footballers-do-what-they-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa111afb66923c42263033899d20315bc9e28de1e%2F0_135_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Here's%20a%20thought%3A%20how%20do%20footballers%20do%20what%20they%20do%3F%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fheres-a-thought-how-do-footballers-do-what-they-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Here%27s%20a%20thought%3A%20how%20do%20footballers%20do%20what%20they%20do%3F%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fheres-a-thought-how-do-footballers-do-what-they-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa111afb66923c42263033899d20315bc9e28de1e%2F0_135_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Did Wayne Rooney visualise this goal against Manchester City or just 
anticipate the cross quicker than anybody else did? Photograph: Matthew 
Peters/Man Utd via Getty Images 
I once tried to tease this depth of thought out of Alan Shearer when asking 
how he scored a goal that he considered to be his greatest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/20/golden-goal-alan-shearer-newcastle-everton-2002>
 but, even after knocking on the door in as many new and interesting ways as I 
could muster, he wouldn’t let me in: “That volley was one in a hundred I 
think,” he said. It’s an answer that could have been given by thousands of 
other footballers who perhaps don’t realise that what they are able to do – and 
the speed at which they do it – is extraordinary.

In the same way that flies see the world in slow-motion, the very best 
footballers are often spoken about as having this hyper-developed sense when it 
comes to digesting multiple movements. Anyone who has ever played with or 
against a former or current professional who has taken a step down to play an 
amateur game, can see this first-hand. A player such as Jan Molby, even when 
bulging out of his shirt and years past retirement, can run a game without 
moving. This is all part of the art of understanding space. Xavi, while being a 
much more energetic proponent of this craft, made football sound like a manic 
game of Tetrisin a brilliant interview with Sid Lowe in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/feb/11/xavi-barcelona-spain-interview>
.

Think quickly, look for spaces. That’s what I do: look for spaces. All day. 
I’m always looking. All day, all day. Here? No. There? No. People who haven’t 
played don’t always realise how hard that is. Space, space, space. It’s like 
being on the PlayStation. I think shit, the defender’s here, play it there. I 
see the space and pass. That’s what I do.”Xavi

Thomas Müller: the modest assassin | Uli Hesse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/thomas-muller-modest-assassin-bayern-munich-germany>
With socks down round his ankles and his game seemingly lacking the gloss of 
other upper-echelon players, Thomas Müller can give off the impression of being 
a forward who plays in the moment, never stopping for long enough to consider 
what it is that has made him so effective. But in fact the opposite is true.In 
a piece for Eight by Eight magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/thomas-muller-modest-assassin-bayern-munich-germany>
 by Uli Hesse, the Bayern Munich player spoke astutely about the importance he 
places on timing. And although he clearly sees his role as being different to a 
metronomic passer such as Xavi or Pirlo, he views his near-perfect punctuality 
in the six-yard box as being a product of his ability to calculate distances in 
a razor-sharp fashion. In fact, he has thought about his role on the football 
pitch to such an extent that he has invented a name for it.

I’m an interpreter of space. Every good, successful player, especially an 
attacking player, has a well-developed sense of space and time. It’s not a 
phenomenon you only find in two or three people on earth. Every great striker 
knows it’s all about the timing between the person who plays the pass and the 
person making a run into the right zone. It’s nothing new … when you make a 
run, you don’t always do it for yourself. Often you do it to open the door for 
a team-mate.”Thomas Müller

So it would appear that some of the very best footballers, when made to feel 
comfortable and asked the right questions, view their visual understanding of 
space and time as being vital components in putting them at the top of their 
profession. But what about one ofthe best, a player who floated around the 
pitch in the unhurried fashion of someone who had been there and done it a 
thousand times before, even at a relatively young age. In the fascinating 
documentary,Zidane: A 21st Century Portrait 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e5EharkjNBc>, the Real Madrid legend and World 
Cup winner conjures an image of himself as an ethereal presence on the football 
pitch … with psychic powers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fheres-a-thought-how-do-footballers-do-what-they-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc87ae1b09935a88f4b11d69e0935bca265c4ec%2F60_0_2704_1623%2F2704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Here's%20a%20thought%3A%20how%20do%20footballers%20do%20what%20they%20do%3F%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fheres-a-thought-how-do-footballers-do-what-they-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Here%27s%20a%20thought%3A%20how%20do%20footballers%20do%20what%20they%20do%3F%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fheres-a-thought-how-do-footballers-do-what-they-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc87ae1b09935a88f4b11d69e0935bca265c4ec%2F60_0_2704_1623%2F2704.jpg>
 Zinedine Zidane ‘knew exactly what was going to happen’. 
 I can imagine that I can hear the ticking of a watch … I remember playing in 
another place, at another time, when something amazing happened. Someone passed 
the ball to me, and before even touching it, I knew exactly what was going to 
happen. I knew I was going to score.”Zinedine Zidane 

There are millions of words written and spoken about football and footballers 
every day. Some good. Some bad. On subjects of tactics, emotions, hopes and 
dreams, we’re well catered for. So when one of the game’s greats, such as 
Zidane, lets us into his head mid-match – even for just a moment – it stands 
out. Well done to those journalists who get us there. And kudos to the 
footballers who take the time to think.
 