
Three, two, one ... liftoff on the trailer for Hidden Figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hidden-figures>, Theodore Melfi’s biopic of 
the black female mathematicians whose work at Nasa helped the US win the space 
race.

Starring Octavia Spencer <https://www.theguardian.com/film/octavia-spencer>, 
Taraji P Henson and Janelle Monáe and based on the book by Margot Lee 
Shetterly, Hidden Figures follows the life story of Katherine Johnson (Henson), 
a physicist who began her career as one of the administration’s first 
“computers” – female Nasa staff who were responsible for calculating the 
results of wind tunnel tests.

Johnson went on to calculate the flight trajectory for Alan Shepard – the 
first American in space – and supplied some of the theory that ensured the 
success of the Apollo moon landing. She was awarded the Presidential Medal of 
Freedom by Barack Obama in 2015. Spencer and Monáe play Dorothy Vaughan and 
Mary Jackson, brilliant mathematicians who likewise stood out from Nasa’s 
largely white staff.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRK8xHq6dfAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRK8xHq6dfAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRK8xHq6dfAo&media=>
From the trailer, it looks as though Melfi’s film will chart a course between 
civil-rights drama and workplace comedy, with emphasis put on the womens’ 
struggle against the white male perception of them. Their mistreatment is 
presented most obviously in the scene where a white-collar Joe dumps his trash 
can into the arms of Johnson, assuming she’s the cleaning lady. Elsewhere, a 
cop who pulls the friends over remarks that he “had no ideaNasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> hired ... ” “There’s quite a few 
women in the space programme, sir,” Spencer’s character curtly replies.

Hidden Figures, which also stars Kevin Costner and Kirsten Dunst, will be 
released on 13 January.

 