
Sir Norman Bettison, a chief inspector in the South Yorkshire police at the 
time of the Hillsborough disaster, has been derided this week forpublishing a 
book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/police-chiefs-hillsborough-book-will-not-affect-investigation-says-watchdog>
, Hillsborough Untold, in which he once again places himself at the centre of 
the story and poses as a victim of unfair criticism. Bereaved families, who 
were put through a 27-year legal nightmare fighting police lies before this 
year’sverdict that their 96 loved ones were unlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
, haveattacked Bettison’s timing and labelled him a narcissist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/hillsborough-families-criticise-police-chief-over-witch-hunt-claim-in-book>
.

Hillsborough families criticise police chief over witch-hunt claim in book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/hillsborough-families-criticise-police-chief-over-witch-hunt-claim-in-book>
Yet as Bettison toured TV and radio studios 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HS3bxT4Yrrc&app=desktop> this week exonerating 
himself from any wrongdoing, his purpose in writing this book has become 
evident. He is seeking to deny the truth, yet again.

In the book, Bettison confirms that he is a suspect in the huge criminal 
investigation currently being conducted by theIndependent Police Complaints 
Commission <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ipcc> (IPCC) into the disaster 
and the South Yorkshire force’s alleged cover-up after it. The IPCC has said 
that by the turn of the year, it will send files to the Crown Prosecution 
Service, which will consider possible criminal charges of perjury and 
perverting the course of justice by South Yorkshire police officers.

Bettison actually suggests on page 319 of his book, in a chapter entitled “In 
the Shadow of Salem” that explicitly portrays himself as the victim of a witch 
hunt, that this is his effort to influence the CPS. He clearly intends it to 
help him avoid any criminal charges.

Bettison argues that he himself did nothing to obscure the truth or falsely 
blameLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> supporters for 
the disaster. But incredibly, given the evidence that has emerged under the 
pressure of relentless campaigning, he also argues that the force itself, and 
its chief constable Peter Wright, orchestrated no corporate effort to blame 
supporters.

Bettison’s role in the force’s alleged cover-up was never volunteered by him, 
but it has been dug out over the many years in which the families fought for 
the truth. In 1999, after he applied to be chief constable of Merseyside police 
without including his Hillsborough work on the record of his career, Bettison, 
when challenged about it, described his involvement as “peripheral”. In aBBC 
Newsnight interview on Wednesday 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HS3bxT4Yrrc&app=desktop>, he accepted that was 
untrue. He was exposed by the Labour MP Maria Eagle in 1998 for involvement in 
the notorious process of changing police statements, which he presents again in 
his book as wholly innocent and administrative, save for isolated errors of 
judgment. It was only in 2012, after the disclosure of South Yorkshire police 
documents and the report by the Hillsborough Independent Panel (HIP), that the 
families learned that after Lord Justice Taylor’s 1989 report, Bettison had 
compiled a video and taken it to show MPs in parliament. His own memo to Wright 
notes that two Conservative MPs promised him they would “attack” Taylor’s 
report, which concluded the disaster was predominantly the police’s fault. Some 
MPs who have seen the video describe it as propaganda for the force, which 
blamed supporters again, but Bettison says in his book it was produced for “a 
better understanding of what happened”.

Also after the publication of the HIP report, 23 years after the unlawful 
killings, the families learned of the “Wain report”, the South Yorkshire 
police’s draft submission to the Taylor inquiry, which blamed supporters and 
did not admit police failings, not even that the officer in command, Ch Supt 
David Duckenfield, was inexperienced at Hillsborough. At the inquests, the 
officer responsible, former Ch Supt Terry Wain, said much of the narrative was 
written by Bettison. The force’s former solicitor, Peter Metcalf, had 
ultimately decided not to submit the narrative to Taylor because, he told the 
inquests, it was “too one-sided”. Yet in the book, Bettison presents his work 
as a compilation of “objective” police testimony, produced as an internal 
briefing.

But in exonerating Wright and the force as a whole, Bettison is flying in the 
face of what has been established over these agonising years for the families, 
including the two-year ordeal of the new inquests, the longest case ever heard 
by a jury in British legal history. It was drawn out because the South 
Yorkshire police and their former officers again, despite all that was known, 
repeated their blame of the victims, which the families’ lawyers had to 
challenge day after day. Yet Bettison nevertheless claims there was no 
corporate effort to blame supporters, that the foul lies about Liverpool 
supporters were the briefings of a few junior officers, and that Wright “did 
not commission or command a black propaganda exercise after Hillsborough”.

This is despite internal documents exposing the corporate effort, which was 
anyway conducted in public. Minutes show that on the very morning after the 
disaster, Wright exonerated his officers from any responsibility, said the 
force had to prepare “a rock solid story” and that the “animalistic” behaviour 
of supporters would emerge in the evidence. Bettison argues there was no cover 
up because Taylor came to the right conclusion, but that was in spite of the 
case South Yorkshire police made to blame supporters, which Taylor himself 
criticised in his report. Missing from Bettison’s pleadings is that while 
Wright accepted Taylor’s findings in public, within the force’s corridors 
efforts were redoubled to avoid blame at the first inquest.

Bettison acknowledged in his evidence at the new inquests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/01/former-officer-tells-hillsborough-inquest-that-fans-were-in-no-way-to-blame>
 that he did a search for key words in witness statements relating to fans’ 
behaviour, which included “drunk, unruly, pushing, shoving, fighting, violent, 
ticketless”.

He was also given the job of searching the police computer to find witnesses 
who had given the most emphatic evidence alleging Liverpool supporters were 
misbehaving, drunk or had no tickets. His case then was that he was merely a 
“functionary”, and played no leadership role in the orchestration of this case.

At the first inquest, the police slurs against supporters were repeated even 
more forcefully, and a verdict of accidental death returned in 1991. That 
denial of justice was what led families to theawful, heroic fight for 25 more 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
 before they secured the unlawful killing verdicts this year.

The IPCC has now said it has no legal grounds for injuncting Bettison’s 
manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/police-chiefs-hillsborough-book-will-not-affect-investigation-says-watchdog>
, because in narrow terms it does not prejudice ongoing inquiries. That does 
not mean, however, that it is accurate, and it is designed to influence the 
CPS. Bettison’s piece of work does further damage to the precious term abused 
so dreadfully in the tragic history of Hillsborough: the truth.
 