
Most women think – swear, even – that they’d leave a cheating husband. We are, 
after all, living in theBeyoncé <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2EwViQxSJJQ>-
Carrie Underwood <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WaSy8yy-mr8> era, not the 
Tammy Wynette <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DwBirf4BWew> days: leaving is 
the celebrated choice for one’s self-respect and physical health, and staying 
in a relationship post-affair is seen as all but allowing him do it to you 
again.

The end of a relationship – even a years-long marriage, even an otherwise-good 
relationship, even with children in the mix – is, at this point, the only 
acceptable consequence of infidelity, and staying is posited as the 
inexplicable choice for a woman to make.

But life and love are more complicated than that for many people, even in 2016.

Being cheated on forces you to confront whether your love (and your partner’s) 
is more than trust or stronger than betrayal, whether there’s happiness 
together beyond how you’ve been hurt, whether settling is better than 
loneliness. You have to ask yourself why you committed, who you’ve become as a 
result, and who you can be afterwards, either separately or together.

Lots of people don’t leave 
<http://www.ozy.com/fast-forward/cheating-but-not-leaving/38322>, or don’t 
leave right away, no matter whatyour favorite pop song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LMOKlXfXn50> suggests is the right thing to 
do. But somehow the judgment for a woman not leaving an unfaithful partner 
tends to be more pointed than the judgment for the person who cheated in the 
first place.

In 1992, after Gennifer Flowers’ allegations became the story of Bill 
Clinton’s 1992 presidential campaign, he and Hillary Clinton went on 60 Minutes 
to discuss their marriage, while Hillary, after suggesting that few married 
couples would want to discuss the most intimate details of their relationship 
with a national audience, defended her choice to stay. “ I’m not sitting here – 
some little woman standing by my man like Tammy Wynette,” shesaid 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/special/clinton/stories/flowers012792.htm>
. “I’m sitting here because I love him, and I respect him, and I honor what 
he’s been through and what we’ve been through together.”

That, of course, was never good enough for a lot of people: Republicans have 
suggested for years that she stayed not because she loved her husband of 
decades, but because they had more of an “arrangement” than a marriage.

Since Monday night’s debate multiple Trump surrogates 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/09/28/trumps-surrogates-go-where-he-coyly-hasnt-attacking-clinton-for-her-husbands-infidelity/>
, such as theArkansas attorney general, Leslie Rutledge 
<http://www.arktimes.com/ArkansasBlog/archives/2016/09/28/there-leslie-rutledge-goes-again-now-shes-blaming-hillary-for-bills-infidelity-20-years-ago>
, andTennessee congresswoman Marsha Blackburn 
<https://twitter.com/BenjySarlin/status/781178821366181888>, have taken to the 
media to suggest that Hillary Clinton’s choice to stay in her marriage should 
be up for public debate, as should her – can we admit, all-too-human? –private 
reactions 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/hillary-clinton-monica-lewinsky-a-narcissistic-loony-toon/>
 to the women with whom her husband admitted infidelities.

They’re not doing it (just) to be mean or to rattle her; they’re doing it 
because they think it’s effective on voters. They know that some people will 
judge her for staying in her marriage post-infidelity more than they’ll judge 
Trump for hisinfidelity 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/magazine/2015/07/donald-ivana-trump-divorce-prenup-marie-brenner>
 andadmitted rampant promiscuity 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3451452/Trump-says-sex-eighties-personal-Vietnam-Howard-Stern-interview-1997.html>
.

They’re doing it because many women want to think of themselves as the women 
who leave, and disrespect the women who stay – even when we are among their 
ranks.

•••

When I still played with Barbies, my Ken always got caught cheating on Miko 
<http://www.museumofplay.org/online-collections/2/37/107.96> with Barbie. Miko 
dumped Ken every time, haughtily wishing him luck with his new girlfriend and 
declaring she’d be better off without him.

And she always was.

So by the time I was a teenager, I thought I had dating figured out: if a guy 
cheated, you dumped him. You deserved better. Cheaters always cheat; leaving is 
his punishment. And then … my boyfriend cheated on me during his first weekend 
away at college. He confessed it, crying, on his first weekend home, and I 
cried and hated myself for not having been “enough”, and tried to muster that 
haughty tone of voice I used to conjure so easily when playing Barbies to tell 
him to get lost. Instead, as he begged me not to dump him, I agreed to stay.

Of course, we broke up eventually: that’s what you do at 17. I told myself my 
reaction to his unfaithfulness was a momentary weakness, a product of first 
love and immaturity, and practiced being more ruthless in enforcing my 
boundaries. It didn’t always stick, and it wasn’t the onlytime 
<http://www.thefrisky.com/2011-11-28/girl-talk-i-snooped-his-online-dating-profile/>
 that I’vecaught <https://twitter.com/megancarpentier/status/778622442365485056>
 a man at leastattempting 
<https://twitter.com/megancarpentier/status/770243792033185793> to be 
unfaithful. My initial reactions differed depending on the relationship, but I 
didn’t tell anyone in my social circle about any of it, because I didn’t want 
the decisions I had to make influenced by what I knew was the socially 
acceptable reaction.

The thing is, I stayed, however briefly, for me – not for the men in question. 
I wanted toknow that it was over; I needed to feel that there was nothing 
salvageable about a relationship in which I’d invested time and emotion. That 
they got to “keep” me longer wasn’t my consideration; what I could have and 
what I could still give was what I tried to figure out in between bouts of 
crying and glasses of wine.

It took a long time, but I’m no longer embarrassed to admit that I didn’t 
summarily throw people I loved out of my life because they were flawed and had 
hurt me: I’m OK with my life and my relationships being more complicated than a 
three-minute pop song and listening to the back-third of Beyoncé’s Lemonade – 
theforgiveness and reconciliation arc 
<http://www.forharriet.com/2016/04/jay-z-did-exactly-what-you-should-do.html> – 
on repeat as much as the front third.

But I do wince every time a Republican smirks and suggests that the next 
gotcha-game they’re going to play withHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is going to be her 
husband’s admitted infidelities. She’s hardly the only woman in American who’s 
ever decided that an imperfect relationship with a flawed man was in her best 
interest; she’s hardly the only woman in America to admit that she loves 
someone who hurt her and had to put work into her relationship for it to 
function.

And none of the judgment about why she stayed has anything to do with the 
issues facing America, except to wildly suggest that a woman’s acceptance of a 
flawed man into her personal life should have professional repercussions.

That’s a slippery slope to climb – especially for the women who are willingly 
associating with Donald Trump.
 