
David Bossie, the new deputy campaign manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/03/citizens-united-david-bossie-trump-campaign>
 for Donald Trump, was probably hoping – at best – that his 2008 anti-Hillary 
Clinton campaign commercial-cum-documentary Hillary: The Movie would put a fork 
in Clinton’s political ambitions.

Little did he know it would result in a major US supreme court ruling that 
would overturn years of campaign finance law, usher in an age of unlimited and 
undisclosed campaign spending and ultimately become a wedge issue between 
Clinton, during her second campaign, and the candidate running for the 
Democratic nomination – to her left. (Or that the 2016 Republican nominee and 
his eventual boss would also rail against the Super Pacs it helped spawn.)

The movie itself, however, was largely ignored during its initial release, in 
part because of its amateurish production values, its line-up of mostly obscure 
conservative talking heads and its lightly factual, non-chronological look 
throughthe scandals of the Clinton years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/27/hillary-clinton-bill-clinton-scandals>
 (some of which didn’t even involve Hillary Clinton) that many Americans had 
tired of years before.

Travelgate to Furnituregate: a guide to the Clinton scandals of the 90s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/27/hillary-clinton-bill-clinton-scandals>
But as former press secretary for Newt Gingrich turned Washington Times 
editorial page editor Tony Blankley (whodied in 2012 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/09/us/politics/tony-blankley-gingrich-aide-and-columnist-dies-at-63.html>
) noted in the movie, some politicians “say what you need to say at any given 
moment, and rely on the lack of memory of the American public and the support 
of the mainstream media to support that lack of memory”. Though Blankley, of 
course, was referring to the Clintons, similar criticisms have been leveled at 
her Republican opponent and film-maker Bossie’s new employer.

So what could Bossie pull out of his hat that hasn’t yet been thrown at 
Clinton during this campaign?

It’s perhaps easier to look first at what has been ineffective in 2016. 
Calling her “one of the most divisive figures in America”, as the voiceover in 
the film does, is certainly not an effective criticism when her opponent is the 
equally divisiveDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. 
Nor is Ann Coulter’s assertion that “any Republican with those numbers of 
character flaws, with that sort of behavioral problem and psychopathic 
psychology could not run or be elected dog catcher if it were a Republican”.

Attacking her problems, or Bill Clinton’s problems, with ineligible or 
unethical campaign donors and the potential ties to a foreign power, such as 
China, seeking to influence the US election is certain to raise too many 
uncomfortable questions, given theappearance of a cozy relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/donald-trump-paul-manafort-ukraine-russia-putin-ties>
 between parts of the Trump campaign and Russia, and some of the people (like 
white supremacists) supporting him. Dick Morris’s assertion that Clinton didn’t 
pass enough far-reaching legislation during her tenure in the Senate isn’t 
useful when your candidate is a political neophyte who’s never been elected to 
office and makes that part of his supposed allure.

Travelgate, which gets extensive – if slightly inaccurate – treatment in the 
film, is likely too obscure a scandal for most people in 2016; Hillarycare, 
though still a conservative bugaboo, is now the law of the land andabout as 
many people 
<http://kff.org/interactive/kaiser-health-tracking-poll-the-publics-views-on-the-aca/#?response=Favorable--Unfavorable&aRange=twoYear>
 approve as disapprove it. And although the film criticizes her for her lack of 
support for the Iraq war, particularly in its later years, Trump has criticized 
her for supporting it at all (although he reserves the right to change his own 
mind).

More effective – and more dirty – are assertions about the Clintons’ marriage, 
included unsubstantiated but continuing allegations that she personally hired 
private investigators to dig up dirt on and intimidate women who had had 
contact with Bill Clinton and accused him of affairs or assault. (The Clintons 
have long denied these claims.) Given Trump’s willingness to invite questions 
about his own less-than-squeaky-clean marital history by alleging that it’s 
fair to ask Hillary Clinton questions about Bill Clinton’s behavior, it seems 
likely that Bossie’s background with Clinton accuser Kathleen Willey – who
alleged 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/268590-bill-clinton-sexual-assault-accuser-to-campaign-against>
 that Bill Clinton groped her in the Oval Office and that Hillary Clintonhad 
her pet cat killed 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2008/01/did-clintons-try-whack-cat> – and 
Jared K Stern – theprivate investigator 
<http://www.bethesdamagazine.com/Bethesda-Magazine/July-August-2012/Sex-Lies-Videotape/>
 who says he was hired to follow Willey in 1998 – will come into play before 
the election season is over.

Most interesting, though, is the last major anecdote of the Bossie film: he 
uses the story of Joe Connor – whose father, Frank, was killed in thePuerto 
Rican separatist group FALN’s bombing of the Fraunces Tavern 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/manhattan/puerto-rican-terrorists-plant-bomb-tavern-1975-article-1.2484977>
 in New York City in 1974 – to highlight Bill Clinton’sgranting clemency 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/09/08/us/12-imprisoned-puerto-ricans-accept-clemency-conditions.html?pagewanted=all>
 to 12 members of the organization in 1999. Though the man allegedly 
responsible for the bombingremains in exile in Cuba 
<https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20141219/financial-district/cuba-decision-gives-fraunces-tavern-bombing-victims-son-hope-for-justice>
, 10 of the members granted clemency were convicted of charges related to a 
series of bombings in Illinois, and the others were convicted in relationship 
to the hold-up of an armored car in Connecticut.

The Senate opposed 
<http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/stories/1999/09/14/senate.faln/> the granting 
of clemency 95-2 and Hillary Clinton, who was then running for the New York 
Senate seat, eventuallyopposed the offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/sep/07/hillaryclinton> and said she’d 
had no prior knowledge of it. Still, the move by the White House was widely 
seen as an attempt to help her curry favor with the large (and voter-rich) 
Puerto Rican community in New York City – though her subsequent denouncement of 
the offer did her no favors.

Connor is an occasional Fox News guest 
<http://thenewfounders.net/joseph-f-connor/> and a columnist on the 
conservative site TownHall, where hehas 
<http://townhall.com/columnists/joeconnor/2015/12/22/hillary-not-qualified-to-win-war-on-terror-n2096386>
inveighed 
<http://townhall.com/columnists/joeconnor/2016/09/04/flight-to-terror-n2213667> 
against electing Hillary Clinton. But in Bossie’s documentary he came across as 
genuine, still hurting from his father’s death, and very, very likable. It’s 
unlikely Bossie’s forgotten him in the intervening years – and more likely that 
he and the rest of the Trump campaign are just waiting for the right moment to 
bring him up again.
 