
Blues legend BB King once sang: “Never trust a woman, until she’s dead and 
buried.” Sadly, it’s a sentiment that sounds just at home in our current 
political discourse as it does an old song: while this week’sNBC/WSJ poll 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/poll-clinton-leads-trump-ahead-first-debate-n652141>
 shows Hillary Clinton leading Donald Trump in general support, voters consider 
Trump more “honest and straightforward” than Clinton by 10 points.

Clinton hasn't won over millennials. And no, sexism isn't to blame | Kate 
Aronoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/clinton-hasnt-won-millennials-sexism-isnt-to-blame>
Let’s take a moment to consider this. A candidate whose first campaign ad was 
judged by one site to containone lie every four seconds 
<http://www.politicususa.com/2016/08/19/fact-check-devastates-trump-ad-averages-1-lie-4-seconds.html>
 and who, according to Huffington Post, toldover 70 lies 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/donald-trump-fact-check_us_56fc375fe4b0daf53aee9175>
 in just one televised town hall; a manwho one philosopher argues has 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2015/dec/21/2015-lie-year-donald-trump-campaign-misstatements/>
 “perfected the outrageous untruth as a campaign tool”, is considered more 
honest than his opponent.

This isn’t a new problem for Clinton – a CNN poll from July 
<http://i2.cdn.turner.com/cnn/2016/images/07/25/trump.clinton.poll.pdf> found 
that only 30% of people surveyed found Clinton trustworthy, while 43% thought 
Trump was. It’s also not a new issue for American women.

The notion that women are fundamentally untrustworthy snakes through almost 
every area of our lives. Managers distrust women whoask for flextime 
<https://www.shrm.org/ResourcesAndTools/hr-topics/behavioral-competencies/global-and-cultural-effectiveness/Pages/Managers-Distrust-Women-Flextime.aspx>
; women whoshow anger 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/fulfillment-any-age/201511/why-dont-we-trust-angry-women>
 are less trusted than their male counterparts; and people think themore makeup 
a woman wears 
<http://www.latintimes.com/wearing-lot-makeup-make-women-look-competent-attractive-untrustworthy-study-finds-132086>
, the less trustworthy she is. (In fact, there is a trove of “don’t trust 
women” memes inspired by before-and-after pictures of women with makeup.)

Hating Donald Trump isn’t enough – we need to talk about why Hillary Clinton 
rules | Lindy West
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/hating-trump-hillary-clinton-rules-stop-treating-democratic-candidate-literal-white-supremacist>
Republican policies and conservative thought, too, rely on this belief. 
Legislators have tried to pass laws that would mandate women getwritten 
permission from men 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/12/republican-wants-women-get-permission-father-having-abortion>
 before obtaining abortions, or have suggested that rape and incest exceptions 
would give way towomen lying about abuse 
<http://www.newser.com/story/115351/indiana-rep-women-will-lie-about-rape-to-get-abortions.html>
. There is a reason that one of the phrases most often used by the pro-choice 
community is “trust women”.

When it comes to sexual assault or domestic violence, victims – the vast 
majority of whom are women – are still widely disbelieved. When Amber Heard 
brought charges against her then-husband Johnny Depp, she was accused of 
fabricating the allegations toextort him in their divorce settlement 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-hollywood/2016/05/29/johnny-depp-amber-heard-inventing-domestic-violence-allegations-win-millions-divorce/>
. Only when a video of Depp appearing to behave aggressively was released and 
Heard donated millions from the settlement to a charity did the scrutiny slow. 
There are literally dozens of women who have accused Bill Cosby of rape, and 
still there are people who believe every single one of them is making it up, 
something I find barely credible. The way that the police doubt sexual assault 
victims has even been shown to be part of the reason we have such abacklog of 
untested rape kits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/14/why-police-ignored-80000-kits>
: officers treat women shoddily and they don’t want to come back to pursue 
charges.

When we don’t trust women, when we disbelieve them even in the face of 
thoroughly convincing evidence, everyone suffers.

Clinton has been deemed untrustworthy by the public long before Trump came 
into the political picture, it’s true. And like most politicians, she’s given 
the public reasons to question her. But it’s impossible to divorce the way that 
voters view her from the misogyny she’s faced over decades. She’s considered 
“guarded” – but how could she not be after years of sexist smears and slights? 
Trump, on the other hand, is lauded for “telling it like it is” even as so much 
of what he says is shown to be untrue.

The act of trusting women shouldn’t be a radical act, and women shouldn’t have 
to jump through hoops to be considered credible. No matter your politics, the 
double standard here is hard to ignore.

 