
It turns out that there is a nuclear button that Theresa May is reluctant to 
press. She has just made her first big policy decision by choosing to pause and 
review government support for the mammothly controversial Hinkley Point nuclear 
reactor. Be in no doubt that this was a call made in Downing Street. It may 
have been Greg Clark, the business and energy secretary, who released the 
surprise news in a terse, late-hour statement from his department, but the 
order to delay came from Number 10. Only days earlier, the chancellor, Philip 
Hammond, had told Kamal Ahmed, the BBC’s economics editor, that theplant was 
definitely going ahead <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-36923122>.

The pause has evidently come as a complete shock to EDF, which had already 
ordered in the champagne for the contract signing after the board of the French 
state-owned company signed off on the project on Thursday.

Even if it ultimately gets the green light in the autumn, choosing to 
reappraise the Hinkley C project is a significant act in itself. The pause has 
cheered and emboldened enemies of the plant, both those who are against it on 
the grounds that it is a vanity project that will prove ruinously expensive to 
the taxpayer and those who are opposed to nuclear reactors because they involve 
splitting uranium atoms.

The delay has frustrated and angered the project’s supporters who ask how this 
fits with the government’s attempt to convince the world that a Brexit Britain 
will still be open for foreign investment. It has added tension to relations 
with the French at a time when they are already strained by Britain’s vote to 
leave the EU. The Chinese, to whom face matters so very much, aren’t pleased 
that their heavy involvement was clearly one of Mrs May’s problems with the 
project. The GMB, the relevant trade union, has called the delay “bonkers”. 
Labour people have had an opportunity to describe something other than their 
own party as “chaotic”.

This decision has also shed some revelatory light on how Mrs May intends to 
operate. She wants her Number 10 to call the big shots – and she wants people 
to know that it is calling those shots. Another thing it underlines – and this 
point is so obvious that it has been almost completely missed – is that Mrs May 
has not been prime minister for terribly long. She moved into Downing Street 
less than three weeks ago. She had less time to prepare for the transition than 
initially expected because it was accelerated when she received the unopposed 
coronation that she originally said she didn’t want.

Since Mrs May acquired the keys to Number 10, she has not spent all that much 
time in her new home. Many of her early days as prime minister have been spent 
travelling around Europe – if it’s Thursday, it must be Warsaw – trying to get 
acquainted with leaders who will be crucial to the Brexit negotiations. She has 
also devoted time to visits to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland for 
Brexit-related reasons. I’m told that Mrs May is already finding that Brexit 
discussions, both the talks with European leaders and those taking place within 
her cabinet as ministers try to thrash out an agreed negotiating strategy, are 
consuming much more of her diary than she hoped.

That has left her with less time to address an in-tray groaning with a pile of 
other decisions waiting to be made. This bequest of unfinished business from 
her predecessor did not accumulate becauseDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> was a chronically 
indecisive leader. It was often a better critique of him that he made major 
calls without spending sufficient time thinking through all the consequences. 
The backlog of decisions has mounted up because the energies of government have 
been so consumed by Europe for the best part of the last year: first by the 
pre-referendum negotiations, then by the long referendum campaign, and in the 
past month by the political turbulence and economic uncertainty unleashed by 
the result.

In those breathing spaces that have not been dominated by Brexit, Mrs May has 
been endeavouring to immerse herself in a wide array of subjects with which she 
had only a glancing engagement during her six years as home secretary. She was 
party to earlier cabinet discussions about Hinkley Point, but these were 
largely superficial. Cabinet long since ceased to be a forum for meaty policy 
debate and crunchy decision-making, not least because prime ministers have 
become so fearful of discussions being leaked. Were Mrs May of a different 
temperament, I suppose she might have been content to devolve the decision 
about Hinkley. But the other important players are also new to their jobs and, 
anyway, we know that Mrs May is not an instinctive delegator. She is also 
usually at the careful rather than the rapid end of the spectrum when it comes 
to decision-making. Impetuosity is not her hallmark. She doesn’t like to be 
rushed or bounced. Her preference is to work through problem issues by reading 
all the relevant papers and keeping discussion tight with the small group of 
people whom she really trusts. Colleagues report that she hates having to 
commit to a course before she has examined all the angles and the Hinkley 
project is freighted with a lot of risks. The near-horizon cost is £18bn and 
rising. The potential future charge on taxpayers and electricity bill payers is 
higher still. Britain has had a disillusioning history when it comes to nuclear 
power, a technology this country largely invented but has been very poor at 
using successfully. If Mrs May wants to do further reading on the subject, I 
recommend Professor Simon Taylor’s excellent recent book,The Fall and Rise of 
Nuclear Power in Britain. When so much money is involved, and so many people 
think there is such potential for this project to go very badly wrong, it is 
not really so astonishing that Mrs May wanted a pause.

As a new prime minister with a lot on her plate, there is some willingness to 
forgive the chaotic manner in which the review was announced, but she won’t 
always enjoy the benefit of the doubt. A previous occupant of her job once told 
me that Number 10 has to make about a hundred decisions a day of one sort or 
another. Many of those decisions are big. A lot of them are urgent. It remains 
to be seen whether Mrs May’s cautious method will be entirely compatible with 
the sheer velocity of decision-making that is required of a modern prime 
minister operating in a 24/7 media world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fhinkley-offers-useful-guide-to-mays-plans-cameron-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1a0f52cc4df07b2acd60a6e30a04a0c3041cb5e%2F0_153_2372_1424%2F2372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hinkley%20offers%20a%20useful%20guide%20to%20May%E2%80%99s%20plans%20for%20Cameron%E2%80%99s%20legacy%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fhinkley-offers-useful-guide-to-mays-plans-cameron-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hinkley%20offers%20a%20useful%20guide%20to%20May%E2%80%99s%20plans%20for%20Cameron%E2%80%99s%20legacy%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fhinkley-offers-useful-guide-to-mays-plans-cameron-legacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1a0f52cc4df07b2acd60a6e30a04a0c3041cb5e%2F0_153_2372_1424%2F2372.jpg>
 Nick Timothy, the prime minister’s joint chief of staff, has long opposed the 
deal with China. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
One thing she does know a lot about from her previous role is security. “There 
will always be a little bit of the Home Office inside me,” she told her civil 
servants when she made her farewell speech at Marsham Street before moving to 
Number 10. The Hinkley deal binds Britain into a high level of Chinese 
involvement in other nuclear reactors and that has always troubled her on 
security grounds. One of the fiercest critics of making China so central to 
critical infrastructure and energy supply has been Nick Timothy, a 
long-standing aide of the prime minister who is now a figure of considerable 
influence as her joint chief of staff. He usefully put a lot of his thoughts 
about big issues into the public domain during a period out of government when 
he shared his views with the ConservativeHome website. In one post, Mrs May’s 
right-hand man accused David Cameron’s government of “selling our national 
security to China 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thecolumnists/2015/10/nick-timothy-the-government-is-selling-our-national-security-to-china.html>
” on the grounds that “the Chinese could use their role to build weaknesses 
into computer systems, which will allow them to shut down Britain’s energy 
production at will”.

It is a big black mark for Hinkley in the mind of Mrs May that the project is 
an inheritance from her predecessor. Since she arrived at Downing Street, she 
has made a conscious effort to project herself not as a continuity with Mr 
Cameron, but a break from him. Her early statements as prime minister have 
contained a lot of implicit disparaging – and some explicit criticism – of his 
record. His allies were ruthlessly culled in her sweeping reshuffle. Her 
working majority in the Commons is 17. That is smaller than the number of 
ministers she sacked, which is likely to become a problem when her honeymoon 
fades and festering grievances surface. It wasn’t enough for her to dispatch
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>. Her people 
let the world know that he had been fired as chancellor rather than allow him 
to preserve some dignity by dressing it up as a resignation.

The new regime at Number 10 instinctively treats any legacy from the 
Cameron-Osborne government as a dodgy bequest of the most suspect provenance. 
It was the reverse of helpful for the Hinkley deal that its most eager sponsor 
in the previous cabinet was Mr Osborne. That in itself made it suspect in the 
eyes of Mrs May. The former chancellor was also the keenest champion of a third 
runway at Heathrow so I would not be betting on that happening. She has already 
junked his deficit reduction plan and downgraded his focus on the Northern 
Powerhouse.

It will take a while before we get the full measure of how Mrs May will 
perform as prime minister. But we now have a useful, early rule of thumb for 
predicting how she will act. Imagine what George Osborne would do in any given 
situation and assume thatTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> will do the opposite.
 