
The Hinkley Point C nuclear project 
<https://www.edfenergy.com/energy/nuclear-new-build-projects/hinkley-point-c> 
is poised to get the go-ahead from EDF next week in what will be a major boost 
to a new government trying to steady nerves on the economy after the British 
vote to leave the European Union last month.


A board meeting of the French energy group on Thursday 28 July  
<https://www.edfenergy.com/energy/nuclear-new-build-projects/hinkley-point-c/news-views/edf-board-called-to-consider-final-investment-decision>
is expected to give a final investment decision in favour of building new 
reactors in Somerset despite internal divisions over the £18bn scheme.

The decision has been repeatedly postponed, partly because of pressure from 
trade unionists on the board of the partly state-owned French group who claim 
EDF cannot afford the cost and risk of such a massive project in the UK.

But Jean-Bernard Lévy, EDF’s chief executive, has the support of the British 
government to press ahead with a scheme that represents an important shop 
window for selling nuclear technology and expertise worldwide.

EDF said it would discuss Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> (HPC) – which involves 
building two so-called European pressurised reactors (EPR) – at its forthcoming 
board meeting and underlined the importance of building in Britain.

“The HPC project is a major element of the group’s … strategy. The two EPR 
reactors at Hinkley Point would strengthen EDF’s presence in Britain, a country 
where its subsidiaryEDF Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/edf> 
already operates 15 nuclear reactors and is the largest electricity supplier by 
volume.”

Hinkley Point C nuclear power plant decision delayed again by EDF
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/24/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-decision-delayed-again-by-edf>
EDF would not publicly commit itself to a decision in favour of the project, 
but nuclear industry sources said all company preparations were being made as 
if it was a done deal. “We are all expecting the go ahead next week,” the 
sources said.

The timing could not be better for the UK government, which regards Hinkley as 
a flagship energy scheme despite criticism from the City about its massive cost.

EDF insists it can build the project for £18bn but a complex system of 
subsidies agreed by the former chancellor, George Osborne, could cost the 
consumer up to£37bn, according to a recent estimate published on the Department 
of Energy and Climate Change (Decc) website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-plant-costs-up-to-37bn>
.

His successor, Philip Hammond, has seized on a decision by a Japanese company 
to buy one of Britain’s leading technology companies,ARM, for £24bn as an 
example that the UK was still attractive to foreign investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/tech-giant-arm-holdings-sold-to-japanese-firm-for-24bn>
.

But Hinkley would be a much clearer vote of confidence by France and its 
Chinese partners and it should encourage other foreign nuclear companies such 
as Toshiba of Japan to press ahead with their own reactor plans.

New capacity is needed to generate electricity in the UK at a time when old 
atomic and coal plants are being retired and there are fears of the lights 
going out.

Leave vote makes UK's transition to clean energy harder, say experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/leave-vote-makes-uks-transition-to-clean-energy-harder-say-experts>
Greg Clark, the business and energy secretary, said: “It’s clear that we are 
open for business as we come closer to sealing the deal on this major 
investment in British infrastructure and British jobs.

“This is a welcome decision [to hold a board meeting] from EDF, and we look 
forward to the outcome.”

Critics remained vocal. “It’s right that the UK should remain open for 
business but handing billions of energy bill payers money over to the French 
government for an outdated technology makes no business sense,” said John 
Sauven, executive director of Greenpeace UK.

“A possible final investment decision next week will only show that high-level 
post-truth politics trumps good sense. The type of reactor EDF wants to build 
at Hinkley hasn’t yet been shown to work.

“For UK bill payers, the rationale for a massively over-priced power station 
like Hinkley has long since disappeared but all the key players are too 
embarrassed to stop it.”

But Unite was supportive. Kevin Coyne, the union’s energy officer, said: “It 
has been a long journey, but we are within sight of the promised land – the 
making of the final investment decision for the Somerset plant.

 “The go-ahead is desperately needed on a number of grounds – to help keep the 
lights on in Britain in the decades ahead and as a fulcrum for the creation of 
thousands of jobs and related economic activity in the West Country.”
 