
Theresa May will be dodging questions from the Chinese and French premiers at 
the G20 summit in Huangzhou about whether she will or will not be giving the 
go-ahead to the controversialHinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> nuclear project.

One of the first decisions made by May’s new government was to review the 
£18.5bn flagship energy project that foreign companies – EDF of France and CGN 
of China – expected to build.

Beijing is particularly incensed by suggestions that British ministers are 
questioning the national security implications of allowing a Chinese business 
access to the UK national energy infrastructure.

In a prominent opinion piece 
<http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/opinion/2016-09/01/content_26662427.htm> 
published in the state-run China Daily newspaper on Thursday, ahead of her 
arrival, China’s ambassador to London urged May to make “wise strategic 
choices” over Britain’s future relationship with China.

Liu Xiaoming made no direct reference to Hinkley but said “a number of steps 
need to be taken in order to maintain the momentum in the relationship” between 
London and Beijing.

The newly formed Department for Business, Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) 
has also confirmed the secretary of state, Greg Clark, met a delegation from 
EDF in London who were seeking reassurances that the Somerset scheme would 
proceed.

But Hinkley remains under review with May only promising that a final decision 
for or against the new reactor scheme, which was championed by George Osborne, 
would be made in October.

So why is a scheme that has been so long in the making still being 
reconsidered at this time, when EDF and CGN have promised to stump up the 
building costs and Britain is in dire need of new generating capacity?

The case against

Security


Defence of the realm is indeed an issue. Senior military and intelligence 
figures have warned ministers that plans to give China a big stake in Britain’s 
nuclear power industryposes a threat to national security 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article4587446.ece>.

May’s chief of staff, Nick Timothy, wrote a piece saying MI5 believed that the 
intelligence services ofChina continued to work against UK interests at home 
and abroad. 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thecolumnists/2015/10/nick-timothy-the-government-is-selling-our-national-security-to-china.html>

Critics say countries such as the US would never allow the Chinese to work 
inside its national infrastructure where it could insert computer glitches that 
could turn the lights off.America scuppered a Chinese company from buying one 
of its oil companies, Unocal, on strategic grounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2005/aug/02/oil.money> in 2005.

The Hinkley deal is not self-standing, either. Beijing has only agreed to 
provide 30% funding on condition that it will be able to build its own 
Chinese-designed reactor at Bradwell in Essex.

Cost

While spy stories may be headline grabbing, there are other more mundane 
reasons why Hinkley may never go ahead: cost – and most notably the fact that 
UK energy consumers would ultimately pay the eye-watering bill.

Osborne offered EDF and CGN a guaranteed price for its electricity of £92.50 
per megawatt hour – more than twice the current cost of wholesale power – for a 
period of 35 years.

Critics point out that EDF’s track record of delays and cost overruns at 
building a new reactor at Flamanville in Normandy is dismal, as is the 
experience of its reactor designer, Areva, with a new construction at Olkiluoto 
in Finland.

Unnecessary power

 The biggest cloud over Hinkley, which has grown and grown over the years 
since the Somerset project was first muted, surrounds whether this kind of 
inflexible, on-all-the-time nuclear power is really needed now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fhinkley-point-c-theresa-may-china-g20-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb07376ff187da66ad380ed97af028c6366a99360%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hinkley%20Point%20C%3A%20no%20easy%20solution%20to%20Theresa%20May's%20Chinese%20puzzle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fhinkley-point-c-theresa-may-china-g20-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hinkley%20Point%20C%3A%20no%20easy%20solution%20to%20Theresa%20May%27s%20Chinese%20puzzle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fhinkley-point-c-theresa-may-china-g20-summit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb07376ff187da66ad380ed97af028c6366a99360%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 An aerial view of the Hinkley Point site, with views of Hinkley A and Hinkley 
B nuclear power plants. Photograph: EDF Energy/PA 
The rise of renewables such as wind and solar are threatening the whole 
argument for nuclear, which also has ongoing issues such as how to dispose of 
radioactive waste and whether they are a vulnerable terrorist target to contend 
with.

Wind farms and solar arrays are fast coming down in price and while they may 
produce intermittent power, they are relatively quick and easy to construct. 
The idea that Britain could rely on these new low-carbon technologies was 
considered ridiculous even three years ago but less so now.

They can be relatively easily backed up by gas-fired power stations while a 
research race for large scale and efficient batteries could eventually allow 
green power to run 24 hours a day in areas where renewables were located.

A new realisation that Britain could reduce demand for power by a variety of 
energy saving measures has also raised questions about the need for a new 
generation of massive plants such as Hinkley.

The case in favour

Credibility


Against all this is the sheer credibility of the UK as a home for foreign 
investment, especially post-Brexit. Telling the French and Chinese to keep 
their money could have serious consequences, as Beijing is clearly indicating.

Alternatives difficult

While many Conservative MPs have reservations about Hinkley there is little 
enthusiasm for a massive drive on wind and solar, whose subsidy levels have 
been hugely cut back since Ed Davey ran the show for the coalition government.

Britain has carbon emission targets to meet and so any alternative strategy 
for keeping the lights on such as allowing coal-fired power stations to keep on 
polluting would mean a U-turn on climate change.

The stakes are high whichever route is taken. May will be trying to dodge 
these thorny questions over the next couple of days.
 