

When George Osborne announced a new “national living wage” (NLW) to boost 
low-paid workers’ income and help people off welfare, cleaner Maria Hill looked 
forward to the modest rise the extra 50p per hour would bring her. Hill, 54, 
has cleaned the Liverpool offices of HM Revenue and Customs for more than 15 
years.

“Things are tight, really tight to be honest,” she says. When you are earning 
£201.60 a week “every bit helps”. It never occurred to her that she would be 
left much worse off and would end up on strike.


As the April deadline for bringing in the NLW approached, ISS, the company 
that employs theHMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> cleaners in a 
complex subcontracting chain, told staff that it could not afford the mandatory 
rise. It informed them that it intended to claw back any increase in hourly pay 
by cutting each worker’s number of hours so that their overall wages stayed the 
same.

 Hill, on 30 hours a week, was due a £15 rise when the new rate of £7.20 per 
hour came in, but ISS cut her hours to 28 a week, clawing back £14.40. Other 
workers had their hours adjusted similarly. In some cases where cleaners were 
only doing a few hours a week, they say, the company docked 15 minutes a week 
from their rotas to avoid having to pay more.

For Hill and several other cleaners – nearly all women in their 50s born and 
bred in Liverpool – there was an additional sting in the tail. Single people on 
low pay who work at least 30 hours a week qualify for the government’s working 
tax credits to supplement their wages. Ironically, these credits are paid out 
by HMRC, which is also the government department responsible for enforcing the 
NLW.

When ISS lopped two hours from their working week, the cleaners fell below the 
threshold and have, as a result, lost between £40 and £50 a week in tax credit 
payments each. Several of the women have visited Citizens Advice bureaux (CAB) 
or the council’s One Stop Shop for advice in recent weeks and have been told 
they would be better off not working and receiving full benefits.

Hill says that by the time she has paid for her bus pass to work, her gas, 
electricity, water and rent, “there’s nothing spare”. She has fallen behind 
with her council tax since the changes. “It’s really upsetting, You work all 
week and what’s the point of it, it’s just hand-to-mouth, beans on toast, 
nothing left to go anywhere or take the grandchildren out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhmrc-cleaners-striking-over-pay-national-living-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f50a8f80c137177daf3a8ace09c1eb4e3e5a647%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=HMRC%20cleaners%20striking%20over%20pay%3A%20'They've%20treated%20us%20appallingly'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhmrc-cleaners-striking-over-pay-national-living-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=HMRC%20cleaners%20striking%20over%20pay%3A%20%27They%27ve%20treated%20us%20appallingly%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhmrc-cleaners-striking-over-pay-national-living-wage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f50a8f80c137177daf3a8ace09c1eb4e3e5a647%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The picket in Liverpool Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
Patricia Walls, 53, is in the same position as Hill. Her 30-hour week has been 
cut to 28 hours and she has lost her in-work tax credits. She worked throughout 
the years when her four children were growing up, enjoying the friendship and 
dignity a job gave her. She, too, now fears she may be better off not working, 
although she says she would hate to be unemployed. “I’ve worked all my life, I 
don’t want to give up,” she told the Guardian outside the HMRC offices in James 
Street.

Those of the cleaners who are members of the Public and Commercial Services 
union voted tostrike for two days this week against the changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/25/hmrc-cleaners-merseyside-strike-pay-national-living-wage>
 and gathered around a bench outside the building to form a picket line. 
Beneath the steady flow of cheerful Liverpool banter and raucous clapping of 
ISS managers crossing the picket line, there was a sense of bewilderment and 
fear for the future.

Walls was referred to CAB by her GP because the stress was already taking its 
toll – she ended up in hospital with high blood pressure and an infection. 
Having lost her tax credits, she would probably receive more money getting 
welfare and housing support, but since she still lives in the housing 
association three-bedroomed house her children grew up in, leaving the job she 
has done for 27 years would also mean leaving the family home, thanks to 
government’s so-called “bedroom tax” for under-occupancy. “It’s really 
stressing me out,” she says.

Hill says. “They’ve treated us appallingly, we’re just a number, they don’t 
care about us,” she says. “The managers are not local.”

ISS is, in fact, a transnational corporation, one of the largest employers in 
the world, with its headquarters in Denmark. It specialises in facilities 
management and doubled its profits last year to £250m, although none of the 
female cleaners we spoke to at the HMRC offices knew they were working for a 
foreign company.

The origins of the arrangement for HMRC buildings date back to 2001 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/2263208.stm>, when the department sold off 
its estate of more than 600 buildings to Mapeley, a Bermuda-based offshore 
company, as part of a private finance initiative. The deal waslater condemned 
by MPs 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmpubacc/312/31208.htm>
 as bad value and as undermining HMRC’s position as a tax collector.

HMRC leases back buildings from a subsidiary of Mapele; a further subsidiary, 
Salisbury FM 
<http://www.fm-world.co.uk/news/business-news/mapeley-launches-stand-alone-fm-business/>
, is contracted by Mapeley to manage the day-to-day running of the offices. 
Salisbury, in turn, subcontracts the cleaning to ISS.

HMRC said that while it “greatly appreciated the work cleaning staff do”, 
their terms and conditions were determined by the external contractor and that 
it had no involvement in their pay. “HMRC is absolutely committed to every 
worker receiving at least the national living wage and we come down hard on 
suppliers, including our own, who don’t share that commitment. All those who 
work for our third party suppliers can be assured of our determination to 
secure for all workers their legal entitlement to a living wage.”

I clean HMRC’s offices for an unfair wage. I hope our strike has embarrassed 
them | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/27/hmrc-cleaner-unfair-wage-strike>
ISS declined to discuss whether its contract to clean HMRC offices allowed for 
increases in pay mandated by government. “Our contract with Salisbury is 
commercially sensitive and details are not made public. We do, however, have 
the necessary checks in place with our client to ensure the cleaning provision 
targets are maintained,” it said in a statement.

After the two-day strike, it said: “ISS has a duty of care towards our staff, 
as well as a contractual responsibility to the client. As such, we look forward 
to resuming discussions with our people, and to do so with their PCS trade 
union representatives and the other key parties involved.”

A spokesperson for Salisbury FM declined to comment on questions about 
provisions in its contract with ISS for an increase in costs as a result of the 
NLW, saying that workers’ terms were a private matter between them and ISS, and 
that Salisbury’s contract with ISS was also private and confidential. Mapeley 
did not respond to requests for comment.

Hills’s MP, Maria Eagle, said it was “beyond parody” that the government could 
not make sure people who cleaned its own offices benefited from the NLW, “a 
policy supposed to tackle low pay. It makes their policy look more like a 
propaganda tool than wanting to do something. These convoluted arrangements to 
distance employees from their employer are one of the ways working people have 
had money drained away from them in the last 20 years. This sleight of hand is 
the kind of things that makes people disillusioned with politics.”
 