
Whisper it – you have to, beneath the barrage of furious indignation, bad 
temper, even declarations of “war”, from the prime minister down, over our 
gentle symbol of peace – but Fifa has a point about poppies. World football’s 
governing body, which Fifa still is, tried to articulate this as itunveiled the 
fines levelled at the football associations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/fifa-fines-english-fa-poppies-scotland>
 of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, for framing their November 
World Cup qualifiers as Armistice Day events.

“It is not our intention to judge or question specific commemorations as we 
fully respect the significance of such moments in the respective countries, 
each one of them with its own history and background,” Claudio Sulser, the 
chairman of the disciplinary committee, explained. “However, keeping in mind 
that the rules need to be applied in a neutral and fair manner across Fifa’s 
211 member associations, the display, among others, of any political or 
religious symbol is strictly prohibited.”

Fifa did, to be fair, try to make this case beforehand, when it respectfully 
asked the home countries not to drape their football matches in poppies or 
other collective remembrance of war. However cherished a symbol the poppy is, 
and apolitical –not, incidentally, an assessment with which everybody agrees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/shortcuts/2016/nov/01/fifas-poppy-ban-the-latest-remembrance-outrage>
, including West Bromwich Albion’s James McClean, who is from Derry and has 
refused to wear it – Fifa was emphasising that its rules have to apply to all 
countries of the world. As Fifa’s general secretary,Fatma Samoura, who is from 
Senegal, pointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/02/england-players-to-defy-fifa-ruling-and-wear-poppies-in-armistice-day-match>
, tragically many countries, including her own, are still or have recently been 
riven by bloody conflict and do not have our modern luxury of distance from it.

FA to appeal against Fifa fine over poppies at World Cup qualifier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/fifa-fines-english-fa-poppies-scotland>
The International Football Association Board (Ifab), the rule-making body 
dominated as ever by the home countries themselves, has always sought to enable 
the sport to be free from political divisions rather than a vehicle for them. 
The rule is interpreted broadly, because it would be unworkable to judge every 
symbol for the sentiments with which it is freighted in its own country. One 
country’s remembrance might be a provocation to another. The principle is to 
keep the subjects of war and religion out of football, no matter if countries 
strongly believe they are only respecting those who died and not being 
political about how it came to happen. Of course it grates that Fifa’s matches 
are surrounded by branding for McDonalds and Coca Cola while the poppy is out 
of bounds – but the English FA takes the junk food dollar too, so that is not 
an argument here.

In return for its request and explanation, Fifa was met by the “poppy war”. 
The home FAs could not find it in themselves to accede. They became defiant 
over the delicate flower. Martin Glenn, the English FA’s chief executive, 
revealed they had obtained a legal opinion whichadvised they had a “rock solid” 
case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/england-poppies-scotland-fa-martin-glenn>
 – another odd formulation for the flower which grew in the mud of military 
carnage. Such aggressive legal posturing, and now the response that the FA will 
appeal, makes it look as if they really are preparing to march to the court of 
arbitration for sport and fight a case over whether Fifa and Ifab are entitled 
to consider the poppy political. Presumably, if the FA were to do that and win, 
that could lead to all 211 countries taking their chosen gestures of pre-match 
and armband remembrance to Cas, forcing Fifa to do exactly what Sulser is 
explaining it cannot: untangle the precise meaning of each one.

In the poppy war the easiest attack was, of course, the one Theresa May served 
up at prime minister’s questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/02/theresa-may-attacks-fifa-over-utterly-outrageous-poppy-ban-remembrance-day>
, when she answered a dolly question on the issue by saying Fifa should “get 
its own house in order”. Damian Collins, the Conservative chairman of the 
culture media and sport committee, who was industriously busy on poppies as on 
so much else, also questioned Fifa’s right to make this ruling as, he said, 
they had not stopped the 2m Swiss franc payment from the former president Sepp 
Blatter to the former Uefa president Michel Platini, which has led toboth men 
being banned from football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/21/sepp-blatter-michel-platini-banned-from-football-fifa>
.

These barbs at Fifa’s corruption are non-sequiturs barely worth unpicking, 
particularly as Collins is always responding to scandals by insisting Fifa and 
the FA should indeed enforce their own rules. As for May and other politicians, 
if only they could see how it looks, speaking scathingly in parliament for a 
symbol they argue is apolitical, calling onFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> to get its house in order, when 
they appear from Europe to have plenty else to be getting on with in their own 
House.

Fifa, of course, has indeed been mired in financial corruption for years, with 
the men around its top table trousering millions, but there is a large part to 
its history which can be considered admirably successful. Founded in 1904 at 
the beginnings of European football, after the FA and Ifab, Fifa has overseen 
football’s phenomenal worldwide growth, despite so many wars and other horrors. 
The British set this principle of keeping politics and religion out of sport 
and the English Fifa president from 1961 to 1974, Sir Stanley Rous, was 
absolute in his interpretation of it. Previously as FA secretary, Rous led 
England back into Fifa in 1945 from self‑imposed isolation, because he viewed 
the spread of international football as inevitable, exciting and as an arena 
for friendship.

The late 1940s were the years in which crowds were the most populous ever in 
domestic football, as people flocked back to normality, to civic pleasures, 
from the hardships of war. In those years and for decades afterwards all the 
home countries’ players, and everybody in the crowds, had either fought, lost 
friends and family, suffered or knew people who had suffered in the war but 
football matches did not have to be events of remembrance then. People seemed 
to want them to be separate. And it was always kept that way, it seems,until 
the friendly played in November 2011 when a poppy was sewn into an armband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/nov/09/england-poppies-armbands-fifa-compromise>
 on the players’ sleeves for England’s friendly against Spain, 93 years after 
the end of the first world war, 66 years after the end of the second. Fifa 
should perhaps explain publicly why it has changed its mind but it grates a 
little that this 2011 agreement is now cited by the FA as some sacrosanct 
precedent.

Fifa’s request to the home countries was not to make an issue of wearing 
poppies because the sport is played in a volatile and war-stricken world. The 
FAs refused and Fifa has now responded as promised, just as itsanctioned Iran 
for religious ceremonies held 
<http://www.fifa.com/governance/news/y=2016/m=11/news=fifa-sanctions-several-member-associations-for-incidents-during-fifa-w-2847779.html>
 at its match against Korea in October. Are the home FAs really now going to 
stomp to court, brandishing QCs’ opinions, to have a proper fallout over the 
poppy?

One wonders how difficult it would have been to see Fifa’s point of view on 
this one and show some understanding that this rule might just be appropriate 
given the complexities of the world. The home FAs could have shown some 
leadership, appreciation of the peace we are privileged to enjoy and maybe 
demonstrated remembrance in some other way – perhaps, for example, at the 
Cenotaph.
 