
Hours after cancelling a scheduled meeting with the New York Times and 
claiming on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801021596228091905> that the 
newspaper had changed the “terms and conditions” of the meeting, Donald Trump 
attended a lunchtime discussion with a group of reporters and editors at the 
newspaper’s headquarters on Tuesday.

Trump v the media: did his tactics mortally wound the fourth estate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/election-2016-donald-trump-media-coverage>


New York Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> reporters 
tweeted from inside a 16th-floor lunchtime meeting at the newspaper’s main 
office in Midtown Manhattan, providing a live updating account of the 
on-the-record session.


Mike Grynbaum, a media writer for the New York Times, said the meeting began 
with the president-elect declaring his respect for the newspaper, which he had 
hours earlier accused of being “not nice”.

“I have great respect for the New York Times. I have tremendous respect,” 
Trump said. <https://twitter.com/grynbaum/status/801124017973379072> “I think 
I’ve been treated very rough.”

Grynbaum said 22 New York Times journalists and five people from Trump’s team, 
including the president-elect, attended the meeting. When Trump left the 
meeting, there were audible boos and cheers from a crowd assembled inside the 
New York Times building.
Michael Calderone (@mlcalderone) 
Trump leaves the Times pic.twitter.com/KU1pTaUjXt <https://t.co/KU1pTaUjXt>
 <https://twitter.com/mlcalderone/status/801141182164189184> November 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mlcalderone/status/801141182164189184> 
The discussion will mark the end of a two-day press blitz by the 
president-elect, which included a Monday meeting with more than 20 top 
broadcast journalists and news executives.

Trump had abruptly canceled the New York Times meeting at 6.31am local time on 
Twitter, after calling the newspaper “failing”. The cancellation was not final, 
however. The Times announced the meeting was back on only three hours later.

“Perhaps a new meeting will be set up with the @nytimes,” Trump tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801025256487940096> following his 
cancellation, one of several tweets directed at the paper. “In the meantime 
they continue to cover me inaccurately and with a nasty tone!”
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Perhaps a new meeting will be set up with the @nytimes 
<https://twitter.com/nytimes>. In the meantime they continue to cover me 
inaccurately and with a nasty tone!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801025256487940096> November 22, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801025256487940096> 
The New York Times only learned that its meeting with the president-elect had 
been canceled after seeing Trump’s tweet, according to the paper’s head of 
communications, Eileen Murphy.

Later on Tuesday morning, after the meeting was restored, Murphy said in a 
statement that Trump would meet with the New York Times publisher, Arthur Ochs 
Sulzberger Jr, off the record, then with reporters and columnists on the record.

The president-elect, who has never held public office, has had a coarse 
relationship with the media for decades and squirmed under the intense press 
scrutiny that came with his campaign for president. He repeatedly bashed the 
media at campaign events, on social media and in interviews. His rhetoric was 
eventually accompanied by open hostility from his supporters at campaign 
rallies, where they would crowd around the press pen and jeer at reporters.


This behavior led the Committee to Protect Journalists, a not-for-profit 
organization that advocates press freedom under repressive regimes around the 
world,to declare in October 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/reading/committee-to-protect-journalists-says-trump-is-a-threat-to-press-freedom/>
 that Trump was a “threat to press freedom in the United States”.

Despite Trump’s opposition to the news media, on Monday he met with more than 
20 broadcast journalists and news executives including ABC’s Martha Raddatz, 
NBC’s Lester Holt and CNN’s president, Jeff Zucker.

Multiple reports from anonymous sources said Trump complained about the 
“dishonest” media. Trump said NBC and CNN were examples of “the worst”,
according to Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/on-media/2016/11/donald-trump-media-transition-tension-231727>
. And in the meeting, he criticized some in the room by name, including Zucker,
according to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/business/media/trump-summons-tv-figures-for-private-meeting-and-lets-them-have-it.html>
.

These reports follow a more heated account of the meeting in the New York Post 
<http://nypost.com/2016/11/21/donald-trumps-media-summit-was-a-f-ing-firing-squad/>
, which cited an anonymous source as saying: “It was like a fucking firing 
squad.” Trump spokeswoman Kellyanne Conway disputed this account. “He did not 
explode in anger,” she said.

Tuesday’s meeting with the New York Times was meant to include off-the-record 
and on-the-record sessions, with reporters, columnists and editors from a 
newspaper Trump has called “inaccurate”, “dishonest”, and “failing” since being 
elected president. In the two weeks since the election, Trump has tweeted 
directly at the newspaper nine times.

Before Trump’s election victory, the paper found Trump may have avoided paying 
taxes for two decades, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/us/politics/donald-trump-taxes.html> 
reported ontwo women who accused Trump of touching them inappropriately 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/13/us/politics/donald-trump-women.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&_r=0>
 and wrote extensively about lawsuits stemming from his educational venture, 
Trump University.Trump agreed to pay $25m to settle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/trump-university-settlement-twitter>
 some of the related lawsuits last Friday.

“We did not change the ground rules at all and made no attempt to,” said 
Murphy in a statement on the meeting.

Murphy said Trump’s team attempted to make the entire meeting off the record 
on Monday, after the two sides had already agreed to do part of it off the 
record and part of it on the record, which would make some parts of the 
discussion public. Murphy said the New York Times “refused to agree” to that 
proposal and the two sides agreed to go back to the original plan.

Earlier Tuesday, Trump said he would use the day for meetings “concerning the 
formation of the people” who would be in his administration.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Great meetings will take place today at Trump Tower concerning the formation 
of the people who will run our government for the next 8 years.
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801029194906038272> November 22, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801029194906038272>  