
House Republicans were forced into a humiliating climbdown on Tuesday after 
Donald Trump tweeted criticism of their move to gut an independent 
congressional ethics watchdog.

Members ditched their plan to severely weaken the independent Office of 
CongressionalEthics <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethics> (OCE) at an 
emergency meeting just before the start of a new legislative session on Capitol 
Hill in Washington.

The original rule change, carried out without warning and behind closed doors, 
hadprovoked a fierce backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/outcry-after-republicans-vote-to-dismantle-independent-ethics-body>
 from Democrats and transparency activists when first announced on Monday night.

But it was flexing of muscles by the president-elect that appeared to force 
Republicans to cave in. “With all that Congress has to work on, do they really 
have to make the weakening of the Independent Ethics Watchdog, as unfair as it 
may be, their number one act and priority,” he tweeted on Tuesday morning. 
“Focus on tax reform, healthcare and so many other things of far greater 
importance!”

Trump added the hashtag #DTS, for his campaign slogan “drain the swamp”.

His team confirmed it was the timing, not the reform itself, that had irked 
the president-elect. His incoming press secretary, Sean Spicer, told reporters: 
“He says their focus should be on tax reform and healthcare. It’s not a 
question of strengthening or weakening, it’s a question of priorities.”

Even before Trump’s tweet, many House Republicans, including top leaders, 
opposed the measure and worried about its ramifications, the Associated Press 
reported. In addition, members of Congress were inundated with calls and 
complaints from the public, which may have played a part.

At the subsequent emergency meeting, House majority leader Kevin McCarthy of 
California, who had opposed the timing of the decision, reportedly offered a 
motion to restore the current OCE rules which was accepted by members. The 
House will instead study changes to the office ahead of a deadline in August.

Representative Tom Cole of Oklahoma, a Republican, said: “People didn’t want 
this story on opening day.”

Later McCarthy, walking through the Capitol building with an ice cream, was 
questioned about the climbdown. “I just thought when you look at the taskforce 
about the reforms that are needed, it’s better to do it bipartisan,” he said. 
“It was with unanimous consent.”

He denied that Trump’s tweets had played a part, saying: “No, no, no. Last 
night these are things I told people. From a standpoint, it’s better if people 
see the process. I just think it’s better that full bipartisan work on it 
together.”

Asked if the reversal had been embarrassing for the party, McCarthy told the 
Guardian: “No reversal on my part. Same position I had the night before.”


But Representative Steve King of Iowa, who supported the measure and indeed 
would prefer to scrap the OCE altogether, insisted that Trump’s intervention 
had been crucial. “When President-elect Trump sent out his tweet, that gave 
license for the press and everybody else to pile on,” he said.

The abrupt reversal was welcomed by Democrats – but with a note of scepticism. 
House minority leader Nancy Pelosi said: “House Republicans showed their true 
colours last night, and reversing their plans to destroy the Office of 
Congressional Ethics will not obscure their clear contempt for ethics in the 
people’s house.

“Once again, the American people have seen the toxic dysfunction of a 
Republican House that will do anything to further their special interest 
agenda, thwart transparency and undermine the public trust.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fpaul-ryan-re-elected-as-speaker-of-house-of-representatives-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Ryan%20re-elected%20as%20speaker%20of%20House%20of%20Representatives%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fpaul-ryan-re-elected-as-speaker-of-house-of-representatives-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Ryan%20re-elected%20as%20speaker%20of%20House%20of%20Representatives%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fpaul-ryan-re-elected-as-speaker-of-house-of-representatives-video&media=>
Paul Ryan re-elected as speaker of House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/03/paul-ryan-re-elected-as-speaker-of-house-of-representatives-video>
Government accountability groups also expressed caution. Noah Bookbinder, 
executive director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, 
said: “The Office of Congressional Ethics is the only independent check on the 
House of Representatives. Without it we would return to a Congress awash in 
scandal.


The U-turn marked a public relations disaster for the party on a day when it 
hoped to hit the ground running with an ambitious agenda that includes
dismantling Barack Obama’s healthcare policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/02/republicans-congress-obamacare-repeal-replace>
. Republican senator Mike Enzi introduced a resolution allowing for the repeal 
of Obamacare on Tuesday, his office said in a statement.

The ethics office U-turn handed Trump a victory in what may prove a battle of 
wills over the next four years.


Trump criticizes House Republicans for voting to eliminate ethics oversight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/trump-criticizes-house-republicans-ethics-oversight-congress>
It is not the first time that Trump, a billionaire businessman often described 
as an outsider who mounted a “hostile takeover” of the Republican party, has 
been at odds with its rank and file. His intervention came on the day that the 
115th Congress convened, with Republicans in control of both chambers, hoping 
that the incoming president will prove willing to sign long-planned bills into 
law.

But on the OCE issue, Trump did appear aligned with McCarthy and the House 
speaker, Paul Ryan, who had both urged their colleagues during the closed-door 
meeting to vote against the idea, arguing that it should be done later and on a 
bipartisan basis.

Both men then appeared to defend the move on Tuesday morning – “The office is 
still expected to take in complaints of wrongdoing from the public. It will 
still investigate them thoroughly and independently,” Ryan said – only for it 
to collapse at the emergency meeting, fuelling a sense of confusion and chaos 
before Trump is even inaugurated.

The OCE was conceived in 2008 to investigate allegations of misconduct after a 
series of bribery and corruption scandals that resulted in three members of 
Congress being sent to jail.

The Republicans’ plan would have barred the OCE from considering anonymous 
tips about potential ethics violations, seen by critics as a potential 
deterrent to whistleblowers, and would have meant the OCE would have fallen 
under the control of the House Ethics Committee, which is run by lawmakers. It 
would have been known as the Office of Congressional Complaint Review, and the 
rule change would have required that “any matter that may involve a violation 
of criminal law must be referred to the Committee on Ethics for potential 
referral to law enforcement agencies after an affirmative vote by the members”, 
according to the office of Representative Bob Goodlatte, a Republican from 
Virginia who pushed for the change. Lawmakers would have had the final say on 
their colleagues under the change.

Goodlatte expressed disappointment: “Gross misrepresentation by opponents of 
my amendment, and the media willing to go along with this agenda, resulted in a 
flurry of misconceptions and unfounded claims about the true purpose of this 
amendment,” he said in a statement. “To be perfectly clear, the OCE has a 
serious and important role in the House, and my amendment would have done 
nothing to impede their work or lessen the high ethical standards to which all 
members of Congress should be held.”

During the nomination process for Ryan as speaker and Pelosi as minority 
leader in the House on Tuesday, many Democrats said they were voting for Pelosi 
because “the people’s house should be ethical, accountable and open to free 
debate”. One said: “We should read the bills before we pass the bills.” There 
were heckles from Republicans.


Ryan won the election for speaker with 239 votes, while Pelosi notched 189. 
Republican Liz Cheney, daughter of former vice-president Dick Cheney, who won 
her father’s old House seat in Wyoming, sat beside her father in the crowded 
chamber, which included some members’ young children.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Famerica-cannot-afford-a-twitter-presidency-115th-us-congress-sworn-in-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98America%20cannot%20afford%20a%20Twitter%20presidency%E2%80%99%3A%20115th%20US%20Congress%20sworn%20in%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Famerica-cannot-afford-a-twitter-presidency-115th-us-congress-sworn-in-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98America%20cannot%20afford%20a%20Twitter%20presidency%E2%80%99%3A%20115th%20US%20Congress%20sworn%20in%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Famerica-cannot-afford-a-twitter-presidency-115th-us-congress-sworn-in-video&media=>
‘America cannot afford a Twitter presidency’: 115th US Congress sworn in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/03/america-cannot-afford-a-twitter-presidency-115th-us-congress-sworn-in-video>
Meanwhile, addressing the Senate for the first time as minority leader, Chuck 
Schumer, of New York, implored Trump not to abandon the promise of change that 
helped elect him.

Trump's cabinet picks: here are all of the appointments so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-administration-cabinet-picks-so-far>
“Making America Great Again requires more than 140 characters per issue,” 
Schumer said of the president-elect’s habit of sparking outcry with a single 
tweet. “With all due respect, America cannot afford a Twitter presidency.”

He added: “On January 20, we won’t be in reality TV – we’ll be in reality.”

Vice-president Joe Biden, who also serves as the president of the Senate, 
presided over the swearing-in ceremony for a historic class of new senators. 
Among them were Catherine Cortez Masto, of Nevada, who is the first Latina 
senator, Kamala Harris, of California, the first Indian American senator, and 
Tammy Duckworth, of Illinois, an Iraq war veteran.

The new Congress is among the most racially diverse in history, owing in large 
part to the minority party, which represents the majority of racial, gender and 
religious diversity.

Republicans hold a 52-48 edge over Democrats in the Senate and 241-194 
advantage in the House.
 