
Television <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> is often accused 
by faith leaders of marginalising religion. But, if this sin of omission 
exists, the charitable explanation would be that the subject imposes a double 
penance on schedulers. In a largely secular society, not only is the potential 
audience for shows on religious subjects small, but those few who might tune in 
tend to be hypersensitive about coverage of their beliefs or those of rival 
worldviews.


But, though theology may be a minority interest, the politics and psychology 
of the Vatican have long proved a fascination, and TV fiction has often 
genuflected towards Rome. Graham Greene (a convert who made the church his 
central subject as a novelist) once said that Catholicism was naturally 
dramatic because of the moral jeopardy within a system in which believers were 
forbidden contraceptives or abortion, and clergy were forbidden sex at all. 
This week,The Young Pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-young-pope> – starring Jude Law 
as Lenny Belardo, an American cardinal who becomes Pope Pius XIII – takes its 
place in a congregation of memorable TV shows involving Catholicism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc4c4a74fc8d14db65ff38c7c4b37c48a056c29%2F0_65_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=House%20of%20cardinals%3A%20why%20is%20TV%20so%20obsessed%20with%20Catholicism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=House%20of%20cardinals%3A%20why%20is%20TV%20so%20obsessed%20with%20Catholicism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc4c4a74fc8d14db65ff38c7c4b37c48a056c29%2F0_65_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Baptised in the Roman faith … The Sopranos. Photograph: 
Allstar/HBO/Sportsphoto Ltd. 
President Josiah Bartlet in The West Wing, Dana Scully in The X-Files and 
Peggy Olsen in Mad Men were all Catholics whose faith was significant. And as a 
result of their Italian-American background, most of the characters inThe 
Sopranos <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-sopranos> had been 
baptised in the Roman faith, and the sacrament of confession (and its secular 
descendant, therapy) underlay the moral agonies of Tony Soprano and his 
relatives. Another high-profile US series – Lost – and a British one – Life on 
Mars/Ashes to Ashes – both proved at their conclusions to have been occurring 
in versions of purgatory, the place of purification that, in Catholic doctrine, 
stands between death and heaven for troubled souls.

The Young Pope, though, stands out as a startlingly original treatment of the 
topic. Created by big-screen film director Paolo Sorrentino, whose films include
The Great Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/05/le-grande-bellezza-great-beauty-review>
 and Youth, no other recruit from the movies has transferred their cinematic 
sensibility to the new medium so successfully.

The most obvious story to have told would be a sort of House of Cardinals, 
exploiting the parallels (elections, cabinet positions, assassination threats) 
between the Vatican and Washington. The Young Pope has a small strand of such 
narrative – disloyal Cardinals plot to “save the church” from the unpredictable 
American – but Sorrentino starts after the papal election, avoiding the 
tantalisingly melodramatic plotlines of the death of an old pope and the choice 
of a new one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F655d6bbf069c2ae2a9c4c899b414572d57720bc6%2F0_98_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=House%20of%20cardinals%3A%20why%20is%20TV%20so%20obsessed%20with%20Catholicism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=House%20of%20cardinals%3A%20why%20is%20TV%20so%20obsessed%20with%20Catholicism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F655d6bbf069c2ae2a9c4c899b414572d57720bc6%2F0_98_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Facing the faithful … The Young Pope. Photograph: Gianni Fiorito/Sky TV 
This is no ecclesiastical procedural: Law’s character wakes up as pope, 
preparing to face the faithful in St Peter’s Square. As it happens, this is 
logistically improbable (popes tend to be elected in early evening and address 
the waiting crowds immediately) but Sorrentino needs Pope Pius XIII to start in 
bed so he can unleash a lavish dream sequence, seamlessly merging pontifical 
news footage with fantasy material, that sets the tone for the whole show.

Puffing pontiff: The Young Pope's Oscar-winning director on Jude Law, sex and 
cigarettes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/25/the-young-pope-jude-law-paolo-sorrentino>
In terms of televisual heritage, The Young Pope most bends the knee to Mad 
Men: Lenny Belardo, like Don Draper, has a central blankness that is both 
attractive and dangerous. Abandoned by hippy parents, he was raised at an 
orphanage where he came under the tutelage of Sister Mary (Diane Keaton), a nun 
who became his surrogate mother. As happened with the enigmatic advertising 
executive, the truths and rumours about Lenny’s past seem set to become central.

Otherwise, Sorrentino cuts his own cloth, consistently resisting the templates 
of Vatican drama. The standard storyline of a liberal reformist pope who 
battles reactionaries is reversed. Law’s character is theologically severe, 
confirming homosexuality as a sin and urging the faithful to make God their 
priority. And, while the current occupant of the throne of St Peter is Pope 
Francis, a natural theatric happy to pose for selfies with the crowds, Pius 
XIII refuses to be photographed and delivers his public homilies in silhouette.

What’s most striking, though, is that its attitude to the papacy is 
simultaneously cheeky and serious. Pius XIII is a chain-smoker whose diet 
consists largely of Cherry Coke Zero, while Keaton’s Sister Mary sleeps in a 
T-shirt with the slogan: “I’m a virgin (but this is an old shirt).” Sorrentino 
also delights in surreal background details, including a kangaroo gifted to the 
pope by the Australian government, Cardinals playing pool on a table occupied 
by a dog, and footballing nuns taking part in a penalty shootout while Ave 
Maria soars on the soundtrack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bc2f5d6269186ea6b6fc61d4c11d4ead9b24d15%2F0_0_1500_1067%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=House%20of%20cardinals%3A%20why%20is%20TV%20so%20obsessed%20with%20Catholicism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=House%20of%20cardinals%3A%20why%20is%20TV%20so%20obsessed%20with%20Catholicism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fthe-young-pope-jude-law-the-sopranos-tv-obsessed-with-catholicism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bc2f5d6269186ea6b6fc61d4c11d4ead9b24d15%2F0_0_1500_1067%2F1500.jpg>
 This is no ecclesiastical procedural … Jude Law plays the Pope with a 
marvellous mix of humanity and unearthliness. Photograph: Sky TV 
Amid these moments of irreverence, Law’s pope is a reverent man, whose faith 
and vows are taken seriously. Even before the virgin T-shirt, it’s clear that 
Keaton’s character is a sort of Mother Mary. And, while it is common in the 
work of Dan Brown for the pope to be secretly the antichrist, there are strong 
early hints that Lenny may have dropped the anti. He seems to possess 
miraculous powers and, like Jesus, to have known of his mission since childhood.

This is a show that trusts its audience enough for a key plot point to be 
established through words written in unsubtitled Latin in the condensation on a 
coach window. Handed parts that must be among the most unusual but rewarding of 
their careers, Law and Keaton will have other actors praying not to be up 
against them for an Emmy. Their portrayals feature subtle touches of lightness 
and darkness that leave viewers alternately faithful and agnostic about them.

Law creates a hybrid of humanity and unearthliness that recalls David Bowie as 
Thomas Newton. What might have been House of Cardinals becomes, in Sorrentino’s 
hands, something more like The Pope Who Fell to Earth – magnificently strange 
and strangely magnificent.

 * The Young Pope starts in the UK on Thursday at 9pm on Sky Atlantic. 
 