
I love addressing a British audience. My last trip to Hay was in 2006, when I 
was here to talk aboutNo god but God <http://www.rezaaslan.com/nogodbutgod.html>
. That book was about what I call the Islamic Reformation, which has been 
taking place in the Muslim world for the last century. I remember I got about 
five minutes into my lecture when people began shouting out questions to me. I 
loved it. In America, I can barely get audiences to ask questions during Q&A 
sessions!

This time was no different. I came to Hay this year to talk about How to Win a 
Cosmic War <http://www.rezaaslan.com/cosmicwar.html>, my critique of the 
so-called "war on terror" and my outline for how to more adequately confront 
radical and extremist forces in the Muslim world.

As expected, the audience response was intelligent and sophisticated. There 
was none of the "Islam is evil and violent, so why bother?" attitude, which I 
tend to get a lot in some American audiences.

I spoke about the way globalisation has led to an increase in religious 
identities around the world. I also challenged the audience to view al-Qaida as 
a movement, not as an entity (to quote the great al-Qaida ideologueAbu Musab 
al-Suri <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mustafa_Setmariam_Nasar>, "al-Qaida is 
not an organisation [â€¦] it is a methodology.") And I spoke about the way 
al-Qaida connects the local grievances of Muslim kids living in, say, Leeds to 
the global grievances facing Muslims in places like Palestine and Iraq.

The question that I posed to the audience was this: How, then, do you confront 
a movement?

Surely, not just with bombs and guns. Rather, you must make the movement 
irrelevant. In the case of al-Qaida, that means addressing the very grievances 
that the movement uses to rally young Muslims to its cause: the suffering of 
the Palestinians, American support for Arab dictators, the lack of social, 
political, and economic development in large parts of the Middle East, the fact 
that we in the west tend to treat that entire region as a giant gas station. 
Only by addressing these grievances can the appeal of al-Qaida be diminished.

Reza Aslan is an academic, author and journalist. Born in Iran, he now lives 
in Los Angeles where he is assistant professor of creative writing at the 
University of California, Riverside. His 2006 book, No god but God, was a New 
York Times bestseller and was shortlisted for the Guardian first book award. He 
is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations, and is acolumnist at the Daily 
Beast <http://www.thedailybeast.com/author/reza-aslan/>
 