
I’ve just switched from slow ADSL broadband, where the router was outside my 
office, to fast Virgin broadband, where the router is on the other side of the 
house. Unfortunately, my computer is struggling to pick-up the Wi-Fi signal. In 
the past, I’ve tried Wi-Fi extenders from Netgear and Belkin but not had much 
luck with them. I found that if I placed them where they got a strong enough 
signal, they didn’t actually extend the signal much further. Will Google’sWi-Fi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wifi> mesh routers be the solution, and 
if so, do you know of any routers like that that can be bought in the UK?Stephen

Wi-Fi is never as fast, and never as reliable, as a wired internet connection. 
In the old days, before DECT and mobile phones, many people had wires running 
to landline phones, and it’s still not that hard to do with bulkier Cat5E (E 
for “enhanced”) or Cat6 cable. Cat6A can deliver 10 gigabits per second over 
100 metres of Ethernet cable, which would solve the speed problem for the 
foreseeable future.

Failing that, the best answer is HomePlug 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HomePlug>, which is what I use.

HomePlug was developed to send broadband internet traffic across a home’s – or 
an office’s – mains electricity cables. The system is overseen by theHomePlug 
Alliance <http://www.homeplug.org/>, which is much like the Wi-Fi Alliance that 
looks after Wi-Fi. The first HomePlugs were shipped in 2001, and the latest 
versions are HomePlug AV (2005) and AV2 (2012). The latest AV2 HomePlugs offer 
MIMO (multiple input multiple output) operation instead of SISO (single input 
single output). This should provide much better throughput.

HomePlug AV includes 128-bit encryption, in case your mains signals stray onto 
next door’s wiring.

HomePlug networks are usually sold with two paired devices. There’s a sender, 
which you connect to your router via an Ethernet cable and RJ-45 socket. 
There’s a receiver plug that connects to your local device. The pair may be 
hard-wired with a unique password to talk to one another. If the devices ship 
with common default passwords, you should change them, following the 
instructions in the manual. This may be as simple as holding down the reset 
button for a couple of seconds on each device.

Some HomePlug devices offer Wi-Fi as well. That is to say, the receiver has a 
small Wi-Fi transmitter as well as one or more RJ-45 ports for wired 
connections. In my experience with aDevolo dLan 1200+ Wi-Fi ac Starter Kit 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Devolo-Powerline-Starter-Adapter-Extender/dp/B00OZDO8RE/>
, this works well.

The disadvantage is that a HomePlug usually creates its own separate Wi-Fi 
network. The Devolo dLan 1200+ gets round this by including “Wi-Fi Move 
Technology” that lets you use your existing router’s SSID and password to 
create a single network. Some systems have a “Wi-Fi Extender” mode instead.

HomePlug speeds

As with Wi-Fi, the specified speeds of HomePlug devices are nothing like the 
actual speeds. For example, an 802.11n Wi-Fi router may have a theoretical 
maximum speed of 600Mbps, but you may well get only 40-50Mbps. It depends 
partly on the distance from the router, your walls and floors, interference 
from other networks, and the number of devices sharing your bandwidth.

Similarly, a HomePlug AV system has a theoretical speed of 200Mbps, but you’re 
more likely to get 30-60Mbps, sometimes less. In this case, it depends on the 
distance from the router, wiring quality, and the amount of noise present. 
Noise can be created by other electrical products from fridges to smartphone 
chargers. If you have problems with a HomePlug connection, try turning off 
other devices and see if you can find the culprit.

Some HomePlug devices may work better when plugged directly into a wall socket 
than when plugged into a multi-way adaptor. Most HomePlugs have a pass-through 
connection so you don’t actually lose a socket.

Either way, my ancient Solwise 85Mbps HomePlug Turbo package was more than 
fast enough to handle BBC iPlayer. I would expect any decent HomePlug AV or AV2 
system to meet your needs.

Router changes

Before you invest in some HomePlugs, try to improve the performance of your 
current system. Rather than leave your router in a corner or on the floor, try 
to position it as high as possible, perhaps on a shelf, with lots of space 
around it. Move it away from the TV set and other large household appliances.

See if it’s possible to add one or more high-gain antennas to increase the 
signal strength.

You may also get better performance if you use a different channel from any 
strong Wi-Fi networks nearby. There are lots of ways to find out which channels 
your neighbours are using, but in Microsoft Windows, you can open a command 
prompt and type (or paste in): netsh wlan show all

Many PC programs and smartphone apps will give you a list of all the networks 
within range, and tell you which channel they are using, among other things. 
Examples include the paid-forinSSIDer 
<http://www.metageek.com/products/inssider/> (Windows, Mac and Android), and 
free ones such asAcrylic WiFi Home 
<https://www.acrylicwifi.com/en/wlan-software/wlan-scanner-acrylic-wifi-free/> 
(Windows),WiFi Scanner <http://wifiscanner.com/wifiscanner.html> (Mac, though 
there’s a scanner built in now) andAmped Wireless 
<http://www.ampedwireless.com/wifianalytics/> (Windows, Android). There’s also 
a free version ofNetspot <https://www.netspotapp.com/wlan-wifi-analyzer.html> 
(Windows, Mac), which lets you create a heatmap of your Wi-Fi signal, if you 
upload a floorplan.

In the UK, routers frequently use channels 1, 6 and 11, so these are more 
likely to be congested. You may get better results by disabling channel bonding 
and using a different single channel. Remember to reduce the channel width to 
20MHz.

Unfortunately, switching from the overcrowded 2.4GHz baby alarm band to 5GHz, 
if available, probably won’t help. The 5GHz signal doesn’t travel as far.

The ultimate router fix is just to use a better router. However, Virgin Media 
does not support third-party replacements, so I won’t go into it here, butthere 
are guides online 
<https://www.broadbandchoices.co.uk/how-to/how-to-use-your-own-router>.

Google Mesh

I first came across a consumer mesh network in the form of a Russian handheld 
gaming and messaging handheld calledCybiko 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cybiko>, in 2001 (The gadget that came in from 
the cold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2001/jan/25/gadgets.onlinesupplement>). 
However, you could set one up using existing comms equipment, if you knew how. 
The problems are that it’s tricky to do and, unless you live in a mansion, you 
really don’t need one.

The sites that can benefit from mesh networks include stadiums, small towns, 
large clubs, restaurant chains and so on. Hotels are ideal.Open Mesh supplies 
these markets <http://www.open-mesh.com/success-stories.html>, and includes a 
cloud-based network controller calledCloudTrax <https://ct4.cloudtrax.com/login>
.

A few companies have seen the potential for simplifying mesh networking for 
home users. These include Eero, Luma and, most recently,Google 
<https://madeby.google.com/wifi/>. They all take the same approach: you can buy 
a single device or a three-pack to set up a mesh. All three have designed their 
products to look nothing like routers, which is where they differ from Open 
Mesh. (The prices arenot that different 
<http://www.open-mesh.com/products/access-points.html>.)

In the US, Eero <https://store.eero.com/> sells a router for $199 and a 
three-pack for $499.Luma <https://getluma.com/>’s three-pack costs $399. Google 
announced waiting-list prices of $129 for one and $299 for a three-pack, but at 
the time of writing, the product has disappeared from theGoogle Store 
<https://store.google.com/?srp=/product/google_wifi>.

I don’t know of anyone who sells consumer-style mesh networks in the UK, but 
Open Mesh has a global network of distributors. UK sources includeUtility 
Networks <http://www.utilitynetworks.co.uk/shop/open-mesh.html> and MS 
(Distribution) UK Ltd <http://www.msdist.co.uk/catalogue_Open-Mesh.php>.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>

 * Which all-in-one PC should I buy for home use? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/oct/20/which-all-in-one-pc-should-i-buy-for-home-use>

 * How can I provide guests with Wi-Fi without giving them my password? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/may/12/how-can-i-provide-guests-with-wi-fi-without-giving-them-my-password>

 * How can I get my PCs to connect to my new Wi-Fi? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/31/pc-connect-new-hi-fi>
 