
I’m thinking of replacing my Huawei Y300 
<http://www.gsmarena.com/huawei_ascend_y300-5386.php> smartphone, which is 
about three years old now. I was wondering about buying a second-hand phone. I 
believe you save a considerable amount of money buying hardware behind the 
curve. Until now, I’ve bought most hardware new. Are there any dos and don’ts 
when buying second hand?Robert

You can save money by buying new smartphones that are “behind the curve” – 
Amazon often has deals on new phones at close to used prices. Otherwise, the 
savings on second-hand phones may be offset by the extra work you have to do, 
and the extra risks. The savings may be wiped out if your phone fails, or turns 
out to be stolen.

There are actually two types of second-hand phone. The first is the usual 
type, sold by individuals and some small dealers. The second type consists of 
refurbished phones, which have been tested, fixed and graded by retailers. 
Refurbished phones should always come with a guarantee, though you may only get 
six months.

Buying a refurbished phone reduces the risks involved, but generally raises 
the prices.

Refurbishers

O2’s Like New <https://www.o2.co.uk/shop/like-new> online store should be one 
of the safest places to buy refurbished. The first catch is that O2’s 
smartphones come with a sim and a contract, butSimply Pay As You Go 
<https://www.o2.co.uk/shop/phones/?contractType=payasyougo#condition=likenew&sort=content.sorting.featured>
 doesn’t involve a monthly fee. The second catch is that you can only choose 
from a small number of phones. The third catch is thatO2 Refresh 
<http://www.o2.co.uk/refresh> offers low prices if you trade in your existing 
phone.

There are other sources of refurbished phones including eBay and Amazon 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/SIM-Free-Mobile-Phones-Smartphones-Second-Hand/s> 
traders, and CeX and similar stores. There’s a list on the Money Saving Expert 
page,Buying a refurbished mobile 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/phones/buying-refurbished-phones>

If you buy from a refurbisher, you will usually be able to use a credit card 
for payment, except on eBay. If your second hand smartphone costs more than 
£100, you will get extra protection if something goes wrong.

Checking a phone

If you buy from an individual, you must check that the smartphone works 
correctly, and that it isn’t stolen. Warn sellers in advance: they may spare 
you the effort by selling to someone less savvy.

This approach depends on meeting the seller face to face, rather than buying 
sight-unseen from eBay, Gumtree or whatever. It also depends on you having the 
right size sim for the phone you want to buy, but you can always pick up a 
cheap one.

You should obviously check the smartphone for scratches and other damage, 
including corrosion around the sockets. Check the camera lens for scratches. If 
the back opens, get the seller to open it: the smartphone should be clean 
inside.

Take along a laptop, a charging cable, earbuds or headphones, and – if 
necessary – a microSD or SD card. Plug the smartphone into your laptop to make 
sure it charges. Check that the headphone jack and card slot work. Use your own 
sim to make a phone call.

If the smartphone is locked to a particular network, it should be cheaper than 
an unlocked phone. Even if you happen to use the same network, do some research 
first, to make sure you can unlock it.

Secret codes and apps

Most if not all phones have “hidden codes” that provide access to extra 
information and self-test routines. For example, on some Android phones, 
*#*#4636#*#* will provide usage statistics and battery information, while 
*#*#0*#*#* will run an LCD display test. I got both these codes from a post at
Redmond Pie 
<http://www.redmondpie.com/hidden-android-secret-codes-for-samsung-htc-motorola-sony-lg-and-other-devices/>
, and many others are demonstrated in variousYouTube videos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KyQvMAKZ6qI>. You can search in advance for 
the codes you need.

An alternative is to run an app such as Phone Tester 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mtorres.phonetester> for 
Android orPhone Doctor Plus 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.idea.PhoneDoctorPlus> for 
Android and Apple’s iOS. These will tell you about the actual smartphone 
hardware, whether the sensors work, and something about the state of the 
battery. The healthier the battery, the better – especially if it’s sealed in 
the case.

Is it stolen?

Every phone has a unique IMEI (International Mobile Equipment Identity) 
number, which it sends to the mobile network operator when you turn it on. It’s 
a string of 15 or 16 digits. It’s usually found on the outside of the box the 
phone came in, and it will be printed somewhere on or inside the phone, eg 
under the battery.

The IMEI should also be listed somewhere in the smartphone settings, eg under 
“About device” on Android. If not, typing *#06# should show it on the screen.

Once you have the IMEI, you can find out the phone’s history. The prime source 
is theCheckMEND Mobile Equipment National Database 
<https://www.checkmend.com/uk/>, which claims to be “the world’s largest source 
of used mobile phone and device history, including data from police, insurers, 
retailers and networks.” Unfortunately, it’s not free. A single history report 
costs £1.99, but you can get them for less if you open an account.

There’s a more expensive but possibly more convenient way to access CheckMEND. 
Send anSMS text message <https://www.checkmend.com/uk/sms-mobile-checking> to 
83010 with the word CHECK followed by your IMEI followed by your email address. 
This costs £3 plus your standard network rate.

CheckMEND also runs a Safe Seller <https://www.checkmend.com/uk/safe-seller> 
scheme with UK police forces. Second hand phone retailers can sign up to get 25 
free IMEI searches and a Safe Seller window sticker, among other things.

A few sites will check IMEI numbers for nothing. For example, try the Free 
international IMEI blacklist checker <http://www.imeipro.info/> or the 
AustralianAMTA 
<http://www.amta.org.au/pages/amta/Check.the.Status.of.your.Handset> website.

What’s a fair price?

Second-hand smartphone prices are set by the market, so the best thing you can 
do is compare prices and see if there is a consensus. Useful websites include
Smartphone Store.com <http://www.smartfonestore.com/>, Cash Generator 
<http://www.cashgenerator.co.uk/mobile-phones>, Preloved 
<http://www.preloved.co.uk/adverts/list/3600/mobile-phones.html?keyword=unlocked+smartphones+for+sale>
 and, of course,eBay 
<http://www.ebay.co.uk/sch/Mobile-Smart-Phones/9355/bn_450671/i.html>. If you 
use eBay, it’s important to click “UK only” (or wherever) and to show only 
“sold listings”. This will tell you the prices things actually sold for 
locally, not the often-silly prices demanded.

Bear in mind that the price depends on the condition of the product. Something 
sold as BNIB (brand new in box) is going to fetch a lot more than the beat-up 
version some careless user has kept with his keys and dropped every week.

I think a fair price is one that makes both people happy. There’s no point in 
trying to rip someone off for a few quid because you may want to contact the 
seller later, either for advice or because something has gone wrong.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>

 