
The steam had gone out of Mardi Gras by the time the parade reached the El 
Alamein fountain in Kings Cross. For an hour or so a couple of thousand gays 
and lesbians, their friends and civil libertarians, had marched throughSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> on a midwinter night 
calling for freedom. Now it was time for a drink.

But the police had other ideas. As the marchers began to disperse, they found 
their way blocked by a fleet of paddy wagons. Bashings and arrests began.


A riot outside New York’s Stonewall Bar a few years earlier had kicked fresh 
life into gay law reform in America. On this night in June 1978, Stonewall was 
happening all over again in Sydney’s Darlinghurst Road.

On Thursday an apology is to be debated in the New South Wales parliament this 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/21/state-mps-to-apologise-for-mistreatment-of-first-sydney-mardi-gras-marchers>
 for the violence of the police that night. About time. But we should thank the 
cops, too, because their zeal and brutality were so out of kilter with the 
city’s take on gay life they made reform in New South Wales inescapable.

I wasn’t on the march – I’m not one of the honoured “78-ers” – but I was at 
the court that Monday to find the witnesses I needed to do what we did on The 
National Times in those days: write a big narrative of what happened in the 
hours after a happy crowd chanting “Out of the bars and into the streets” set 
off down Oxford Street behind a truck at 10.30 pm.


State MPs to apologise for mistreatment of first Sydney Mardi Gras marchers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/21/state-mps-to-apologise-for-mistreatment-of-first-sydney-mardi-gras-marchers>
I’ve been back to my notes. They are better than the story I wrote nearly 40 
years ago. Names swim out of the past. Aids has claimed some of these warriors. 
A few of the lawyers on the streets that night are coming to the end of their 
time as judges in NSW and federal courts. Some of the braver souls on the march 
have escaped respectability. We’re all getting old.

Revellers poured out of the bars. The police hurried them all down the road. 
Within 20 minutes they had reached Hyde Park where the police permit issued for 
the march decreed the demonstration had to end. It was too soon.


The park filled with people expecting speeches but wishing for a concert. The 
police were having neither. They ordered the truck and its loudspeakers to 
drive away. The driver refused, was dragged out and fled into the crowd. The 
police ripped out the speaker leads.


As the first arrests were made the crowd began chanting, “Stop police attacks 
on gays, women and blacks.” It was an old favourite. Once the loudspeakers were 
disabled, the crowd was left to make up its own mind – by chanting. A chorus 
began: “March to the Cross. March to the Cross.”


This was an action with only one purpose: to make arrests

On William Street happy bravado was restored. The ruckus round the truck was 
forgotten. It was party time again. People left the footpaths to join the happy 
procession. “Ho-ho-homosexual,” chanted the marchers. Also a new favourite: 
“Dare to struggle, dare to fight, smash theFestival of Light 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FamilyVoice_Australia>.”


Word somehow swept through the crowd that their destination was now the El 
Alamein fountain. It made sense. The fountain is the bullseye of the Cross. But 
even before they arrived, there was a sense that the night was over. Old timers 
sang mournfully, “We Shall Not be Moved”. People broke off to buy ice creams.

But about midnight the paddy wagons moved into place, their sirens blaring. 
The marchers were packed tight in a stretch of Darlinghurst Road with no way of 
dispersing. This was an action with only one purpose: to make arrests. Police 
removed their badges and began grabbing people.


In the melee of the next half an hour the demonstrators were joined by locals, 
drunks and a couple of bikies. The queers fought back. “Police were using fists 
and boots,” one of the marchers, Jeff McCarthy, told me. “Beer cans were being 
thrown, full ones from the back of the footpath, bottles of Spumante, shoes, at 
least one garbage can from each side of the road.”


There was screaming and crying. McCarthy saw a policeman kicked in the balls. 
“Someone was thrown half into a van, landed on his stomach on the edge of the 
door, then police slamming the door on his legs.”

Several witnesses confirmed that incident and widely shared was McCarthy’s 
impression that the police were particularly targeting women. “They seemed to 
make their attacks especially sexual,” McCarthy said. “Women were dragged along 
by the hair … One woman was grabbed by the tits. She called, ‘Let go of my 
tits’ and was charged with offensive language.”


Paddy wagons ferried the arrested to the nearby Darlinghurst police station 
followed by several hundred marchers who took up a vigil in the street. This 
was the headquarters of the notorious No 3 Division that policed gay Sydney. 
There was antagonism of long standing between this station and that community. 
Darlinghurst police frankly regarded homosexuals as criminals.


More demonstrators were arrested. Heads connected with paddy wagon mirrors. 
Three big constables dragged a woman into the station by the hair.


Inside, police refused for hours to bail any of the 50 prisoners. Peter Murphy 
was the first to emerge at about 4am. He had been bashed in the cells. Dr Jim 
Walker told me: “Murphy had bruises of the head, ribs, stomach arms and legs. 
His lower leg was particularly swollen to twice its normal size. I suspected a 
broken fibula.”


Murphy was taken to St Vincent’s hospital.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fhow-the-beatings-and-humiliations-of-the-1978-sydney-mardi-gras-made-reform-inescapable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe48660c3966634b2d478dbea2d68ea096adad28e%2F0_147_4368_2765%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20beatings%20and%20humiliations%20of%20the%201978%20Sydney%20Mardi%20Gras%20made%20reform%20inescapable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fhow-the-beatings-and-humiliations-of-the-1978-sydney-mardi-gras-made-reform-inescapable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20beatings%20and%20humiliations%20of%20the%201978%20Sydney%20Mardi%20Gras%20made%20reform%20inescapable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fhow-the-beatings-and-humiliations-of-the-1978-sydney-mardi-gras-made-reform-inescapable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe48660c3966634b2d478dbea2d68ea096adad28e%2F0_147_4368_2765%2F4368.jpg>
 Some of the 1978-ers marching in the Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras in 2008. 
Photograph: Jane Dempster/AAP 
Helping bail the men was Barbara Ramjan. It was nearly a year since the 
dramatic night of her election as the president of the Sydney University 
Students’ Representative Council, the night the man she beat, Tony Abbott, 
punched the wall beside her head.


Now she was dealing with bewildered students, obstructive police and tearful 
gay solicitors. The last of the men bailed about 8.30am on Sunday morning 
complained of a busted eardrum after being bashed in the police garage.


For no particular reason except to prolong their ordeal, the women prisoners 
had been removed to central police station. There they were very, very slowly 
fingerprinted. The last of them was not released until 9.30am.


That night on television, the then NSW premier Neville Wran claimed the 
demonstrators had had “a pretty good go … and I don’t suppose that it’s 
unexpected that the police have taken exception to a busy thoroughfare in Kings 
Cross being completely blocked off at midnight.”


All those charges were eventually dropped. Police commanders were shown to 
have lied in court

That was a signal to police. Next morning in a cold drizzle up to 150 officers 
blockaded the steps of the Liverpool Street courts. There followed a battle 
that lasted most of the day between police and the magistrates to allow access 
to the courts. Despite order after order from the magistrates, the police 
declared: “The courts are closed.”


The crowd grew restive. Eggs were thrown. Three women who tried to climb over 
a high balustrade were tossed back into the crowd. There were more arrests. A 
police photographer shot rolls of film. Solicitors were threatened.


A magistrate ordered Ramjan to be allowed into the building to bail the new 
prisoners. I watched police push her down the stairs instead. She somehow kept 
her footing. After all these years she puts that down to “Girl Guide training”. 
She made it into the building at last.


Soon after lunch, the police gave way. They’d made their point. The public 
entered to watch the magistrates grind through formalities: one charge of 
malicious injury to a police uniform, three charges of assault, four of 
offensive behaviour, five of failure to observe a direction, nine of resisting 
arrest, 10 of unseemly words, 18 of hindering police and 19 of unlawful 
procession.


All those charges were eventually dropped. Police commanders were shown to 
have lied in court. Protests continued all through that winter. It was at this 
time that a cohort of young solicitors came out. The law was at last seen for 
what it has always been: one of the great gay professions.


Mardi Gras became a great Sydney event, at first commemorating that 1978 
shemozzle. But in an absolutely Sydney development, it shifted from winter to 
summer to celebrate itself – and to keep calling for law reform. It was 1984 
before Wran stared down the churches and the Catholic flank of the Labor party 
to decriminalise gay sex in NSW.


Marriage equality: why knot?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/feb/18/marriage-equality-why-knot-guardian-live>
The police changed. This year the NSW police gay and lesbian liaison officers 
will march in Mardi Gras as they have done for the past 20 or so years. Bill 
Shorten will be among the squad of politicians turning out for the celebrations.


And as a curtain-raiser this week the NSW parliament will debate an apology 
for 1978 and what Liberal MP Bruce Notley-Smith calls “the struggles and harm 
caused to the many who took part in the demonstration and march both on that 
night and in the weeks, months and years to follow”.


Ken Davis, one of the organisers of the first march is weighing up whether to 
attend the ceremony. He welcomes the apology after all these years but wonders 
where we are on the bigger question of freedom in a city of lockout laws and 
harsh bans on processions.


“We got law reform,” says Davis, “but police control of public life is much 
more extensive now than it was in 1978.”

 