
If you want your child to be a healthy weight, don’t use the D word. Talking 
about diets or even weight is bad for all adolescents,the American Academy of 
Pediatrics said this week 
<http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/early/2016/08/18/peds.2016-1649>
. The academy’s latest guidelines aim to prevent not only eating disorders but 
also obesity. They are particularly aimed at preventing teenagers who are 
trying to lose weight from tipping into eating disorders such asanorexia nervosa
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia>. Neville Golden, professor of 
pediatrics at Stanford University Medical School and lead author of the 
guidelines, said that40% of those admitted for eating disorders are dieters 
<http://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2016/08/new-guidelines-offer-one-approach-to-prevent-teen-obesity-eating-disorders.html>
 who got out of control. “Scientific evidence increasingly shows that, for 
teenagers, dieting is bad news,” he said.

Teenagers in the US who diet in ninth grade (around 15 years of age) are three 
times more likely than non-dieters to be overweight by 12th grade. But dieting 
is also the most important predictor for developing an eating disorder. Hence 
the academy’s new one-size-fits-all guidelines. Wellness is the word preferred 
to weight. But wellness needs to be managed, too.Eating disorders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/eating-disorders> can start with teenagers 
wanting to eat “healthily” and eliminate “bad” foods. This can slip into 
skipping meals and severely restricting foods. Likewise, exercise can become 
compulsive – especially after people praise teenagers for losing weight.

Should parents ever comment on their daughter’s weight?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/19/should-parents-comment-on-daughters-weight-diet>
So what can you do to reduce the risk of eating disorders? A Guardian reader 
criticiseda piece I wrote earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/19/should-parents-comment-on-daughters-weight-diet>
 on children’s weight by saying “this article reads like a list of what not to 
do, but has very little advice on whatto do”. Ouch. So here, thanks to the 
academy, is that advice.

The solution


Don’t talk about dieting with your child, but go big on healthy eating and 
more physical activity instead. Do not talk about weight – yours, theirs, 
anybody’s. Encourage your teenagers to feel positive about their bodies – which 
is tough when half of teenage girls and a quarter of boys dislike their shape. 
But adolescents who are encouraged by parents and peers to exercise and eat 
healthily are happier with their bodies. Family dinners are also protective. A 
study of more than 13,000 pre-adolescents and adolescents found that having 
family dinners most days reduced the risk of eating disorders – parents can be 
role models for healthy eating, monitor their child’s intake and have a chat.


Never tease teenagers about weight. Up to 40% of girls are teased – it doubles 
the risk of being overweight and increases the risk of unhealthy dieting.Dr 
Rachel Rodgers <http://www.northeastern.edu/bouve/directory/rachel-rodgers/>, 
associate professor at the department of applied psychology at Northeastern 
University in Boston, says families should try to protect teenagers from the 
emphasis society puts on appearance and weight. It is better to push a “total 
diet” – eat anything, but in varying quantities. Can these guidelines really 
prevent eating disorders? At the very least, they won’t encourage them.
 