
It is a sad fact of office life that the high point of the working day, second 
only to the utterly glorious bit where you get to go home, is lunch. Somehow a 
morning of meetings and pointless paperwork can seem almost worth it for a few 
minutes alone with your Tupperware, quietly going through your ex’s tasteless 
wedding photos – until a box of fried chicken or a Lean Cuisine curry wafts 
past, spoiling your gastronomic moment with the all-pervading scent of complete 
and unabashed rudeness. Eating smelly food at your desk is tantamount to 
sticking two greasy fingers up at your co-workers – and then wiping them clean 
on their mouse mats.

Two-thirds of Britons now eat our lunches “al desko” (a phrase that makes this 
statistic all the more depressing, somehow) most days of the week and, 
according to a recentsurvey 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3976846/How-stink-al-desko-dining-hindering-work-Half-say-eating-pungent-packed-lunch-anti-social.html>
 for the interior landscaping firm Ambius (which may, I suspect, have an 
interest in redesigning our working environment), half of office workers judge 
colleagues who choose particularly aromatic food as antisocial. It’s hard not 
to see this as having a negative effect on productivity – if you’re still 
boiling with rage at someone for that sardine curry, you’re hardly going to 
bust a gut to meet their sales targets for the afternoon, or go the extra mile 
to help them out on an urgent project.

Caroline Craig and Sophie Missing, authors of the definitive guide to the 
office feast, theLittle Book of Lunch 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/little-book-of-lunch.html>, agree smelly food 
is a problem: “In every office, there is always at least one employee who 
flouts the staffroom etiquette and microwaves something so pungent, it 
permeates the whole building’s vents for hours.” However, they acknowledge that 
sometimes smelly packed lunches are unavoidable – “so if you’ve got smoked 
haddock chowder to heat up, then for God’s sake do it quickly, then eat it 
outside on a park bench”.

Not all foods are created equally offensive, of course; hot food smells more 
strongly, and smelly food that you can hear being slurped or crunched supplies 
a double whammy of queasy irritation. So where does your lunch come in the 
hierarachy of shame?

Hot, smelly, noisy food

The worst. Even if you close your eyes and breathe through your mouth, you can 
still hear this lot being consumed through the simmering sound of your own 
rage. Enjoy only if you’re planning to resign in the next half hour: onion soup 
(slurp), cheesy chilli nachos (crunch), instant noodles (ugh), garlic bread 
(basically a P45 in baguette form).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bc6c23692942bb66f4a5c7d83317c7c4ca0b46a%2F0_0_2455_1926%2F2455.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20hot%2C%20smelly%20and%20noisy%20is%20your%20al%C2%A0desko%20lunch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20hot%2C%20smelly%20and%20noisy%20is%20your%20al%C2%A0desko%20lunch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bc6c23692942bb66f4a5c7d83317c7c4ca0b46a%2F0_0_2455_1926%2F2455.jpg>
 Instant noodles are hot, smelly and noisy. Photograph: Linda Nylind/change 
definition of feminitiy for the Guardian 
Hot, smelly food

Heat causes molecules in food to move around faster, which means more of them 
will reach your nose. Best consumed outside in a wide open space: curry of any 
variety, any brassicas (school dinner alert), fast food, fish, particularly 
oily fish such as kippers, which could land you in a tribunal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fae742859ea219946c59356b2b3e9c387a48cb2%2F0_0_4232_3568%2F4232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20hot%2C%20smelly%20and%20noisy%20is%20your%20al%C2%A0desko%20lunch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20hot%2C%20smelly%20and%20noisy%20is%20your%20al%C2%A0desko%20lunch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fae742859ea219946c59356b2b3e9c387a48cb2%2F0_0_4232_3568%2F4232.jpg>
 All curry is banned. Photograph: JoeGough/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
Smelly, noisy food

Enjoy with the window wide open, and only if your deskmate is listening to 
loud metal over headphones: cheese and onion crisps, crusty tuna rolls, any 
hipster sandwiches containing kimchi.

Smelly food

Best saved for when the rest of your team has popped to the shops: tuna salad, 
ripe brie sandwiches, hard-boiled eggs, tinned fish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c48c635db43a9272ccdef3a14e2765f1eb01202%2F0_0_3010_1999%2F3010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20hot%2C%20smelly%20and%20noisy%20is%20your%20al%C2%A0desko%20lunch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20hot%2C%20smelly%20and%20noisy%20is%20your%20al%C2%A0desko%20lunch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-offensive-al-desko-lunches-office-packed-lunch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c48c635db43a9272ccdef3a14e2765f1eb01202%2F0_0_3010_1999%2F3010.jpg>
 Enjoy tuna with the window wide open. Photograph: Getty Images/iStockphoto 
Noisy food

Eat when your deskmate is busy on the phone: apples, carrot sticks, 
ready-salted crisps, nuts, crunchy salads.

Acceptable office food

Eat as much as you like, when you like: chocolate bars, yoghurt, cucumber 
sandwiches.
 