
My laptop has been hijacked by the ransomware virus. I really have no files on 
my computer worth paying for. However, how do I continue to use my computer 
after it has been hijacked? I did a system restore back to when it came in the 
box, but the ransom screen still covers my home page. Kevin

Ransomware is a type of malware that demands money with menaces: it takes 
control of your PC, and wants you to pay to get it back. In general, it’s best 
to avoid paying. If you feel you have no choice, then the malware has exposed 
critical flaws in your malware protection, and backup and recovery procedures. 
No reputable business should ever find itself in this position. However, some 
have been caught out by ransomware that infects files on the server as well as 
on individual PCs, when they did not have adequate offline or cloud backups.

Ransomware shouldn’t even get through if a PC is running a fully updated copy 
of Windows,Microsoft’s SmartScreen 
<https://feedback.smartscreen.microsoft.com/smartscreenfaq.aspx> or Google Safe 
Browsing <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Safe_Browsing>, and up-to-date 
anti-virus software. Nowadays, most anti-virus software is familiar with all 
the common variants of ransomware, and if not, should include heuristics that 
recognise potentially dangerous activities, such as encrypting files. 
Unfortunately, users can install ransomware themselves, either by downloading 
infected files or by running files that arrive in phishing emails.

Of course, anti-virus programs should scan those files as well. If you have 
doubts, upload the file toVirus Total <https://www.virustotal.com/> and have it 
checked by more than 50 anti-virus programs.

In principle, it should be possible to defeat all ransomware by immediately 
disconnecting your PC from the internet, reformatting the hard drive, and 
reinstalling everything from a backup. If your laptop is running Windows 8, 8.1 
or 10, then I would expect the “Restore factory settings” option to solve the 
problem, if you can get to it. Try typing “reinstall” in the Windows search 
box, then click on “Remove everything and reinstall Windows”.

This is different from the “system restore” function in earlier versions of 
Windows, which tries to take the PC back to an earlier state. You can do that 
by starting your PC in Safe Mode, choosing “Safe Mode with Command Prompt” from 
the Advanced Boot Options menu, typing rstrui.exe and pressing Enter. 
Apparently this works with some early types of ransomware, but I suspect that’s 
not what you did.

Alternatively, you may be able to run a program such as MalwareBytes 
Anti-Malware <https://www.malwarebytes.com/mwb-download/> from a CD/DVD or a 
USB thumb drive, possibly after usingProcess Explorer 
<https://technet.microsoft.com/en-gb/sysinternals/bb896653> to kill the browser 
or other malware process. I keep a USB thumbdrive with a selection of repair 
utilities in case I need them for this sort of purpose. Many people use a 
“rescue disk” such as the ones fromComodo 
<https://www.comodo.com/business-security/network-protection/rescue-disk.php> 
andKaspersky <http://support.kaspersky.com/viruses/rescuedisk>. These include 
utilities that can run from a USB device. Kaspersky also explainsHow to record 
Kaspersky Rescue Disk 10 to a USB device and boot a computer from it 
<https://support.kaspersky.co.uk/8092>.

Types of ransomware

There are many different types of ransomware, and they work in different ways. 
You need to know which bit of malware has infected your laptop so that you can 
search for removal instructions. There are at least a couple of dozen to choose 
from. The most common include Crowti, FakeBsod, Reveton and Tescrpt, while 
Petya is one of the worst.

The new No More Ransom! <https://www.nomoreransom.org/ransomware-qa.html> 
website, backed by the European Cybercrime Centre, has useful advice plus 
screen shots of some common ransomware screens, while Jen Ruhman has a LinkedIn 
page with27 screenshots 
<https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/27-screenshots-real-ransomware-jen-ruhman>. 
Alternatively, you could do an image search for ransomware, or even upload your 
own screenshot and do a reverse image search.

The type of laptop also makes a difference, as does the operating system. Most 
ransomware infections are aimed at Microsoft Windows, but a couple have targeted
 Apple Macs 
<http://researchcenter.paloaltonetworks.com/2016/03/new-os-x-ransomware-keranger-infected-transmission-bittorrent-client-installer/>
,Linux 
<https://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2015/11/11/ransomware-meets-linux-on-the-command-line/>
 machines andAndroid smartphones 
<http://www.welivesecurity.com/2015/09/10/aggressive-android-ransomware-spreading-in-the-usa/>
. When it comes to Windows laptops, older models running Windows 7, Vista or XP 
are more vulnerable: the malware can infect the MBR orMaster Boot Record 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Master_boot_record>. (Boot sector viruses have 
been common for many years.) Newer Windows 8/8/1/10 systems with UEFI startup 
sequences andSecureBoot 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unified_Extensible_Firmware_Interface#Secure_boot>
 are less vulnerable.

Removal

Some ransomware viruses are relatively easy to remove, while others are hard. 
The easiest ones are “scareware” browser screens that claim your laptop has 
been locked by the FBI or a local police force. This is never true. You can 
usually stop them by using the Windows Task Manager to close the browser, or f
orce quit on Macs 
<https://malwaretips.com/blogs/your-browser-has-been-blocked-up-mac-os-x/>, 
then run an anti-virus program to remove them.

The harder ones encrypt either the Master File Table in Windows, or individual 
files, or the whole hard drive.

The Master File Table 
<https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/aa365230(v=vs.85).aspx>
 keeps track of all the sectors on the hard drive, and which bits of which 
files are stored in those sectors. It the MFT is encrypted, it’s theoretically 
possible to rescue files by using an undelete program such asEaseUS’s Undelete 
<http://www.easeus.com/data-recovery/deleted-recovery-software/free-undelete-tool-program.htm>
 (Windows or Mac) orPiriform’s Recuva <https://www.piriform.com/recuva>. 
However, untangling and identifying more than a few files could be a huge task.

The worst ransomware programs encrypt files or hard drives with military 
strength encryption. However, all is not necessarily lost. There are at least 
20 programs designed to decrypt these files, from companies such as AVG, 
Emissoft, and Kaspersky Lab. The Windows Club has a goodList of free Ransomware 
Decryptor Tools to unlock files 
<http://www.thewindowsclub.com/list-ransomware-decryptor-tools>, with links.

However, if your ransomware encrypts each file with its own unique key, like 
Rokku 
<http://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/rokku-ransomware-encrypts-each-file-with-its-own-unique-key/>
, then you will probably not get your files back. This is why offline and 
possible offsite backups are essential for protecting valuable data.

The future

Ransomware has been around for a long time, starting with Joseph Popp’s PC 
Cyborg in 1989 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ransomware>, but it only started 
to become more common about a decade ago. Fortunately, it was hard for the 
criminals to harvest money without being tracked and identified.

That problem was largely solved by the arrival of the dark web (via Tor) and 
Bitcoin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin>, the pseudonymous digital 
cryptocurrency. Most ransomware victims have probably never used Bitcoin, so 
infected PCs have to provide clear instructions on how to make payments, and 
then how to decrypt their files.

The standard recommendation is never to pay the criminals who propagate 
ransomware, because financial success will attract more criminals to the 
industry. In some cases, people will pay, because they think the chance of 
recovering their files is worth more than the cost.

For home users, of course, it’s always cheaper and easier to buy an external 
hard drive and make a back-up than pay for files to be decrypted. In most 
cases, it’s also cheaper to buy a USB DVD or Blu-ray drive and make backups on 
optical discs. No ransomware can encrypt files on those.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 