
My Irish friend, Aoife, doesn’t get the new Australian lamb ad. How could she? 
She’s from another country. And while I can vouch that her Irish homeland has 
advertised its domestic produce with more than a little local weirdness, it’s 
easy to forget that other cultures aren’t themselves immersed in an evolving 
discourse of surreal meat advertising.

How does one explain to them how Lee Lin Chin is both a popular newsreader and 
some kind of Asian-Australian immortal,conferred the status of a haute couture 
James Bond in order to promote the eating of sheep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/10/lee-lin-chin-promises-to-rescue-expats-from-lambless-australia-day-in-new-ad>
? In my university days, I would have suggested these are somewhat culturally 
specific paradigms. Can anyone beyond these shores even understand Sam Kekovich?

Can you be a practising Muslim and identify with the Australian way of life? | 
Hass Dellal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/30/can-you-be-a-practising-muslim-and-identify-with-the-australian-way-of-life>
So the new lamb ad is the latest contribution to this endemic tradition of 
Australian meat-kooky. In it, a self-referential white person transforms into a 
brown one, who then parades through a gathering of Australian barbecue 
attendees while performing something like a promenade poem to diversity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftheguardianaustralia%2Fvideos%2F1116862505015501&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftheguardianaustralia%2Fvideos%2F1116862505015501>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Ftheguardianaustralia%2Fvideos%2F1116862505015501&media=>
 We Love Our Lamb – Australian lamb ad for diversity 
As he greets gay dads with a new baby, Christians, women wearing hijabs, a 
woman signing in Auslan and people of dazzlingly numerous ethnicities, he joins 
a building crowd smattered with celebrities including model Samantha Harris, 
comedian Jordan Raskopoulos and athlete Cathy Freeman. Lamb, you see, is the 
multicultural meal, as alamb ad from the 90s told us 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eg1WW1YFtUc>. In the current ad, the barbie is 
sparked, the chops are shared and the Indigenous Australians present are, 
pointedly, served first.

For what it’s worth, I like the new lamb ad. I am its target audience, after 
all. But why do I like it?

First, I like lamb. The family ritual of gathering around a well-set dining 
table to tuck into a juicy lamb leg – Mum baking the accompanying potatoes 
extra crispy, Dad ensuring the gelatinous goo of the mint jelly was within 
reach on the table, Nanna perfectly shelling the greenest of beans – is one 
I’ve carried into my own adulthood. My partner and I make a Sunday pilgrimage 
to Melbourne’s Queen Vic Markets to select a weekly joint for roasting, then 
allow the cooking meat to slowly perfume the house, trying every week to get 
the potatoes as crispy as Mum’s, the mint jelly on our own table, the beans on 
our plates.

The real problem is not the lamb ad but the militarisation of Australian 
nationalism | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/12/the-real-problem-is-not-the-lamb-ad-but-the-militarisation-of-australian-nationalism>
Second, I like diversity. I’m one of the 92% of Australians adamant that 
multiculturalism has made this nation a smarter, more fun, and infinitely 
tastier place. I’m from the pale ranks of the potato-eating Anglo-Celts, but 
having grown up in the most multicultural parts of Sydney, learning that dinner 
would be a bit different with Dinah’s Hong Kong family than with Aphrodite’s 
Greek one was happily unremarkable – because, of course, to them, our home 
cuisine experience was different, too. When I transferred from school in 
diverse and thriving Kogarah to a new school in the infamous Sutherland Shire 
(local member, one Scott Morrison), the shift to monoculture was startling. 
Much like boiling a stew consisting entirely of potatoes and water and eating 
it every day for a year.

In Australia, whether it’s due to structural prejudice, individual bigotries 
or just plain habit, there remain far too many boiled potato stews on the menu 
of cultural representation. It’s refreshing to see acknowledgment of these 
exclusions in the lamb ad, and also an overt celebration of an alternative. 
That the multiculturalism we live in every day becomes a news story when it’s 
showcased in a single commercial is an indictment of the disconnect of who we 
are and who we see reflected back in popular culture.

I’m reminded of my friend, a great short-statured actor who was advised by an 
agent that due to her size she’d struggle to be cast. “I’m not too short to be 
an office assistant in my day job,” she insisted, “so why I can’t I just play 
one on the bloody stage?”

Or make a meat commercial? Why the hell not indeed?
 