
Now that the snooper’s charter has been passed, how can I protect myself? 
Should I use a VPN?Charles

The UK has just passed the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Investigatory_Powers_Act_2016>, at the third 
attempt, and it will become law by the end of the year. The bill was instigated 
by the then home secretary, Theresa May, in 2012. It is better known as the 
snooper’s charter.


Jim Killock, the director of Open Rights Group, described it as the “most 
extreme surveillance law ever passed in a democracy”. It more or less removes 
your right to online privacy.

The snooper’s charter: one misspelled Google search for ‘bong-making’ and 
you’ll be in an orange jumpsuit | Frankie Boyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/10/frankie-boyle-theresa-may-internet-surveillance>
The law forces internet service providers to keep a record of all the websites 
– not the actual pages – you visit for up to a year. It also obliges companies 
to decrypt data on demand and gives government security services the power to 
hack your computers, tablets, mobile phones and other devices.


To some extent, the new law merely legalises the current “custom and practice” 
as revealed byEdward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-nsa-files>
. The most obvious difference is that it makes your web history readily 
available toalmost 50 assorted police forces and government departments 
<http://yiu.co.uk/blog/who-can-view-my-internet-history/>. These include the 
British Transport Police, the Department of Health, the Food Standards Agency, 
the Gambling Commission, and the Welsh Ambulance Services NHS Trust.

Web tracking and proxies

When you sign up with an ISP, the traffic from your PCs and other devices goes 
to your ISP’s servers, which feed most of it – exceptvarious blocked websites 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_websites_blocked_in_the_United_Kingdom> 
– on to the internet. You can track this process yourself usingTraceRoute 
<http://www.mediacollege.com/internet/troubleshooter/traceroute.html>.

Your ISP therefore knows where you are going online. You can avoid this by 
using one or more anonymous “proxy servers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proxy_server>” between your PC and your eventual 
destination. Your ISP will then know you visited the proxy server, but, if the 
anonymising is done properly, it won’t know where you went from there.

Most people aren’t interested in proxy servers, but often end up using them. 
For example, British people travelling or living aboard use UK-based proxy 
servers to watch TV programmes on BBC iPlayer, while people outside the US use 
American proxies to access Netflix and other services.

Enter the VPN

There are two big problems with using free proxies. First, you may not know 
who’s running them. They could be helpful hackers or criminals, or even CIA 
honeypots. Second, they may be unreliable and slow. It’s better to use a 
virtual private network orVPN 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_network>.

Multinational corporations have long used VPNs as a way of extending their 
private networks across the public internet. If they encrypt all the traffic 
between computers in their British, American and other offices, they can send 
their traffic securely over the internet without paying for expensive leased 
lines. VPN service providers offer the same facilities to ordinary users for a 
small monthly fee.

The traffic from your PC is automatically encrypted and sent to the VPN 
supplier’s server, so your ISP can’t see the final destination. The ISP’s 
records should only contain the VPN company’s server addresses.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
Not many people use VPNs. However, I recommend them to people who travel a lot 
or work from public Wi-Fi hotspots, because they protect your traffic from 
snoopers who steal passwords – or worse. I also recommend them to people who 
are potential targets for other reasons. They might be diplomats, film stars, 
bankers or anyone with commercially sensitive data

Choosing a VPN

Dozens of companies sell VPN services, and you can find plenty of reviews to 
help you choose. The things to look for include the number of servers and where 
they are located, their privacy policies, the applications they support (Tor, 
BitTorrent etc), speed and price. Some have applications for different devices. 
For example,NordVPN <https://nordvpn.com/> has them for Windows, MacOS, iPhone, 
iPad and Android.

If your motivation includes the snooper’s charter, choose a VPN that is not 
UK-based, and that does not keep any logs. If they don’t keep any logs, they 
can’t hand them over to government raiders. TorrentFreak keeps an updated list 
of “which VPN services take your anonymity seriously”:The Best Anonymous VPN 
Services of 2016 <https://torrentfreak.com/vpn-anonymous-review-160220/>. 

For increased privacy, some VPN providers accept payments by dozens of 
different methods including Bitcoin andanonymous gift cards 
<https://torguard.net/blog/torguard-now-accepts-100-gift-cards/>.

However, note that a VPN can’t guarantee access to any particular website. For 
example, Netflix has taken to blocking most VPN services (where hundreds of 
users are coming from one IP address), though some are making technical efforts 
to maintain access. You may also have problems with Google’s geolocation, 
PayPal’s fraud detection software, and so on.

Also, remember that a VPN doesn’t protect you from phishing emails, 
keyloggers, and websites that try to install“drive by” malware 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drive-by_download>.

Web tracking

A VPN stops your ISP from logging your web visits, but they may still be 
logged. For starters, your own web browser is keeping a history. You’re also 
being tracked by dozens of advertising services, including Google’s. You can 
block trackers with a browser extension such asGhostery 
<https://www.ghostery.com/> or the EFF’s Privacy Badger 
<https://www.eff.org/privacybadger>, but note that Privacy Badger only blocks 
trackers from third-party sites.

GRC has a “forensics” page <https://www.grc.com/cookies/forensics.htm>, which 
checks whether you are being tracked by cookies.

For increased privacy, you could access the internet from a “virtual computer” 
loaded in your operating system, and then throw it away after use.VirtualBox 
<https://www.virtualbox.org/> is a good free example. VMware Workstation Player 
<http://www.vmware.com/products/player/playerpro-evaluation.html> is also free 
for non-commercial use.

This may be the only way to avoid being tracked by “browser fingerprinting 
<https://wiki.mozilla.org/Fingerprinting>”. This is when the tracking company 
(or government agency) gives your PC a unique identifier based on variables 
such as screen resolution, browser version, extensions, fonts, timezone and so 
on. If you use a virtual PC, every session starts with a more-or-less generic 
fingerprint. It may not be perfect, but it’s less identifiable than the 
alternative.

Mail, messaging and smartphones

The snooper’s charter obviously covers too many services and devices for a 
single answer. However, you could consider switching to a secure email service 
such asProtonMail <https://protonmail.com/>, and a secure messaging service 
such asSignal <https://whispersystems.org/>. ChatSecure, WhatsApp and Apple’s 
iMessage also encrypt messages.

You can’t make smartphone use private because you’re always being tracked by 
the cellular network. However, you can turn off Wi-Fi and Bluetooth when you’re 
not using them – they can also be used to track you – and use a VPN for web 
access. Remember also thatmany smartphone apps request permissions that enable 
them to track you 
<http://www.cs.cmu.edu/news/carnegie-mellon-study-shows-people-act-protect-privacy-when-told-how-often-phone-apps-share-personal-information>
.

Last words

As an ordinary citizen with a life, you can’t hide from the security services, 
any more than you can defend your house against a tank regiment. If they want 
to hack your devices, they will. If you’re an investigative journalist, human 
rights campaigner, one of Snowden’s collaborators etc, you need a higher level 
of security.

But if they are not out to get you, why act as though they should be? It’s 
probably better to be as inconspicuous as possible, while limiting the amount 
of data that might turn up in some bored agency’s random fishing expeditions.

I think that VPNs are – or soon will be – normal enough not to attract undue 
attention. There are already plenty of reasons for using a VPN, to protect 
yourself in a world of hostile Wi-Fi hotspots (henceHotSpot Shield 
<https://www.anchorfree.com/>, Hide My Ass <https://www.hidemyass.com/proxy> 
etc) and other online threats. That’s why many large businesses use VPNs. The 
fact that they may also shield you from some state snooping is just a bonus.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>

 