
The League Managers Association chairman, Howard Wilkinson, will be called 
upon to advise the Football Association on the next permanentEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager, it has emerged. It is 
understood that the FA plans to rely on a wider body of opinion than when Sam 
Allardyce was appointed by the trio of the governing body’s chief executive, 
Martin Glenn, the then acting chairman, David Gill, and the FA’s technical 
director, Dan Ashworth.

As such, the former Leeds United manager and one-time FA technical director 
will be among those consulted. However, it is also understood that Gill will 
not have a say this time around, following criticism from Sunderland over his 
role when Allardyce was appointed.

It is believed that Sunderland perceived a conflict of interest between Gill 
being a Manchester United director and his active role in assessing and 
approaching potential candidates as acting FA chairman in the interregnum that 
followed the departure of Greg Dyke.

With Greg Clarke now installed as the new FA chairman it is understood that he 
will take over from Gill, who remains on the FA board as well as Fifa’s council 
and the Uefa executive committee, on the decision-making panel.

Gareth Southgate, who stepped in for four matches when Allardyce was forced 
out following an embarrassing newspaper sting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/gareth-southgate-england-sam-allardcye-exit>
, is expected to be among the leading contenders for the role. Southgate said 
recently he would want to see what was on the tablein terms of a contract offer 
before deciding whether to apply for the job full time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/04/gareth-southgate-turn-down-england-job-full-time>
.

“There is a big difference, for example, between being asked to take the team 
over the summer or to take the team for three years or take the team for a year 
and a half,” he said. “I don’t think it is as easy as saying: ‘Yes I would like 
the job,’ and I would also like to see how it is affecting my family – and my 
health probably!”

However, it is understood that the FA plans to make a long term appointment – 
giving the new coach a contract that is likely to stretch to the 2020 European 
Championship, for which the final is at Wembley, albeit with a break clause 
after the 2018 World Cup.

Allardyce, who oversaw just one game as England manager before his departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/slovakia-england-world-cup-2018-qualifier-sam-allardyce>
, was on a shorter two-year contract.

The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> has said it will not consider 
the situation until after Friday’s World Cup qualifier against Scotland and the 
friendly with Spain next week. Southgate too has said he is happy with that 
timescale.

While Southgate is a leading contender, Glenn has also said that the FA is 
determined to consider other options and may wait until the end of the season 
for the right candidate.

In the wake of Allardyce’s mutually agreed departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
, Glenn said Southgate was “a genuine contender but this isn’t an audition”. In 
his two matches since, England havedrawn 0-0 in Slovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/slovenia-england-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
 andbeaten Malta 2-0 at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/england-malta-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
.

Speaking at a Sport Industry Group breakfast on Thursday, the FA chief 
executive added: “We get through the next two games – Spain on Tuesday – and 
then we’re going to put our heads together, we’re going to talk to Gareth and 
really understand what his level of interest is in the role and I hope he is 
interested and wants to put his hat in the ring. And we’ve got a bit of time 
then to thoroughly assess him and every other candidate.”

Wilkinson, who remains the last English manager to win a league title, had a 
career that took in spells at Sheffield Wednesday, Leeds United and Sunderland 
and included five years as technical director at the FA between 1997 and 2002.

During that time he oversaw two senior England games as caretaker manager, one 
in 1998 following the sacking of Glenn Hoddle and again in 2000 when Kevin 
Keegan resigned.
 