
Locals in a small north Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> fishing town improvised 
with rubbish bins and hay bales to corral a 3.5m crocodile who wandered into 
their midst on New Year’s Eve.

The crocodile kept police and residents in Karumba, on the shores of the Gulf 
of Carpentaria, on high alert for most of Saturday until environment department 
officials arrived from Cairns, about 700km away, to capture and remove the 
reptile.

The male saltwater crocodile was discovered sunning itself in the backyard of 
a local house on Karumba’s waterfront Esplanade around 6am on Saturday, later 
moving to the property’s front gate.

Woman shoos away crocodile in Northern Territory as rangers call for safety 
measures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/woman-uses-thong-to-scare-off-stalking-crocodile-in-northern-territory>
Police and locals “initially orchestrated a line of wheelie bins in an attempt 
to funnel him back towards the water but it became clear he wasn’t keen to 
move”, police media said in a release.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fhuge-crocodile-trapped-by-wheelie-bin-barricade-after-appearing-in-queensland-backyard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa464593d865672247037fa832ba132ca49c03c50%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Huge%20crocodile%20trapped%20by%20wheelie%20bin%20barricade%20after%20appearing%20in%20Queensland%20backyard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fhuge-crocodile-trapped-by-wheelie-bin-barricade-after-appearing-in-queensland-backyard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Huge%20crocodile%20trapped%20by%20wheelie%20bin%20barricade%20after%20appearing%20in%20Queensland%20backyard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fhuge-crocodile-trapped-by-wheelie-bin-barricade-after-appearing-in-queensland-backyard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa464593d865672247037fa832ba132ca49c03c50%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Karumba residents improvise with rubbish bins and hay bins in an attempt to 
lead a saltwater crocodile back to the water. Photograph: Queensland Police 
A video uploaded to YouTube captured locals’ disappointment when the 
crocodile, after taking a few tentative steps in the direction of the 
shoreline, performed an about face to return to his post at the house’s front 
gate where he remained for the rest of the day.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrfP_BWkkP-Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrfP_BWkkP-Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrfP_BWkkP-Q&media=>
Officers then decided to surround the crocodile with hay bales to contain him 
until the wildlife officials arrived from Cairns. The animal was reportedly 
then hoisted by forklift into a boat as the new year countdown approached on 
Saturday night.

Welcome to crocodile country: the remarkable comeback of Australia's Jaws of 
the north
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/27/welcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north>
The reptile was in a local holding facility on Monday, with the environment 
department trying to find it a new home, such as a crocodile farm, a 
spokeswoman said.

A local resident, Danielle Day, told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-01/wall-of-wheelie-bins-used-to-keep-rogue-croc-at-bay/8156238>
 the crocodile wandered into two accommodation complexes before settling in the 
residential backyard.

“We’ve been here for nearly 10 years and we’ve never seen that happen, like [a 
crocodile] come up on to the road and come up to where people stay,” she said.

Karumba, on the banks of the Norman river with a population of about 500, is 
billed as a “fishing Mecca” and the inspiration for the Red Hot Chili Peppers 
song Animal Bar, named after the local pub.

The Karumba crocodile was one of almost 400 removed by wildlife officers in 
2016 under Queensland’s largely non-lethal management plan for the protected 
animal.

Northern Territory rangers pulled out 223 salties in 2016 – a significant 
decline from 290 the year before.

Ranger Tom Nichols put that down to two poor wet seasons, but this holiday 
season has been wetter than normal as monsoonal conditions kick in. Most 
national parks in the Top End are now closed due to croc safety and flooding 
concerns.

Nichols described it as a “very concerning” time of year as river systems join 
up, and he urged the public to remain vigilant.

“Remember that a crocodile will see you before you see them,” he said. 
“Saltwater crocodiles were removed from many parts of the Territory, including 
Darwin Harbour, the northern suburbs as well as tidal creeks and inlets, 
meaning they could be anywhere at any time.”

Salties can inhabit freshwater systems, billabongs and low areas subject to 
flooding.

Crocodiles <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/crocodiles> were hunted to 
near extinction in the NT after the second world war, with only about 3,000 
left in the wild in 1971 when they became a protected species. Numbers have 
since exploded up to 100,000 in the Top End.
 