
Years ago, Hollywood’s best attempt to extinguish humanity involved an 
Austrian bodybuilder who had the misfortune of being sent back through time 
naked, and worse still, to the 80s. Somehow the nude meat calculator ended up 
in biker gear every time, a massive truck would flip over, and there’d be a 
final showdown in some sort of industrial facility – because Terminators never 
get into fights of narrative significance in forests, meadows or public 
libraries.

As a threat to humanity, the Terminator now seems a frightfully outdated 
concept: Skynet might as well have sent back a spear taped to a typewriter. 
It’s actually the mundane creep of technology that scares me most. You don’t 
need a killing machine with lasers to eradicate a species that divides its time 
between taking selfies andfollowing a pizza on GPS 
<http://www.smh.com.au/digital-life/digital-life-news/dominos-drivertracking-lets-you-follow-a-pizza-from-the-oven-to-your-door-20150507-ggw857.html>
. The machines have already won.

Humans: a bankable British TV show that isn't a costume drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jun/22/humans-bankable-british-tv-show-that-isnt-costume-drama>
As a glimpse into the future, the first episode of Humans 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/humans/ZW0398A001S00> (ABC2) seemed similarly 
rather dated. Exported to Australia from the UK,where it was Channel 4’s 
biggest drama in 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/22/humans-becomes-channel-4s-biggest-drama-hit-in-20-years>
, this is show about a world where menial tasks have been handed over to 
“synths”, sort of like the replicants from Blade Runner except that instead of 
whimsically crying in the rain they do useful things like carrying your 
shopping.

Already there’s a problem. Seeing a synth burdened with shopping bags leaves 
me unconvinced. In the near future, won’t drones be leaving groceries on our 
doorsteps, like creepy flying stalkers with a fresh produce fetish? Then 
there’s a synth handing out the free newspaper at a train station. Really? 
Print newspapers in the future? And for all the advances in robotics, 
apparently these characters still use “house phones” which, for those of you 
who can’t remember, are like mobiles you have to share with other people if 
they live with you.

It’s in the little details that Humans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/humans> seems to be overexcited by 
its own premise. It’s as if they’ve thought: “In the future, robot slaves will 
do everything for us.” Synths are so overused in this universe I was waiting 
for a scene where, instead of going to the toilet, the protagonist just poos 
into a robot’s hands which dutifully ferries the deposit to the nearest ocean 
for him.

As with all the house phones, this society’s values have also happily remained 
in stasis while technology has progressed. Father, Joe Hawkins (Tom 
Goodman-Hill), is having to deal with domestic chores while his wife (played by 
Katherine Parkinson) is away. On seeing a messy pile of shoes he obviously 
can’t cope with, he immediately sets off to the shops to get a synth.

All too human: in pop culture's robot revolution, familiarity breeds revulsion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/18/robots-artificial-intelligence-ex-machina-humans-her>
This seems a drastic reaction. If you burn some toast you don’t go and hire a 
professional, in-house chef. It’s a tiresome old hat plot that relies on 
pointing out how hopeless a husband is without his wife around the house. To 
make matters worse, the robot he buys is a sexy femail robot, because obviously 
it’s not getting the chores done that’s the key issue here, it’s the gender of 
the person doing them. Cue lots of shots of the teenage son awkwardly gawking 
at the robot’s bottom.

Honestly, if tablets, smartphones, and cute app icons have taught us anything, 
it’s that the future will be a sleek, sexless existence, not one populated by 
hot robots. No one’s going to buy an Apple Watch with a penis bulge. Humans 
treads old philosophical ground and seems to ignore the fact that technology is 
becoming less prominent in our lives at the same time as increasing its grip. 
We’re completely overrun by machines without even noticing it – that’s what’s 
really terrifying.
 