
“If nobody has any questions, I’m going to have to break into a dance!” 
exclaimed a representative of the Rivers Casino in Schenectady,New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, at a group of potential 
recruits. She then broke into a little dance.

“We told her not to do that!” shouted another, half joking, and the other 
representatives laughed.

They were trying to pep up applicant numbers 200 to 230, who had been waiting 
in line on a sidewalk this weekend for more than an hour to apply for one of 
the 1,200 jobs available at the $300m casino, slated to open in 2017 at the old 
American Locomotive Company (Alco) factory footprint. The area is abrownfield 
site 
<http://www.timesunion.com/tuplus-local/article/General-Electric-used-contaminated-casino-site-6268324.php>
 that requireda vast environmental clean-up 
<http://www.timesunion.com/tuplus-local/article/Site-of-Schenectady-casino-contaminated-with-6209090.php>
 after the state gaming facility location boardselected it in 2014 
<http://www.recordernews.com/assets/11340440/12182014_A12.pdf>.

Trump and Atlantic City: the lessons behind the demise of his casino empire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/donald-trump-atlantic-city-casinos-taj-mahal-plaza-bankruptcy>
Outside the Social Enterprise and Training (Seat) Center, DJ Ketchup 
<http://djketchup.weebly.com/> was doing similar work, trying to keep hundreds 
of applicants standing on the sidewalk and another 30 seated under a tent, 
where they reviewed job openings while dance tunes such as Macklemore’s Can’t 
Hold Us, Robin Thicke’s Blurred Lines and Gloria Gaynor’s I Will Survive played.

Back inside the Seat Center, the female representative shouted “We want to see 
enthusiasm!” while doing a couple of recognizable cheerleader poses. “We want 
to see excitement!”

The applicants, many in business suits and ferrying résumés in leather 
portfolios, stared politely – but Robin Monroe, a 54-year-old Schenectady 
resident dressed a little more casually, raised her arms and shouted “Yes!”

The woman who had been cheerleading cornered Monroe to take down her number, 
but she needn’t have bothered. Monroe later descended into the center’s 
basement, where casino representatives conducted micro-interviews with 
applicants, and emerged from below with a second interview lined up for a line 
cook job.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fcasino-new-york-schenectady-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89ed78b5908a198d85c52f1f8911af25f08c6e92%2F0_117_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hundreds%20of%20jobseekers%20flock%20to%20planned%20casino%20in%20New%20York%3A%20'It's%20a%20new%20start'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fcasino-new-york-schenectady-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hundreds%20of%20jobseekers%20flock%20to%20planned%20casino%20in%20New%20York%3A%20%27It%27s%20a%20new%20start%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fcasino-new-york-schenectady-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89ed78b5908a198d85c52f1f8911af25f08c6e92%2F0_117_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Schenectady will be home to a new casino next year. Photograph: Ralph Coulter 
for the Guardian 
“My two passions are taking care of the elderly and cooking,” said Monroe, 
radiating enthusiasm. “I do the racetrack [in Saratoga] every year, so I’m 
excited about having a casino here.”

New Yorkers voted in favor of a constitutional amendment 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/06/nyregion/referendum-to-expand-casino-gambling-in-new-york-is-approved.html?_r=0>
 allowing casinos in 2013, in a ballot proposal worded to highlight the 
potential economic benefits for upstate communities where manufacturing jobs 
have seeped away for decades. It passed handily, despite some opposition from 
local groups and religious leaders. Rush Street Gaming, which already operates 
casinos in Illinois and Pennsylvania, was awarded the contract in Schenectady.

Outside in the line, Cerese Meisel, 48, and her son Marcus Meisel, 26, were 
waiting together for their micro-interviews. Cerese, who currently commutes 30 
minutes to Albany for a job as an executive assistant, said she had joined the 
throng of people after reviewing the positions available because “It’s a 
different environment, I’m sure it’ll be fun, and it’s a new start”.

Her son was there to apply for one of the wardrobe positions: having recently 
moved from Cherry Hill, New Jersey, he had found that there weren’t many jobs 
in fashion retail. Plus, he said, “I’ve never worked at a casino, so I thought 
it would be fun.”

Brian Hollander, 45, was reading a book in his business suit and tie while 
waiting his turn in the line. “I’m just here because the Department of Labor 
said there was a job fair,” he said. Hollander has been unemployed since May, 
when his grant-funded public health position ended, but, with a background in 
disability advocacy and public health, he wasn’t sure for what job he would 
qualify at the casino.

Neither was Mary Cunningham, 33, who lives in the village of Scotia and 
currently works atPine Ridge Industries 
<http://www.arcschenectady.org/vocational.html>, a vocational center operated 
by the Schenectady ARC, a not-for-profit group serving people with intellectual 
and developmental disabilities. “I want to be a janitor in the new casino,” she 
said, “or maybe hand out sodas.”

Elizabeth Amidon was one of a few people in line who did know exactly what she 
wanted to do. Originally from Troy, New York, she had been working in the 
casino business for 12 years, and is currently a table games supervisor at a 
family-owned casino in the Pocono Mountains of Pennsylvania. “That’s the 
business I’m in,” she said. “I’ve been doing this since I was 22.”

A couple of local union organizers prowled the sidewalks, asking applicants to 
sign union cards, but they walked right past Kevin Moynihan, who cut an 
imposing figure clad all in black. A 47-year-old Albany police officer nearing 
retirement, he said he had come as part of his effort to explore options for 
his second career.

“I think there’s going to be a lot of things to work out” with the casino 
coming to town, he said. “Traffic issues, people issues, lodging issues – we 
have those in Albany, too – parking issues.” He was one of a number of 
recognizable law enforcement officers in line, most of whom made a beeline for 
the security and surveillance table when they got to the basement of the Seat 
Center.

Another casino representative walked by in a turquoise T-shirt emblazoned with 
the Rivers Casino logo; on the back, it said “Get Out & Live a Lot!” She 
explained to the folks waiting on the sidewalk behind the KFC that the line was 
moving quickly, and that they should be done within the hour. Some people 
didn’t even look up from their phones. They hadn’t yet been told that 
enthusiasm and excitement were a qualifying factor for employment.
 