
For me, the first sign of recovery from post-Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> shock was the sudden and 
unexpected return of my sense of humour and perspective. It started when I 
progressed to not feeling quite such an urge to plead with people to sign 
endless online petitions, which, at any rate, were becoming so numerous that 
they were in grave danger of outnumbering the 48% of Remainers who were signing 
them.

My petition Tourette’s under control, it was time to slap my own face several 
times to get rid of any lingering “dual nationality” fantasies. My insomnia has 
improved too – I only wake to see Boris Johnson’s face appearing in the pattern 
on the bedroom curtains a few times a night now. Sadly, the nocturnal visions 
of a tiny, capering Nigel Farage are still going strong…

Some of the above – endless petitions, insomnia– you might have experienced 
yourself, while other parts – visions of Farage and Johnson – with luck, you 
haven’t.

Fact is, I crumbled post-Brexit. While others got to work (a magazine called 
theNew European <http://www.theneweuropean.co.uk/home> was created and 
published within a week), I came to typify the archetypal, foot-stamping, 
ineffectual Remain casualty, a veritable Violet Elizabeth Bott of the 
handwringing liberal echo chamber.

I have no excuse for this. I suppose it was just the shock of feeling that I’d 
gone to sleep in one country and woken up in another.

All those signifiers, big and small, that something important had been broken 
and something ugly was gaining strength got to me. Marine Le Pen gloating at 
the result. The3,000 new hate crimes in England and Wales 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36746763>. The pound plummeting like a reckless 
tombstoner – you’ve all seen the news.

Now that the “liberal panic” is settling, the Leave camp has some explaining 
to do – if we could find any of them. They’ve been vanishing one by one, as 
though in some surreal Agatha Christie whodunnit (from what I can make out, Liz 
Hurley is in charge now). Has anyone concocted a Leave plan yet or is it still: 
“We’re taking our country back – and fingers crossed we can be Norway”?

The only point I’ve seen Leavers make with any fervour is that Remainers 
should stop being “sore losers” and accept democracy.

Would that be the same kind of “sore loser” that Farage said he’d be if Leave 
lost by a similar minuscule margin? Is democracy now defined by the many Leave 
voters regretting their “protest vote”, realising that they were lied to by 
squabbling politicians?

Despite everything, I refuse to believe that the provincial working class, the 
kind of people I grew up among, are either stupid or racist. Not only were 
Leave voters brazenly (unlawfully) lied to, they were also abandoned to their 
fate by an opposition party that should have been robustly campaigning and 
informing, rather than what amounted to strategic ineffectiveness.

The same Labour party that is led by a man who at best comes across as a 
sparkly eyed competition winner who can’t quite believe all the attention he’s 
getting (and doesn’t look like volunteering to return to backbench obscurity 
just yet).

Shame on Jeremy Corbyn for enabling this shoddy, contaminated Brexit – for me, 
this amounts to yet another last straw.

Indeed, embarrassed though I am by my post-Brexit meltdown, I feel positively 
chipper now, so much so that, like many others I’ve spoken to, I’m considering 
giving my vote, perhaps even membership fees, to the party (Liberal Democrats?) 
most committed to finding a way out of this mess.

Looking back on this tumultuous fortnight, I can’t help but feel that people 
like me might not have felt so “lost” had we believed that our views were being 
politically represented.

Less bull about Pamplona’s bull run, please
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpost-brexit-meltdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6b6cfac6ff84875f44afd69405c61f22d1b680d%2F0_172_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%E2%80%99m%20getting%20over%20my%20post-Brexit%20meltdown%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpost-brexit-meltdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%E2%80%99m%20getting%20over%20my%20post-Brexit%20meltdown%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpost-brexit-meltdown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6b6cfac6ff84875f44afd69405c61f22d1b680d%2F0_172_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Bull running in Pamplona. Photograph: Pablo Blazquez Dominguez/Getty Images 
Five people were gored during the yearly running of the bulls at Pamplona’s 
San Fermin festival. Please forgive me, but, just for a split second, a part of 
me thought: “Good.”

Of course it isn’t good (may the injured make swift recoveries). However, the 
Pamplona bull run is a cruel, disgusting custom that deeply shames its host 
nation every year. Popularised by Ernest Hemingway, it’s become a test of 
machismo for men who ironically seem too dumb to have readThe Sun Also Rises. 
Others blather about tradition, but who has the patience for tradition where 
animal cruelty is concerned? Britain used to have bearbaiting and cockfighting. 
Anyone fancy getting those charming, folksy pastimes back?

A good rule of thumb with such matters is to ask: if a particular custom had 
completely died out, would a revival be permitted? If the answer is no, then 
why in any humane world should it continue? At a time when it’s rumoured that 
foxhunting may be about to make a reappearance on the British political agenda, 
it seems important to know exactly where you stand on bloodsports and the 
“traditions” that excuse them.

Three-fifths of Girl Power? No thanks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpost-brexit-meltdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15bab99332382e3a1e8acdb12a69b8c38b06595b%2F0_3_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%E2%80%99m%20getting%20over%20my%20post-Brexit%20meltdown%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpost-brexit-meltdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%E2%80%99m%20getting%20over%20my%20post-Brexit%20meltdown%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fpost-brexit-meltdown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15bab99332382e3a1e8acdb12a69b8c38b06595b%2F0_3_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The Spice Girls perform during the closing ceremony of the London 2012 Olympic 
Games. Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
Emboldened by their 20th anniversary, the Spice Girls 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-36744207> are planning another 
reunion jaunt. However, it looks as though they might be missing Mel Chisholm 
(undecided) and Victoria Beckham (very decided… against). Hence they’re said to 
be toying with the new name Gem, representing the initials of the remaining 
trio, Geri (Halliwell), Emma (Bunton) and Melanie (Brown).

I would strongly advise against this. First, a change of moniker is 
unnecessary as many acts have re-formed with key personnel missing, as 
evidenced by the myriad ugly squabbles over rights to band names. Out of 
friendship, loyalty and decency (and perhaps just a teeny weeny bit of sheer 
boredom, laced with icy contempt), neither Beckham nor Chisholm seems 
interested in fighting the trio over the use of the name, so what’s the point 
of changing it?

As the depleted Spice Girls (possible tagline for posters: “At least one less 
with her microphone turned off by a discreet roadie!”), the band could at least 
hope to make a packet on the thriving retro-music circuit, and good luck to 
them. As Gem, with the same personnel, I’m not so sure. I even feel slightly 
afraid for them. As the Spice Girls, there’s exciting talk of a huge show in 
Hyde Park; as Gem, I’m envisioning tragic, increasingly desperate personal 
appearances, say, outside branches of Morrisons, with staff handing around 
paper plates of pork pies with union jack skewers in them (to echo Geri’s 
famous dress) or, worse, some microwaved congealing Pop-Tarts (geddit?).

This is the sort of thing that happens when a strong brand doesn’t recognise 
its own value and inevitability. If the remaining Spices aren’t careful, they 
could end up being wannabes to their own legacy.
 