
The context of the conversation was this: on the ABC’s Q&A panel were three 
members of parliament, including Australia’s attorney general,George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>. A young man in the 
audience revealed that his sister had been murdered by her male parter in the 
most gruesome way.

He said: 

Sam Newman has courted controversy yet again for defending Eddie Maguire for 
making a joke about drowning Caroline Wilson. I work as an ambassador for Our 
Watch, White Ribbon, and the Safe Steps family violence response centre.

My sister Nikita was stabbed to death by her partner in January last year, 
with a meat cleaver. She was 23. Male violence is a leading cause of death and 
disability of women under 45 in Australia. How will politicians and the media 
play a better role in bringing about long-overdue cultural shifts, so tragedies 
like what happened to my family are not normalised?

Q&A: Steve Price says Van Badham 'just being hysterical' about domestic 
violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jul/12/qa-steve-price-says-van-badham-just-being-hysterical-about-domestic-violence>
 In Australia, where a woman is murdered by her intimate partner every week 
<http://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2016-04-06/fact-file-domestic-violence-statistics/7147938>
, it’s a question that speaks to a crisis that has taken too long to arrive 
into the national consciousness. For the young man, Tarang Chawla, whosince his 
sister’s brutal death 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/i-hope-that-wherever-my-sister-is-now-she-is-safe-and-happy-20160606-gpcins.html>
has become a survivor advocate, it’s a devastating reality.

 But for Steve Price, a 2GB broadcaster who gets regular gigs on Channel 10’s 
The Project, and who had first crack at the answer, it was an opportunity to 
ignore the reality of that young man, his murdered sister, and the undeniable 
culture of misogyny that normalises mistreatment of women.

With no acknowledgement of the horrific crime of which he’d just been made 
aware, he instead launched into excuses for his friends, disgraced sports 
entertainers Eddie Maguire and Sam Newman.

The need for a cultural shift in gendered attitudes has been spoken of very 
loudly sinceMaguire’s joke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/eddie-mcguire-defends-comments-about-drowning-writer-caroline-wilson>
 on radio that female sports commentator Caroline Wilson should be drowned. 
Maguire took his time to apologise and was defended by Newman, whoon television 
declared Wilson “an embarrassment” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/23/afl-commentator-sam-newman-weighs-into-eddie-mcguire-controversy>
 and those who stood up for her as “cowardly excrement”. For Price on Q&A, the 
kind of hateful behaviour to a female colleague that has directly resulted in
Newman losing $2m of Nissan sponsorship 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/collingwood-magpies/sam-newmans-footy-show-gaffe-could-cost-nine-2-million-a-year-20160708-gq1os2.html>
 from The Footy Show was just “a bunch of blokes laughing about something they 
shouldn’t have laughed about” and “far too much was then made of it”.

 Readers, forgive my lack of eloquence today, but I heard Chawla’s story, was 
sat next to Steve Price on that Q&A panel and was the next to speak. And 
struggling to comprehend how any human being could hear a man speak of his 
sister’s death and launch into a defence of Eddie freakin’ Maguire, I tried to 
both show due respect to Chawla as well as make the point that politicians and 
the media have to make structural changes to address that women are mistreated.

I hope I was able to do the first. Steve Price certainly prevented me from 
doing the second, and I am still reeling from it. The attorney general, George 
Brandis, was on the panel and I wanted to challenge his government’s 
destructive and disastrous$34m cut to the funding 
<https://communitylawblog.wordpress.com/2016/06/23/legal-peak-rejects-brandis-comments-urges-pm-response-to-open-letter-on-legal-help-crisis/>
 of community legal centres – a front line for women fleeing violent 
situations. Instead, Steve Price interrupted with, “Just because you’re a woman 
doesn’t mean you’re the only person who can get upset about this.”

I wanted to explain how women fleeing violence with their children need up to 
seven court orders to establish their legal protections, and how the funding 
shortfall of legal centres that amounts to $100m over four years abandons those 
women when they need legal help the most. I wanted to communicate that the 
imprimatur of government and proper resourcing agencies that protect women is a 
powerful message to the culture in itself.

But Price would not let me speak. “Men can be just as upset about these 
things,” he interrupted again.

So there we were on Q&A with an all-too-rare opportunity to challenge a 
powerful politician on a policy with dire real-world implications for women 
trying to flee violence and Steve Price was making the discussion all about 
himself, his feelings, his concern that just because he was making excuses for 
Newman and Maguire, he might be “tarred with the same brush”.

How do we convince 'the boys' that their ranting only gives succour to violent 
men? | Phil Cleary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/how-do-we-convince-the-boys-that-their-ranting-only-gives-succour-to-violent-men>
“You’re proving my point,” I said. 

 And then he called me “hysterical”.

 I had a comeback (“it’s probably my ovaries making me do it, Steve”), but 
that’s far from the point. The context of the conversation was the young man, 
his murdered sister, and a culture that needs to shift its attitudes on gender 
– because real-world violence against women by men is rendered unexceptional 
and unimportant when the subject is considered so trivial it can be joked about 
in banter on a sports show, and then excused in commentary around it.

This is what Chawla means by “normalisation”.

If structures of power and influence like the media convey that it’s OK to 
speak over women and interrupt them, to hold them responsible for your own 
feelings, to pay no heed to the reality and consequences of female suffering 
and write off a woman’s contribution to debate – not with engagement of content 
but a single reductive gendered insult – then the old culture of woman hating 
is going nowhere.

 