
Apart from crags and pockets of ancient woodland, the British uplands are 
manmade. Three thousand years before Christ, neolithic farmers felled the trees 
and gave us a landscape stripped to grassland by grazing sheep we take as 
“natural” today. Two thousand years after Christ, new forces are moulding the 
British uplands. They will bring back at least a part of what stone age men 
destroyed.

It’s hard to believe in an unequal country, where wealth and land are so 
unevenly distributed, but the ecology of the hills depends on popular approval. 
When public opinion moves, the hills move with it. However solid their drystone 
walls are, they will not be strong enough to hold back political change, 
climate change and changes in fashion, which affect the countryside as surely 
as they affect clothes and music.

The sale of Thorneythwaite 
<https://www.fwi.co.uk/news/national-trust-farm-purchase-a-disaster-for-herdwick-sheep-farming.htm>
, a sheep farm near the head of Borrowdale, encapsulates the coming revolution. 
If you don’t know Borrowdale, you should. To my mind, it is the most beautiful 
valley in England. Thorneythwaite is high up the river Derwent, almost at the 
end of the metalled road, and overlooks the route to Scafell Pike. The National 
Trust bought it last week with an astonishingly high bid of £950,000, £200,000 
above the guide price and £450,000 above what farmers could match

Local opinion was scandalised. The great Cumbrian Melvyn Bragg said 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cumbria-37219512> that had a billionaire 
bullied his way to “this disgraceful purchase”, as the trust had done there, 
would have been “a deserved outcry”. James Rebanks, the Lakeland author of the 
wonderfulThe Shepherd’s Life, said the trust should be protecting hill farmers, 
not gazumping them.

I spent my childhood holidays on a Cumbrian sheep farm and would once have 
defended Bragg and Rebanks with all my heart. But although I feel like a 
traitor, I can see good reasons for saying not just that their opponents will 
win, but that they should win.

The inability of farmers to meet the guide price for Thorneythwaite will only 
grow. Of all the consequences of Brexit, the cutting of agricultural subsidies 
is the easiest to predict. Farmers who voted leave –58% 
<http://www.fwi.co.uk/news/exclusive-survey-reveals-farmers-back-eu-exit.htm> 
according to one survey – astonished friends of mine who campaigned for remain 
in rural Britain. What turnip truck had these yokels fallen off? When the 
promise to maintain common agricultural policy subsidies runs out in 2020, 
parliament will not continue to pump public money to farmers. Free-market 
conservatives do not believe in state subsidies. As for centre-left 
politicians, can you imagine them putting farmers before the NHS?

Before the vote to leave the EU, farm subsidies were almost beyond political 
debate. Now we are heading for the exit, they will be open to negotiation. 
British farmersreceive up to 60% <http://www.telegraph.co.uk> of their income 
from EU subsidies. Hill farmers are the most dependent of all. If they are to 
continue to take public money, they will have to do what the public wants and 
raising sheep will not be enough.

The most telling point about the trust’s intervention is that it did not buy 
the Thorneythwaite farmhouse. Rather, it wanted to transform the hills sheep 
have stripped of all except a few pockets of woodland. The trust will replace 
the monoculture with “healthy soil, natural water management and thriving 
natural habitats”. Following a succession of floods, the trust will also 
“explore” whether tree planning can “slow the flow of the upper river Derwent” 
and help prevent flooding downstream in Keswick and Cockermouth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Frewilding-countryside-national-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90229be1d9973d72ac7507e89753602fd3e887bd%2F0_168_3289_1974%2F3289.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%E2%80%99m%20sorry%20if%20rewilding%20hurts%20farmers%2C%20but%20we%20need%20it%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Frewilding-countryside-national-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%E2%80%99m%20sorry%20if%20rewilding%20hurts%20farmers%2C%20but%20we%20need%20it%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Frewilding-countryside-national-trust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90229be1d9973d72ac7507e89753602fd3e887bd%2F0_168_3289_1974%2F3289.jpg>
 The aftermath of flooding in Keswick in 2015. Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty 
Images 
A writer in the Spectator, who accused the trust of wanting to turn the Lake 
District intoDisneyland, 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/08/national-trust-mission-disney-fy-britain/>
 could not have been more wrong. Keswick and Cockermouth have been flooded 
repeatedly. Flood defences are unable to spare them as global warming 
intensifies. The same is true for Scottish, Lancashire and Yorkshire towns 
downstream of the Highlands and Pennines. A part of the answer is to expel 
sheep and plant trees that might hold up the water on their old grazing lands. 
You don’t need to cloak the landscape, just to forest about20% 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-35777927> of the hills to slow 
run off and create natural dams in mountain streams. It’s not that sheep 
farming cannot coexist with flood management, but it will have to be 
restricted. The monoculture of the uplands must change, in other words, and the 
public, whose representatives will soon have exclusive power to decide 
agricultural policy and whose taxes will keep the farmer in business, will want 
it to change.

Before the Romantic movement, most saw the Highlands as wastelands. Our love 
for them is a result of the romantic reaction against the Industrial 
Revolution, which in turn produced its own revolution in sensibility. Another 
revolution is upon us. It is easy to mock the rewilding movement just as it was 
easy to mock the Romantics. But I would keep the “Disneyland” jeers to a 
minimum if I wanted to get a hearing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Frewilding-countryside-national-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc356dcabd965a2266f1246f104ead4af6cb74968%2F0_165_5172_3103%2F5172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%E2%80%99m%20sorry%20if%20rewilding%20hurts%20farmers%2C%20but%20we%20need%20it%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Frewilding-countryside-national-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%E2%80%99m%20sorry%20if%20rewilding%20hurts%20farmers%2C%20but%20we%20need%20it%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Frewilding-countryside-national-trust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc356dcabd965a2266f1246f104ead4af6cb74968%2F0_165_5172_3103%2F5172.jpg>
 Reintroducing beavers in Scotland has been popular with the public. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Rewilding the fells is not just townies forcing their naive fantasies on the 
countryside. It is a hard-headed policy: in a tiny way, it will help offset 
global warming; more tangibly, it will slow the floodwaters climate change is 
bringing. It will also be popular. If you doubt me, look at how many go to see 
the newbeaver colonies in Scotland <http://www.scottishbeavers.org.uk/> or the 
wetlands in East Anglia and Somerset. Or listen to the sympathetic hearings 
plans to reintroduce lynx to the Kielder Forest r 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/24/eurasian-lynx-reintroduce-england-scotland-consultation-lynx-uk-trust>
eceive. Look even at the seeds on sale in supermarkets and notice how popular 
the wildflowers we once dismissed as weeds have become.

“Taxpayers should only pay public subsidy to farmers in return for things that 
the market won’t pay for, but are valued and needed by the public,”said  
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/news/the-future-of-our-countryside>the 
National Trust’s director general, Helen Ghosh, after the Brexit vote. Her 
shopping list included wildflowers, bees and butterflies, farmland birds, water 
meadows and meandering rivers, which themselves slow flood water.

You can mock her if you want, but your mockery won’t stop her. Romanticism was 
a reaction against industrialisation and rewilding is a reaction against global 
warming and the mass extinction of species. It is likely to be as uncontainable.

In any case, I don’t want to mock. I have walked the Lake District since I was 
a child. As I tramped the hills above Borrowdale and Buttermere this spring, I 
noticed the absence of trees for the first time and found it disconcerting, 
almost shocking. All my life I thought I’d want to see the landscape the 
Romantic poets saw stay the way it was. All of a sudden, I wanted something new 
– and better.
 