
Racism is not a specific illness but a general sickness. Display one symptom 
and you display them all. If you show me an anti-Muslim bigot, I will be able 
to guess his or her views on the European Union, welfare state, crime and 
“political correctness”. Show me a leftwing or Islamist antisemite and, once 
again, he will carry a suitcase full of prejudices, which have nothing to do 
with Jews, but somehow have everything to do with Jews.

The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party does not have a 
“problem with antisemitism” it can isolate and treat, like a patient asking a 
doctor for a course of antibiotics. The party and much of the wider 
liberal-left have a chronic condition.

As I have written about the darkness on the left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/19/why-i-am-becoming-a-jew-and-you-should-too>
 before, I am not going to crow now that it has turned darker than even I 
predicted. (There is not much to crow about, after all.) I have nothing but 
respect for the Labour MPs who are trying to stop their party becoming a 
playpen for fanatics and cranks. It just appears to me that they face 
interlocking difficulties that are close to insoluble.

They must first pay the political price of confronting supporters from 
immigrant communities, which Labour MPs from all wings of the party have failed 
to do for decades. It may be high. While Ken Livingstone was forcing startled 
historians to explain thatAdolf Hitler was not a Zionist 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36165298>, I was in Naz Shah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/27/naz-shah-timeline-of-events-leading-to-mps-suspension-from-labour>
’s Bradford. A politician who wants to win there cannot afford to be 
reasonable, I discovered. He or she cannot deplore the Israeli occupation of 
the West Bank and say that the Israelis and Palestinians should have their own 
states. They have to engage in extremist rhetoric of the “sweep all the Jews 
out” variety or risk their opponents denouncing them as “Zionists”.

George Galloway, who, never forget, was a demagogue from the race-card playing 
left rather than the far right, made the private prejudices of conservative 
Muslim voters respectable. Aisha Ali-Khan, who worked as Galloway’s assistant 
until his behaviour came todisgust her 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-33347153>, realised how deep prejudice 
had sunk when she made a silly quip about David Miliband being more “fanciable” 
than Ed. Respect members accused her of being a “Jew lover” and, all of a 
sudden in Bradford politics, that did not seem an outrageous, or even an 
unusual, insult. Where Galloway led, others followed. David Ward, a now 
mercifully forgotten Liberal Democrat MP, tried and failed to save his seat by 
proclaiming his Jew obsession. Nothing, not even the murder of Jews, could 
restrain him. Atone point, <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-30803254> he 
told his constituents that the sight of the Israeli prime minister honouring 
the Parisian Jews whom Islamists had murdered made him “sick”. (He appeared to 
find the massacre itself easier to stomach.)

Naz Shah’s picture of Israel superimposed on to a map of the US to show her 
“solution” for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was not a one-off but part of a 
race to the bottom. But Shah’s wider behaviour as an MP – a “progressive” MP, 
mark you – gives you a better idea of how deep the rot has sunk. She ignored a 
Bradford imam who declared that the terrorist who murdered a liberal Pakistani 
politician was a“great hero of Islam” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/sara-khan-stop-these-muslim-girls-making-worst-mistake-of-their-lives-isis.>
 and concentrated her energies on expressing her “loathing” of liberal and 
feminist British Muslims instead.

Shah is not alone, which is why I talk of a general sickness. Liberal Muslims 
make many profoundly uncomfortable. Writers in the left-wing press treat them 
as Uncle Toms, as Shah did, because they are willing to work with the 
government to stop young men and women joining Islamic State. While they are 
criticised, politically correct criticism rarely extends to clerics who 
celebrate religious assassins. As for the antisemitism that allows Labour MPs 
to fantasise about“transporting” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/27/naz-shah-timeline-of-events-leading-to-mps-suspension-from-labour>
 Jews, consider how jeering and dishonest the debate around that has become.

When feminists talk about rape, they are not told as a matter of course “but 
women are always making false rape accusations”. If they were, they would 
suspect that their opponents wanted to deny the existence of sexual violence. 
Yet it is standard in polite society to hear that accusations of antisemitism 
are always made in bad faith to delegitimise justifiable criticism of Israel. I 
accept that there are Jews who say that all criticism ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> is antisemitic. For her part, a 
feminist must accept that there are women who make false accusations of rape. 
But that does not mean that antisemitism does not exist, any more than it means 
that rape never happens.

Challenging prejudices on the left wing is going to be all the more difficult 
because, incredibly, the British left in the second decade of the 21st century 
is led by men steeped in the worst traditions of the 20th. When historians had 
to explain last week that if Montgomery had not defeated Rommel at El Alamein 
in Egypt then the German armies would have killed every Jew they could find in 
Palestine, they were dealing with the conspiracy theory that Hitler was a 
Zionist, developed by a half-educated American Trotskyist calledLenni Brenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/29/ken-livingstone-marxist-book-lenni-brenner-defence-israel-comments>
 in the 1980s.

When Jeremy Corbyn defended  
<http://leftfootforward.org/2015/06/an-open-letter-to-jeremy-corbyn/>the 
Islamist likes of Raed Salah, who say that Jews dine on the blood of Christian 
children, he was continuing a tradition of communist accommodation with 
antisemitism that goes back to Stalin’s purges of Soviet Jews in the late 1940s.

It is astonishing that you have to, but you must learn the worst of leftwing 
history now. For Labour is not just led by dirty men but by dirtyold men, with 
roots in the contaminated soil of Marxist totalitarianism. If it is to change, 
its leaders will either have to change their minds or be thrown out of office.

Put like this, the tasks facing Labour moderates seem impossible. They have to 
be attempted, however, for moral as much as electoral reasons.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fdiane-abbott-smear-labour-antisemitism-problem-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diane%20Abbott%3A%20'Smear'%20to%20say%20Labour%20has%20anti-semitism%20problem%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fdiane-abbott-smear-labour-antisemitism-problem-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diane%20Abbott%3A%20%27Smear%27%20to%20say%20Labour%20has%20anti-semitism%20problem%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fdiane-abbott-smear-labour-antisemitism-problem-video&media=>
Diane Abbott: ‘Smear’ to say Labour has anti-semitism problem – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/01/diane-abbott-smear-labour-antisemitism-problem-video>
Allow me to state the moral argument as baldly as I can. Not just in Paris, 
but inMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/19/jewish-teacher-stabbed-in-marseille-street-by-trio-praising-islamic-state>
,Copenhagen <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-31475803> and Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/01/french-suspect-brussels-jewish-museum-attack-syria>
, fascistic reactionaries are murdering Jews – once again. Go to any British 
synagogue or Jewish school and you will see police officers and volunteers 
guarding them. I do not want to tempt fate, but if British Jews were murdered, 
the leader of the Labour party would not be welcome at their memorial. The 
mourners would point to the exit and ask him to leave.

If it is incredible that we have reached this pass, it is also intolerable. 
However hard the effort to overthrow it, the status quo cannot stand.
 