
When I read that a group of Eton schoolboys had organised their own trip to 
meet President Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/vladimir-putin-eton-boys-private-audience-kremlin>
 and exchange portentous remarks in a big, posh Russian room, I could sense an 
expression crossing my face that I’m glad no one had to see. It must have been 
a kind of frowning, closed-eyed, open-mouthed, nauseated sneer.

I could feel my jowls attempt to detach themselves from my head. My nostrils 
seemed to be trying to put some distance between one another, while my eyebrows 
were huddling together for comfort. Of the words that escaped the weird-shaped 
hole my mouth had become, “oh” and “those” were the only ones this newspaper 
hasn’t recently resolved not to print without indisputable editorial 
justification.

I did not rejoice in the young people’s adventure. The pictures of them 
smartly greeting Russia’s puffy little tyrant, and lounging across the floor of 
an anteroom making wacky hand gestures, didn’t make me think, “Good on them!” 
Instead I was filled with loathing, which isn’t very nice of me because they’re 
basically children and they haven’t really done any harm.

Public schoolboys are endlessly encouraged to show this sort of vacuous 
initiative

That’s not to say they did any good. Putin will feel his regime came out of it 
well. One of the boys was reportedly quoted in a pro-Putin newspaper (how 
accurately, we can’t know) saying: “Personally, I think that Putin is right to 
continue defending Assad in his role as president.” Meanwhile, on Facebook, 
Trenton Bricken, a member of the group, described Russia’s leader as “small in 
person but not in presence” and David Wei, who seems to have been the jaunt’s 
chief organiser, wrote: “Guys, we truly gave Putin a deep impression of us and 
he responded by showing us his human face.” So rumours the president carries 
the severed face of a rival are true, then.

They obviously think he’s great. But that’s hardly surprising: they’re 
teenagers and he’s the president of Russia and he was nice to them. They’re not 
in the business of speaking truth to power, but getting amazing selfies. I’d be 
the same at their age – I’d probably be the same now. I refuse to think more of 
them for all this but I’m going to really try not to think less, particularly 
as public schoolboys are endlessly encouraged to show this sort of vacuous 
initiative.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fi-preferred-eton-when-it-was-still-doomed-schoolboys-trip-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbe209d9d7d03c1e98055473c654e4cd42890033%2F0_107_853_1066%2F853.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20think%20I%20preferred%20Eton%20when%20it%20was%20still%20doomed%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fi-preferred-eton-when-it-was-still-doomed-schoolboys-trip-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20think%20I%20preferred%20Eton%20when%20it%20was%20still%20doomed%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fi-preferred-eton-when-it-was-still-doomed-schoolboys-trip-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbe209d9d7d03c1e98055473c654e4cd42890033%2F0_107_853_1066%2F853.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Which is why Eton college’s response is suspect. “This was a private visit by 
a small group of boys organised entirely at their own initiative and 
independently of the college,” it said. I’m not saying that’s a lie – I’m sure 
the school didn’t set up the trip – but Eton has a tradition of encouraging 
pupils to organise societies and events, and this must be exactly the kind of 
stunt it dreams of its charges getting up to.

“Wow! They met the PRESIDENT OF RUSSIA!? How the hell did they do that?!” 
would be a more natural response. Instead, the college’s line is so dry and 
dignified as to be a parody of dry dignity. “We can’t be expected to keep track 
ofevery single time our boys meet up with the leader of a superpower,” is the 
tone and it’s disingenuous. It’s all a bit “Fog in channel, continent 
isolated.” Stiff upper-lipped establishment reserve masking feverish excitement 
at its own coolness.

And it suits Eton very well for people to think that this trip is the kind of 
dynamic thing that Etonians just do. It subtly reinforces the notion that 
Eton’s pupils are made of more enterprising stuff than normal schoolchildren – 
that there’s something special about them apart from their parents’ money and 
connections, and their own consequent sense of entitlement. The college 
couldn’t possibly assert this view openly – it would be met with ridicule and 
offence in equal measure – but its over-understated response to the boys’ 
headline-grabbing antics is a clear invitation for us to infer it.

I used to like Eton. As a pupil at a minor public school, I admired it as the 
independent sector’s market leader. I didn’t think private education was evil – 
I still don’t – and Eton’s continued prominence felt picturesque and reassuring.

Then suddenly, a couple of years ago, I noticed my feelings had changed. My 
wife and I were driving through the town of Eton – just sightseeing, we’d spent 
the morning wandering round Windsor – and, as I looked at the beautiful 
buildings, the inextricability of town and school, the royal castle in the 
background, the heady mixture of history, wealth and confidence, my face 
started imitating the gargoyles.

As my sneer of envy, disdain and rage subsided, I realised there’d been a much 
more significant alteration in my outlook than losing my taste for one public 
school. It had crept up on me over the previous decade. It struck me that, when 
I was growing up, when I looked fondly on institutions like Eton, it was on the 
basis that they were ultimately doomed. They were relics of a more spacious 
age, an aesthetically attractive one, also an unjust one, but crucially, one 
that was over. For better or worse, and largely for better, history was leaving 
them behind.

Don’t purge the posh, invite them to join us | Carole Cadwalladr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/05/dont-purge-posh-invite-them-to-join-us>
I was brought up with the general postwar assumption that Britain was getting 
fairer. It was taken for granted – by parents and teachers alike. There might 
be a nuclear war, oil might run out but, failing that, moral progress was 
assured. In the old days, the elderly didn’t have pensions, now they did; women 
didn’t have careers, now they did; poor people didn’t have access to 
healthcare, now they did. Etc, etc, etc. Change might be happening too slowly 
but it was happening inexorably and exclusively in the right direction.

I didn’t notice the moment when I lost that assumption – it was probably 
between the Iraq war and the credit crunch – but when we were driving through 
Eton, it hit me hard. I remembered the complacent feeling of advancing justice 
with which I’d once looked fondly on the crumbling beauty of institutions like 
Eton, and I felt tricked.

The British are a nostalgic people: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/25/backwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving>
 we love costume drama, ancient buildings, stories of kings, tradition. But I 
realised in Eton that there was a  context for these fond backward glances and 
that context was progress. Progress towards a fairer society.

Who still believes that fairness is advancing? Britain’s period of greatest 
social justice is probably already over. The sun isn’t setting on the 
lichen-pocked crenellations of Eton, but on the NHS and the BBC. And they won’t 
be remembered in a spirit of bittersweet, misty-eyed nostalgia, but with 
straightforward grief.
 