
‘Grab ’em by the pussy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
” was the line that was supposed to have ended Donald Trump’s campaign for 
presidency. Instead it turned out to be one of the most astonishing and 
successful strategies for the highest office. In a campaign based on racism, 
misogyny and bullying, Trump proved that boasting about sexually assaulting 
women, far from ruining a man’s career, can boost it; and white women voted for 
him in droves. Grab ’em by the pussy, indeed. The first black American 
president will now be succeeded by a man endorsed by the Ku Klux Klan. This, 
according to Trump and his supporters, male and female, is what the American 
dream actually looks like.

A lot will be written about how Trump’s victory represents a backlash of rage 
from the white working classes. The election of Trump, this narrative goes, 
proves how these people feel ignored by the elite politicians and metropolitan 
media. We need to hear more from these people, the argument continues, and how 
they have suffered because of globalisation, the demise of industry, theopioid 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-prescription-painkillers-heroin-addiction>
, the death of the American dream.

It’s interesting, this take, not least because, far from being a 
“working-class revolt”,48% of those who earn more than $250,000 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/11/08/us/politics/election-exit-polls.html>
 and 49% of white college graduate voters chose Trump. But even leaving that 
aside, to say that no one took notice of the angry white vote in this US 
election is awfully reminiscent of British politicians saying “no one talks 
about immigration”, when it feels like – you know what? I think we got that 
base well and truly covered.

Far from ignoring the white working class during this election, they were 
written about so extensively by nervously placatory liberal journalists that 
these articles became a genre unto themselves, satirised perfectlyby Benjamin 
Hart last week 
<https://theawl.com/i-talked-to-some-trump-voters-too-24d8399a6147#.itpe82pej> 
(“I couldn’t help but notice that people in Bleaksville are angry … I wanted to 
hear more but Ed explained that David Brooks had scheduled an interview with 
him to discuss whether he ate dinner with his family every night, and what it 
means for America.”)

So here’s an alternative take: we’ve heard enough of white rage now. Oh sure, 
listen to the grievances of enraged voters. But understanding them is different 
from indulging them, and the media and politicians – in the US and UK – have 
for too long conflated the two, encouraging the white victim narrative and 
stoking precisely the kind of nasty, race-baiting campaigns that led to Brexit 
and Trump (as the voter demographics have proved, the linking factor in Trump 
voters is not class but race).

Donald Trump wins US election: 'we're all on the same team' Obama says – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-election-2016-live-reactio>
Both campaigns promised to turn the clock back to a time when white men were 
in the ascendence, and both were fronted by privately educated false prophets 
such as Nigel Farage and Trump, absurdly privileged buccaneers who style 
themselves as friends of the working classes while pushing policies that work 
against them. They have bleached language of meaning, boasting that they aren’t 
“career politicians” (now a negative thing as opposed to someone who has 
devoted their life to public service), and they scorn “experts” (who are now 
apparently the biggest threat to democracy).

Trump’s supporters, like Brexit supporters before them, will say that these 
are merely the bleatings of the sore losers – the Remoaners, the Grimtons, or 
whatever portmanteau is conceived next. This objection always misses the 
obvious point that these people aren’t mourning for themselves. Whereas those 
who voted for Trump and Brexit did so to turn time back for their personal 
benefit, those who voted for remain orHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> did so because they know 
time only moves forward, and this benefits society. To try to force it back 
hurts everyone.

To call out voters for falling for such damagingly racist and sexist messages 
is viewed by politicians as a vote-killer and dangerously snobby by the media, 
as though working-class people are precious toddlers who must be humoured and 
can’t possibly be held responsible for any flawed thinking. There is no doubt 
the white working classes in the west have suffered in recent decades, yet no 
other demographic that has endured similarly straitened circumstances is 
indulged in this way. For decades, American politicians have demonised the 
black working classes who suffered far worse structural inequalities and for 
far longer – and Trumpcontinues to do so today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/17/central-park-five-donald-trump-jogger-rape-case-new-york>
.

And yet, as Stacey Pattoon wrote 
<http://www.damemagazine.com/2016/11/01/why-i-have-no-sympathy-angry-white-men>
, only the white working classes are accorded this handwringing and insistent 
media empathy. No one is telling these voters to pull up their boot straps. The 
much-discussed American Dream is only considered “broken” when it’s the white 
working classes who are suffering. When it’s African-Americans, they are simply 
lazy and morally flawed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
But Clinton, according to the politicians and journalists who indulge inverted 
narratives, was seen as simply too corrupt and establishment by these voters. 
“Trump’s election is an unmistakable rejection of a political establishment and 
an economic system that simply isn’t working for most people,”Jeremy Corbyn said
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/09/theresa-may-congratulates-us-election-win>
, as though the election of a racist property billionaire who inherited his 
wealth was the class warrior triumph we’ve all been waiting for. But if anyone 
thinks that, it is because the media promoted false equivalencies throughout 
this campaign to a degree never before seen.

The US has elected its most dangerous leader. We all have plenty to fear | 
Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-president-nightmare>
On Tuesday, the Times headlined its editorial about the election “Tough 
Choice”, as if the decision between a woman who used the wrong email server and 
a racist, sexist, tax-dodging bully wasn’t, in fact, the easiest choice in the 
world. Clinton’s private email server was covered more ferociously than Trump’s 
misogyny. That Clinton had talked at Goldman Sachs was reported as a financial 
flaw somehow analogous to his non-payment of tax. However much people want to 
blame the Democrats, their voters or Clinton herself, the result of this 
election is due at least as much to anyone who pushed the narrative that 
Clinton and Trump were equally or even similarly “bad”.

Shame on them. The most qualified candidate in a generation was defeated by 
the least qualified of all time. That is what misogyny looks like, and, like 
all bigotries, it will end up dragging us all down.
 