
There are some people who claim they enjoyed their teenage years. These people 
say – and I swear this is true: I have actually met them – that the years 
between 13 and 18 were “a laugh”, “brilliant”, even “the best years”. I’m happy 
for these people, I really am. How marvellous to look back on your youth and 
see the extended director’s cut ofHappy Days 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0070992/>, Gregory’s Girl 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0082477/>, Beverly Hills 90210 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jun/06/six-reasons-why-beverly-hills-90210-was-the-ultimate-teenage-tv>
 orAmerican Pie <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0163651/> (delete as appropriate 
to the decade of your youth). But those people? They are not my people.

I was not good at being a teenager. I lacked both the fearless sense of 
rebellion and the carefree desire for fun you need. My teenage years were spent 
alternately hiding in my room because I was so miserable and anxious about 
everything and nothing, and hiding in various psychiatric hospitals when that 
misery became life-threatening. Like I said,Ferris Bueller 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0091042/> I was not. I wasn’t even Angela Chase in 
My So-Called Life <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0108872/>. I was more like 
Angela’s history classmate, whom you never saw on screen because she was too 
busy self-harming at home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwas-not-good-being-teenager-some-advice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2b6a84520edee587251443e7350b344ff2df069%2F320_761_1932_1158%2F1932.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20was%20not%20good%20at%20being%20a%20teenager.%20But%20I%20do%20have%20some%20advice...&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwas-not-good-being-teenager-some-advice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20was%20not%20good%20at%20being%20a%20teenager.%20But%20I%20do%20have%20some%20advice...&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwas-not-good-being-teenager-some-advice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2b6a84520edee587251443e7350b344ff2df069%2F320_761_1932_1158%2F1932.jpg>
 Hadley Freeman at school. Photograph: Charlie Ritchie 
And for a long time afterwards, I worried I’d ruined my life when it had 
barely begun. Ever since movies, pop music and TV started mythologising the 
teenage years in the 1950s, there has been a sense that those years matter 
enormously. FromJames Dean <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesdean> to John 
Hughes, pop culture has pushed the idea that being a teenager has some kind of 
mythic grandeur to it, and that if you do it right it will resonate into your 
adult life – save you, even, from the banality of becoming average. Your 
teenage years are when you forge the person you will be, the cliche goes, when 
you learn how to drink alcohol, have sex – not be a child, in other words. No 
wonder they’re so important. But all I did with mine was hide from the world.

Well, teenagers of the 21st century, I am here to tell you something: none of 
this is true. That is not to say that any emotions you feel now don’t matter – 
of course they do. But they won’t, in all likelihood, dictate the rest of your 
life. You will be an adult for far longer than you were a teenager, and any 
adult who considers their teenage years to have been their peak is always a bit 
odd. (The only man who ever said that to me was a 32-year-old snowboarding 
instructor who went by the name of Malibu and pursued 17-year-old girls. So 
there you go.)

Who you are now is not who you will be. How I wish someone had told me that. 
And despite what pop culture might tell you, who you are now is not the best of 
you. You are still clay, taking shape; no wonder you feel disoriented. If you 
are the kind of teenager I was, or perhaps a less extreme version, let me tell 
you something else: this too shall pass.

But I do have three pieces of advice for making it pass a little more 
painlessly. First, create something. Write, draw, bake, knit, make a magazine, 
design a video game – whatever, it doesn’t matter, as long as it comes from 
you. Just make something that wasn’t there before, so you can look at it and 
say, “That came out of my brain, my fingers, me. Without me, that would not 
exist.” One of the best ways to learn who you are internally is to find out 
what kind of mark you can make externally.

Grief comes in five stages. But when it comes to Trump, I can’t get past anger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/grief-five-stages-trump-cant-get-past-anger>
Second, do things just for you. I’m sure you’re sick of condescending oldsters 
like me wagging their fingers at you about “the selfie generation”, which is 
just our way of trying to say how worried we are about you coming of age at a 
time when your worthiness is measured in likes. But try to do as much as 
possible just for yourself, not external validation: make something anddon’t 
Instagram it. Go to a gig on your own, and don’t Facebook it. Validate yourself.

Finally, remember that you are currently wearing teenager goggles. This means 
that everything you are experiencing is being refracted through the crazy hazy 
hormonal moshpit in your head, as well as the various injustices that come with 
that time of life when you’re not sure if you’re an adult or a child and no one 
else is, either.

Your confusion is not misplaced; this really is the weirdest time of your 
life. But here’s the good news: the best is just around the corner.
 