
Glue or fairweather friend?

What is it about Ian Bell? In his own quiet way he has been almost as 
polarising a figure as Kevin Pietersen over the past decade or so. For some he 
was the ultimate cult hero, the most aesthetically pleasing cog in the England 
machine, the often-overlooked glue that bound the flashier elements together. 
For others, he was a flake, a fairweather friend, a frustration. And each 
camp’s existence helped entrench the other.

Sign up to the Spin
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>
The fiery debates appeared to have ended for good last November when Bell was 
left out of the squad for South Africa, after 118 Tests. But the travails of 
England’s middle-order this summer breathed life into the embers and the 
revelation last week that the 34-year-oldhas been sounded out about a return 
for the tours of Bangladesh and India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/ian-bell-under-consideration-england-test-recall-bangladesh-india-trevor-bayliss>
 brought the flames roaring back, though this time the arguments surround not 
whether he should keep his place but whether he should be getting it back.

Even former England captains struggle to agree over Bell. At the start of the 
summer Michael Atherton was in the minority when making the case for Bell’s 
return in the middle order, quoting the stellar records of Kumar Sangakkara, 
Graham Gooch and Jacques Kallis after turning 34. Last week Nasser Hussain 
described the potential selection of Bell as “a backward step 
<http://www.skysports.com/cricket/news/12123/10548680/nasser-hussain-feels-england-shouldnt-recall-bell-for-winter-tours>
”, adding: “I would like to look to the future, especially with the tour of 
Bangladesh. I don’t see the mileage of taking Bell, albeit a fantastic player.”

And isn’t it typical of the man that the pontificating over his unexceptional 
County Championship season – 565 runs at 37.66 (34 batsmen have scored more 
Division One runs than him this season 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/county-championship-div1-2016/engine/records/batting/most_runs_career.html?id=10771;type=tournament>
) – had barely finished when he produceda superb unbeaten 94 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/warwickshire-somerset-royal-london-one-day-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 in Warwickshire’s Royal London One Day Cup win over Somerset in Monday’s 
semi-final.

Other statistics don’t really help bring clarity either. His record on the 
subcontinent may be excellent –he averages 44.09 in India, Bangladesh and 
Pakistan combined 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/player/9062.html?class=1;host=25;host=6;host=7;template=results;type=batting;view=innings>
 – but his record in India alone, where England are likely to need runs the 
most, is not much to write home about – 352 runs at 27.07. And just to further 
muddy the waters, he has signed up tojoin Perth Scorchers for the Big Bash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/30/ian-bell-england-big-bash>. The 
final Test of the India series begins on 16 December, the Scorchers’ first 
fixture is against Adelaide Strikers on 23 December.

Just as you have had to do throughout his career – through no fault of his own 
– you simply have to pick a side withthe Sledgehammer of Eternal Justice 
<https://twitter.com/zaltzcricket/status/42892230767292417>. But whether you 
sign up to the idea that his form is temporary, his class permanent, or would 
prefer simply to move on with new names and faces, perhaps there’s one thing we 
can all agree on.

Everybody loves a comeback tale. And English cricket history is littered with 
returnees who made an impact. Take Ian Botham in 1991. After two years out of 
the Test team, the all-rounder returned to face West Indies one last time. It 
was,as Rob Smyth put it in this excellent Spin from 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/15/the-spin-england-west-indies-1991>
: “Both v Viv, one last time: Botham’s comeback and Viv Richards’s farewell.” 
And despite struggling to recapture the old magic with bat and ball, Botham 
managed to make an indelible mark: his dismissal in the first innings, when he 
tumbled into his stumps, promptedBrian Johnson’s unforgettable “leg over” moment
 <> on TMS, he became the first England player to wear sunglasses in a Test, 
and he even strolled out to smack the winning runs on the final day.

Fifteen years earlier there had been Brian Close. Again the West Indies were 
in town when England asked the 45-year-old Close to return, nine years after 
his previous Test. Promoted to open the batting at Old Trafford against the 
fearsome attack of Michael Holding, Andy Roberts and Wayne Daniel, on the 
evening of the third day Close and John Edrich stood up to one of the more 
terrifying spells in Test history.Watching the footage now 
<https://youtu.be/_8kvK-rylWw?t=18m11s>, you can still hear the thunk of 
leather on barrel chest.

Geoff Boycott’s first Test back in the fold after his self-imposed three-year 
exile was no less notable.For the third Ashes Test at Trent Bridge in 1977 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/06/20-great-ashes-moments-boycott-randall>
 he returned and produced what he rates as his best Test innings, though for 
many it is more memorable for his run out of the Nottinghamshire favourite 
Derek Randall <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rwuo4RZRjDU>.

Graham Thorpe deserves a place on the list too for his century against South 
Africa at The Oval in 2003 (a complex story told brilliantly by Donald McRae 
and Thorpe himselfin an interview at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/oct/13/cricket.comment>). A partnership 
of 268 with Marcus Trescothick, after South Africa had made 484, was pivotal in 
taking England to victory in the Test and with it the series.

There are plenty of others scattered through the years. This is not to say 
that all comebacks are imbued with a fairytale quality – the struggles of 
England’s latest returnee, Nick Compton, are testament to that – but that magic 
exists in potentia. With Bell there is no need for England to leave the 
memories alone when there is still the chance to make new ones.

This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe,just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>.
 