
Ian Macfarlane, the former cabinet minister who unsuccessfully tried to defect 
from the Liberals to the Nationals, will bow out of parliament at the next 
election.

Macfarlane served as the minister for industry and science in Tony Abbott’s 
government and was dumped from the frontbench shortly after the leadership 
change in September despite being a long-time friend of Malcolm Turnbull.

Late last year he tried to move to the Nationals party room and indicated he 
wanted to return to cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/03/ian-macfarlane-reported-to-be-ready-to-defect-from-liberals-to-nationals>
, but the switch wasblocked by the Queensland Liberal National Party (LNP) 
state executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/14/lnp-blocks-ian-macfarlane-bid-defect-liberals-nationals>
.

LNP blocks Ian Macfarlane's bid to defect from Liberals to Nationals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/14/lnp-blocks-ian-macfarlane-bid-defect-liberals-nationals>
“Today I confirm I will not contest the next federal election due later this 
year,” Macfarlane said on Monday.


“After almost 18 years representing the constituents of Groom, serving nine of 
those years as a cabinet minister and minister under the Howard and Abbott 
governments, and a further six years as a shadow minister, the time is right to 
pass the baton.”

Macfarlane said he would look for “new challenges to use my wealth of 
knowledge and experience in the resources, industry and science sectors for the 
betterment of our great nation”.

“I am truly grateful for the opportunities to serve the nation over the years 
and greatly appreciate the support I have received from my family, my 
electorate and ministerial staff and members of the LNP,” he said.

In a statement praising Macfarlane, Turnbull said there were “few if any 
Australians who better understand the public policy realms of industry, 
resources and science”.

“Ian has been and remains one of my closest friends in politics,” the prime 
minister said.

“His retirement from parliament is the end of an era but I have no doubt he 
will go from strength to strength in a new stage of his career and continue to 
make a formidable contribution to our nation.”

The failed defection bid overshadowed Macfarlane’s prior ministerial service 
and opened up a new round of public tensions withinCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> ranks.

Although the Queensland Liberal and National parties merged into a single LNP 
in 2008, seats are still designated as either Liberal or National and when in 
Canberra the LNP’s representatives sit in the corresponding party rooms.

Liberals had accused Macfarlane of trying to “game the system” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/06/brandis-accuses-macfarlane-of-gaming-the-system-in-defection-to-nationals>
 by engineering his return to the frontbench as a National.

Poll shows support for Malcolm Turnbull's government slipping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/15/poll-shows-support-for-malcolm-turnbulls-government-slipping>
LNP members of in Macfarlane’s Groom electorate voted to support the defection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/12/ian-macfarlanes-decision-to-switch-to-nationals-endorsed-by-his-lnp-branch>
 but the party’s state executive said it vetoed the move in December “after 
taking into consideration the best interests of the LNP in Queensland”.

After the procedural defeat, Macfarlane said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/ian-macfarlane-ponders-future-after-lnp-stonewalls-move-to-defect-to-nationals>
 politics was “a rough and tough game” and he did not “ever want to die 
wondering”.

Macfarlane has a close personal history with Turnbull, including through his 
handling of the Coalition’s negotiations with the Rudd government over the 
proposed emissions trading scheme.


Announcing the September 2015 reshuffle, Turnbull said Macfarlane was “one of 
my very, very best friends in this place” but it was time for renewal.

Macfarlane’s decision to bow out at the next election, rather than quit the 
parliament immediately, means a byelection will not be triggered.
 