
Criminal charges should be bought against the former New South Wales ministers 
Chris Hartcher and Joe Tripodi, theIndependent Commission Against Corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/independent-commission-against-corruption>
 has found after an investigation that has lasted years.

On Tuesday the Icac released its findings into Operation Spicer 
<https://www.icac.nsw.gov.au/investigations/current-investigations/investigationdetail/203>
, which investigated alleged developer donations to the NSW Liberal party.

The sole corruption finding was against the former Labor ports minister 
Tripodi, who Icac heard leaked a Treasury memo to Nathan Tinkler’s Buildev 
company that benefited the company.

Icac corruption findings protected after Mike Baird announces urgent 
legislation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/05/mike-baird-plans-legislation-to-protect-previous-icac-corruption-findings>
Icac recommended Tripodi be charged with misconduct in public office and 
Hartcher, a former energy minister, with lacerny.

Sitting MP Mike Gallacher did not receive a corruption finding, but Icac found 
he acted with the intention of evading political donation laws, as did former 
Liberal MPs Andrew Cornwell, Tim Owen and Hartcher. Icac recommended charges 
against Cornwell and his wife Samantha Brookes for giving false or misleading 
evidence to the commission.

Gallacher, a former police minister, has been sitting on the crossbenches 
since resigning from theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> during the Icac 
investigation.

Federal senator Arthur Sinodinos was referenced in the report but Icac made no 
findings against him.

“As I have consistently said, I was only called as a witness by the Icac. I 
gave my evidence and respected the process throughout,” he said in a statement.

“Although I have long anticipated Icac’s report, the process has been 
personally difficult and it has taken its toll on me and my family.

“I now look forward to getting on with the job of helping to provide the good 
government and economic leadership that Australia needs and deserves.”


The premier, Mike Baird, introduced legal changes that prevented Icac making 
corruption findings against several MPs after crown prosecutorMargaret 
Cunneen’s high court battle with the commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/23/four-icac-corruption-findings-set-aside-after-margaret-cunneen-ruling>
.

The changes meant Gallacher and former Liberal MPs Chris Spence, Garry 
Edwards, Darren Webber and Marie Ficarra would not have corruption findings 
made by Icac if they were found to have breached electoral laws alone.

Baird defended the reforms on Tuesday afternoon and said the Operation Spicer 
report vindicated action taken by the Liberal party in 2014.

“The conduct revealed in today’s report by the Icac is completely unacceptable 
and constitutes a betrayal of public trust by both sides of politics. The 
Government has zero tolerance for corruption,” he said in a statement.

“The report justifies the tough actions we took between May and August 2014 
when a number of former Liberal MPs permanently left the parliamentary Liberal 
party.”

Baird said he undertook the legal changes which prevented corruption findings 
because he was implementing all the recommendations of a review of Icac after 
the high court decision on Cuneen.

“These amendments expanded the Icac’s jurisdiction so that it can now 
investigate, and make findings of fact about, any alleged breach of the 
electoral and campaign finance laws, even if the breach would not amount to 
corrupt conduct,” he said.

Icac heard Cornwell had been offered $10,000 in a brown paper bag by the 
Newcastle mayor, Jeff McCloy, before the 2011 state election.

The MP told the commission he had been offered the cash while sitting in the 
mayor’s Bentley. The bag was described as either a brown paper bag or brown 
envelope full of $100 bills.Cornwell stood down from the Liberal party after 
giving the evidence in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/06/two-nsw-liberal-mps-stand-down-from-party-after-icac-hearing>
.

The sound and fury of Icac: surely it can't get any more theatrical than this? 
| Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/the-sound-and-fury-of-icac-surely-it-cant-get-any-more-theatrical-than-this>
Icac investigated allegations Spence and Webber were paid thousands of dollars 
by alleged Liberal party slush fund EightbyFive when they were running for 
office. It also investigated aNew Year’s Eve fundraising dinner held for 
Gallacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/15/liberal-party-fundraiser-to-face-icac-questions-at-operation-spicer-inquiry>
 at Circuluar Key where Buildev executives allegedly donated $66,000 to 
Eightbyfive.

Operation Spicer examined allegations the NSW Liberal party accepted illegal 
donations from developers and implicated eight Liberal party MPs who moved to 
the crossbench. Six of them resigned before the state election.

The then premier, Barry O’Farrell, resigned after it was revealed at an 
Operation Spicer hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/16/barry-ofarrell-resigns-as-nsw-premier-after-thankyou-card-for-wine-emerges>
 that he had not declared a $3,000 bottle of 1959 Grange given to him by 
developer Nick Di Girolamo in 2011.
 