
Is there no place to be carefree and safe, both black and a woman in America?

Late last week, Danièle Watts – best known for her role in Quentin Tarantino’s 
Django Unchained – was detained by the Los Angeles police department on the 
suspicion of being a prostitute ...for kissing her husband in a car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/14/django-unchained-actor-alleges-racial-bias-arrest-los-angeles>
.

Watts, who is African American and married to a white man, took to Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/wattsdaniele/posts/682727425137030> both to describe 
her ordeal and assert her humanity.

Today I was handcuffed and detained by 2 police officers from the Studio City 
Police Department after refusing to agree that I had done something wrong by 
showing affection, fully clothed, in a public place.

Her husband, the chef Brian Lucas, was less kind 
<https://www.facebook.com/chefbelive2/posts/817284528304447> in recounting the 
incident.

If you trust the images projected in the media, then it is easy to believe the 
narrative of the inherent criminality of black women: that we are thieves and 
whores; that our sexuality is only palatable to white men under the cover of 
prostitution. If you buy in to the stereotypes that all black women aresingle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/11/opinion/sunday/black-and-female-the-marriage-question.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
, orunmarried <http://www.economist.com/node/21532296>, to the idea that black 
women are the least desired 
<http://colorlines.com/archives/2011/05/satoshi_kanazawa_is_a_scientific.html>, 
then of course you could never look at Watts and her husband and see a couple 
in love.

You could believe that no one loves a black woman. You could believe that a 
white man is an innocent bewitched by a gold-digging, hyper-sexed black woman. 
You could believe that we are black first, criminal second and women only later.

In the inscription to her photo series, “Peaches, Liz, Tamika, Elaine”, 
American photographer Carrie Mae Weems wrote, “The construction of black women 
as the embodiment of difference is so deep, so wide, so vast, so completely 
absolved of reality that I didn’t know it was me being made fun of.”

It’s all fun and games until aspects of our physicality are co-opted and 
declared a beauty standard for white women 
<http://www.vogue.com/1342927/booty-in-pop-culture-jennifer-lopez-iggy-azalea/> 
in fashion magazines.

Watts told BuzzFeed 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/jimdalrympleii/the-lapd-handcuffed-and-detain-a-django-unchained-actress#njpnp3>
 that she and her husband were kissing and “a man from a nearby office came out 
and asked Watts and Lucas to ‘stop putting on a show’”. Watts emphasized “that 
she and Lucas were fully clothed and only kissing”, but they stopped anyway.

That anonymous tipster in Studio City last week is a modern incarnation of the 
same hate that – eventually – forced states to nullify their laws against 
interracial marriage. Back in 1958, another unnamed onlooker tipped off the 
Virginia police that Mildred and Richard Loving were living as a married couple,
prompting a raid on their home that led all the way to the US supreme court 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/06/us/06loving.html?_r=0>. 

The Lovings were sleeping when the county sheriff and two deputies burst into 
their bedroom, shone flashlights in their eyes and demanded, “Who is this woman 
you’re sleeping with?”. Richard Loving pointed to the marriage certificate on 
the wall, to which the sheriff responded, “That’s no good here.”

The Lovings were charged with violating the Racial Integrity Act and sentenced 
to one-year prison sentences, suspended on the condition that they leave 
Virginia never to return together. It took until 1967 for the high court to 
declare that anti-miscegenation laws in Virginia – and all of America – are 
unconstitutional.

Since then, according to 2012 report by the Pew Center 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/02/16/the-rise-of-intermarriage/>, at 
least 15% of new marriages are interracial – but, according toa 2013 Gallup poll
 <http://www.gallup.com/poll/163697/approve-marriage-blacks-whites.aspx>, only 
87% of Americans are actually cool with it. (Though, if an actress in an 
Oscar-nominated movie can be handcuffed and detained by police for engaging in 
public displays of affection with a white man, perhaps it is an underestimation 
that only 13% of Americans reject interracial relationships.)

It all goes back to the deeper point about the perception of black women in 
America, how deeply embedded the social conditioning is that presumes our 
guilt. Certain women are permitted, and others are presumed desirable; certain 
women are valued and others are automatically wanton; only certain women are 
debased and objectified.

What was so repugnant to the anonymous tipster that merited a phone call to 
LAPD? Why would police officers assume that a passionate kiss between a black 
woman and a white man must mean that there was money exchanged – and that it 
wasn’t possible that love was present?

That is a scenario played out more often by police in the absence of cameras 
and social media: individuals are detained and falsely accused of crimes 
because they are black, because their descriptions fit an archetype of black 
criminality.

What rankles to the very core is that no matter what black women do in America 
– whether our bodies are moving free or in distress – the machinations of white 
supremacy keeps its clammy grip on our freedom and our right to be equally 
protected under the law.

Watts, in her Facebook statement and under a picture of her face contorted in 
pain, asserted her full humanity in a world that seeks to negate it:

In this moment there is a still small voice whispering to me. It says: You are 
love. You are free. You are pure.

You are. We are. 
 