
After yesterday’s state memorial service 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-05/gough-whitlam-to-be-farewelled-in-state-memorial-service/5866874>
, the beatification of former Prime Minister Gough Whitlam is complete. His 
domestic policies were rightly praised for dragging the country into a more
enlightened age <http://www.buzzfeed.com/markdistefano/thank-you-gough-whitlam> 
(although the project is far from complete) but since his death in October 
there’s been curiously little written about his foreign affairs legacy.

A few exceptions exist: The Australian’s Greg Sheridan’s praised 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/in-depth/gough-whitlam/busting-decades-of-myths-on-gough-whitlam/story-fnpxuhqd-1227097838305>
 Whitlam for backing the Indonesian invasion of Timor Leste, and John Pilger
saluted 
<http://johnpilger.com/articles/the-forgotten-coup-how-america-and-britain-crushed-the-government-of-their-ally-australia>
 his rare challenge to global American dominance.

On foreign policy, Whitlam supported some troubling causes. He cosied up 
<https://twitter.com/TimorJustice/status/524364548728299520> to Indonesian 
dictator General Suharto, and gave his assent to Jakarta’s plans to occupy what 
was then Portuguese Timor. During a conversation he had with Suharto in 
Townsville in April 1975, the former prime ministerexpressed concern 
<http://www.dfat.gov.au/publications/historical/volume-23/123-Record-of-Conversation-Between-Whitlam-and-Soeharto.html>
 about the Australian left.

“[They] tended to be paternalistic, patronising and wholly convinced of their 
purity and of the soundness of their own views,” Whitlam told Suharto.

“From this basis they assumed the right to criticise the domestic politics of 
other countries and to find fault with certain aspects of the social or 
political structure of other countries, including corruption or the fact that 
there were too many Generals in government departments.”

This was less than 10 years after the horrific, Western-backed massacres 
unleashed by Suharto against his own people, which led to one of the worst
genocides 
<http://johnpilger.com/articles/suharto-the-model-killer-and-his-friends-in-high-places>
 of the 20th century.

The World Bank later called Suharto a model pupil for his repressive economic 
and political positions. Every Australian prime minister to the present day, 
from both the Labor and Liberal parties, agreed. On Suharto’s death in 2008, 
former prime minister Paul Keatingpraised 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/opinion/soehartos-unsung-legacy/2008/02/01/1201801032980.html?page=fullpage#contentSwap1>
 the dictator as bringing “peace and order” to his country.


It took until the late 1990s for a rare voice of elite dissent to emerge. 
Labor’s foreign affairs spokesman Laurie Breretonargued 
<http://hass.unsw.adfa.edu.au/timor_companion/fracturing_the_bipartisan_consensus/fracture.php>
 that his party should change its stance on Timor and support 
self-determination. It’s a view thatangered Whitlam 
<http://www.abc.net.au/am/stories/s182826.htm>. A revealing cartoon 
<https://twitter.com/TimorJustice/status/524804959229849600> from 1999 
reflected the mood:
Clinton Fernandes (@TimorJustice) 
Cartoon fm 1999 about Laurie Brereton attacked by #Gough 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Gough?src=hash> #Whitlam 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Whitlam?src=hash> for his pro-East #Timor 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Timor?src=hash> stance #auspol 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/auspol?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/JIkuEUyqak 
<http://t.co/JIkuEUyqak>
 <https://twitter.com/TimorJustice/status/524804959229849600> October 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/TimorJustice/status/524804959229849600> 
Less well-known is how Whitlam’s stance on Timor influenced Jakarta’s domestic 
policy. According to aletter 
<http://hass.unsw.adfa.edu.au/Timor/1/links/before_1974.pdf> sent to Timor’s 
Jose Ramos Horta on 17 June 1974, Indonesian foreign minister Adam Malik 
expressed support for an independent Timor. “The independence of every country 
is the right of every nation, with no exception for the people of Timor”, Malik 
stated.

This may have been an untruth, designed to fool Timorese independence leaders. 
Acable sent 
<http://dfat.gov.au/publications/historical/volume-23/45-Cablegram-to-Canberra.html>
 to Canberra on 14 October 1974 showed that Whitlam’s views influenced 
Jakarta’s decision to invade:

Until Mr Whitlam’s visit to Djakarta they [Indonesia] had been undecided about 
Timor. However the Prime Minister’s support for the idea of incorporation into
Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> had helped them to 
crystallise their own thinking and they were now firmly convinced of the wisdom 
of this course.

When Indonesian troops rolled into Timor in December 1975 and occupied the 
nation until October 1999,decades 
<http://www.chomsky.info/articles/199910--02.htm> of violence and hundreds of 
thousands of deaths followed. Diplomatic, political and military support came 
from Australia, America and Britain.

The murder of the Balibo Five, Australian journalists who were killed by 
Indonesian security forces in October 1975, remains anopen sore 
<http://www.nickxenophon.com.au/blog/balibo-five-cover-up-when-will-justice-prevail/>
 from that time; both countries are loathe to investigate the deaths more 
thoroughly. Even the Jakarta Post recentlyacknowledged 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2014/10/20/timor-leste-atrocities-not-forgotten.html>
 the lack of accountability over Indonesian atrocities in Timor.


Like every political leader, Whitlam could be principled, humane and 
provocative. On the Israel/Palestine conflict, unlike every prime minister 
since, he sent the Zionist establishment and Israeli government into 
conniptions.Like Bob Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/15/bob-carr-was-right-to-start-a-debate-on-the-influence-of-the-zionist-lobby>
, the Gillard government’s foreign minister, Whitlam was also sceptical of 
Israel’s colonial ambitions.


Where Bob Hawke was once described as a “pro-Israel fanatic” by US ambassador 
James Hargrove, the Australian Financial Review’s Tony Walkerlamented 
<http://www.afr.com/p/opinion/gough_whitlam_and_the_west_bank_yRKHH194Lt8ZAocibGseTM>
 on Whitlam’s death that “Australian governments have a tendency to tailor 
Middle East policy to suit domestic political considerations and forego first 
principles.”

With the notable exception of Labor MP Melissa Parke – who recently saluted 
<https://newmatilda.com/2014/10/28/melissa-parke-breaks-labor-ranks-back-bds-campaign-against-israel>
 the boycott, divestment and sanctions (BDS) movement against Israel – it’s 
almost unimaginable for an Australian politician, let alone a prime minister, 
to speak like Whitlam did during his time in government:

There can be no peace until Israeli forces have been withdrawn from occupied 
territories, to secure and recognised boundaries, and a just settlement of the 
refugee problem is achievable. That is an even-handed policy.

Myth-making is common when a legendary figure dies and Whitlam is no 
different. His support for the independence of Papua New Guinea in 1975, a long 
overdue recognition that Canberra should no longer control Port Moresby’s 
affairs, has attracted revisionism from across the political spectrum.

Some critics 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/how-whitlams-selfinterest-sank-png/story-e6frg6zo-1227111372340>
 believe Whitlam used independence for PNG as “a lever to advance his ambitions 
in the Labor party”, and that PNG – now a “failed state” – would have been 
better to wait, perhaps indefinitely, for statehood. Missing from the picture 
are the real causes of the country’s woes: corruption and theresource curse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/19/bougainville-mine-locals-who-oppose-its-re-opening-must-have-a-voice>
, prompted by Western leaders and corporations too keen to exploit precious 
minerals and people.

In a similar way, progressives laud Whitlam for challenging Washington’s 
meddling in Australia, the Pine Gap intelligence base and the disastrous US 
invasion of Vietnam. Newly released documentsportray 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/features/gough-whitlams-pine-gap-problem/story-e6frg6z6-1227112648511>
 a more nuanced picture. Whitlam had resolved to shift the balance in favour of 
Australian sovereignty. The US consequently became anxious over the future of 
its military installations.

The Nixon administration seriously considered ditching the formal strategic 
alliance with Canberra, and proposed to move key intelligence posts to other 
nations. It was only after Whitlam publicly defended the installations – 
against the wishes of many in his party – that he again became palatable to 
Washington.

Every great leader, of which too few exist today, is a bundle of vision, wit, 
force and contradiction. Whitlam was no different. Domestically his agenda was 
saintly and vital, giving Australia a modern face and temperament. Overseas, 
however, he both excelled and sinned. Any assessment of a great leader must 
acknowledge who benefits, and who suffers – both locally and internationally.
 