
When respectable commentators tell us the crisis will blow over, they are 
usually right. Most of the time, the shock passes and the status quo reasserts 
itself. Most of the time, men of the world can lie back in their comfortable 
chairs and guffaw at the Chicken Lickens who thought the sky was falling down.

But most of the time is not all of the time. And it most certainly is not our 
time. In the revolutionary years of 1914, 1917, 1929, 1933, 1939, 1979, 1989 
and 2008, those who said we would soon be back to normal were history’s fools. 
This year is a revolutionary year for the radical right. It is at once 
predictable and extraordinary that authoritative voices are telling us to keep 
calm and carry on.

Despite all appearances to the contrary, Donald Trump is just a traditional 
conservative,they say 
<http://capx.co/why-trump-will-be-good-for-america-and-for-britain/> as they 
prettify venality and sanitise hatred. Great opportunities lie ahead,splutters 
Boris Johnson 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/foreign-affairs/news/80688/boris-johnson-calls-end-%E2%80%98doom-and-gloom%E2%80%99-over-donald-trump>
, Trump’s British twin. The constitution will bind him and the media will check 
him, others insist, as they show they have no idea ofhow weak serious 
journalism has become 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-will-not-go-unchallenged>
. Like playing Russian roulette, those trying to minimise the shock of the 
revolution in American politics may be lucky. Trump may not have meant what he 
said in the campaign and will settle down to a presidency of indolent 
corruption. They cannot possibly know the revolver won’t explode, however, and 
are being dishonest when they pretend they can.

The rest of us should ignore them and concentrate on what we know for sure. We 
know that a man who talks as if he was born to lie, who carries grudges like a 
gangster, whose sexual rapacity propels him to demean and assault women, who 
admires the Putin kleptocracy and who wants to impose bans on adherents of a 
global religion is now the president of a great power. We also know that, faced 
with an election they had to win, America’s liberals were too unpopular to stop 
him.

Will Donald Trump destroy America?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/will-trump-destroy-america> 
If we were just talking about the United States, we could concentrate on the 
shocking irresponsibility of the Democratic party in running an establishment 
candidate in a country that was sick of the status quo. It is bizarre to see 
people who condemn cultural appropriation engage in political appropriation. 
But maybe US leftists are right to think that a portion of Trump supporters 
were secretly on their side and a more radical Democrat would have won them 
over.

Unfortunately, this is not just an argument about the wretched Clinton 
campaign. Not only in America, but across the democratic world, liberals and 
leftists are becoming used to waking up in the early hours and learning that 
they have lost. Again. They did not expect the Conservatives to win the British 
general election or the British to vote to leave the EU. They didn’t see Trump 
coming. They won’t see Le Pen coming. Poland may be the future. In a country 
that had a centre-left government within recent memory, not one member of the 
Polish parliament now calls himself or herself a social democrat or socialist. 
Debate is between the internationalist right in opposition and the 
authoritarian nationalists in power. Theirs may be our future too.

To suffer such calamitous defeats and not feel the need to change is to behave 
as irresponsibly as the US Democratic party. It isa myth 
<https://medium.com/@DuncanWeldon/political-economy-trumps-trilemmas-8c8f1b905448#.4ybdijffv>
 that Trump and Brexit won because of overwhelming working-class support. 
Nevertheless, they could win only because a large chunk of the white working 
class moved rightwards. Debates about how to lure them back ought to reveal the 
difference between arguing with and arguing against your fellow citizens, which 
most middle-class leftists have not even begun to think about.

You can only argue against committed supporters of Trump. If they believe all 
Mexicans are rapists and Muslims terrorists, you cannot compromise without 
betraying your principles. Fair enough. But before you become self-righteous 
you must accept that the dominant faction on the western left uses language 
just as suggestive of collective punishment when they talk about their own 
white working class. Imagine how it must feel for a worker in Bruce 
Springsteen’s Youngstown to hear college-educatedliberals condemn “white 
privilege” 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/08/23/white_privilege_an_insidious_virus_thats_eating_america_from_within/>
 when he has a shit job and a miserable life. Or Google the number of times 
“straight white males” aredenounced 
<http://labourlist.org/2009/06/dear-white-straight-guys-its-not-about-you/> by 
public-school educated women in the liberal media and think how that sounds to 
an ex-miner coughing his guts up in a Yorkshire council flat.

Emotionally, as well as rationally, they sense the left, or at least the left 
they see and hear, is no longer their friend. They are men and women who could 
be argued with, if the middle classes were willing to treat them decently. You 
might change their minds. You might even find that they could change yours. 
Instead of hearing an argument, they see liberals who call the police to 
suppress not only genuine hate speech that incites violence but any uncouth or
“inappropriate” transgression. 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/prosecuting-paul-gascoigne-racist-comment-8900383>

It’s not enough to moan about the new right – resist it | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/05/brexit-right-politics-speaking-for-the-people>
For too many in the poor neighbourhoods of the west, middle-class liberals 
have become like their bosses at work. They tell you what you can and can’t 
think. They warn that you must accept their superiority and you will be in no 
end of trouble if you do not.

In Spain 
<https://sites.google.com/a/upr.edu/modernpoetry/Student-Blogs/ivan-andres-rodriguez/spainbywhauden>
, his great 1937 poem on political activism, WH Auden concluded with these grim 
lines: “We are left alone with our day, and the time is short, and/ History to 
the defeated/ May say Alas but cannot help or pardon.” George Orwell made an 
uncharacteristically incoherentattack 
<http://orwell.ru/library/essays/whale/english/e_itw>. Auden had said earlier 
in the poem that soldiers fighting in the Spanish Civil War must engage in 
“necessary murder” and this proved he was a dilettante “warmonger”. Although 
necessary murders are what soldiers commit, Auden came to agree and disowned 
his poem for suggesting the ends justify the means.

For all that, Auden’s words hold true. There are times when your opponents 
must be defeated, whatever the cost. Defeating them today involves nothing so 
violent as necessary murders. Thinking about class, not instead of but along 
with gender and race, would be a step forward. Realising that every time you 
ban an opponent you prove you cannot win an argument would be another. I do not 
doubt history will look back on 2016 and say “alas”. But it will not pardon 
defeated liberals who never learned that to win they had to change.
 