
If only men voted in the upcoming presidential election, Donald Trump - a man 
who brags aboutsexually assaulting women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 and deliberatelywalked in on naked teenage pageant contestants 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/300551-report-trump-walked-into-teen-beauty-pageant-changing>
 – would be our president. And here it was women who had to spend years 
convincing the country we weren’t too stupid to vote!

FiveThirtyEight’s Nate Silver released a map this week 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/election-update-women-are-defeating-donald-trump/>
 showing Trump’s men-only win alongside a map of a Hillary Clinton landslide 
should only women vote. In that scenario, Silver estimates Clinton would take 
the presidency with 458 electoral votes, a landslide victory.

'Locker room talk' isn't harmless – it normalizes rape | Jaclyn Friedman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/locker-room-talk-not-harmless-rape-culture-trump>
Fantasy voting maps aside, the gender gap in November will be historic: One 
current poll shows Clintonleading among women by a massive 33 points 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/10/prri-atlantic-poll-trump-plummets/503561/>
, and more than 68% of white women with a college education voting for her (a 
group that Mitt Romney won in 2012 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-polls-2016-8>). 

If there was ever an election that was a referendum on gender in America, this 
is it. But that doesn’t mean the moment is just about women.

In the wake of tapes that some still characterize as “locker room talk,” right 
now is an opportunity for undecided male voters to demonstrate that they are 
better than all this. That, no, not all men talk about sexually assaulting 
women and laugh. That it is not normal male behavior to treat women as if we 
were no more than a collection of sexualized body parts. And that voting trends 
aside, they won’t vote for someone who talks like it is normal.

Because the claim that “all men” when out of earshot talk this way is 
certainly offensive to women, but it also deeply underestimates men and their 
morality. But for Trump to bounce back from the tape, his campaign needs to 
send the message that what he did was not horrific or abnormal, just 
regrettable and mundane.

That’s why Rudy Giuliani has made the media rounds claiming that this is just 
the way men talk 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/rudy-giuliani-trump-language-229400>. 
And why, in a CNN interview,Ben Carson said 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/ben-carson-defends-trump-that-kind-of-banter-goes-around-all-the-time-211428208.html>
, “that kind of banter goes around all the time.” Evenwhen pressed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/sexual-assault-definition-trump-comments>
 about how the language Trump used described a sexual assault, Republican 
Senator Jeff Sessions said, “that’s a stretch,” and RNC communications director
Sean Spicer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/20/donald-trump-rnc-sean-spicer-my-little-pony-melania-plagiarism>
 said, “I’m not a lawyer.”

Perhaps most appallingly, when MSNBC’s Chris Hayes asked Texas Rep Blake 
Farenthold whether he’d pull support from Trump if he was to say, “I like 
raping women,” Farenthold replied,“I’d consider it.” 
<https://twitter.com/allinwithchris/status/785999654034874368>

This is cowardice. Are women really so disposable to these men – not just as 
“wives, mothers and daughters,” but as people – that they would abandon all 
sense of morality in favor of allegiance to a monster?

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> on the left are not 
necessarily shocked by this behavior from the GOP – their policies enshrine a 
basic disrespect for women’s bodies and autonomy.


But now conservative women are feeling fed up. In a scathing series of tweets 
<https://twitter.com/MBGlenn/status/785641127604916224>, for example, one 
Republican woman blasted the men in her party who are still supporting Trump. 
She noted how conservative women have defending Republican men from sexism 
claims for years. “I fought on behalf of my principles while other women told 
me I hated my own sex,” she wrote. “Now some Trojan horse nationalist sexual 
predator invades the GOP, eating it alive, and you cowards sit this one out?”


This is the point of no return for Donald Trump | Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-women-comments-groping-apology>
“You won’t really care that I’m offended by your silence, and your inability 
to take a stand. But one by one you’ll watch more women like me go.”

It cannot be up to just women – whether by our voices or our votes – to end 
this madness. Men need to step up. The white male voters who tend to vote 
Republican need to look at that map of red and feel ashamed. Women will likely 
be the ones who stave off armageddon this time, but we sure would like some 
company.
 