
When I moved to Britain in 1990, I was pretty happy with my new home. But 
there were two things I couldn’t understand: first, why there were only four 
channels on TV (four! It was like living in a third-world country); second, why 
Britons were so obsessed with the second world war (that’s right, it’s not just 
the Germans who notice this). Britain and I have since compromised on the TV 
issue, because while you can still count the number of channels on one hand, at 
least we’re united in the international language of streaming.

But I have long since fathomed the war obsession. Countries forge their 
self-image on what they deem to be their greatest hour, and all who come after 
it live in its shadow. For more than 70 years, Britain has been able to think 
of itself as the plucky country that refused to betray the continent’s neediest 
citizens, who fought against its basest sentiments and, in doing so, saved 
Europe. I’ve occasionally wondered how different the national character would 
be if Britain had given into appeasement: would people be even more 
self-deprecating? Or would they instead try to style out their collective shame 
with arrogance and affected rudeness, comme les Français?

These are merely hypothetical musings, of course, but I am fascinated by how a 
country’s self-image affects the national character, particularly when this 
self-image starts to corrode. Perhaps that’s not surprising, given that I come 
from America, a country that so prides itself on self-reliance that the 
prospect of more affordable healthcare is still viewed by many of those who 
need it most as a gateway to reds under the bed.

One of my favourite novels is The Remains Of The Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/06/kazuo-ishiguro-the-remains-of-the-day-guardian-book-club>
, again unsurprisingly, given that it consists of an outsider’s take on the 
British character (the author, Kazuo Ishiguro, was born in Japan). The turning 
point in that book comes when the British aristocrat, Lord Darlington, 
instructs his butler, Stevens, to fire two young Jewish maids, because, well, 
you know. This, Ishiguro shows but never says, is an example of how the British 
character can go so wrong, thinking it is upholding national values but in the 
process betraying morality.

How different Lord Darlington was from one of my favourite film characters, 
Miss Price (Angela Lansbury) inBedknobs And Broomsticks 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0066817/>, who pluckily takes in three child 
evacuees, even though she’d only gone into town to collect her post. When I 
moved to Britain, Miss Price – singing her way up Portobello Road with three 
grubby kids in tow – pretty much summed up the British character for me. And 
given that my local train station for many years was Paddington, the landing 
spot of Britain’s most famous refugee – welcomed in by the Brown family with 
only jars of marmalade to recommend him – this, for a long time, seemed pretty 
accurate. After all, as that book’s author, Michael Bond, has said many times, 
theinspiration for his bear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/jan/13/paddington-through-the-ages-michael-bond>
 came from his memory of child refugees during the war.

A certain amount of idealisation is involved when it comes to defining a 
national character. Still, I think we can all agree that Britain’s self-image 
is going to need some updating, because “stout-hearted saviour of those in 
need” just doesn’t seem quite right for a country that completely flips its wig 
over the prospect of 70 child refugees. “Residents of picturesque Devon village 
tell of their fury at ‘bizarre’ decision to send 70 young migrants there,” 
bellowedone recent headline 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3865588/Residents-picturesque-Devon-village-tell-fury-bizarre-decision-send-70-young-migrants-arrived-UK-jungle.html>
, suggesting the decision would be less bizarre if the “young migrants” – AKA 
child refugees – were sent somewhere less picturesque. Will Staines do? Can we 
check their teeth there?

Trump's troubles show we have turned a corner: women's stories are being heard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/22/donald-trump-troubles-show-turned-corner-womens-stories-being-heard>
“What responsible parent would put an actual child in the hands of such 
people?” stormedone rightwing columnist 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3863466/PETER-HITCHENS-child-refugees-fleeing-France-bad-coffee.html>
, displaying the common anti-refugee tendency to think only about where the 
refugees are now, not what they were fleeing from.

Once, it was a source of pride that those in need wanted to come here. Last 
weekend Labour MP Chi Onwurahtweeted that someone had put up a mocking poster 
<https://twitter.com/ChiOnwurah/status/790510050594947072> in a communal 
kitchen in parliament, depicting a pensioner captioned as a child refugee. The 
Sun, David Davies and everyone else seeking adult faces among the child 
refugees claim they are merely trying to keep Britain “safe” for future 
generations; but if we’re going to engage in this long-view thinking, how about 
looking at what kind of Britain we want our children to be defined by. There 
seems to be a lot of concern about the bad hombres exploiting “that famous 
British hospitality”. I don’t think we need worry about that for much longer.
 