
Detached from history, most forms of popular entertainment seem completely 
baffling. Were I, in 2015, to observe various viscera being gleefully tossed 
around in the Colosseum by armour-clad celebrities, I might lean across to a 
fellow plebeian and ponder, “Um, isn’t this a bit weird? No? Not even the bit 
where they bring out a lion to nibble on a Christian? Oh, I get that it’s 
popular, I’m just not sure that therefore means it’s a good … wow, that lion’s 
tucking into his third already.” Then I’d be sucked in, cheering for BloodFoo 
to bring death through mouthfuls of popcorn.

Of course, sometimes you don’t have to wait for the passage of time to 
engender an anachronistic perspective, such as with whatever it is Kanye West 
does, and the popular Chinese dating showIf You Are The One 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/399576643555/if-you-are-the-one-s6-ep4> , 
which is broadcast in Australia on SBS2 and has been taking enjoyable idiocy to 
whole new levels for years.

To give a rough idea to the uninitiated, If You Are The One allows awkward 
singletons to pitch themselves to a stage-spanning panel of 24 women, in a 
perverse cross-breeding program that involvedThe Bachelor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/australia-culture-blog/2014/oct/06/the-bachelor-finale-there-are-no-winners-in-competitive-dating>
,Shark Tank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/09/shark-tanks-reality-tv-formula>
, and a whole load of traumatised Chinese scientists who now wake up in a cold 
sweat every night whispering something about Project Chimera.

Shark Tank's reality TV formula: buy a desk, hire some 'experts', judge a pleb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/09/shark-tanks-reality-tv-formula>
Overseeing this public ritual of humiliation, camouflaged as a romantic quest, 
is popular host Meng Fei, who descends calmly from a metal tube in the studio 
wall – as if the hysterical crowd has somehow convinced the spirit of reality 
TV to birth the chosen one. Meng has a certain serenity about him, which is 
lucky because the stage and lighting design are the visual equivalent of 
hyperventilation. Honestly, the man could out-Zen an anaesthetised brick.

Contestants then plop out of the same tube in the wall, looking uncomfortable 
– probably because they were just sucked out of a business meeting through the 
floor – and immediately pick their favourite girl, having not heard a single 
word from them, which is a slightly odd move given a lot of the show focuses on 
the issue of marriage and what makes a good life partner. This section seems 
more like If You Fancy A Quick Shag.

Perhaps the most nail-bitingly enjoyable parts are the pre-recorded video 
packages. These are apparently designed to boost the lonely male’s chances, but 
more often than not turn into a bizarre case of self-sabotage. OnSaturday’s 
episode 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/399576643555/if-you-are-the-one-s6-ep4>, 
one contestant confesses to drinking shampoo. Prodded by one of the women, he 
elaborates, “Then I puked and I rinsed with water, but foam kept coming out.” 
Cupid there, not so much missing with his arrow, as deliberately aiming at and 
piercing a drum of radioactive waste.

Friends join in to lend an unhelpful hand. In a video promoting one would-be 
romantic, a colleague explains, “He’s sloppy. He doesn’t clean up his room or 
wash his clothes. I hope he can find a girl to help him.” It’s a bit like going 
on Shark Tank, pitching an upside-down toilet, and then getting a friend to say 
you embezzled money to pay for your gambling addiction.

There’s a not-so-inconspicuous undercurrent of sexism here too. Men seem to 
either pitch their faults as necessitating a woman’s touch (messy bedrooms need 
tidying, kids that don’t exist yet will need looking after), or they boast 
their salaries as proof that any would-be wife would largely be taken care of 
and won’t need to work again. After the previous seriesreceived criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/25/china-crackdown-on-vulgar-tv> 
for its focus on salaries and gender roles, you can see Meng attempting to butt 
in and course correct, but it’s nonetheless a tone that makes watching If You 
Are The One all the more curious.

G20 and Beauty and the Geek vie for best TV humiliation | Jazz Twemlow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/nov/17/g20-beauty-and-the-geek-battle-tv-review>
More often than not – due to confessing that time they puked up some shampoo 
froth, getting a friend to say they live in a pile of unwashed clothes that 
needs attending, or admitting they hired a journalist to research one of the 
female judges (yes) – all of the lights on the women’s podiums go out, and the 
rejected suitor has to bugger off, back up the tube.

And given that women who remain unmatched get to stay on the program for 
another episode, it might be fairer to the men’s expectations to simply call 
the show Go On, Back Up The Tube You Go.

• If You Are The One airs on SBS2 and can also be viewed using SBS On Demand 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/399577667683/If-You-Are-The-One>
 