
Fashion fans have had to wait 99 years for it and when it came – atop a 
secondary school in central Paris – it did not disappoint. On Wednesday, the 
iconic house ofBalenciaga <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga> 
unveiled its first menswear catwalk show, with a collection that focused almost 
exclusively on exaggerated tailoring. It was, said designer Demna Gvasalia, 
wearing jeans tucked into his socks, Reebok pump trainers and smoking a 
cigarette, “a clean slate”.

 The label has produced menswear before – quietly, revealed with presentations 
– but this collection was the first time that the menswear has come out of the 
shadows and been given equal billing with womenswear.

 Balenciaga is currently enjoying almost unilateral critical acclaim. It is now
 under the command of Gvasalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/21/balenciaga-debut-menswear-show-vetements-demna-gvasalia>
, who also designs for cult Parisian-based collective Vetements, ofDHL T-shirt 
fame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/19/dhl-t-shirt-vetements-fashion-paris-catwalk>
. The Georgian-born designer unveiled his debut womenswear show for Balenciaga 
three months ago to rave reviews. It was considered a hard stop on the outlook 
of Alexander Wang, the brand’s previous designer, and a statement of intent by 
Gvasalia. His Balenciaga collection simultaneously used the heritage of the 
brand as an oblique frame of reference while seamlessly blending in his 
outsider, street-influenced vision. Under Gvasalia, the Balenciaga mission 
statement is clear: luxury clothes to be worn, not mothballed; product that is 
desirable without losing its integrity as something practical.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c4da53c75664028b5d37f09f8825b2908a5ee90%2F0_0_2873_4376%2F2873.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ikea%20chic%20and%20Talking%20Heads%20suits%20%E2%80%93%20Balenciaga%20gets%20the%20Vetements%20treatment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ikea%20chic%20and%20Talking%20Heads%20suits%20%E2%80%93%20Balenciaga%20gets%20the%20Vetements%20treatment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c4da53c75664028b5d37f09f8825b2908a5ee90%2F0_0_2873_4376%2F2873.jpg>
 Exaggerated almost menacing shoulders at the Balenciaga show. Photograph: 
WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
On the catwalk, this unwritten motto was evident, albeit not in a 
straightforward way. Tailoring is one of the basic tenets of a masculine 
wardrobe, but these silhouettes – either with exaggerated, almost menacing 
shoulders, or strained tightly around the torso – were far from everyday. The 
effect of the supersize was reminiscent ofTalking Heads’ big suit 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kuoiRr6hLjg>. Backstage, however, Gvasalia was 
keen to emphasise that all of the collection would go into production, meaning 
the brand expects to sell it as is.

The idea for the tailoring apparently came from Cristóbal Balenciaga – a 
master tailor who made suits for himself and his clients. In the pockets of 
some of the blazers (often worn with shorts and knee boots) were “Balenciaga 
cards”, originally used to write notes about measurements and fit for each of 
his clients. The volume was another nod to the house’s couture heritage. A 
search for silks had led the designer to suppliers to the Vatican. They wove 
fabrics for the show in cardinal red and papal purple, giving the formalwear an 
ecclesiastical touch. A lace altar-boy cassock peeping below a suit and a 
priest’s stole were surprise touches to this new Balenciaga era.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9a6e45fc70211a247bfef3f65172ced7761b75%2F316_0_1938_4032%2F1938.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ikea%20chic%20and%20Talking%20Heads%20suits%20%E2%80%93%20Balenciaga%20gets%20the%20Vetements%20treatment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ikea%20chic%20and%20Talking%20Heads%20suits%20%E2%80%93%20Balenciaga%20gets%20the%20Vetements%20treatment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9a6e45fc70211a247bfef3f65172ced7761b75%2F316_0_1938_4032%2F1938.jpg>
 Skater chains made an appearance. Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
Parts of the collection were pure Gvasalia. Skater chains hanging down from 
the waistband of trousers, baseball caps with logos, pleated voluminous 
trousers and cropped MA1 tailored bombers will be dog whistles to the 
designer’s fans. Many of them were present either attending or as part of the 
show, some watching from black padded office chairs more usually found stacked 
outside a conference room. The designer’s penchant for elevating the normal to 
couture status came through with the inclusion of a leather overnight bag, 
which appeared to have been inspired by the bags found at the entrance of Ikea.

One criticism levelled at the Balenciaga womenswear show was that there were 
no non-white models. Happily, this was not the case at the menswear debut. The 
models were united by youth, cheekbones, home-cut-looking hair and studied 
snarls, but not by their skin colour.
 