
Australia’s immigration department has been “freezing” the release of 
documents about asylum seekers at in its offshore detention centre onNauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>, according to a internal email, 
suggesting it has been deliberately breaching freedom of information laws.

In an email sent by accident to Guardian Australia 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/329580029/DIBP-Email>, an official at the 
Department of Immigration and Border Protection, says there are “risks” to the 
apparent policy and asks for it to be reconsidered.

The Greens’ immigration spokesman, Nick McKim said the emails showed the 
department had “gone rogue”.


The shadow immigration minister, Shayne Neumann, said it showed the 
immigration minister, Peter Dutton, was mismanaging his department.

UN official criticises Australia's plan for lifetime ban on refugees who 
travel by sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/un-official-criticises-australias-plan-for-lifetime-ban-on-refugees-who-travel-by-sea>
The department said the email was “a misunderstanding”.

The email, sent by Ian Campbell, the immigration department’s freedom of 
information officer, <https://www.scribd.com/document/329580029/DIBP-Email> 
asks two other officials:

We note that our Nauru­-related FOI cases (ie summary incident reports, health 
data set and several others) continue to be on­ hold pending confirmation from 
you about when we can proceed to finalise them.

Are you able to please give us an update/indication of when you consider we 
will be able to proceed?

There are some risks associated with not proceeding these FOI requests.

Rather than freezing the processing of these cases for several more weeks or 
months, we might be better off releasing the documents sooner, with the Nauru 
information fully exempted under grounds of international relations. This is 
something we’d want to discuss with Susan [Mathew] given the concerns 
previously expressed about such an approach.

Under Australia’s freedom of information laws 
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-guidelines/>, strict 
timeframes are set out for processing requests for information, and there is 
evidence that the department has exceeded the timeframe for processing a number 
of requests made by Guardian Australia.

Guardian Australia’s request for healthcare data on Nauru has been delayed for 
processing since July this year.

In another case, a request for the child protection panel report on Nauru has 
also been delayed. A freedom of information officer previously said the 
department has committed to releasing it by the end of October. The secretary 
of the department, Michael Pezzullo, has been in possession of the report for 
several months.

There has been renewed focus on the asylum seekers and refugees held on Nauru 
by Australiaafter the Guardian’s publication of the Nauru files, which detailed 
thousands of incident reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
 from the island’s detention facility until October 2015.

A Senate inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/12/senate-to-investigate-allegations-of-child-abuse-on-nauru-and-manus-island>
 isunder way into serious allegations of abuse and assault on Nauru 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Legal_and_Constitutional_Affairs/NauruandManusRPCs>
 and the department is facing increasing pressure to release information about 
incident reports it holds, as well as for healthcare information for asylum 
seekers and refugees on the island.

Coalition MPs can't agree on which refugees Australia's lifetime ban will 
affect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/coalition-mps-cant-agree-on-who-australias-lifetime-ban-on-refugees-will-affect>
Neumann and McKim urged Australia’s information commissioner, Timothy Pilgrim, 
to examine the immigration department’s actions.

Neumann said Dutton had been “caught out” in the revelation.

“Peter Dutton might not like what he finds in these files but that doesn’t 
give him the right to withhold the information from the Australian public,” 
Neumann said.

“I’m sure the information commissioner will take a keen interest in any 
evidence that suggests a deliberate strategy by the Turnbull government to 
withhold information from the FoI process.”

McKim said the email showed what appeared to be a “deliberate breach” of 
freedom of information laws.

“This email is an extraordinary admission of the department’s culture of 
secrecy and obfuscation of people trying to find out the truth,” he said. “In 
many respects, the department has gone rogue and it is long past time for the 
government to bring it to heel.

“The government’s reasons for secrecy are clear – their policies have failed 
in humanitarian, financial and logistical terms, and they simply don’t want 
people finding that out.”

The immigration department’s FoI unit has a fraught relationship with the rest 
of the department. Decision-making powers have been stripped from many of its 
officers and are now made by other officials. As a consequence, the unit often 
doesn’t have the power to see the processing of requests through.

A spokesman from the Department of Immigration and Border Protection said: 
“There has been no freeze of FoI requests in relation to Nauru; the email you 
reference reflected a misunderstanding of the process and was an internal 
communication seeking advice in relation to specific ongoing requests.”

The department’s response did not address whether it accepted it had breached 
freedom of information laws.

Dutton did not respond to requests for comment.

The manager of the department’s freedom of information unit, Linda Rossiter, 
denied there was a deliberate freeze and said there had been a 
“misunderstanding” in the email.


“There isn’t a freeze and it’s a misunderstanding,” Rossiter told Guardian 
Australia. “There’s no freeze on the processing of requests. Requests are dealt 
with on a case by case basis.”

The office of the Australian information commissioner has the power to 
investigate the handling of freedom of information requests. It also has 
sweeping investigative powers and can conduct own motion investigations into 
the actions of government agencies.

The immigration department has faced several investigations into the handling 
of information requests. The officeconducted an investigation 
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-decisions/foi-omi-reports/processing-of-non-routine-foi-requests-by-the-department-of-immigration-and-citizenship>
 that identified a range of serious flaws in 2012.

A separate internal review 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwj4nuzNuIbQAhXJJ5QKHTJ8DPYQFggdMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.border.gov.au%2FReportsandPublications%2FDocuments%2Freviews-and-inquiries%2Findependent-comparative-review-foi-procedures.pdf&usg=AFQjCNH9Xmmi0gUIGhj8HjNBYk6d0VAHZA&sig2=YjbwBB6kx3FEQ1M38JK1PA>
 commissioned by the department and undertaken by Robert Cornall also found 
there was a lack of efficient management of FoI by the department.

Could a mild outbreak of humanity be behind the Coalition's cynical new asylum 
politics? | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/could-a-mild-outbreak-of-humanity-be-behind-the-coalitions-cynical-new-asylum-politics>
A spokeswoman for the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner said: 
“The Australian information commissioner expects Australian government agencies 
bound by the Freedom of Information Act 1982 to meet the statutory timeframes 
in relation to processing FoI requests.


“While the act allows for extensions of time in certain circumstances, the 
commissioner would expect those extensions are only requested when there is a 
substantive reason. Where we receive requests by agencies for extensions we 
review them in relation to the specific circumstances.

“In the last 12 months we have received a small number of extension of time 
requests from the Department of Immigration and Border Protection. Not all have 
been granted.

 “The commissioner monitors FoI processing within Australian government 
agencies and will conduct investigations when appropriate.”
 