
Australia’s immigration department failed to appropriately oversee the 
multinational that provides healthcare for asylum seekers and was unable to 
cope with the “commercially aggressive practices” that led to numerous failures 
to meet medical benchmarks, a series of damning internal reviews have found.

The findings substantiated a number of key allegations published by Guardian 
Australia in July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/series/healthcare-in-detention> 
about the relationship between International Health and Medical Services and 
the immigration department.

Leaked documents showed IHMS failed to meet medical targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/significant-risks-to-health-of-asylum-seekers-in-firms-failure-to-meet-targets>
,deliberately included incorrect data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/asylum-seeker-healthcare-firms-reports-included-wrong-data-internal-briefing>
 in reports andadmitted it was “inevitable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/inevitable-over-asylum-seeker-health-targets-leaked-documents-show>
 fraud would occur as it tried to meet government standards. The documents also 
revealed that IHMS failed to undertakeworking with children checks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/immigration-healthcare-firm-likely-to-fail-on-child-protection-briefing-note>
 andpolice checks on Manus Island. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/22/ihms-deployed-staff-in-detention-centres-without-police-checks>

Fraud 'inevitable' over asylum seeker health targets, leaked documents show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/inevitable-over-asylum-seeker-health-targets-leaked-documents-show>
Three reviews were commissioned by the immigration department to examine the 
allegations. Two were internal and one was to be conducted by KPMG.

IHMS, a subsidiary of the global healthcare giant International SOS, has 
received more than $1.6bn in government funding to provide asylum seeker 
healthcare in Australia and onManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> and Nauru.

 The detention assurance review team report, released under freedom of 
information, which drew together findings from the KPMG audit and the first 
initial internal audit, said: “Through the review processes, both internal and 
external reviews agree that IHMS took an approach of seeking to maximise 
profits, including through actively reducing opportunities for the department 
to seek contract abatements.”

It later continued: “There is a fundamental conflict between contractual and 
clinical objectives where profit and cost dictate clinical operations.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fihms-healthcare-detention-explainer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437517455449%2Fcomposite-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=IHMS%20healthcare%20in%20detention%20investigation%3A%20the%20essentials%20explained%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fihms-healthcare-detention-explainer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=IHMS%20healthcare%20in%20detention%20investigation%3A%20the%20essentials%20explained%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fihms-healthcare-detention-explainer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437517455449%2Fcomposite-001.jpg>
IHMS healthcare in detention investigation: the essentials explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jul/22/ihms-healthcare-detention-explainer-video>
The review acknowledges that the series of contracts set up to manage IHMS 
were simply unable to adequately meet the expansion of asylum seeker health 
services needed as the detention population increased over the past five years.

“The department acknowledges that the existing contract was not designed for 
this volume and that the service delivery and staffing models for IHMS were 
subsequently modified to meet demand faster than good governance would normally 
allow,” the review said.

The reviews break the allegations raised in the reports down into eight 
distinct issues. Of the most serious allegations surrounding the high risk of 
systemic fraud within IHMS, the reviews stated that they did not identify 
evidence of widespread fraud. They said the slide published by Guardian 
Australia containing this allegation was “aimed at educating the audience on 
the contractual performance requirements, the abatements scheme”.

IHMS, the healthcare giant at the heart of Australia's asylum system – 
explainer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/ihms-the-healthcare-giant-at-the-heart-of-australias-asylum-system-explainer>
IHMS also told the reviewers there was no evidence the slide had been 
presented. The KPMG review said: “IHMS could not identify any meeting where 
this presentation was used.

“The lead analyst at the time (who has since left) often produced ad hoc 
presentations of his own volition designed to illustrate risks. Not all 
resulted in formal presentations and it was the view of one analyst, crafted to 
attract attention.

“The analyst was well-motivated but often used emotive and inappropriate 
language.”

But it acknowledged there were major deficiencies in the oversight of the 
healthcare contract that dramatically exacerbated fraud risks. It said that 
until 2012 no clear monitoring of IHMS was undertaken for the department.

The KPMG review said: “Accordingly, the potential for unidentified systemic 
fraud at this time was high.” It added that across 2013 and 2014 the department 
sought to improve oversight of the provision of health services but that the 
department struggled to achieve this. It said the department “missed several 
key opportunities to address the deficiencies” as the detention population rose.

It also revealed that IHMS had no fraud risk policy in place until 2015. IHMS 
denies it implemented this policy after Guardian Australia’s series.

The reports found that there had been evidence of failures by IHMS to make 
accurate reports to the department. The final review recommended that the 
department include “rigorous compliance monitoring” as part of its processes.

The review found that IHMS had failed to appropriately conduct working with 
children checks but said “this was an ongoing issue that was never resolved”.

The reviews also made adverse findings surrounding vaccination standards and 
other aspects of healthcare. The department redacted all parts on the issue in 
its final review but disclosed an observation that read: “The level of 
‘comfort’ around the provision of healthcare, or what constitutes ‘appropriate’ 
are ambiguous terms. From both a reputation risk perspective, and to satisfy 
its duty of care, the department should be assured that the provision of care, 
including adequate vaccinations rates, are in line with Australian community 
expectations.”

'Grab from the excuse bag' – how health firm IHMS tackled asylum seeker targets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/22/grab-from-the-excuse-bag-how-health-firm-ihms-tackled-asylum-seeker-targets>
Both the department and IHMS disputed that asylum seeker health had been 
jeopardised as a result of the failures identified.

A department spokesman said: “The department is confident that IHMS provided 
and continues to provide the appropriate level of healthcare to all people in 
immigration detention and regional processing countries.”

He added: “The review did find that there were instances of reporting errors 
and delays in addressing contractual compliance issues. These issues have been 
addressed through processes to strengthen reporting requirements from the 
service provider, including introducing a higher level of rigour around 
compliance monitoring of the immigration detention health services contract.”


He also said the department had introduced monthly performance audits to 
increase oversight.

An IHMS spokeswoman said: “The partial findings related to certain 
administrative procedures, not any deceptive or fraudulent conduct. These 
findings have been addressed through our strengthened reporting and compliance 
monitoring.

“IHMS has full confidence in the quality of the professional services we 
provide and is committed to open and transparent engagement with DIBP to ensure 
our patients receive high-quality healthcare in accordance with our contractual 
obligations.”

International SOS declined to provide a separate response.

The reviews also examined allegations that personal medical records of asylum 
seekershad been handed over by IHMS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/23/immigration-department-sought-private-medical-records-for-political-reasons>
 to the immigration department for “political purposes” and potentially in 
breach of privacy laws.

The reviews indicated they did not believe there had been a breach of 
Australia’s privacy laws but they contained an admission that personal data is 
routinely handed over to the foreign governments ofNauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> and Papua New Guinea.

“The department has confirmed that it is not inappropriate for medical 
information to be provided to foreign governments where transfers are being 
made offshore, as it is necessary to provide a certain level of disclosure to 
the host country,” the KPMG review said.

It also disclosed that IHMS believed that it did not even need a consent form 
from asylum seekers to be able to hand over personal medical information to the 
department.

The internal review noted one instance of inappropriate access by a state 
office monitoring team but said it was “rapidly resolved”.

The immigration department has selectively redacted the most critical parts of 
the reviews.

In the areas where allegations where substantiated – such as surrounding the 
failure to undertake working with children checks on Christmas Island and 
police checks on Manus Island and deliberately misreporting incident data – the 
department has blocked release of information. The basis for this decision is 
that it would reveal trade secrets and would be considered “deliberative” 
material.

A department spokesman said: “Some of the redacted information details 
unsubstantiated allegations against IHMS. Where such allegations are not 
supported by evidence it would be inappropriate for the department to release 
them.”

Child detainee mental trauma will last, immigration healthcare provider warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/18/child-detainee-mental-trauma-will-last-immigration-healthcare-provider-warns>
KPMG’s review was not a detailed audit of the materials or documents. It 
undertook some interviews and reviewed some information but the report 
emphasised it was not a “detailed investigation” and that it had “not 
comprehensively examined all available material.”

The delivery of asylum seeker healthcare and IHMS’s role in the delivery of 
the contract is also the subject of a sweeping audit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/07/national-audit-office-to-investigate-asylum-seeker-healthcare-in-detention>
 currently being undertaken by the Australian National Audit Office. The 
findings are scheduled to be tabled in June 2015.

There are also several individual and class action claims against the 
Australian government by asylum seekers over alleged medical negligence.

Some of the allegations surrounding IHMS were also referred to the Australian 
federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/30/sarah-hanson-young-refers-asylum-seeker-health-providers-to-federal-police>
 for investigation by the Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young. An investigation 
was initiated by the AFP but was later closed.

A spokeswoman for the AFP said: “The AFP can confirm it received a referral in 
relation to this matter on 30 July 2015.

“The matter was accepted for investigation, however there was insufficient 
evidence to establish any criminal offences and the matter was finalised.”
 