
Londoners face a one in five probability of queuing in the street at 
standpipes for their water for days or weeks during a sweltering summer in the 
coming 25 years, owing to drought brought about by climate change and a lack of 
water infrastructure,new data suggests 
<http://www.water.org.uk/news-water-uk/latest-news/research-shows-more-action-needed-protect-against-growing-drought-risk>
.

As the UK basked in unaccustomed September heat, with temperatures topping 30C 
on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/13/uks-hottest-september-day-since-1949-32c-heathrow>
, a report commissioned by water companies found that the likelihood of 
droughts was increasing, while investment in water supplies failed to keep up 
with likely demand.

The threat to London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/29/where-world-most-water-stressed-cities-drought>
 is particularly dire, as the population of the south-east of England is set to
increase markedly while steady rainfall declines 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-09/growing-london-faces-water-shortages-and-overflowing-sewage>
, and there are few new sites available for the reservoirs that may be needed.


The economic costs of such a drought would amount to as much as £1.3bn a day 
in the most severe case, according to the report, published on Tuesday byWater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> UK, the trade association for 
water utilities.

The report, called Water Resources: Long-term Planning Framework, shows a 20% 
chance of a drought requiring standpipes inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> for periods of several days to weeks 
occurring in the next 25 years.

Avoiding such a probability would cost an extra £3bn to £5bn, added to 
customers’ bills on top of inflation and other infrastructure costs, according 
to Doug Hunt, of the engineering firm Atkins, a co-author of the study, which 
was commissioned from engineering companies and academics and paid for by water 
companies.

While the likelihood of future floods has taken up political attention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/30/uk-flooding-fears-grow-danger-inquiry-prevention-shelved>
, owing to dire events in recent winters and the millions of people displaced 
from their houses, with associated costs, the risk of future droughts has been 
largely overlooked.

Droughts have tended to be more of a problem for farmers than urban residents, 
for whomhosepipe bans have been the main effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/apr/05/hosepipe-bans-southern-eastern-england>
. But the UK’s creaking infrastructure and the increased severity of climate 
change are likely to mean that Londoners in particular face a future where 
serious water shortages become more common.

The UK is currently experiencing its hottest September days since 1949 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/13/uks-hottest-september-day-since-1949-32c-heathrow>
. Globally,data just published 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/13/august-ties-with-july-as-hottest-month-on-record>
 shows that August and July were the hottest yet on record.

The last major drought warnings for most of the country occurred in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/apr/16/drought-wildlife-farming-disaster-warning>
, but there have been localised problems and close calls since. Britain’s water 
and sewage infrastructure were built, from the 19th century, to withstand far 
different weather circumstances than those that are beginning to prevail as 
global warming takes hold.

Climate change is likely to mean an increase in extreme weather of all kinds - 
floods, droughts, heatwaves and fiercer storms - with changes in rainfall 
patterns having knock-on effects on current infrastructure.

One thing that both droughts and flooding have in common is a lack of storage 
space for water: in the case of floods, centuries-old storage spaces such as 
river flood plains and water meadows have been drained or redeveloped for 
agriculture and housing; and in the case of droughts, few new reservoirs have 
been built in the areas where they are most needed, particularly in the 
south-east of England.

Sewage is also a key problem, as sewers can overflow during floods but become 
backed-up during droughts, when there is not enough water to flush material 
through the pipes. When rainfall resumes after a period of drought, the 
resulting back-up can cause blocked sewers and flooding.

Thames Water has been criticised for selling off 25 of its reservoirs 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/earth/drought/9236909/Thames-Water-accused-of-mismanagement-by-closing-two-dozen-reservoirs.html>
 in the wake of privatisation, despite the threat of water shortages in London.

Hunt told the Guardian that these reservoirs would have had “no effect” on the 
utility’s current and future resilience to drought, as they were “service” 
reservoirs intended to balance the load between supply and changing demand, 
rather than “storage” reservoirs to collect water.

However, the company is now facing having to buy new - and expensive - land 
for creating new storage reservoirs around London in order to provide 
reassurance against shortages, if measures to encourage residents to reduce 
their water use are insufficiently effective.

Michael Roberts, chief executive of Water UK, the utilities’ trade body, said: 
“Since privatisation, the industry has invested billions of pounds in securing 
the nation’s precious water resources, but we all need to do more in the face 
of current and future pressures on those resources.”

Rose O’Neill, freshwater programme manager at WWF-UK, said that abstraction 
licences, used mainly water companies and farmers to take water from existing 
rivers, lakes and underground sources, should come under urgent review.

She said: “Pressure on our rivers and water supplies is only going to rise. We 
need to act now to ensure we have enough water for people and nature in years 
to come. [The system of granting and monitoring] abstraction licences is 
out-of-date, unsustainable and not fit for purpose. It urgently needs reform.”

Simon Gosling, associate professor in climate risk at the University of 
Nottingham, said the report added to the body of evidence that the UK should 
expect and increase in the frequency and severity of droughts, owing to climate 
change. “This, when coupled with projected population growth scenarios, creates 
an important risk to water infrastructure as a result of water demand exceeding 
the available supply,” he said.

“One of the recommendations in the report is for a ‘twin track’ approach to 
future water management, which would involve an enhancement in the supply of 
water along with improved management of the demand for water. This 
recommendation confirms one of the conclusions from theUK Climate Change Risk 
Assessment, published earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/12/uk-poorly-prepared-for-climate-change-impacts-government-advisers-warn>
, which noted that new policies and increased efforts are needed in order to 
provide more ambitious reductions in water consumption, and planning of new 
water supply infrastructure.”

Dr Marc Stutter, a research leader on water management at the James Hutton 
Institute in Scotland, told the Guardian that the report should help 
policymakers looking at government actions such as the licensing of businesses 
that need to use water.

He said: “In terms of the disposal route of effluents to waters these are 
based on licensing discharge based on a safe level of effluent dilution with 
river flows. These need to recognise future risks of extreme drought and 
impaired dilution leading to severe ecological stress. The modelled scenarios 
[in the report] are a good basis [for further study] to understand drought 
effects for business sectors and the environment that rely on water.”

Dr Richard Harding, research fellow at the Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, 
added: “The UK, particularly the south-east, faces a critical water supply 
situation in the coming decades, with the twin pressures of rising population 
and the likelihood of increasing drought due to climate change. We mustn’t let 
the recent run of wet years, since 2012, lull us into a sense of complacency, 
because the weather patterns could very well switch, as they did in the spring 
of 2012.”
 