
Journalists are facing an “unprecedented” wave of attacks around the world 
with increased hostility to the media leading to assaults on individuals as 
well as press freedom, according to a new report.


A series of crackdowns on media workers and news outlets in Europe as well as 
elsewhere has confirmed 2016 as one of the most dangerous times to be a 
journalist, according to the latest figures compiled by Index onCensorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/censorship>.

13 countries where journalists have been killed with impunity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/oct/27/13-countries-where-journalists-have-been-killed-with-impunity>
The study found 406 verified reports of violence, threats or violations 
throughout European Union member states and neighbouring countries including 
Russia, Turkey and Ukraine in the three months to the end of September.

Melody Patry, senior advocacy officer at Index, said the year so far had been 
striking for the increase in reports as well as range of attacks, from threats 
to media freedom to attacks leading to death. “The attacks are unprecedented in 
both scope and scale.”

With a marked increase in attacks in Europe, long considered a bastion of 
press freedom, the latest research does not reflect increased violence in Asia 
or the US, which has seen an increase in assaults and abuse during a highly 
charged US election during which reporters were put in pens by President-elect
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. 


“Hostility to the media is increasing globally,” said Patry. “When the 
credibility and legitimacy of media outlets starts to be questioned it can 
easily spread and the sentiment easily becomes one of distrust.”

As well as four murders, the Index report verified 54 incidents of physical 
assault, 107 arrests, 150 detentions and 112 reports of intimidation, which 
includes psychological abuse, sexual harassment, trolling or cyberbullying and 
defamation. The work of journalists was censored or altered 29 times and media 
professionals were blocked from covering a story in 89 cases.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-censorship-journalists-under-unprecedented-attack-russia-turkey-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62a655503108c816c08e12aef0b92fc3df9274fd%2F0_151_4540_2724%2F4540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Index%20on%20Censorship%3A%20journalists%20now%20under%20'unprecedented'%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-censorship-journalists-under-unprecedented-attack-russia-turkey-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Index%20on%20Censorship%3A%20journalists%20now%20under%20%27unprecedented%27%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-censorship-journalists-under-unprecedented-attack-russia-turkey-ukraine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62a655503108c816c08e12aef0b92fc3df9274fd%2F0_151_4540_2724%2F4540.jpg>
 Forensic experts examine the the car in which the journalist Pavel Sheremet 
was killed in a bombing in Ukraine’s capital, Kiev. Photograph: Sergei 
Chuzavkov/AP 
Those campaigning to protect journalists suggest that the most extreme forms 
of violence have proliferated because of a feeling of impunity. Dunja 
Mijatović, an expert on media law and regulation and representative for the 
Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe, said: “With nine out of 
every 10 murders of journalists never solved, the vicious cycle of impunity 
still prevails. It has to be broken.”

'We became the news': staff at Turkey's Cumhuriyet speak out over arrests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/we-became-the-news-staff-at-turkeys-cumhuriyet-speak-out-over-arrests>
Two journalists were killed in Ukraine: Pavel Sheremet, a journalist working 
for the online investigative newspaper Ukrayinska Pravda, was killed in a car 
explosion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/ukraine-journalist-pavel-sheremet-killed-kiev-car-bombing>
, andAlexander Shchetinin <https://mappingmediafreedom.org/#/2892>, founder of 
news agency Novy Region, was shot in the head in his apartment in Kiev. In 
Russia,Andrey Nazarenko <https://mappingmediafreedom.org/#/2651>, a cameraman 
for state TV channel Russia-1, was found dead in his apartment in Moscow with 
two bullet wounds.

In Turkey, soldiers shot and killed 
<https://cpj.org/2016/07/in-turkey-one-journalist-killed-several-newsrooms-.php>
Mustafa Cambaz 
<https://cpj.org/2016/07/in-turkey-one-journalist-killed-several-newsrooms-.php>
, a photographer, during the coup attempt on Turkey’s democratically elected 
government in July. Following the failed coup, Turkish authorities forced more 
than 2,500 journalists out of their jobs, arrested and prosecuted 98 under 
trumped-up criminal charges, detained 133 and seized or shut down 133 media 
outlets, according to Index.

The report’s 19% rise in the number of verified incidents in the third quarter 
compared with the previous three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/28/press-freedom-europe-index-on-censorship-turkey-ukraine>
 is likely to represent an underreporting of the extent of the problem. Several 
attacks were reported under one case and there was also underreporting in some 
of the worst countries.

Patry said journalists in countries known as beacons of press freedom, such as 
the UK and France, feel “guilty” reporting threats. “There’s a real sense that 
it’s part of the job, that they should accept it and anyway it’s not as bad as 
it is in Azerbaijan.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-censorship-journalists-under-unprecedented-attack-russia-turkey-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F864bbd29143e21192353280e311000af11edf3e5%2F0_509_1594_956%2F1594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Index%20on%20Censorship%3A%20journalists%20now%20under%20'unprecedented'%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-censorship-journalists-under-unprecedented-attack-russia-turkey-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Index%20on%20Censorship%3A%20journalists%20now%20under%20%27unprecedented%27%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Findex-censorship-journalists-under-unprecedented-attack-russia-turkey-ukraine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F864bbd29143e21192353280e311000af11edf3e5%2F0_509_1594_956%2F1594.jpg>
 David Gilkey, right, and his translator, Zabihullah Tamannawere, were killed 
while traveling with an Afghan army unit. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Among anti-press freedom laws introduced recently are the Investigatory Powers 
Act in the UK, or so-called snooper’s charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/extreme-surveillance-becomes-uk-law-with-barely-a-whimper>
, which legalises a whole range of tools for snooping and hacking by the 
security services and allows the authorities to in effective identify 
journalists’ anonymous sources.

In France, the National Assembly passed an amendment where journalists would 
be subject to up toseven years’ imprisonment 
<https://mappingmediafreedom.org/#/2630> for protecting sources. 

'The world can be better': a tribute to journalist Pavel Sheremet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/tribute-to-journalist-pavel-sheremet-car-bomb-kiev>
Just over a week after his election a group of 18 major journalism 
associations published an open letter to Trump,asking that the new 
administration take steps to protect freedom of the press 
<http://petapixel.com/2016/11/17/major-media-groups-pen-open-letter-trump-press-freedom/>
 in the United States. Index now wants to extend its mapping exercise to the US.

Recent attacks range from the death of David Gilkey, a photojournalist with 
National Public Radio 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/06/06/480866035/remembering-photojournalist-david-gilkey>
, alongside his Afghan translator, Zabihullah Tamanna, in an ambush in 
Afghanistan in June, to theattack on Kyle Ludowitz, 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3925606/Photojournalist-attacked-covering-anti-Trump-protest-Oakland.html>
 a photojournalist who was left with a fractured cheekbone after being attacked 
at an anti-Trump protest in California.

The Mapping Media Freedom  <https://mappingmediafreedom.org/#/>project – run 
by the European Federation of Journalists, Index on Censorship and Reporters 
Without Borders and part funded by the European commission – has recorded more 
than 2,400 incidents threatening media freedom from its launch in May 2014. 
Launched amid concern over rising attacks on the media, Patry said this year 
has proved that it is “needed more than ever”.
 