
11.35am GMT 

India win the series 3-2

Ian Bell finished with 113, Eoin Morgan an important 40. The three main 
bowlers – Bresnan, Finn and Tredwell were very good early on then Bell, in 
particular, Root and Morgan saw them home. Thanks for your emails. I'm off 
home. See you for some of the New Zealand tour. Bye.

11.33am GMT 

England win by seven wickets

Bell ends it with a four off the first ball and a single off the second. That 
victory puts England on 118 points at the top of the rankings, same amount as 
India but still in second place.

11.30am GMT 

47th over: England 222-3 (Bell 108, Morgan 40)

This will be Ishant's last over and Morgan taps him down to third man and runs 
one. Bell goes on the charge and plays a lovely midwicket drive for four. What 
fine innings both of them have played. As ever in this series, as Bumble says, 
it's win the toss and win the game. England, with six wanted, halt play while 
Ian Bell signals for a drink. He ends the over with a single. Five to win off 
18 balls.

11.25am GMT 

46th over: England 216-3 (Bell 103, Morgan 39)

Now it's 27 off 30 balls and so far Bell and Morgan and Root have timed this 
perfectly. Bell looks in a hurry now, flat batting one that didn't get on to 
him as quickly as he thought from Ahmed, pulling it over mid-on's head but 
short of the boundary. Morgan makes no mistake outside off stump, following 
through with violent power as the ball sails over long-off for six. So Ahmed 
tries to bounce him but it doesn't rise as much as Ahmed wanted and Morgan 
pulls him for six over backward square leg. What forearms he's got. Eleven to 
win.

11.21am GMT 

45th over: England 200-3 (Bell 102, Morgan 24)

Morgan finds one right up his alley, in the slot, and smashes it for a flat 
six to the long-on boundary. He gets another off his glove on the sweep that 
goes between Dhoni's legs then Bell brings up the 200.

11.19am GMT 

44th over: England 192-3 (Bell 101, Morgan 17)

Jadeja hits the stumps when he dives to save at mid-onand launches it to try 
and run Morgan out at the non-striker's end backing up. The ball ricochets off 
the stumps with Morgan home and the batsmen saunter a single. Bell moves closer 
single-by-single, dropping the ball into the off-side ring and sprinting hard 
for one. And that's his hundred, getting there off the fifth ball of Ishant's 
over, clipping a low full toss off his front pad to the midwicket boundary.

11.14am GMT 

43rd over: England 184-3 (Bell 95, Morgan 15)

Bad maths from me. It's only 6.63 per over required, four of which this over 
from Ashwin come off Bell's rather inelegant reverse sweep, hoicked to the 
extra cover rope. This is expensive from Ashwin hwose length is inconsistent as 
the batsmen use their creases, Bell taking two off a low full toss, Morgan 
hitting another off the back foot wide of mid-on.

11.10am GMT 

42nd over: England 173-3 (Bell 87, Morgan 14)

Oh, Shami Ahmed. Morgan and Bell take three singles before Kohli's 
Collingwood-dive at point saves the fourth as Ahmed's length strays too short. 
The batsmen look unruffled but the rate is racing above seven now.

11.06am GMT 

41st over: England 170-3 (Bell 85, Morgan 12)

Sixty off 60 required and Ashwin is entrusted with the first six of them, 
coming round the wicket to Morgan. I don't think he's turned one to the 
left-hander but he's keeping it pretty flat, making Morgan do the work to knock 
it off the square. He stays round for Bell, seeing it fizz past the outside 
edge but I'm not sure Bell played a shot. "Surely I can't be the only one 
thinking that Rob Smyth missed a trick in having his birthday off from OBOing?" 
writes Ryan Dunne. "Surely if he'd publicised the event ahead of time, he might 
have got a cake from fans like they get on Test Match Special! Perhaps one in 
the shape of a keyboard with handcuffs on it would be apt." Yeah, and no files 
in the middle of them either. This liveblogging factory is Devil's Island. None 
shall escape.

Updated at 11.07am GMT

11.01am GMT 

40th over: England 167-3 (Bell 84, Morgan 10)

Jadeja spears one across Morgan and concedes a wide and both Bell and Morgan 
now look far more at ease against Jadeja, taking three off the bat and a 
welcome extra

10.59am GMT 

39th over: England 163-3 (Bell 83, Morgan 8)

God there's a lot of wasted time between deliveries when Ishant's bowling, 
fiddling with the field, people moving above the sightscreen. Anyhow, Morgan 
takes two with a front-foot punch drive through cover for two then repeats the 
shot with a more open face for only a single. Bell takes the high road off the 
last ball. Mid-off has been moved so he plays a nice little nine-iron firm chip 
there one bounce and into the crowd.

Updated at 10.59am GMT

10.54am GMT 

38th over: England 156-3 (Bell 79, Morgan 5)

They made Jadeja look easy fayre that opver, taking him for five singles, 
Morghan playing in orthodox fashion, calmly knocking the ball around into gaps 
a la Thorpe, who, incidentally, will take over as ODI and T20 batting coach 
from tomorrow. England need 71 off 72 balls.

Updated at 10.54am GMT

10.51am GMT 

37th over: England 151-3 (Bell 77, Morgan 2)

Ishant is going to share the Powerplay and pitches his first ball of the new 
spell up which Bell drives beautifully to mid-off where it's fielded so he only 
gets one. Morgan has a heart in the mouth moment, one of those crowd "catches" 
the equivalent of the "side-netting goal", the sub diving at cover to pick it 
up low on the half-volley. "Of course England are cruising," writes Indy Neogy. 
"It's a dead rubber. They'll win with a stylish Bell century." Ooh, how 
cynical. Ian Bell moves into the 80s with a turn off his toes for four behind 
square leg. He had bowled five good uns then one bit of tripe.

10.46am GMT 

36th over: England 145-3 (Bell 72, Morgan 1)

This is a batting powerplay with Jadeja to open the five-over zany "funfest" 
and he hilariously bags Root. How does he do it? Three off the over and a 
wicket. Enter Morgan, who needs some runs and gets off the mark with a push to 
long-on.

10.43am GMT 

Wicket!! Root b Jadeja 31

Saw a spot over midwicket to aim for, went for it, missed the ball and got 
done neck and crop. Eeh. Lad.

10.37am GMT 

35th over: England 142-2 (Bell 70, Root 31)

Nick Knight seems to think England are cruising. I wasn't sure that they were 
but I'll take his word for it – as an opener he should know how well set Bell 
is and, given their Warwickshire past together, certainly trusts him. Kumar 
returns to the attack and they take the five runs from the over, three balls of 
which are short, two of them cracked to the point area and one behind square 
leg for two.That's drinkies.

10.33am GMT 

34th over: England 137-2 (Bell 67, Root 29)

Bell decides to dart out of the centre lane into the overatking lane by 
smacking Ashwin for a flat six over mid-off. Lovely shot. "Please. Swisskit, 
not Swizzkit," writes Dr Jim Harris. "It was supposed to be Swiss, you see, not 
a swizz. Which would have been a big disappointment, very unlike a snack bar 
consisting entirely of sawdust. Oh … I can't stand it. And don't tell me, 'You 
can stand it with Bandit …'" Now you're talking Jim. A Texan takes time a 
chewin'. 

10.29am GMT 

33rd over: England 126-2 (Bell 59, Root 27)

Jadeja's ability to give his captain control is priceless, only two off that 
over which builds the pressure to score. He's got six overs left and going at 
two an over. England look well set but shouldn't get complacent about when to 
shift up a gear I think.

10.27am GMT 

32nd over: England 124-2 (Bell 58, Root 26)

Improvement from Ashwin, who gives away only a couple of singles in his first 
five balls, both played off the back foot and turned to square leg. There's a 
strangled appeal off the last ball for lbw but it hit Root outside the line. 
England need 103 to win off 108 balls.

10.24am GMT 

31st over: England 122-2 (Bell 57, Root 25)

Rattling through these overs now with spin from both ends. Jadeja giving Bell 
no time to compose himself between deliveries. Bell turns him to midwicket and 
runs two, then lets it run off the face of the bat through gully for another 
two.

Updated at 10.24am GMT

10.21am GMT 

30th over: England 118-2 (Bell 53, Root 25)

Now Root's turn to bring up a half-century - this time for the partnership 
from Ashwin's attempted top-spinner I think which was a pie so full of gravy 
Root just stood up and belted it to the fine leg boundary. Pure filth.

Updated at 10.22am GMT

10.19am GMT 

29th over: England 111-2 (Bell 51, Root 20)

They really do struggle against Jadeja who is turning it away from the bat but 
Bell, says Nasser Hussain, ought to be happy to be beaten on his outside edge 
rather than getting pinned leg-before in the way Jadeja has trapped so many 
Englishmen on this tour

10.16am GMT 

28th over: England 109-2 (Bell 50, Root 19)

Fifty for Ian Bell off 88 balls as the pair decide to milk Yuvraj, taking six 
off this over to go with nine off the previous one. I think Dhoni's OK with six 
an over from Yuvraj because he feels England find Jadeja too difficult to score 
from.

10.14am GMT 

27th over: England 103-2 (Bell 46, Root 17)

Ravindra Jadeja takes a bow. Round the wicket to a wary Bell who is worried 
about the loop and bounce but is playing him with the full face. "When at 
school, the answer to 'What has an hazelnut in every bite?' was 'Squirrel 
poo'," writes Joanne Beasley, lowering the tone foe a second successive ODI. 
"Rather disappointed not to see any ruffles or frills in your photo Rob, you 
should have risked it, for a Swizzkit." Not at Kings Cross at 3am, Joanne. Not 
even for a Swizzkit. Bell takes one off the last ball with a steer to midwicket 
that comes off the inside edge and trickles to square leg.

Updated at 10.14am GMT

10.10am GMT 

26th over: England 102-2 (Bell 45, Root 17)

It's Yuvraj into the attack and Bell slaps him cross-batted along the floor to 
the fielder at cover. Why no Jadeja, we wonder, as Yuvraj bowls a juicy 
long-hop on middle and leg which Bell thrashes round the corner with a vertical 
bat for four. Root then brings up the hundred with a lateish cut, diverted 
impeccably for four.

Updated at 10.10am GMT

10.06am GMT 

25th over: England 93-2 (Bell 40, Root 13)

They've succeeded in tamping down the offending crater if that's the correct 
technical term. Kohli makes a very good diving stop at point off Bell when 
Ishant Sharma at last feels his feet are safe. One off the over. I'm starting 
to flag now. I'll risk another of those coffees I think. Be still my beating 
heart.

Updated at 10.07am GMT

10.02am GMT 

24th over: England 92-2 (Bell 39, Root 13)

Ashwin re-establishes a wee bit of control which brings me back to something 
Andy Wilson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hvRjzGqgYtA> sent at the innings 
break. "Just spoken to an Indian journo who reckons they've got enough, Jadeja 
and Raina will spin England out." I wonder what they're thinking now. There'll 
be a big delay while a couple of chaps mend the footholds at Kumar's end and 
the PA man is torturing us with Queen while they do it.

Updated at 10.02am GMT

9.57am GMT 

23rd over: England 89-2 (Bell 37, Root 12)

Kumar drops short and Root leans into a marvellous cut shot, pummeling it for 
four between point and gully. He adds another with a deliberate edge played 
with a cross bat and rolled wrists that may have caught Dhoni on the tip of his 
gloves but had enough power to still make it to the third man boundary. 
Excellent acceleration from Root.

9.54am GMT 

22nd over: England 79-2 (Bell 37, Root 2)

Big turner from Ashwin leaps and spits off the wicket, clipping the thigh pad 
and eluding the keeper. They run a leg-bye then exchange singles but the run 
rate has now crept above five. "Topics were nearly as good as Banjo's, Rob. 
Bring them both back, I say. Who's with me?" asks Simon McMahon. I am Simon. 
But we can't do defunct chocolate bars. We're not observational comedians.

Updated at 9.55am GMT

9.51am GMT 

21st over: England 76-2 (Bell 36, Root 1)

Bumble sounds obsessed with the Dalai Lama. Or at least he relishes saying his 
name with dramatic Accrington emphasis. I'm enjoying it anyway. Kumar is back 
with his swingers, all fine until Root has a little trigger jump down the track 
so the bowler fires one wide down the legside. Root completes the over with one 
off the bat, a push-glide to mid-on

Updated at 9.53am GMT

9.47am GMT 

20th over: England 74-2 (Bell 36, Root 1)

Ashwin givs Root his first ball, the Sheffield lad playing it with his bat in 
front of his pad, dabbing it into the leg side. It doesn't appear to be turning 
all that much and the one he tosses up outside off, although Dhoni whips that 
bails off when Root plays inside the line, needed to spin to have a chance of 
the edge. He gets off the mark and lets Bell have a look at Ashwin, who pats 
him to mid-on then backs away to make room to cut to cover point and he runs 
two. What has a hazelnut in every bite? Pure milk chocolate for your delight? 
Nougat and caramel golden light? And don't forget the hazelnut in every bite.

9.42am GMT 

19th over: England 71-2 (Bell 34, Root 0)

Pietersen was a little early if anything on the shot which he played almost 
from a standing start with no foot movement save a rock of momentum on to his 
back leg. Bell is not going to chance his arm, he has no need to, tickling one 
shaping towards leg-stump from Ahmed down to the fine leg boundary for four. 
Good skiddy movement from Ahmed but Bell is looking determined to knuckle down.

9.38am GMT 

WIcket!! Pietersen c Jadeja b Ahmed 6

Top-edged hook, well caught on the run at deep midwicket. And I'm back with a 
wicket first ball. Just call me Graeme Swann.

9.35am GMT 

18th over: England 64-1 (Bell 28, Pietersen 6)

Sharma's spell concludes and he is replaced by the spin of Ravi Ashwin. 
Pietersen picks up a single and Bell comfortably sees off the remainder. 
Anyway, Rob is refreshed and ready to return. I'll hand you back to his far 
more capable hands for the remainder of England's run chase. Enjoy.

Updated at 9.36am GMT

9.32am GMT 

17th over: England 63-1 (Bell 28, Pietersen 5)

Drinks break. Are dead rubbers in cricket the most entertaining and 
competitive dead rubbers in sport? A maiden from Shami Ahmed.

9.25am GMT 

16th over: England 63-1 (Bell 28, Pietersen 5)

I'm finding the mid-over cutaways to edited clips of downtown Dharamsala just 
a little distracting. The accompanying muzak's not helping either. Anyway, when 
the cameras return to the field of play, Sharma concedes an actual run, Bell 
scampering through with a quick single. The bowler retaliates, beating 
Pietersen with a good length and line outside off stump. And then some fielding 
that Sharma doesn't deserve: Pietersen cracks one straight to Rohit Sharma at 
mid-off, where he dives over the ball and watches it race away through his legs.

9.20am GMT 

15th over: England 58-1 (Bell 27, Pietersen 1)

"Yeah, Grand Slam final with Murray and Djokovic from Melbourne, or dead 
rubber with Patel and Bresnan, and an inevitable English collapse, from India?" 
Indeed, that's why you're following the cricket, Simon McMahon. Pietersen gets 
off the mark, cracking Ahmed viciously to square leg, where Ravindra Jadeja 
gets his body behind the ball to prevent a boundary. Not pretty, but effective 
fielding. Bell adds another single.

9.16am GMT 

14th over: England 56-1 (Bell 26, Pietersen 0)

Sharma continues and immediately beats Bell's outside edge. A good rhythm, a 
good length and some pressure for the batsmen. A third maiden from four.

9.12am GMT 

13th over: England 56-1 (Bell 26, Pietersen 0)

The Dharamsala crowd has found its voice, echoing off the foothills. Shami 
Ahmed replaces Kumar in the attack and concedes three from the over, Bell 
denied by some tidy work from Yuvraj Singh on the ropes at deep point, before a 
leg bye.

9.06am GMT 

12th over: England 53-1 (Bell 24, Pietersen 0)

Cook was well beaten by Sharma there, jagging one in to beat the defences 
after an over in which he'd already beaten the batsman with one that darted 
away from the bat. A good, good wicket maiden.

9.05am GMT 

WICKET! Cook 22 b Sharma (England 53-1)

A splendid delivery from a splendid little spell.

Updated at 9.05am GMT

9.01am GMT 

11th over: England 53-0 (Cook 22, Bell 24)

Another flashed thick edge, this time from Cook, as Kumar offers the batsman 
room to flex his arms. It safely flies wide of the slip fielder and makes a 
hasty run to the boundary. Kumar's line is again found wanting when he 
over-compensates, swinging one down leg and it brushes Cook's pad and beats the 
glove. Four leg byes.

8.56am GMT 

10th over: England 42-0 (Cook 17, Bell 23)

Anyone out there? All watching the tennis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/27/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-live>? 
This is a strong opening from England. A maiden from Sharma. I'd highly 
recommendthis interactive gallery of the most beautiful cricket grounds in the 
world 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/interactive/2013/jan/25/worlds-most-beautiful-cricket-grounds>
, as chosen by our writers. NoWheal Eliza 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wheal_Eliza>, mentioned, mind.

8.52am GMT 

9th over: England 42-0 (Cook 17, Bell 23)

Bhuvneshwar Kumar continues. Dropping short and wide to Bell, the batsman 
thick edges uppishly, but well clear of the slips, for four. Then Bell prods 
forcefully away to mid-off, timing exquisite, and the ball speeds away to the 
ropes.

8.48am GMT 

8th over: England 34-0 (Cook 17, Bell 15)

Morning. And quickly into a big shout from Ishant Sharma against Alastair 
Cook. He jags one back in to the left-hander and claims a nick through to the 
wicketkeeper. Nothing doing from the umpire, and despite numerous replays, it's 
still difficult to be conclusive. Two balls later and Cook isn't fazed, rocking 
back and cracking a delicious stroke through deep cover for four.

8.43am GMT 

7th over: England 30-0 (Cook 13, Bell 15)

Ian Bell. Ian Bell. How do I love thy cover drive? Let me count the ways. He 
creams another textbook one that races for four but follows it up with a stroke 
that hit every branch on the ugly tree as it fell down, a hoick off the back 
foot played away from his body for two. I'm grateful that James Dart is here 
and he'll take over for a while from now. See you soon.

8.40am GMT 

6th over: England 24-0 (Cook 13, Bell 9)

Appropriate start from England, given the target and the amount of movement – 
happy to go at three an over until they're settled. Cook cashes in when Ahmed 
feeds his leg-glance, punching him off his hip for four to catch Bell up on 9 
from 17 balls. Another four completes the best over so far for England, Cook 
smacking a square drive off a wayward half-tracker.

8.35am GMT 

5th over: England 16-0 (Cook 5, Bell 9)

Ian Bell, after riding his luck in the last over, now shows his class with a 
Comptonesque cover drive on the up for four off Kumar, who fights back with a 
big leg-cutter, too big for Bell to hit.

Updated at 8.35am GMT

8.31am GMT 

4th over: England 12-0 (Cook 5, Bell 5)

Softly, softly and nicely watchful so far from Cook and Bell. There's no doubt 
that these are the best conditions for bowling either side has enjoyed 
throughout the series and both Kumar and Ahmed are bending it. Bell hist his 
first boundary with a Chinese cut or Harrow drive if you prefer, getting away 
with a bifter of an inside edge past Dhoni's left side.

8.27am GMT 

3rd over: England 5-0 (Cook 4, Bell 1)

I do like Kumar. As I wrote a long time ago about Praveen of the Kumar ilk, 
there's something of the theme tune to Tales of the Unexpected when an 80mph 
merchant makes the ball sing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOc46Gk-6qrA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOc46Gk-6qrA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOc46Gk-6qrA&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOc46Gk-6qrA&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOc46Gk-6qrA>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOc46Gk-6qrA&media=>
close 
Updated at 8.27am GMT

8.23am GMT 

2nd over: England 5-0 (Cook 4, Bell 1)

Ahmed begins with a jaffa that drifts away through the air and snakes back off 
the pitch to miss off-stump by an inch or so. Bell left it, estimating that it 
would not be coming back in. Bell gets off the mark with a cross-bat dab. 
Ahemed's upping the pace significantly now, hitting 88mph with the fourth ball, 
a massive outswinger to Cook who lets it and the next two pass.

8.18am GMT 

1st over: England 4-0 (Cook 4, Bell 0)

Kumar starts with one that drifts across Cook, a real dibbly dobbler but the 
second is a bit pacier though still hoops away. Cook gets away with a thick 
outside edge past where third slip would have been for four. Martin Davison 
asks: "Morning, not seen much of Woakes, has he got it?" He's certainly got 
something special I think, Martin. Good nerve, too, but he still had at least 
one bad ball an over for most of them this morning.

Updated at 8.19am GMT

8.06am GMT 

Innings break

There's no cavalry to rescue me, though I have seen a human face for the first 
time in five hours. Katy Murrells has arrived to do the Australian Open final. 
You can follow that in the usual place.

7.35am GMT 

India 226 all out

Bresnan took four for 45, Finn two for 28 and Tredwell two for 25. All three 
proper, frontline bowlers did very well. Excuse me now for a while. I'll be 
back in 20 minutes or so.

7.33am GMT 

Wicket!! Ahmed c and b Bresnan 1

Top-edged a hook and Bresnan sprinted towards the short leg position ion his 
followthrough and took it easily.

Updated at 7.33am GMT

7.31am GMT 

Wicket!! Kumar c Finn b Bresnan 30

Briliant diving catch after a sprint in from Finn to the edge of the circle at 
mid-off.

Updated at 8.11am GMT

7.30am GMT 

49th over: India 221-8 (Ahmed 1 Kumar 27)

Finn will bowl his 10th over, beginning it with two for 23 off nine. Huge roar 
from the crowd when Kumar leans back and hits him over cover. Root races round 
and stops the boundary with a rapid chase and dive. Ahmed gets off the mark 
with an off drive to mid-off. Patel then crowns a rotten 15 minutes by dropping 
Kumar when running in and trying to catch a steepler at mid-off while sliding 
on his knees but spooning it out.

Updated at 7.31am GMT

7.25am GMT 

48th over: India 216-8 (Ahmed 0, Kumar 23)

What a shot from Kumar, smashed contemptuously back over the bowler's head for 
four when all Bresnan did was fractionally overpitched, which you would think 
you'd get away with at a No9. Bresnan says sod that for a game of soldiers and 
goes short, firing off his quota of bouncers in three balls. A slower ball 
bouncer bamboozles Ahmed and Bresnan will definitely take giving up only five 
runs at this stage.

7.21am GMT 

47th over: India 211-8 (Ahmed 0, Kumar 18)

And Cook decides to persevere with Patel. Kumar plays like a No3, though, 
skips three paces down the wicket and smears a cover drive over the 
outstretched hands of the jumping fielder for four. When they rotate the strike 
with a single Ashwin follows Kumar down the track and launches a drive off the 
bottom of his bat to long-on, Tredwell reaches it but can''t cling on and tips 
it over the bar, as it were, for six. Four more come through midwicket before 
Patel finally takes his wicket.

7.20am GMT 

Wicket!! Ashwin c Finn Patel 19

Caught on the sweep, having top-edged it, after a productive over off Patel.

Updated at 7.20am GMT

7.16am GMT 

46th over: India 196-7 (Ashwin 9, Kumar 13)

Woakes opts for a good length, hazarding that Nos8 and 9 are less likely to 
get after him. But he has to get the line right and he does for three balls 
then lets himself down with one outside off that begs to be cut and Kumar 
obliges, carting it for four with a majestic swipe.

Updated at 7.20am GMT

7.13am GMT 

45th over: India 188-7 (Ashwin 7, Kumar 8)

Samit is going to bowl his fifth and possibly final over, round the wicket, 
whippy and flat. Just one comes off the first five balls and Kumar doubles the 
take off the over from the last ball with a sweep scoop to short third man. 
Maybe that won't be his last over if he can get through another like that.

7.10am GMT 

44th over: India 186-7 (Ashwin 6, Kumar 7)

I feel like Billy Bowden here. Every 15 minutes the lights cut out as the 
nearest sensor is about 20ft away. So then I have to stand up and make some 
extravagant gesture, just then signalling Kumar's glorious cut four off Woakes. 
Actually, looking at it again it wasn't too far from Bell's hands when diving 
at point.

7.07am GMT 

43rd over: India 181-7 (Ashwin 6, Kumar 2)

Samit Patel at last gets a bowl at someone, unlike Raina who is after him. He 
comes around the wicket and keeps it to four from the over as Ashwin and Kumar 
have to defer gambling for a couple more overs.

7.04am GMT 

42nd over: India 177-7 (Ashwin 4, Kumar 0)

Raina charges Woakes, who sees him and drops it short, so the batsman plays a 
short-arm pull into the ground for one. Ashwin, who for some reason reminds me 
of Richard Osman from Pointless in his gait, happily takes one to get Raina 
back on strike. Woakes strikes with his slower ball, and Raina was guilty there 
of rashness given how long there is to go. He wanted to cash in while Woakes 
was in the attack but the Warwickshire seamer knew that gave him a chance and 
outfoxed him. Well done.

Updated at 7.04am GMT

7.02am GMT 

Wicket!! Raina c Bell b Woakes 83

Misjudges a slower ball, hits it off the splice to Bell at midwicket.

6.58am GMT 

41st over: India 173-6 (Ashwin 3, Raina 80)

Now, you fear, we're in the danger zone with Patel needing to find three overs 
between them. It's Samit to start and Raina hits a pair of swirling shots with 
the spin for four, the first inches in front of square, the second between 
mid-on and midwicket. Ashwin is happy to give Raina the strike when he loses it 
by misjudging a long hop and bottoming it for only a single. Costly. India, 
unlike England, have little problem with non-spinning slow left armers.

Updated at 7.02am GMT

6.55am GMT 

40th over: India 161-6 (Ashwin 1, Raina 70)

The Finnster returns for the last over of the Powerplay, Ashwin tucking him 
off his legs to get off the mark with a single to square leg. The interludes of 
India tourist board activity, which beg AW Greig's voiceovers, are currently 
turning to the Dharamshala prayer wheels between each delivery. Good over from 
Finn, four off it as the Powerplay ends.

6.49am GMT 

39th over: India 157-6 (Ashwin 0, Raina 68)

Tredwell is going to bowl out and, given he's been England's best bowler in 
this series, deserves the wicket he takes. Jadeja, who had been playing well, 
lost his marbles there – as Raina had the previous over of spin in the 
powerplay. Tredders, as we know him, finishes with two for 25. "G'bowling," as 
Paul Downton used to say.

Updated at 6.50am GMT

6.47am GMT 

Wicket!! Jadeja c Bell b Tredwell 39

Sliced a one-handed drive to Bell at backward point.

6.45am GMT 

38th over: India 155-5 (Jadeja 38, Raina 67)

What I like about this revival partnership – and India were down among the 
muck and nettles when Dhoni was out – has been their patience (the last crazy 
over from Raina notwithstanding). They've used their feet well but also been 
happy to wait for the opportunity to play the big shot, rarely risking 
anything. Here they take Bresnan into the milk sheds, tapping him and steering 
him around. But honours even and he's bowling well – for him five off a 
powerplay over is no punishment at all.

6.39am GMT 

37th over: India 150-5 (Jadeja 36, Raina 65)

Tredwell begins with one that drifts down the leg side and concedes a wide. 
Then Cook diving at leg gully drops a difficult chance off Raina's paddle 
sweep. SK continues to play with fire putting it a knuckle-length beyond the 
diving Tredwell's grasp with a bottom-hand drive.

Updated at 6.40am GMT

6.36am GMT 

36th over: India 144-5 (Jadeja 35, Raina 61)

It's powerplay time and to deal with it England turn to Timmy Time. Three 
singles begin the over then Raina, who I felt during his Test tribulations here 
in 2011 was shot, plays another flashing cut for four. He's impish and 
outrageous at times, some would say flighty, but I really like his style.

Updated at 6.36am GMT

6.31am GMT 

35th over: India 134-5 (Jadeja 33, Raina 55)

Sorry about the rather short, I'll call them pithy, last couple of overs. This 
Guardian coffee has given me palpitations, which may also account for the 
foolishness that Sara Torvalds points out:"32nd over: India 127-5 (Jadeja 265, 
Raina 53), it says. India's run-rate has gone up significantly, then? Also, 
since I'm the only member of the Finns For Finn crowd, could we have another 
Finnish wicket?" Yep, Sara. I'm pining for one.

Updated at 6.32am GMT

6.28am GMT 

34th over: India 134-5 (Jadeja 32, Raina 54)

Jadeja plays patiently until the fifth ball of Root's over which he larrups 
about 80ft in the air into the stands behind the bowler.

Updated at 6.29am GMT

6.22am GMT 

33rd over: India 127-5 (Jadeja 26, Raina 53)

Tredwell bustles in, continuing his excellent spell, giving Jadeja no room at 
all to free his arms and forcing him to rely on his wrists and bat speed. 
Maiden for Tredwell and now it's drinks again. Something hot given the state of 
the Indian commentators' woolies.

Updated at 6.29am GMT

6.20am GMT 

32nd over: India 127-5 (Jadeja 26, Raina 53)

Samit was given his sweater back after one over and Root now comes in, Raina 
reaching his fifty playing with the turn of the Yorkshireman's off-spinner to 
tonk it over cover for four. Tredwell has dropped him, when he was on five, 
then there was the lbw a couple of Root overs back but those apart he has again 
burnished his reputation as India's batsman of the series.

Updated at 6.29am GMT

6.16am GMT 

31st over: India 119-5 (Jadeja 24, Raina 47)

Buttler whips off Jadeja's bails when he props forward to Tredwell but after a 
long delay for the third umpire it's clear that the batsman's foot had not 
betrayed him.

6.14am GMT 

30th over: India 117-5 (Jadeja 23, Raina 46)

Samit Patel is now into the attack and India are going to milk him, taking a 
run a ball until Jadeja's eyes light up and he takes a big stride down the 
wicket and belts him over long-off for six. Here's our man in the Himalayas, 
Sir Edmund (Andy) Wilson: "It really is fab here, been a great series in terms 
of venues if not necessarily cricket. They're saying Fnn brushed the stumps 
once in the over when he got Dhoni out, but bails didn't drop. didn't spot it 
up here." Yeah Sky say that, too but they've not shown the replay which is in 
the hands of the host broadcaster. 

Updated at 6.16am GMT

6.10am GMT 

29th over: India 106-5 (Jadeja 14, Raina 44)

Two off the over from Tredwell, who has replaced Joe Root and is bowling 
really well.

Updated at 6.11am GMT

6.06am GMT 

28th over: India 104-5 (Jadeja 13, Raina 43)

Woakes has recovered from that over that went for 14. He's not getting much 
bounce at all which is making him all the harder to hit, the ball almost dying 
on Raina when he tries to free his arms and go blacksmith over cow corner. 
Clever spell, this.

Updated at 6.10am GMT

6.02am GMT 

27th over: India 101-5 (Jadeja 12, Raina 42)

Joe Root's nickname is … Rooty. At least that's what Jos Buttler is calling 
him. And he's bowling well despite appearances when Raina sashays two steps 
towards him and launches him over long-off for six. Ten off the over for India.

Updated at 6.04am GMT

5.59am GMT 

26th over: India 91-5 (Jadeja 10, Raina 34)

Hawk-Eye tells Bumble, who graciously tells us, that Raina should have been 
given out in the last over. It was hitting middle stump. Woakes makes it hard 
for Raina by sticking diligently to a good length, forcing the batsman into a 
nurdling approach.

Updated at 6.04am GMT

5.56am GMT 

25th over: India 89-5 (Jadeja 9, Raina 33)

Jadeja hits his first boundary with one he misjudges from Root, the ball 
clipping the edge as he prodded forward and going to where a Tony Greig at 
second slip could have had him out. But who puts a second slip in for a 
spinner? Big shout off the last ball of the over which looked absolutely plum 
but the umpire may have thought he hit it. He didn't.

Updated at 6.03am GMT

5.53am GMT 

24th over: India 84-5 (Jadeja 4, Raina 33)

Woakes returns. As I said I'd hoped Cook would bowl Finn through such has been 
his impact. "Given that to OBO you need only a TV and a computer with internet 
connection (and lots of journalistic skill, no doubt), why do you need to be at 
Guardian Towers to do this?" writes Andrew Benton. "Do they make you clock-in 
of a morning? How very old fashioned." Not them, Andrew. The two children who 
would be asking from 6.30am onwards: "Can we watch Scooby Doo, dad … are you 
coming swimming, dad … what are you doing, dad. Is this rugby, dad … who are 
you supporting, dad" etc. Much better over from Woakes than his last in the 
previous spell, sticking it on Jadeja's off-stump with just a hint of swing.

Updated at 6.03am GMT

5.48am GMT 

23rd over: India 83-5 (Jadeja 3, Raina 33)

Rather surprisingly Joe Root is the first of the fifth bowlers to turn his arm 
over and has an lbw shout for one that catches Jadeja on his crease but I think 
it was going down.

Updated at 6.03am GMT

5.46am GMT 

22nd over: India 79-5 (Jadeja 0, Raina 32)

The replay of Dhoni's wicket shows him reaching around his pad again to try 
and play outside-in. Suresh Raina from the non-striker's shook his head as if 
to say it wasn't out but it would have hit the top of off and middle I reckon. 
Finn greets Jadeja with one that skims the frame of the stumps but doesn't 
dislodge the bails. That was his eighth over. I think they should bowl him out 
in the hope of at least one more wicket.

Updated at 6.03am GMT

5.41am GMT 

Wicket!! Dhoni lbw Finn 15

The bowling change worked magnificently, hurrying the India captain up and 
getting him to plant his big front pad right on the line of off stump looking 
to drive. He missed. Finn hit it.

Updated at 5.42am GMT

5.40am GMT 

21st over: India 73-4 (Dhoni 15, Raina 32)

Turn from Tredwell and a good line, forcing the batsmen to come after him if 
they want to take the risk. Dhoni does but only gets a single with a rather 
ragged-looking cross-bat drive to mid on.

Updated at 6.03am GMT

5.38am GMT 

20th over: India 71-4 (Dhoni 14, Raina 31)

Alastair Cook decides to see if MS Dhoni can handle Steven Finn, bringing him 
back in for a second spell very early. Dhoni shuffles around his crease a lot, 
a deliberate ploy I think to try to get him to alter his line at the last 
minute. India's skipper takes a single by playing inside-out through midwicket 
and Raina copies him by dropping it to the same position which gives Dhoni one 
more ball. Finn tries to get him driving and bring the slips into play – he 
achieves the former and Dhoni takes four with a fine square drive which 
elegantly leaves him on one knee as he completes his shot.

Updated at 6.02am GMT

5.32am GMT 

19th over: India 71-4 (Dhoni 9, Raina 30)

Jos Buttler is enjoying Tredwell's contribution ("Lovely, Treddy") which is 
only fairly twirly for four balls but when he really tosses one up Raina comes 
down the pitch and smacks him for a straight six.

Updated at 6.02am GMT

5.29am GMT 

18th over: India 65-4 (Dhoni 9, Raina 24)

Sunil Gavaskar has a big woolly scarf on (tied in continental/womanly style 
I'm afraid to report) as he's asked to answer how much snow he's seen when he 
was playing. Meanwhile Lord Gower waxes on about the Cresta Run as Bresnan 
keeps the batsmen on their toes with some away movement. They play tip and run, 
especially when he strays on to middle, but are too wary yet to get after him.

5.25am GMT 

17th over: India 62-4 (Dhoni 8, Raina 22)

Tredders tempts Dhoni into a huge sweep from outside off stump and he misses 
it by a mile but he'd got his pad outside the line so the appeal died in 
England's throats. "Do you get the feeling India aren't trying very hard?" asks 
Tom Carver. Not really, Tom. I think England are bowling well, perhaps the 
pitch and the climate have put some lead in their collective pencils but they 
look really sprightly and confident.

5.21am GMT 

16th over: India 57-4 (Dhoni 5, Raina 21)

Is it wrong to pray for a swift England victory so I can run off home before 
everyone else turns up? Why do I keep misspelling Tredwell? It's like Newcsatle 
United or Newcastle United as they are more commonly known. I've got a block. 
After drinks Bresnan continues as Messrs Knight and Gower laud the scenery - 
perhaps to inject some due reverence after Nasser Hussain said it reminded him 
of Chelmsford. This ovber takes an age as Raina keeps backing away as the crowd 
behind Bresnan's arm keeps moving. "Delighted to see you here," writes Mac 
Millings. "What's up with Smyth? Too important for a dead rubber? I just rapped 
in front of 300+ people. Am now hammered. Apologies." What did you rap, Mac? 
Was it side one of Three Feet High and Rising? Smyth, by the by, is having a 
rare day off to celebrate his (24th) birthday.

5.12am GMT 

15th over: India 57-4 (Dhoni 5, Raina 21)

Raina takes a single and gives Treadwell a chance against Dhoni who is all 
movement this morning, nervily planting his front leg then reaching around to 
knock it into the leg-side. One off the over and then drinks.

5.10am GMT 

14th over: India 56-4 (Dhoni 5, Raina 20)

Bresnan is allowed back into the attack, serving Dhoni up a gimme that he 
smacks through point for four. England yell out an appeal for lbw when Dhoni 
gets a big stride in and missed it but he was a good half a yard outside the 
line. Raina fiddles with the velcro straps on his gloves after every ball. 
Opens them, closes them. He's a fidget this one and he finishes the over with a 
checked off-drive for a single.

5.05am GMT 

13th over: India 50-4 (Dhoni 1, Raina 19)

England wanted Bresnan to replace Finn and the Pontefract prince marked out 
his run, slipped off his pullover and after a short delay Treadwell came on and 
the spinner seduced Gambhir to his doom. And he finished the over well, the 
ball spinning. This looks like a fantastic pitch.

5.02am GMT 

Wicket!! Gambhir c Bell b Treadwell 24

Woo hoo. Slapped square cut that arced up before dying on Bell at cover point 
but the Ironman picked it up with his knuckles just kissing the turf.

Updated at 5.02am GMT

4.59am GMT 

12th over: India 49-3 (Gambhir 24, Raina 19)

Raina breaks the stranglehold when Woakes errs towards the leg-side and he 
tucks it off his hip to the fine leg boundary for four. The tension transfers 
from batsman to bowler, who serves up a meaty half-volley that Raina spanks 
through the covers for four. A two takes Raina to 4,000 ODI runs in his 159th 
match then Woakes dollies up a long hop outside off and Raina says ta, belting 
it for four before Morgan can move from backward point.

Updated at 5.04am GMT

4.54am GMT 

11th over: India 35-3 (Gambhir 24, Raina 5)

Might as well keep Finn going when his pace is certainly keeping both batsmen 
on their toes. Gambhir just drops one short of the diving Morgan from an 
off-cutter and Finn then tests him with three balls that hold their line. 
Another M. (Bernard Lee).

Updated at 4.54am GMT

4.51am GMT 

10th over: India 35-3 (Gambhir 24, Raina 5)

Woakes pitches up to Raina who treats the wobblers with the utmost respect, 
though he does play a lovely straight drive for none. Four come in, the last 
two dart away and the sixth ball is edged to a diving Treadwell at second slip 
who stretches out his left hand but can't get it to stick. Maiden. Should have 
been a wicket maiden.

Updated at 4.51am GMT

4.46am GMT 

9th over: India 35-3 (Gambhir 24, Raina 5)

Finn's round the wicket line hasn't been as accurate as when he comes over and 
after only two balls round, both angled across, he comes back on to the true 
path and almost extracts a caught and bowled off Raina but even at 6ft 8in he 
can't quite reach it with his outstretched hand on the rather tardy dive. 
They've placed a leg-gully in for Raina and he middles it over Bell's head in 
that very position, a shot that may have taken his head off had he not sensibly 
ducked.

4.41am GMT 

8th over: India 33-3 (Gambhir 23, Raina 4)

Chris Woakes replaces Tim Bresnan, swing for swing and he's too full with his 
second ball that Gambhir stop-drives through the covers where Morgan chases but 
despite his dive it trickles on to the rope. Woakes is getting movement from 
this ball as well, trapping Raina on the pads with one that arcs in but is 
sliding down the leg-side. Raina gets off the mark with a whip from an 
off-stump delivery through square leg, using those strong wrists to reach for 
it and manipulate it violently off course.

4.36am GMT 

7th over: India 24-3 (Gambhir 17, Raina 0)

Gambhir berates himself for almost being tricked by Finn into following one 
that jags away and then climbs on him but the opener just drops his hands at 
the last minute. They're both bowling pretty well. Finn bags Yuvraj then smacks 
Raina on the shoulder with the last ball of the over. Sharp start from England 
on this the quickest pitch they've been given all winter.

4.33am GMT 

Wicket!! Yuvraj c Morgan b Finn 0

Caught at point off a rotten, slightly surprised looking fend away that looks 
as if it came off the back of the bat as if he didn't expect or fancy Finn's 
pace at all.

4.30am GMT 

6th over: India 23-2 (Gambhir 17, Yuvraj 0)

There's no doubt that Bresnan has found some swing and patted it on the back 
like a long lost friend. No use though if he gets his line wrong, as he does 
with the second ball which sits up at mid-calf height outside off and Gambhir 
thwacks it through point for four. Straining for the swing Bresnan overpitches 
a fraction and Gambhir plays a glorious straight off-drive that rockets to the 
boundary. Shot. Morning Liam Pennington: "Right, got my crumpets, a cup of tea, 
time to settle down with TMS and the live blog. Can't have missed anything so 
early … oh. Oh I have. Going to be one of those mornings …" It is indeed, Liam. 
And here I am sat in the dark, feeling like I've taken the helm of a boat while 
everyone is down below struggling with sickness.

Updated at 4.34am GMT

4.24am GMT 

5th over: India 14-2 (Gambhir 9, Yuvraj 0)

Finn begins with four dot balls that move away from Gambhir if only 
marginally. The bounce allows the batsman to leave them without concern and the 
only run comes off the last ball with a rib-tickler fended off on the leap 
around the corner for one.

4.21am GMT 

4th over: India 13-2 (Gambhir 8, Yuvraj 0)

That over has shaken things up, with Bresnan luring both batsmen into the 
drive with genuine outswing. He followed it up with an inswinger that rapped 
Yuvraj on the pads with the hat-trick ball but it was sliding down the leg-side.

Updated at 4.21am GMT

4.18am GMT 

Wicket!! Kohli c Treadwell b Bresnan 0

And he's on a hat-trick. Languid drive chipped to second slip where Treadwell 
juggled it five times before catching it. Brezzy Lad. Take him to New Zealand.

Updated at 4.18am GMT

4.16am GMT 

Wicket!! Sharma c Treadwell b Bresnan 4

Lured him into a drive, caught a thick outside edge and Treadwell dived across 
to his right to pouch it at second slip.

4.14am GMT 

3rd over: India 13-0 (Gambhir 8, Sharma 4)

This is good from Finn to the left-hander Gambhir, he's getting significant 
movement away with his first three balls, the second of which almost tempts 
Gambhir into a rash prod but he steers it down. And then comes the usual 
boundary-ball, short of a length, 83mph and slapped square for four. There's 
been one per over. And now the lights have gone out.

Updated at 4.19am GMT

4.10am GMT 

2nd over: India 9-0 (Gambhir 4, Sharma 4)

Tim Bresnan is going to share the new ball and I share PWJ Allott's concern 
that he is playing this match even though he's going home after the match 
because he's deemed not fit enough to tour New Zealand while Stuart Meaker has 
been consigned to carrying the drinks for a fifth time. Nice outswinger with 
his second ball, which prompts him to ruffle his own hair and dart a rueful 
smile at Rohit Sharma. Bresnan is hovering just short of the 80mph mark but his 
line (outside off) and length are more consistent for the first five balls and 
Sharma plays him patiently. Last ball, though, Sharma seizes on an inch of 
extra width to cream him through cover point for four.

4.04am GMT 

1st over: India 5-0 (Gambhir 4, Sharma 0)

Massive outswinger from Steven Finn to start with, so huge in fact that it's 
called wide. It started two feet outside off and ended up just short of a Harmy 
at the Gabba 2006. After that it's straight into his groove, on the money 
outside off with seam movement towarsd the slips until the next two dart back 
at Gambhir, the last of which the batsman wears on the forearm before getting 
off the mark with a crisp leg-glance for four. So, same as the last match, Finn 
starts with a wide and India begin with five from the over.

3.57am GMT 

"Must say you look quite tasty in the black frock in the Yaarana video," 
writes John Marshall. "I guess we know what you were up to in the hours leading 
up to 3am in Kings Cross." Ah, if only. I was clenching a steering wheel, 
slapping myself around the chops and listening to Johnny Cash's sister on Five 
Live telling us about his boyhood home. How different, how very different, from 
the home life of our own dear Queen.

3.40am GMT 

This is me arriving for duty at Guardian Towers this morning
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1rN6zpHY3Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1rN6zpHY3Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1rN6zpHY3Y&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1rN6zpHY3Y&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1rN6zpHY3Y>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1rN6zpHY3Y&media=>
close 
3.32am GMT 

England have won the toss …

… and elected to field. A good toss to win in cricket's most picturesque 
stadium in the far from bleak Himalayan midwinter. England bring in Chris 
Woakes for Jade Dernbach, India are unchanged.

India: G Gambhir, RG Sharma, V Kohli, Yuvraj Singh, SK Raina, MS Dhoni (capt, 
wk), RA Jadeja, R Ashwin, B Kumar, I Sharma, Shami Ahmed.

England: AN Cook (capt), IR Bell, KP Pietersen, JE Root, EJG Morgan, JC 
Buttler (wk), SR Patel, CR Woakes, TT Bresnan, JC Tredwell, ST Finn.

Updated at 3.37am GMT

12.49am GMT 

Good morning (note how genuine the good is in that greeting)

I'm the dandy highwayman who you're too scared to mention. I spend my cash on 
looking flash and grabbing your attention. Well, normally, but not this morning 
at 3am in Kings Cross. Today's soundtrack is definitely by the Pogues judging 
by the state of the nation's youth. No coats most of em. It's a scandal. Well, 
dead rubber or no dead rubber, let's do this …

Updated at 3.15am GMT
 