
An Aboriginal corporation in the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> has been 
awarded a carbon credit contract with the federal government for its fire 
management program.

Karlantijpa North Kurrawarra Nyura Mala Aboriginal Corporation successfully 
bid at the Emissions Reduction Fund auction last month.

The project involves the strategic burning of savannah lands early in the dry 
season to ensure low fuel load to reduce large fires later. The burning creates 
less greenhouse gases than the large uncontrolled fires and the difference is 
awarded in carbon credits which the organisation then sells to the commonwealth 
to meet its emission reduction targets.


Glowing review of Indigenous protected areas leaves sector proud but perplexed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/14/glowing-review-of-indigenous-protected-areas-leaves-sector-proud-but-perplexed>
Under the carbon credit scheme Aboriginal groups can also sell to corporations 
looking to offset their own carbon emissions,including airlines such as Qantas 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/credits-where-credits-due-for-frequent-fires-program/news-story/25f88b2988960717210ba1e1a51b738e#itm=taus%7Cnews%7Caus_authors_index%7C5%7Cauthors_storyBlock_headline%7CPaige_Taylor%7Cindex%7Cauthor&itmt=1481062530707>
 that suggest passengers pay a small fee with their ticket.

Several similar Indigenous projects have been running for a number of years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/14/glowing-review-of-indigenous-protected-areas-leaves-sector-proud-but-perplexed>
 but this contract, with the federal Clean Energy Regulator, is the first of 
its kind in the central desert region, the Central Land Council said. Similar 
initiatives are increasingaround the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/16/indigenous-communities-control-over-land-mitigate-climate-change>
.

The first carbon credits – earned from burns conducted in April – will come 
through next July and are intended to pay for fire management of the 3,000km 
square area.

“When burning starts again, next dry season, a dozen Aboriginal people will be 
hired to work with our rangers from Daguragu and Tennant Creek but the benefits 
don’t stop there,” said Central Land Council director David Ross.

“If our successful ranger program is any guide, there will be wider social and 
environmental outcomes, such as improved biodiversity and reinvigorated 
cultural traditions.

Helma Bernard, a Gurindji woman and Indigenous ranger from Daguragu, said the 
group was excited about the contract.

If you want to tackle carbon emissions let indigenous people control their land
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/16/indigenous-communities-control-over-land-mitigate-climate-change>
“I just started [as a ranger], this was my first burn,” she said. “It’s really 
important work for all people, to keep their culture going, to keep the young 
ones happy. To get more of the savannah burned.

“We’re just really happy and excited and we’ll get more to do, with the funds 
from the contract].”

In the fourth ERF auction of its kind, 47 carbon abatement projects were 
awarded to 49 projects for a total value of $367m, lower than the previous 
three, which secured $516m, $556m, and $660m. The auctions secured 34.4m tonnes 
of abatement at an average of $10.69 per tonne.

Karlantijpa North’s contract secures payments for 24,100 tonnes.
 