
Had the Grosvenor estate bequeathed to the new Duke of Westminster been liable 
for 40% inheritance tax, the amount owed to the Treasury would have been not 
far off the government’s entire death duty take for the last financial year.

Hugh Grosvenor, however, avoids a significant cut to his £9bn inheritance 
because the estate is held in a trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/10/grosvenor-estate-structure-protects-fortune-from-hmrc>
.

Britain’s generous trust law ensures that the country’s largest fortunes are 
largely kept intact. This is borne out by statistics which show that duties are 
a modest source of revenue for the Treasury.HMRC collected total tax of £534bn 
in 2015-16 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjFmJ_Es7nOAhULCMAKHfQ2AM4QFggoMAI&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gov.uk%2Fgovernment%2Fuploads%2Fsystem%2Fuploads%2Fattachment_data%2Ffile%2F539194%2FJun16_Receipts_NS_Bulletin_Final.pdf&usg=AFQjCNE310s1EmIKHVmgmL5KBAV4up2OjQ&sig2=EwhRIHhDVHEXCMoHLFnT9A&bvm=bv.129422649,d.ZGg>
, of which inheritance tax receipts represented £4.7bn.

New Duke of Westminster inherits £9bn fortune aged 25
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/10/new-duke-of-westminster-hugh-grosvenor-inherit-fortune>
“The benefits of trusts are that they don’t form part of somebody’s estate,” 
says Ian Dyall, a manager at thefinancial adviser Towry <https://www.towry.com/>
. “In a discretionary trust, you have a whole pick list of potential 
beneficiaries which the trustees can choose to appoint benefits to. Because of 
that, you can’t point a finger to any potential beneficiary and say that’s your 
money. Money can stay in the trust and cascade down from generation to 
generation and nobody pays inheritance tax on it.”

Instead of one-off taxation, trusts are subject to charges every 10 years from 
the anniversary of their creation. Known as the inheritance tax periodic 
charge, it can amount to 6% of the funds held. There are, however, plenty of 
loopholes. Agricultural and business property relief applies, and the Grosvenor 
assets will have been managed to take full advantage of that.

The estate has been divided into three portfolios:





Grosvenor 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Finheritance-tax-why-the-new-duke-of-westminster-will-not-pay-billions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc81300ce973f8f91ad73e2326210f0c222f519e0%2F0_53_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inheritance%20tax%3A%20why%20the%20new%20Duke%20of%20Westminster%20will%20not%20pay%20billions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Finheritance-tax-why-the-new-duke-of-westminster-will-not-pay-billions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inheritance%20tax%3A%20why%20the%20new%20Duke%20of%20Westminster%20will%20not%20pay%20billions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Finheritance-tax-why-the-new-duke-of-westminster-will-not-pay-billions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc81300ce973f8f91ad73e2326210f0c222f519e0%2F0_53_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Eaton Square in central London is the jewel of the 300-year-old Grosvenor 
estate. Photograph: Jonathan Brady/PA 
The privately owned property business <http://www.grosvenor.com/home/> has 
£11.8bn in assets under management. At its heart is the 300-year-old Grosvenor 
estate in London, which began in 1677 as 500 acres of land including Mayfair 
and Belgravia. Its holdings range from hi-tech office space in Silicon Valley 
and a science park in Edinburgh to the freehold on the current US embassy in 
Grosvenor Square. The jewel is Eaton Square, built close to Buckingham Palace 
and the Houses of Parliament during the housing boom that followed the 
Napoleonic wars.
Grosvenor property in London 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/grosvenor_estate_map/giv-31075quLjl6mtzvMh/>
Run as a separate legal entity with its own chief executive, Grosvenor Group 
paid £58m in tax on profits of £527m in 2015, and has 520 employees on its 
payroll. Its holdings are largely expected to qualify for relief from the 
inheritance tax periodic charge.

“Property is at the frontline over what qualifies and what doesn’t,” said 
Dyall. “If you run a hotel, that’s a business. If you have a rental property 
and all you do is collect the rent, that’s not a trading company. That’s an 
investment.”
Tax 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/tax-zip/giv-31075tkDPooHdvlHo>
Wheatsheaf

Set up in 2012, Wheatsheaf <http://www.wheatsheafgroup.com/> employs 450 
people and invests in food, energy and water security. It runs Grosvenor Farms, 
one of the largest farms in the UK with more than 6,000 acres in Cheshire and a 
herd of 1,400 dairy cows. Other businesses include the UK’s largest bull stud, 
Cogent Breeding, and a hydroelectric plant on the Reay Forest estate in 
Scotland.

With its emphasis on food production, job creation and trading rather than 
land holding, Wheatsheaf assets are also likely to be exempt from the 
inheritance tax periodic charge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Finheritance-tax-why-the-new-duke-of-westminster-will-not-pay-billions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eda6996efa6a16ce3a071c6ba7cfb44b952a87f%2F0_275_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inheritance%20tax%3A%20why%20the%20new%20Duke%20of%20Westminster%20will%20not%20pay%20billions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Finheritance-tax-why-the-new-duke-of-westminster-will-not-pay-billions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inheritance%20tax%3A%20why%20the%20new%20Duke%20of%20Westminster%20will%20not%20pay%20billions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Finheritance-tax-why-the-new-duke-of-westminster-will-not-pay-billions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eda6996efa6a16ce3a071c6ba7cfb44b952a87f%2F0_275_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 The late Duke of Westminster, Gerald Cavendish Grosvenor. Photograph: 
Grosvenor Estate/PA 
Family Investment Office

The Family Investment Office manages rural estates in Sutherland, Lancashire, 
Spain and the family seat at Eaton Hall near Chester. It also takes care of 
stock market and other financial investments, the charitable Westminster 
Foundation, and a fine art collection that includes works by Velásquez, Stubbs, 
Rembrandt and Lucian Freud. The office employs 470 people across its rural 
estates. It is likely some of its assets, particularly cash investments, will 
not qualify for periodic tax relief.
tax 2 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/assets-zip/giv-31075j5fb2uE7uk4Y/> 