
The Stoke City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> goalkeeper 
Jack Butland will not be available for Sam Allardyce’s first England squad 
after sustaining​ an ankle problem in training.

Butland was absent during Stoke’s 1-1 draw at Middlesbrough on Saturday with 
Mark Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mark-hughes>, the manager, 
admitting the injury “knocked us sideways” during training the previous day.

Scans have shown that Butland will only be out for weeks rather than months, 
with scar tissue causing him pain on the same ankle that he fractured during 
England’s friendly victory over Germany before Euro 2016. However, Hughes 
insists that he will not be available forEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> when Allardyce’s team play 
Slovakia in a World Cup qualifier on 4 September.

England’s Jack Butland to miss Euro 2016 with fractured ankle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/27/england-jack-butland-euro-2016-fractured-ankle>
“He won’t be involved in that. It’s important that he gets back to playing and 
training and he’ll need a two-week period after the injury where he needs to 
get up to speed. He won’t be ready for England,” said Hughes. “We don’t want to 
put a timescale on it but we’ve had good news. It should settle down quickly 
and it’s a matter of weeks rather than anything more significant thankfully.

“It was a huge blow to us all and it knocked us sideways yesterday [Friday]. 
We’re thankful that we’ve got an outstanding goalkeeper in Shay [Given] to come 
in and hold the fort. There was no challenge, he just felt an uncomfortable 
feeling in the ankle and as the session progressed he was in more pain.

“In the end he had to stop and sit it out. But it’s better news. When he first 
did it we thought that he had maybe refractured it and Jack was quite concerned 
at the time. It’s just an injury that will take a couple of weeks hopefully.”

England’s goalkeeping spot will come under scrutiny when Allardyce links up 
with his squad for the first time. Joe Hart was dropped by Pep Guardiola for 
Manchester City’s openingPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> match of the season and 
made a number of high-profile errors during England’s ill-fated European 
Championship campaign, with Fraser Forster and Tom Heaton those also selected 
in the previous squad by Roy Hodgson.
 