
On 4 October 1913, the new Australian naval fleet entered the waters of Sydney 
harbour for the first time, watched by thousands of enthralled Sydneysiders. 
Led by flagship HMAS Australia, the fleet of seven cruisers and destroyers was 
made up by the Melbourne, Sydney, Encounter, Warrego, Parramatta and Yarra.

One hundred years later, millions of spectators will watch on Saturday as 60 
vessels, from destroyers to elegant sail ships, submarines and civilian craft, 
sail into the harbour for the spectacular centenary celebrations. Here are 
seven ships to watch out for.

1. HMAS LEEUWIN <http://www.navy.gov.au/hmas-leeuwin>

This is the big one for royal watchers: the Australian surveying ship Leeuwin 
will be hosting Prince Harry on Saturday when he accompanies the governor 
general, Quentin Bryce, for the review of the fleet. It was apparently chosen 
because of its manoeuvrability in what will be a very congested harbour and 
because it has a large enough deck space for the dignitaries.

Named after Cape Leeuwin on the south-west tip of Western Australia, Leeuwin 
was built in Cairns and launched in 1997. Manned by a crew of 46 officers and 
sailors, the ship is 71m in length. It carries three fully-equipped 9m survey 
boats and can also carry a helicopter.

2. PICTON CASTLE 
<http://www.picton-castle.com/ship-and-crew/the-picton-castle.html>

The three-masted tall ship Picton Castle is a working vessel best known for 
its sail training voyages around the world. It was built in 1928 as a Swansea 
fishing trawler and is named after an 11th century Welsh castle. Now based in 
Nova Scotia in Canada, the Picton Castle is a barque – a ship with three or 
more masts.

The ship specialises in training and offers apprenticeships in traditional 
seamanship, so if you’re lucky, you could get to take the helm one day. It also 
has its ownTwitter feed <>. <https://twitter.com/ThePictonCastle>

3. LADY HOPETOUN <http://www.shf.org.au/LdyHpt/LdyHpt.html>

The Lady Hopetoun took part in the original entry into the harbour 100 years 
ago. One of three civilian vessels taking part in the celebrations, it is the 
only steam-powered boat in the fleet.

Now part of the Sydney Heritage Fleet, the 23.5m steam launch was built in 
1902 and named after the wife of Australia’s first governor general. For many 
years she served as the VIP launch for the NSW government, and has carried 
numerous VIPs over the years, from the Duke of York (later King George VI), the 
Duke of Windsor, the King and Queen of Thailand and Lord Montgomery of Alamein.

4. QINGDAO <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_052_destroyerinese>

The Qingdao <http://www.navy.gov.au/ifr/participants/warships> is one of the 
first modern, multi-role guided missile destroyers built by the Chinese navy 
and is operated by the People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN). A type 052 
Luhu-class destroyer, it has a crew of 260, including 40 officers, and was 
launched in 1993.

Built at Hudong shipyard, the 142.6m destroyer is one of two such vessels in 
active service in the PLAN and has conducted anti-piracy and escort missions in 
the Gulf of Aden and Somali waters.

5. VOEA SAVEA

Voea Savea <http://www.navy.gov.au/ifr/participants/warships> is part of the 
tiny Tongan Maritime Force, which has a fleet of just half a dozen vessels and 
130 sailors. The Voea Saveo has a crew of 14 to18 sailors, a speed of 20 knots, 
weighs 162 tonnes when fully loaded and is 31.5m long.

The Pacific-class patrol craft was provided to Tonga by Australia as part of 
the Pacific Patrol Boat Program and its main base is Touliki Base in 
Nuku’alofa. Voea Savea carries various small arms, including machine guns, 
although not all Tongan ships are permanently armed.

6. USS CHOSIN <http://www.chosin.navy.mil/>

The American contingent escaped the US government shutdown and the guided 
missile cruiser USS Chosin remains part of the celebrations, although the 
shutdown has apparently meant the cancellation of some of the social functions 
that were planned onboard.

Chosin was named to commemorate the battle of Chosin Reservoir in the Korean 
War in 1950. The 173m long ship was commissioned in 1991 and currently serves 
in the Pacific Fleet based in Pearl harbor. It has a crew of 33 officers, 27 
petty officers and 340 sailors. Armaments include guns, harpoon missiles and 
torpedoes. It carries two Sikorsky or Seahawk helicopters.

7. HMAS BROOME <http://www.navy.gov.au/hmas-broome-ii>

All eyes will be on HMAS Broome on Saturday evening as the spectacular 
fireworks and light show begins, as it is one of seven navy ships and six 
barges that will act as fireworks platforms for the display. The Armidale-class 
patrol boat (ACPB), named after the city in New South Wales, will be anchored 
off Luna Park for the show.

When not hosting firework displays, HMAS Broome is one of 14 ACPBs engaged in 
immigration, customs and drug law enforcement operations and providing 
protection for the nation's fisheries. Each year they provide up to 3,000 
patrol days as part of the coast watch-managed national surveillance effort and 
in the event of war would be tasked to control the waters close to the 
Australian mainland. The Broome has a range of 3,000 nautical miles at 12 knots 
and a maximum speed of about 25 knots.
 