
Major investors have warned the automotive industry it needs to accelerate its 
readiness for a low-carbon world if it is to retain their support and prosper.

Vehicle makers must put climate change specialists on their boards, engage 
better with policy-makers, and invest more heavily in low-emission cars, says a 
network of 250 global investors with assets of more than $24tn (£20tn).

The demands come in a new report, Investor Expectations of Automotive Companies
 
<http://climatenewsnetwork.us6.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6e13c74c17ec527c4be72d64f&id=83fc3c8f29&e=b32211c2fa>
, published this week by the Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change 
(IIGCC).

“Long-term investors want to ensure that automotive companies are prepared for 
the challenges stemming from climate change, new technologies, changing 
policies and shifts in demand caused by global trends,” says Dr Hans-Christoph 
Hirt, co-head ofinvestment house Hermes EOS 
<http://climatenewsnetwork.us6.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6e13c74c17ec527c4be72d64f&id=3a6edd58fc&e=b32211c2fa>
, a member of the IGCC.

Plans for an electric car charging point in every new home in Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/11/electric-car-charging-point-new-home-europe-renault>
“Investors expect the industry to embark upon a smoother route to future 
prosperity by developing and implementing long-term business strategies that 
are resilient to climate change and resulting regulatory shifts.”

Sustainable returns

Chris Davis, senior programme director of the Ceres Investor Network on 
Climate Risk 
<http://climatenewsnetwork.us6.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6e13c74c17ec527c4be72d64f&id=240df7639e&e=b32211c2fa>
, another IIGCC member, agrees. “A growing number of institutional investors 
recognise that climate change will impact their holdings, portfolios, and asset 
values in the short and long-term,” he says.

“To achieve sustainable returns for clients and beneficiaries, investors in 
the automotive sector must engage to ensure companies are prepared to thrive in 
a carbon-constrained environment and support robust policy action sufficient to 
drive the transition to clean vehicles.”

The traditional car industry has gradually been increasing its output of pure 
electric and hybrid diesel/electric models, but in small numbers. It has failed 
to shrug off its image as a foot-dragger in the fight against climate change – 
similar to the way most big oil companies are seen.

The recent Volkswagen emissions scandal 
<http://climatenewsnetwork.us6.list-manage.com/track/click?u=6e13c74c17ec527c4be72d64f&id=b687fd1208&e=b32211c2fa>
, in which the German car manufacturer used “cheat devices” that underplayed 
pollution on its cars, has further tarnished the industry’s image over the last 
12 months. And critics have long claimed that few vehicles live up to the fuel 
consumption levels claimed of them.

Making sure the industry has “closed the gap between real world and emissions 
testing” is highlighted by the IIGCC as one of the key issues that must be 
fixed.

But the finance houses also want car and truck makers to set more meaningful 
targets and metrics to reduce greenhouse gases in their own supply chain. And 
car companies need to engage more meaningfully with international policymakers 
and their own investors on climate change.

Big investors point out that large car companies face serious threats inside 
their own sector from innovators such as the California-based automaker Tesla, 
evangelists for climate change and producers of low-carbon electric vehicles.

Climate agreement

And the finance houses say the move towards driverless vehicles 
<http://climatenewsnetwork.us6.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=6e13c74c17ec527c4be72d64f&id=062b0b7a73&e=b32211c2fa>
, being pioneered by the likes of Google, poses a threat of even more severe 
potential new competition for the traditional car firms.

Last year’s Paris climate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/21/paris-climate-agreement-poised-to-come-into-force>
 has increased the urgency for the big manufacturers such as Ford, VW and 
Toyota to move more quickly, the report warns.

They point to a recent study by the Moody’s credit agency 
<http://climatenewsnetwork.us6.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=6e13c74c17ec527c4be72d64f&id=d16fe32e4c&e=b32211c2fa>
 that highlighted the potential dangers of tighter regulations for vehicles.

And the new IIGCC report warns that the automotive industry is already exposed 
to “a plethora of CO2 and pollutant emission reduction targets in all major 
markets”.

It says that tougher vehicle standards have already been implemented or are on 
their way in Australia, Brazil, China and India, as well as the US and Europe.

And it stresses that governments are increasingly incentivising the use of 
electric vehicles in countries such as Norway and Holland.
 