
Travis Tygart, the US Anti-Doping chief executive, has accused the 
International Olympic Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/international-olympic-committee> of acting 
like the “Keystone Cops” and warned that it is “now or never” to overhaul the 
global fight against doping in the wake of the Russian scandal or lose it 
forever.

The World Anti-Doping Agency met at the weekend to re-elect Sir Craig Reedie 
as president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/craig-reedie-wada-president> for 
another three years, ratify a process that should allow it to set its own 
sanctions against non-compliant countries for the first time, and launch its 
first whistleblower programme.

But Tygart, who this month met the heads of other national anti-doping 
organisations (NADOs) who called unsuccessfully for Russia to be banned from 
the Rio Olympics followingrevelations of widespread state-sponsored doping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/09/wada-iaaf-russia-dick-pound-banned>
, said it was time for wholesale reform.

Wada pushes for power to suspend non-compliant countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/wada-ioc-rio-olympics-drugs-in-sport>
“The governance of Wada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> has to change 
and be made truly independent. We have to be cogniscent and honest about the 
tension between promoting and policing your sport. We have to remove the fox 
from guarding the henhouse. It can’t police itself,” he told the Guardian. “At 
the end of the day, it’s chaos, it’s the Keystone Cops. Clean athletes are 
frustrated and they’re upset. They see what’s going on. They want their rights 
protected and they want a system that works.”

Tygart, who led the investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/dec/19/travis-tygart-us-anti-doping-lance-armstrong>
 that brought down the seven-time Tour de France winner Lance Armstrong, said 
there was a fundamental unwillingness on the part of the IOC – which provides 
half of Wada’s $30m per year funding – to give up control. “It’s all words 
right now,” Tygart said. “The group of NADOs has been clear – the IOC could 
immediately remove themselves from the Wada board, they could immediately put 
$500m or whatever the number is into a fund to ensure anti-doping has the 
resources it needs to truly protect the brand.”

He said the IOC, which has reserves of $1.2bn, should place $500m in a blind 
trust and use the proceeds to fund a truly independent global anti-doping 
regulator. “It is an investment in the brand and it’s short-sightedness that is 
really frustrating. Because if you invest the money, the return is going to be 
a hundred-fold, a thousand-fold, who knows? People want fair play. They want to 
know what they’re watching is real and is not a fraud and is not rigged.”

In the period following the publication of Professor Richard McLaren’s report 
into widespread state-sponsored doping in Russia, Tygart was outspoken in his 
calls for the IOC to ban the country from the Games. Wada backed that call but 
amid confusion and chaos, the decision was eventually left to individual 
federations.

Tygart said he worried about the message that was sent by the IOC decision. 
“That’s always been our biggest worry – if you fail to put any consequence in 
place, which is what the IOC did, that sends a message that there are some that 
are too big to fail,” he said.

The Usada chief executive also criticised Reedie’s position as president. Up 
to now the IOC and the governments that provide the other 50% of Wada’s funding 
have taken it in turns to nominate a president, who sits for two three-year 
terms. “It’s not personal by any means. It’s position. You can’t simultaneously 
serve the IOC and clean athletes. There’s potentially a conflict of interest 
and I think we’ve seen it in his role,” Tygart said.

“It’s interesting that the sport movement is apparently now upset with the 
president. The IOC is half of Wada, probably a bigger influence than that. If 
they’re upset, they’re upset with themselves.”

Last week in Doha, as key IOC officials lined up to attack Wada, its president 
Thomas Bach defended its decision on Russia before the Rio Games, saying it was 
“not political but in the interests of clean athletes”.

The IOC had convened its own series of Olympic Summits to try and plot a way 
forward for anti-doping amid endless infighting and political manoeuvring. Even 
now, Russia refuses to accept that it operated a state-sponsored doping 
programme as outlined by McLaren’s report. Meanwhile, McLaren will deliver the 
second part of his report next month.

IOC washes over farcical findings of Wada’s Rio 2016 anti-doping report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/why-ioc-must-look-more-closely-at-wada-rio-anti-doping-report>
Tygart said the credibility of Wada and the IOC was further undermined by a 
damning independent observer’s (IO) report on anti-doping operations at Rio 
itself. “Look at the Rio IO report – 4,000 athletes out of the 11,000 that were 
in Rio had no tests prior to the Rio Olympics? Our athletes are saying, what on 
earth is going on here? How is that possible? 1,900 of them in high-risk 
sports? No tests before getting to Rio? It’s incredible,” he said.

“It’s unacceptable. For the IOC and Wada to come out and say the integrity of 
the Games was preserved – give me a break? Who are we kidding? The hypocrisy is 
what now has athletes so furious.”

While he was still hopeful a solution could be found, Tygart said he feared 
clean athletes would turn their backs on sport if there wasn’t a fundamental 
overhaul. “Ultimately athletes will think if they can’t win clean then they 
will throw in the towel. Let’s quit the charade, let’s shut down anti-doping 
and let them do whatever they want,” he said.
 