
Bahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> has stripped the spiritual 
leader of the kingdom’s Shia Muslim majority of his citizenship, resulting in 
protests outside his home and furious threats by neighbouring Iran over the 
escalating repression.

The move against Ayatollah Isa Qassim comes less than a week after a court 
banned the country’s main opposition group, al-Wefaq, accusing it of fomenting 
sectarian unrest and having links to a foreign power – a clear reference toIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, which is a fierce critic of Bahrain’s 
Sunni monarchy.


The Iranian Revolutionary Guards commander Gen Qassem Suleimani told Manama 
that it had crossed a “red line” by putting pressure on Qassim and that the 
move would trigger armed resistance, the Fars news agency reported.

“Al-Khalifa [the rulers of Bahrain] will definitely pay the price for that and 
their bloodthirsty regime will be toppled,” warned Suleimani, who heads the 
Guards’ elite Quds force and is seen as the ruthless face of Iran’s strategic 
reach across the Middle East.

Bahrain’s BNA state news agency, citing an interior ministry statement, said 
the cleric had been trying to divide Bahraini society, encourage young people 
to violate the constitution and promote a sectarian environment.


Bahrain detains rights activist as UN official criticises repression
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/13/bahrain-detains-rights-activist-un-official-criticises-repression>
“Based on that, the Bahraini citizenship had been removed from Isa Ahmed 
Qassim, who, since he acquired Bahraini citizenship, had sought to form 
organisations that follow foreign religious and political reference,” BNA said. 
The ayatollah’s official website says he was born in the kingdom in the 1940s.

Reports quickly circulated on social media of a crowd marching outside 
Qassim’s house in Diraz, a village west of the capital. Video footage showed 
dozens of people chanting Shia slogans.

Bahraini media reported last week that authorities had been investigating a 
bank account of about $10m (£6.8m) in Qassim’s name to examine where it was 
getting funds from and how they were being spent.

The action spurred a strongly worded statement from senior clerics, including 
Qassim, against any attempt to meddle with the collection of a tax called 
khums, which is a pillar of Shia Islam.

The Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy <http://birdbh.org/> (Bird), an 
exiled opposition group, warned that the move against Qassim would stoke 
unrest. “We are deeply concerned that these actions will escalate tensions on 
the streets and may even lead to violence, as targeting the country’s leading 
Shia cleric is considered ... a red line for many Bahrainis,” said its director 
of advocacy, Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei.

The US State Department said it was “alarmed” by Bahrain’s action. “We are 
unaware of any credible evidence to support this action,” said John Kirby, a 
spokesman for the department.

Bahrain crushed a 2011 uprising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/08/bahrain-protests-repression-getting-worse>
 by Shia Muslims and others demanding reforms and a bigger voice in the 
country, a close ally of neighbouring Saudi Arabia and the west, which is home 
to the US Fifth Fleet and a new British naval base..

The kingdom has stripped dozens of people of their citizenship over the past 
two years, apparently in a campaign to end opposition. Last month, an appeals 
court increased from four to nine years a prison sentence imposed on Sheikh Ali 
Salman, the al-Wefaq leader. Salman was convicted in 2015 ofinciting hatred and 
disobedience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/16/bahrain-opposition-leader-ali-salman-sentenced-to-four-years-in-jail>
, and insulting public institutions.

Growing international concern about the situation 
<http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20086&LangID=E>
 was highlighted last week when the UN high commissioner for human rights 
warned that repression “will not eliminate people’s grievances”. The criticism 
was flatly rejected by the Bahraini government.


An indefinite ban on gatherings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/30/bahrain-bans-protests-crackdown-opposition>
 in Manama has been in place since 2012. Dozens of people, including minors, 
have been prosecuted for participating in protests.

Bahrain is at the heart of the sectarian faultline running across the Middle 
East, flanked on one side bySaudi Arabia and Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/08/saudi-arabia-v-iran-riyadh-defiant-and-angry-after-turbulent-week>
 on the other. Iranian official media was quick to highlight the move against 
Qassim by what it called the “Bahraini regime”.

The Lebanese Shia movement Hezbollah, which is backed by Tehran, said it 
“pushes the Bahraini people to difficult choices which will have severe 
consequences for this corrupt dictatorial regime”. It showed, said Hezbollah, 
that the Bahraini government had reached “the end of the road” in dealing with 
what it called a peaceful, popular movement.


On Twitter, one Bahraini individual portrayed Qassim as an insect with a spray 
can labelled “sectarianism”.

The UK is coming under mounting pressure to act more robustly towards its Gulf 
ally. In January, the foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, called Bahrain “a 
country which is travelling in the right direction” and “making significant 
reform”.

Bird claims that the British government’s interest in Bahrain’s human rights 
and in promoting political dialogue has “declined precipitously” since a 2014 
agreement to constructthe Mina Salman naval base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/bahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism>
. It alleges that UK funding to improve Bahraini human rights institutions 
since the repression that followed the Arab spring has largely been spent on 
well-intentioned bodies that have proved not to be truly independent of the 
government.
 