
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> may have to revise its 
annual GDP figures for the past decade following the European commission’s 
ruling that the majority of Apple’s overseas profits should have been taxable 
in the Republic.

Europe’s competition watchdog ruled on Tuesday 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-2923_en.htm> that the company owed 
the Irish government €13bn (£10.9bn) in unpaid taxes on profits from 
international sales routed through subsidiaries in Ireland. When interest is 
added the final bill could reach €19bn.

“If the European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> have ruled this profit 
should be taxable in Ireland, it should be reflected in the GDP numbers,” said 
Seamus Coffey, lecturer in economics at University College Cork.

He believes the revision, which could be required by the European statistics 
agency Eurostat, could show that the Irish economy was growing between 6% and 
8% a year from 2010 onwards. This would represent a dramatic change, at least 
on paper: Ireland’s GDP shrank in 2012 and growth was recorded at zero in 2011.

“The commission is essentially reallocating the profits from the US to 
Ireland,” said Coffey. “They are now saying the output produced in Ireland is 
billions higher. The 2015 number won’t change. What will happen is the years 
before it will rise up.”

Following this week’s ruling, which Apple has vowed to appeal against 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/political-crap-tim-cook-apple-tax-ruling>
, Ireland must now recover unpaid taxes from Apple for the years 2003 to 2014. 
The cash will not transfer immediately to the Irish revenue. Apple’s chief 
executive Tim Cook has confirmed that a sum based on the commission’s 
calculations will be paid into an escrow account pending the end of the appeals 
process.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> books the vast majority 
of its non-US revenues through Ireland, and the amounts passing through the 
books of its two principal subsidiaries in the Irish Republic have been 
significant since 2010, when sales of the iPhone and iPad ballooned.

Between 2009 and 2014, Apple’s pre-tax earnings from outside the US rose from 
$6.6bn to $33.6bn. They were $47.6bn (£35.8bn) last year.

A statistical change in the rate at which the economy grew could have material 
consequences. In July, thefinance minister, Michael Noonan 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/economy/state-faces-280m-rise-in-eu-contribution-due-to-gdp-revision-1.2728535>
, confirmed Ireland would have to contribute an additional €280m to the 
European Union budget to reflect a recent revision to its growth.

Ireland’s GDP grew by an astonishing 26.3% in 2015, according to revised 
statistics published by the government in July. The rate is nearly three times 
the highest level recorded during the so-called Celtic Tiger boom years and was 
far ahead of a previous estimate of 7.8%.

Nobel prizewinner Paul Krugman described the figures as “leprechaun economics” 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/leprechaun-economics-irelands-26pc-growth-spurt-laughed-off-as-farcical-34879232.html>
, while Sinn Féin MP Pearse Doherty said that the economy was now “so 
intertwined in international tax and accounting stunts that they bring with 
them a serious risk”.

The National Treasury Management Agency 
<http://www.ntma.ie/news/ntma-investor-presentation/>, which manages Ireland’s 
debt, said the jump was due to a number of large multinationals moving their 
tax domicile to Ireland. This led to a €300bn increase in the country’s capital 
stock, which records assets such as roads and hospitals but also intangibles 
such as intellectual property. This pushed the value of assets above €1tn for 
the first time.
Ireland's assets 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-01T13:53:20/embed.html>
“Whether by re-domiciling or by inverting, the reclassification of several 
large companies as Irish resident expanded the capital stock in 2015,” the 
agency said in a presentation in July.

Since Tuesday’s ruling, there has been speculation that the GDP leap may be 
linked to a change in Apple’s offshore strategy. The commission stated that its 
ruling only applied to the end of 2014 because the company’s two main Irish 
subsidiaries – Apple Sales International and Apple OperationsEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – altered their structures in 
2015.

If Apple has reallocated more of its intellectual property, such as patents 
and branding rights to Ireland, the change could explain the €300bn increase in 
the value of Irish assets.

“We don’t know that what happened in 2015 was Apple,” said Coffey. “Maybe it’s 
spread across 40 companies. But the EU ruling did say that Apple restructured 
in 2015. We do know that a lot of intellectual property is moving to Ireland. 
With most companies it might be worth a couple of hundred million or a billion, 
there aren’t many companies where it’s on the scale of Apple.”

The speculation that a single accounting change at Apple might explain the 
massive swing in Ireland’s GDP underlines its importance to the economy. The 
firm employs 6,000 staff at its European headquarters in Cork, a significant 
proportion of the area’s 200,000 strong metropolitan population.

 