
The Irish government was aware of the trafficking of migrant workers into its 
fishing fleet as long ago as 2010 but failed to tackle the problem. Internal 
documents obtained by the Guardian following a freedom of information (FoI) 
request show that, under the previous administration, trafficking of fishermen 
from countries outsideEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
was raised by officials tasked with investigating illegal employment and the 
flouting of immigration laws in the sector.

A Guardian investigation last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/revealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry>
 uncovered allegations of the widespread exploitation of undocumented Africans 
and Asians and suspected cases of human trafficking in the Irish prawn and 
whitefish fleet. In response to our report, the Irish governmentheld emergency 
cabinet discussions and established an interdepartmental taskforce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/03/irish-cabinet-sets-up-taskforce-to-examine-migrant-workers-treatment-fishing-trawlers-guardian-investigation>
 to devise urgent solutions to the problem.

Revealed: trafficked migrant workers abused in Irish fishing industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/revealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry>
But the FoI documents, released to us by the Irish Department of Jobs, 
Enterprise and Innovation, show that the Irish government had known of the 
problems for years. Officials had begun drafting a work permit scheme for 
seafarers to address illegality in 2008. Difficulties over the division of 
responsibilities between government departments and bodies, and practical 
objections, were still being discussed in 2010. The scheme remained shelved 
until the Guardian’s revelations in November 2015.

The taskforce set up in the wake of our investigation was chaired by the 
minister for agriculture, food and the marine, Simon Coveney, and it issued its
report 
<http://www.agriculture.gov.ie/media/migration/publications/2015/TaskForceReport141215.pdf>
 (pdf) earlier this week. The report detailed plans to introduce a bespoke 
permit scheme to allow boat owners and non-European migrants working for them 
illegally to apply for permission to remain on Irish vessels.


The taskforce has yet to address the problem of human trafficking in the 
fleet, however. Instead, it appeared to push the problem beyond parliamentary 
elections expected in February. “A new national action plan to combat 
trafficking will be published in the coming months,” the report said.

The Irish government’s failure to tackle the problem of human trafficking was 
criticised by the US State Department’s former ambassador on trafficking and 
president of the human rights watchdog Freedom House, Mark Lagon. The taskforce 
report has come up with “a purgatory position in which to place workers without 
regularising their legal status”, he said. “Saying this is a problem everywhere 
in the world does not mean it does not need acute attention inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. When people are in a grey zone 
where their immigration status is vulnerable, it can be exploited grossly. The 
report doesn’t go far enough; the issue they should be giving attention to is 
the one of human trafficking.”

An “atypical worker permission mechanism” will be available for up to 500 
foreign fishermen to work for a 12-month period. It can be applied for by Irish 
vessel owners so long as they produce a contract of employment certified by a 
solicitor, deposit a copy of it with the government, take out health insurance 
for the workers, and agree repatriation costs. Owners will be required to pay 
the legal minimum wage, deduct tax and national insurance, arrange safety 
training and follow the law on rest periods at sea.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-industry-trafficking-overseas-workers-cheap-labour-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trafficking%20in%20Irish%20fishing%3A%20overseas%20workers%20used%20as%20cheap%20labour%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-industry-trafficking-overseas-workers-cheap-labour-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trafficking%20in%20Irish%20fishing%3A%20overseas%20workers%20used%20as%20cheap%20labour%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-industry-trafficking-overseas-workers-cheap-labour-video&media=>
Trafficking in Irish fishing: overseas workers used as cheap labour – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/nov/02/irish-fishing-industry-trafficking-overseas-workers-cheap-labour-video>
The taskforce report recognised that Irish boat owners have failed to declare 
the extent to which they now rely on non-European crew. Logbooks submitted by 
trawler owners to the authorities in the first half of 2015 claimed 62% of crew 
were Irish nationals, with 9% recorded as coming from outside the European 
Economic Area (EEA) and 11% of unknown nationality. However, official 
inspections of fishing vessels in the same period found 42% were from outside 
the EEA and just 32% were Irish.


The Irish fishing industry welcomed the permit scheme, which it described as a 
“win-win” for boat owners and migrants. Francis O’Donnell, chief executive of 
the Irish Fish Producers’ Organisation (IFPO) said: “People can now stop 
looking over their shoulders and get on with their respective businesses. The 
agencies involved in the taskforce acknowledged from the outset that a 
pragmatic approach was required to resolve this issue, and in particular credit 
should be given to Minister Coveney who steered this sensitive issue to a 
satisfactory conclusion in such a short timescale.”

He added that he hoped the cap at 500 permits would be enough. IFPO had argued 
earlier that 1,000 permits would be needed to account for all the non-EEA 
fishermen currently used in the fleet.


Diego Archer, a leading expert in international maritime immigration at the US 
firm Fragomen, said the mechanism devised by the Irish government would close 
the legal loopholes.

Migrant rights groups in Ireland, however, were dismayed by the government’s 
new scheme, which they said would leave migrants vulnerable to exploitation and 
would be largely ignored.


“We welcome the swift publication of the report, however, the fact that this 
scheme does little to address or provide an effective remedy for those who have 
been exploited in the industry is a monumental failure,” said Fiona Finn, chief 
executive of NASC, the Cork-based migrant support organisation.

Migrant Rights Centre Ireland was also concerned that the proposals did not 
address the problems fully. “We are disappointed that the recommendations we 
submitted are not reflected,” said its rights coordinator, Gráinne O’Toole.

The International Transport Federation (ITF) predicted that boat owners would 
not apply for permission for African and Asian workers in any number because 
they would baulk at having to pay migrants properly and at the other 
considerable costs the scheme would impose on them. ITF’s Ken Fleming said he 
feared that a lack of clear independent enforcement would also mean the 
industry carried on with “business as usual”.

The Department of Justice and Equality told us that the understanding of human 
trafficking in to the Irish fleet within the department at the time had been 
“generalised”, based on the potential for trafficking for labour exploitation 
and media reports, but that it had “no evidence of wide-scale trafficking”. It 
added that allegations of human trafficking were always fully investigated by 
the Irish police when they were reported.

• This article was updated 18 December 2015 to include a response from the 
Irish government
 