
The rules around the immigration and employment status of fishermen are 
complex and there is considerable confusion among those wanting to use migrant 
workers from outside the European Economic Area (EEA) as to what is required.

The Irish Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation 
<https://www.djei.ie/en/> told us when we asked last month that to work on an 
Irish fishing vessel that operates within Ireland’s 12-mile territorial waters, 
or to work on trawlers or on the dock while they are in Irish ports, non-EEA 
migrants need an Irish work permit. But since 2006, non-EEA seafarers have been 
not been eligible to apply for Irish work permits.


In 2009 the Irish government prepared a draft scheme for non-EEA permits for 
fishing because the industry said it couldn’t find enough Irish workers, but it 
was ditched after the 2008 crash to protect local employment. Some Asian 
migrant workers we met told us they had applied for permits but had been 
refused.


Revealed: trafficked migrant workers abused in Irish fishing industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/revealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry>
However, the department later told us that as all seafarers work in a 
self-employed capacity, the employment permit legislation does not apply to 
them. We asked the department to clarify this apparent contradiction but it 
declined to do so.


Irish legal experts advise that non-EEA nationals wanting to enter Ireland 
must present themselves to Irish immigration. Those wanting to stay should have 
an Irish visa. Those crossing the border between Northern Ireland andIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> without presenting to immigration 
are in breach of the law. Anyone helping them to do so could be regarded as 
facilitating illegal immigration.


Non-EEA crew trying to enter Ireland without permits or visas have been turned 
back by Irish immigration.


There are special internationally agreed arrangements for seafarers who need 
to transit through countries to join vessels that operate in international 
waters outside the 12-mile limit. They were designed for crew on merchant 
vessels who stay at sea for months, not for fishing boats, but it is these 
loopholes that are being exploited by some to get crew from Africa and Asia.


Crew may be given transit visas, usually of only 48 hours, to pass through a 
country straight out on to a vessel. To get transit visas, fishermen must have 
contracts of employment showing their terms and offering a guarantee of 
repatriation by the employer if there are problems. In other words, they cannot 
be self-employed.

There is also a UN ILO convention – C108 
<http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_INSTRUMENT_ID:312253>
 – that allows seafarers to transit countries to join vessels working in 
international waters using recognised seafarers’ identity documents instead of 
transit visas. They may not leave the vessel if it enters territorial waters or 
comes in to harbour except with express permission on each occasion. The C108 
only applies to nationals of countries that have ratified the convention – 
although Ghana has, Egypt and the Philippines have not. The ILO confirmed to us 
that C108 in any case applies to merchant seamen, not fishermen.


“The purpose of a transit visa in maritime immigration is for entering and 
leaving a country. It is not for working purposes.Fishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fishing> in territorial waters is a 
work activity, not a transit,” explained leading maritime immigration law 
expert Diego Archer at Fragomen Worldwide.


Irish fishermen have traditionally been paid by way of a share of the money 
made from the catch, divided in the proportions agreed by the owner. Share 
fishermen have been considered self-employed. Those who are self-employed are 
responsible for their own tax and insurance. They are not subject to work 
permit requirements or working condition legislation. Simply declaring someone 
self-employed or a share fisherman does not, however, get employers out of 
their obligations if workers are in reality employed. How a worker is 
classified in law depends on what degree of autonomy they have. If someone 
receives a fixed wage, and is under the control and direction of someone, they 
are more likely to be an employee in law than a worker (intermediary category) 
or self-employed.

 