
The Irish government moved quickly on Tuesday to address concerns over the 
treatment of migrant workers on its fishing trawlers, following the publication 
of aGuardian investigation into the sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/revealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry>
 on Monday, which uncovered allegations of exploitation andhuman trafficking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/what-is-the-crime-of-human-trafficking>
 for cheap labour.

The cabinet has decided to set up a taskforce, which brings together five 
government departments and the Irish police, and will be chaired by Simon 
Coveney, minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine (DAFM). It will meet on 
Thursday to begin work immediately examining “the wide range of issues 
identified in the Guardian’s report”, a statement from DAFM said. The other 
departments involved are the Department of Justice, the Department of Jobs, 
Enterprise and Innovation, the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport, and 
the attorney general’s office.

Pressure had been growing on the Irish government on Monday to protect African 
and Asian workers on its prawn and whitefish trawlers, with politicians and 
migrants’ rights organisations inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, the UK and the US calling for 
urgent action to prevent exploitation of undocumented fishermen on Irish boats.

A catalogue of alleged abuses reported to us by migrant workers interviewed 
during our investigation in ports around Ireland, and present in various 
combinations on some but not all trawlers, included: migrant workers being 
brought into Ireland via Belfast without presenting themselves to immigration; 
being confined to vessels unless given permission by their skippers to go on 
land; being paid less than half what an Irish worker eligible for the national 
minimum wage would earn; suffering extreme sleep deprivation, with workers 
having to work for days and nights on end with only a few hours’ sleep and no 
proper rest days; and workers going hungry or being cheated of wages.

Boat owners and skippers have denied the allegations. Some Irish boat owners 
have argued that undocumented migrant crew members are self-employed and 
therefore that Irish employment law on minimum pay and rest hours does not 
apply.

An Irish official who did not want to be named told us: “There are a lot of 
good and decent owners doing the right thing, but they are competing against 
owners with untrained, underpaid or even unpaid trafficked crews. The fishing 
industry needs to be split for anything to really succeed: praise the good, 
shame the bad.”

Responding to the investigation, the industry’s Irish Fish Producers’ 
Organisation <http://www.ifpo.ie/> (IFPO) urged the Irish government to grant 
work permits to migrants from outside the European Economic Area (EEA) to 
tackle crew shortages.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Flife-inside-irish-fishing-industry-i-hate-this-job-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20inside%20the%20Irish%20fishing%20industry%3A%20'I%20hate%20this%20job%2C%20but%20I%20have%20to%20do%20it'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Flife-inside-irish-fishing-industry-i-hate-this-job-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20inside%20the%20Irish%20fishing%20industry%3A%20%27I%20hate%20this%20job%2C%20but%20I%20have%20to%20do%20it%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Flife-inside-irish-fishing-industry-i-hate-this-job-video&media=>
Life inside the Irish fishing industry: ‘I hate this job, but I have to do it’ 
– video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/nov/02/life-inside-irish-fishing-industry-i-hate-this-job-video>
Migrant rights groups also said granting work permits to those already in the 
country without proper papers was vital to tackling abuse.

The chief executive of the IFPO, Francis O’Donnell, said that he had written 
to jobs minister Richard Bruton repeatedly to ask the government to reconsider 
its position that non-EEA fishermen were not eligible to apply for work 
permits. “The Irish government has to stop putting their heads in the sand and 
meet with us.

“People working in the Irish fishing industry should be afforded an 
opportunity to be documented and get a work permit,” he said.

O’Donnell accepted there was a problem in the industry but told us that he 
believed it was limited. “Human trafficking and fishing industry in one 
sentence for me is harrowing – if it is happening it is a small number of 
people doing it. We do not condone it, just because they are from somewhere 
else – they are exactly the same as us and should be treated exactly the same 
as Irish crew members. There is no ambiguity about this.”

Minister Coveney said he was “concerned” about the allegations about labour 
abuse in the Guardian and pointed to a project led by An Garda Síochána, the 
Irish police, to address potential human trafficking in the Irish maritime 
sector.

The UK’s independent anti-slavery commissioner, Kevin Hyland, welcomed the 
Guardian’s work and said that the fishing sector in the north Atlantic was one 
of his priorities in tackling modern slavery and human trafficking. The border 
between Northern Ireland and the Republic is also a key focus of his concern.A 
legal loophole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/ireland-exploiting-the-legal-tangle-on-work-permits-for-fishermen>
 allows seafarers to transit the UK briefly to join ships working exclusively 
in international waters. Our investigation revealed that some agents and owners 
appear to be exploiting these transit arrangements to bring Ghanaian and 
Filipino workers into Heathrow and Belfast airports and then take them across 
the land border with Ireland, bypassing Irish immigration controls.

Some migrant fishermen did tell us they were happy to work on Irish fishing 
boats even though they were paid far less than local or EU crew because it was 
more than they could earn back home.


The commissioner added: “We are working with the police service of Northern 
Ireland, An Garda Síochána, the Gangmasters Licensing Authority, Police 
Scotland and law enforcement across England and Wales to develop a response to 
the fishing industry. We know it is high risk for trafficking.”

He accepted that victims of modern slavery have been found on vessels in 
British waters, “and we know if they are working in British waters they are 
also working in Irish waters too, with known cases in Northern Ireland and the 
Republic”. Where victims had been moved through the UK into Ireland he said UK 
prosecutions for trafficking were highly possible.

The need to protect the victims of human trafficking in the fishing sector 
should be paramount, said Fiona Mactaggart, Labour MP for Slough and co-chair 
of the UK all-party parliamentary group on human trafficking and modern 
slavery, in response to our investigation. “The only way you can prosecute 
successfully is by protecting the victims, and that has to include giving them 
a chance to earn some money so that they can escape the people who brought them 
to Ireland.”

Responding to arguments by some Irish boat owners that undocumented migrant 
crew members are self-employed and that Irish employment law on minimum pay and 
rest hours does not apply, Mactaggart said this was a nonsense. “If workers are 
told they cannot get off boats, they are imprisoned as well as enslaved. You 
can’t say they are self-employed – that’s a fiction because they have no 
control over their lives.”

In the Irish senate, Labour senator Susan O’Keeffe called for the government 
to investigate conditions of non-European Economic Area migrants in the fishing 
fleet urgently, saying that all workers should be given proper training and 
protection of pay. “The fishing industry is worth millions to the Irish economy 
and its good name and reputation is at the heart of its success. Trafficking is 
at crisis point in the western world and the Guardian’s detailed work reveals 
an ugly picture of how we are treating some workers in this country. Those who 
may be involved in trafficking people for the equivalent of slave labour must 
face prosecution. There is no place in a modern society for the behaviour 
reported here.”


Tatiana Jardan, director of the Human Trafficking Foundation, said: “Now we 
understand that trafficking on Irish prawn and fishing vessels happens close to 
our shores, not just far away where we have no power, but in Ireland and 
through the UK we can’t close our eyes to it. We need to protect the rights of 
human beings, not the interests of multimillion-pound industries.”

She hoped the new Modern Slavery Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/30/contents/enacted/data.htm>, which 
places an obligation on UK companies tocheck their supply chains are free of 
slavery and trafficking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/uk-companies-proof-no-links-slave-labour-supply-chain>
, would force retailers sourcing sourced prawns and whitefish from Ireland to 
take action.


The former anti-trafficking ambassador for the US Mark Lagon expressed concern 
that modern forms of slavery were becoming endemic in the seafood industry 
around the world. “It is striking that this kind of growing exploitation can 
happen in the US, Europe or in the sea near Ireland and not just inplaces such 
as south-east Asia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/-sp-migrant-workers-new-life-enslaved-thai-fishing>
 – men seeking a better life abroad who end up on the high seas in zones of 
little regulation and monitoring.” Governments need to press for prosecutions 
and recognise that irregular migrants could become victims of trafficking, he 
added.

 