
Donald Trump is a man of many amazing boasts; someone who never met a 
hyperbole he didn’t like. The truth can be a hazy thing in business, real 
estate and even taxes. But golf is supposed to be different. Golf lives in 
absolutes, and is governed by a strict honor code that playersrigidly follow 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/golf/blog/devil_ball_golf/post/Davis-calls-penalty-on-himself-gives-up-shot-at?urn=golf,234963>
. Or at least they should. And so it is in golf, as most everything else with 
Trump, where the line between fact and fiction is hazy.

Trump has bragged about having a handicap of three. For years, this number was 
accepted 
<http://www.golf.com/instruction/forget-boardroom-donald-will-dominate-you-tee-green-game-thats-better-you-think>
 with little public question, probably because nobody cared enough to 
investigate it. Forbes once reported his handicap as four, with the caveat that
he has yet to produce a signed scorecard 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/monteburke/2012/04/18/famous-golfers-and-their-um-handicaps/#7d483c346ea8>
 as proof. But mostly Trump’s word was that.

The Republican presidential nominee lists his handicap as 2.8  
<http://www.ghin.com/lookup.aspx>on the US Golf Association’s Golf Handicap and 
Information Network, making him an extraordinary golfer at any age – but truly 
phenomenal for someone who is 70. And it raises the question: how likely is 
this claim to be truthful? Is it yet another story of virility fabricated by a 
man who has a long history of distorting reality?

Donald Trump has lost tens of millions on Scottish golf courses, accounts show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/donald-trump-scotland-golf-course-resort-losses>
Trump’s age should not be an impediment. Jim Cowan, the director of course 
rating and handicapping for the Northern CaliforniaGolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Association in Pebble Beach, said in 
an email that the organization runs many events for senior golfers over 65 and 
“handicaps of three and under and not uncommon”.

Terrence Somerville, the assistant pro at Washington DC’s Langston Golf 
Course, located two miles from the US Capitol building where Trump will take 
the oath of office if elected, agrees. In fact, he says, there are 70-year-old 
golfers who show up at Langston with legitimate three handicaps.

There is a hitch, though.

“With someone who has a schedule like Donald Trump’s, it’s unlikely,” 
Somerville said. “That’s almost scratch, someone who can play almost 
professionally. It’s not somebody who has a schedule like his.”

The 70-year-olds who come through the clubhouse with three handicaps are 
usually retired. “They aren’t in and out of meetings,” Somerville said. And 
they are also men who have been playing their entire lives, probably starting 
as teenagers and who either played in college or somehow found a way to play 
nearly every day through adulthood.

“It’s very remote that someone could do this with the schedule he has,” 
Somerville added.

There are many tales of Trump bending the rules on the golf course. Last year, 
former Sports Illustrated managing editor Mark Mulvoytold the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/does-donald-trump-cheat-at-golf-a-washington-post-investigation/2015/09/02/f8a940b2-50c4-11e5-9812-92d5948a40f8_story.html>
 that once playing with Trump in the 1990s he realized that Trump had placed a 
ball just feet from the pin that he had never hit. “Ahh, the guys I play with 
cheat all the time,” Mulvoy said Trump told him. “I have to cheat to keep up 
with them.”

‘Donald Trump had no idea what the Rumbelows Cup was. We didn’t explain’ | 
Sachin Nakrani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-rumbelows-cup-saint-and-greavsie-ian-st-john-jimmy-greaves>
The same story referenced an interview Alice Cooper did in 2012 
<http://www.12news.com/news/local/valley/alice-cooper-talks-about-presidential-candidate-trump/184189079>
 in which the rock star – a regular golfer – answered a question about the 
worst golf cheat he had ever played with by saying: “I played with Donald Trump 
one time, that’s all I’m going to say.”

Trump wouldn’t be the first politician to massage the truth of his athletic 
prowess. Bill Clinton’s propensity for taking mulligans, golfing parlance for 
do-overs, which are not strictly permitted under the rules, iswell documented 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/09/books/books-of-the-times-sure-you-shot-a-79-mr-president-of-course-you-did.html>
. Runner’s World came away withone of the scoops of the 2012 election cycle 
<http://www.runnersworld.com/newswire/paul-ryan-has-not-run-sub-300-marathon> 
when it caught Republican vice-presidential candidate Paul Ryan shaving more 
than an hour off his marathon time. When former North Korean leader Kim Jong-il 
played the first ever round of golf on the 7,700-yard championship course at 
Pyongyang in October 1994, state media reported that the Dear Leader finished 
with an 18-hole score of 34, including no less than five holes-in-one.

That said, Trump clearly has some talent as a golfer, as seen in this 2011 
YouTube video. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-JlzunW6YgA> But his claim of a 
three handicap is hard to quantify, especially when his 20 most recent scores 
on his GHIN index are mostly from 2014 and stretch back to 2009. Even assuming 
he did not include his best rounds, it’s not the kind of record you would see 
from a 70-year-old with a reputation as a scratch golfer.

And it might just be yet another golf story.
 