
In a remarkably short amount of time, drones have become a surveillance 
centrepiece. During the height of the recent protests in Hong Kong, drone 
footagecaptured 
<http://www.vox.com/xpress/2014/9/30/6874857/video-this-drone-footage-shows-the-incredible-scale-of-the-hong-kong>
 by an unmanned vehicle showed the depth of outrage against Beijing. Reporters 
routinely utilise the machines for their work (there’s even aprofessional 
society of drone journalists <http://www.dronejournalism.org/>), though critics 
warn there’s a danger that removing the human element when covering conflict 
could result in “war porn 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/11002913/Replacing-photojournalists-with-drones-will-only-bring-us-war-porn.html>
”. As such, debating the ethics around the use of drones seems vital.

But these are the comparatively simple discussions. Away from public gaze lies 
a huge and growing industry that now dominates the defence and surveillance 
arenas. It’s also becoming a central discussion inside the mining, agriculture 
and resource sectors. Governments, including in Australia, are desperate to 
doll out funds to attract some of the world’s leading drone manufacturers, such 
as Lockheed Martin and Raytheon. Days after president Barack Obama announced 
air strikes against ISIS in September, share pricesreached 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/us-defense-industry-winning-syria-iraq-long-campaign-expected-1697253>
 all time highs.

 The explosion of drone use has led to a new industry called “unmanned aerial 
systems”.Measure <http://www.measure32.com/>, for example, is a company that 
provides a service for clients interested in renting drones for commercial use. 
The company’s founder, Robert Wolf, is a former economic advisor to the Obama 
presidency and Wall Street veteran, and he recently announced that the business 
opportunities in Africa are “incredible 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/video/opportunity-in-africa-is-incredible-wolf-LFx~pMz~QlaLiXVRJ9JApA.html>
”.

I interviewed CEO of Measure Australia, Mark Stevens, who is an early 
architect of the “drone as a service” industry. Today, he’s working with 
customers in agriculture, energy, mining, infrastructure and public safety. 
Offering 50 varieties of non-armed drones, Measure collects data and imagery 
and then produces regular reports for clients. “For example, we can tell if a 
remote pipe needs to be checked”, Stevens says, “and right now a resource 
company like Fortescue Metals would send 20 men to check it out; we can save a 
lot of manpower.” They currently have no plans to work in the defence, military 
and police sectors.

With a hugely expanding commercial market 
<http://www.afr.com/p/technology/us_businesses_make_noise_about_drones_hDJSMthS1hSF7P4cALUDQJ>
, Stevens is convinced that it’s possible to run a drone business with an 
ethical base. “In the US we have turned down business because it didn’t fit 
with our values, such as providing drone support for more extreme African 
states. We reached out to ASIO in 2009 to tell them that we had been contacted 
by individuals that concerned us and we wanted to let them know. There was a 
group in Pakistan that asked us to provide drones over the country and we said 
no.” Stevens would not be drawn on the exact nature of this request.

Measure Australia imagines working with any number of industries that could 
benefit from surveillance. “We’re currently talking to Australian-state based 
rural fire services, so they could improve their vision during fire season and 
operate through smoke. There’s also options in mining, infrastructure and 
surf-life saving groups looking for sharks.”

Stevens is supportive of the Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA) – “they’re 
leading the world in my opinion” – butcritics 
<http://mashable.com/2014/06/24/faa-amazon-drones-2/> accuse regulators in 
America and Australia of dragging their feet over necessary restrictions.

I ask Stevens if his company is monitoring environmental or animal activists – 
it wasrevealed 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/lawreport/animal-rights-activists-26-the-law/5430446>
 this year that Animal Liberation uses drones to monitor poultry and stock in 
the Hunter Valley – and he tells me that it’s not currently happening but is 
possible. He’s keen to highlight the fact that their focus is on “providing an 
industrial solution.” North American energy companies are increasingly taking 
an interest inusing drones 
<http://inthesetimes.com/article/15501/tar_sands_drones_are_on_their_way> to 
monitor green group activities.

Globally, Stevens says his American partners are talking to US companies 
operating in Africa, such as mining firms, cocoa processors and suppliers like 
Archer Daniel Midland (ADM), and agriculture corporations looking for work in 
monitoring crops and infrastructure. But the lack of tight regulation and 
rampant human rights abuses in Africa are surely issues for any drone provider. 
For example, ADM is currently beingsued 
<http://politicsofpoverty.oxfamamerica.org/2014/09/child-laborers-bring-case-food-companies-youre-enabling-enslavement/>
 with Nestle and Cargill in a US court for allegedly aiding and abetting the 
trafficking of enslaved children from Mali in their cocoa supply chains.

With a burgeoning industry and militarised drone usage becoming ubiquitous 
<http://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/category/projects/drones/> in America’s 
“war on terror”, it’s therefore worth investigating the close co-operation 
between drone manufacturers and their desire to promote a softer, less-war 
focused side to the business.

Raytheon Australia donates 
<http://www.raytheon.com.au/corporate_responsibility/maths_science_education/index.html>
 to Canberra’s Questacon and a high school in Adelaide. The Victorian government
partners 
<http://www.lockheedmartin.com.au/au/news/press-releases/2014/29092014.html> 
with Lockheed Martin for development work, and RMIT University now runs aprogram
 <http://mams.rmit.edu.au/wle2qr5t9bs41.pdf> for students to learn about this 
emerging technology. Corporate sponsorship of educational facilities isn’t new, 
and the cost dynamic <http://tech.mit.edu/V105/N41/cia.41n.html> between arms 
makers and universities has occurred for decades – but it should never happen 
without serious questions being asked. Too often, governments and educational 
facilities see dollar signs before morality.

It’s not hard to see how drones might benefit journalism, agriculture or 
efforts to tackle climate change. But too little is discussed in the public 
domain about the limits of unmanned surveillance on privacy, democracy and 
policing. The time for that debate is now.
 