
This week Canada joined the growing list of major developed countries saying 
they will phase out coal power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/canada-coal-electricity-phase-out-2030>
.

The announcement comes against the backdrop of global demand for coal falling 
last year for the first time in nearly two decades, a development that could 
presage a new era of lower-carbon energy generation – or merely a blip in the 
long-term dominance of the highly polluting fuel.

The reversal of the upward trend in demand for coal marked “an inflexion 
point” for the world economy, according to the InternationalEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency (IEA), the gold 
standard for energy data. Since the 1990s, coal use soared in tandem with the 
rapidly developing economies of Asia, chiefly China and to a lesser extent 
India. By 2015, coal was taking a 41% share of global electricity generation.

While coal companies enjoyed a renaissance, the world suffered from the higher 
greenhouse gas emissions that resulted, and fromshockingly poor air quality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/27/more-than-million-died-due-air-pollution-china-one-year>
 in manymajor cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/calls-for-action-mount-as-six-indian-cities-hit-top-10-of-air-pollution>
.

These factors, combined with the seemingly unstoppable rise of natural gas 
that has followed the fracking revolution, have led to coal being at its 
current crossroads.

An increasing number of developed countries have moved to regulate, penalise 
and begin to phase out coal-fired power generation. In the UK, the government 
has pledged tophase out coal by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/britains-last-coal-power-plants-to-close-by-2025>
. France, the Netherlands, Austria, Denmark and Germany have similar plans, 
with differing timescales.

In the US, regulation has been slower to come but the economics of coal have 
changed markedly. Thanks to low natural gas prices as a result of the fracking 
revolution, for the first time in historyas much US electricity was generated 
from gas last year as from coal 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-natgas-coal-idUSKCN0UY2LT>.

By 2030, under Canada’s plans, there will be no more coal-fired power 
generation in the country, with the gap to be filled by renewable or other 
“sustainable” forms of power. Kathleen McKenna, environment minister, said: 
“Taking traditional coal power out of our energy mix and replacing it with 
cleaner technologies will significantly reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, 
improve health and benefit generations to come.”

China's coal peak hailed as turning point in climate change battle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/25/china-coal-peak-hailed-turning-point-climate-change-battle>
China is where the changing fortunes of coal can be most clearly seen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/25/china-coal-peak-hailed-turning-point-climate-change-battle>
. According to the IEA, demand for coal stalled there in 2014, and according to 
some estimates fell by 3% last year. The faltering of China’s phenomenal growth 
rates has been one reason, but government policy has also played a major role, 
spurring investment in renewables and cutting down on the dirtiest coal to try 
to tackle some of the worst pollution.

China is still unusual, however. Most of the world’s less industrialised 
economies, particularly those in Asia, are planning to increase their 
dependence on coal rather than follow Beijing’s lead.

This risks opening up a split whereby developed countries close down their 
most polluting fossil fuel assets, while developing countries continue to open 
them up. In the IEA’s projections, global coal demand is seen as likely to 
rebound to 2014 levels by as soon as the end of this decade, driven bygrowth in 
India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/14/india-says-paris-climate-deal-wont-affect-plans-to-double-coal-output>
 and south-east Asia. This could be enough to more than offset declining demand 
in Europe, north America and China.

What will make the difference is whether governments adhere to the promises 
made inthe Paris agreement to limit global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
, and whether investment is available for poorer countries to move away from 
the most polluting fuels.

Simon Bullock, a climate campaigner at Friends of the Earth said: “Like going 
straight to mobile without bothering with landlines, developing countries can 
bypass dirty coal and gas and go straight to renewables.

“The main stumbling block remains the upfront investment and technology. For 
coal the only real costs are a person with a shovel. That’s why we need a 
global renewable energy fund, to help developing countries leapfrog coal and go 
straight to renewables.”

Renewables made up half of net electricity capacity added last year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/renewables-made-up-half-of-net-electricity-capacity-added-last-year>
Despite the problems coal causes, in climate change and air pollution, the 
World Coal Association sees a strong future for the fuel, in both the 
developing and developed world. Its chief executive, Benjamin Sporton,said: 
“Developed countries will continue to use coal for decades to come, and 
developing countries will increase [their use]. There are new high-efficiency 
technologies that reduce emissions, and developments in carbon capture and 
storage.Coal <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal> is a reliable fuel.”

One of the most scrutinised markets for coal in the next few years will be the 
US, where president-elect Donald Trump has repeatedly vowed to revive the 
fortunes of the coal industry.

However, he may be fighting against economic reality. Fatih Birol, the 
executive director of the IEA, said: “Coal is losing ground because it is 
losing competitiveness. In the US gas is cheaper than coal. Gas will be a very 
economic option [for decades] unless there are new government policies and new 
fiscal measures to change the balance.”

Such measures would be expensive, and paid for by consumers and taxpayers. 
Changing economics, led by fracking, may yet prevent the US from returning to 
the old days of King Coal.
 