
It has been one of the eternal questions of the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> era, echoing down the 
years as kits have got tighter and wage packets heavier. Will the bubble ever 
burst? Will the seemingly insatiable demand for the product ever level out? 
Will the thirst of giant media companies for live top-flight action in order to 
grow and retain their customer bases ever run dry? Will the exponential growth 
in TV rights income at home and abroad that has fuelled the endless inflation 
of the Premier League’s high-octane balloon ever level off?

Every time the question has been posed, the answer has come back ever more 
emphatically: no. Just as one tectonic plate appears to be shifting, another 
slots into place to take broadcasting income to new heights.

The bitter competition between Sky and BT Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bt-sport>, both desperately using sport as a 
weapon in the battle for customers across TV, broadband, telephone and mobile, 
plus the increasing demand across the world in an international market that is 
still far from sated, drove the latest Premier League TV deal beyond £8.3bn 
over three seasons. BT shelled out almost £1bn for the Champions League over 
the same period, while the FA has just brought in around £820m over six seasons 
for the international rights to the FA Cup alone.

Received wisdom, in the US and the UK, remains that in a fracturing, 
splintering media landscape top-notch live sport remains one of the only types 
of content for which viewers will make an “appointment to view”. Since Rupert 
Murdoch famously bet the farm on Premier League football to rescue Sky TV in 
1991, it has been the catnip that has underpinned subscriber loyalty and, even 
in a far more complicated media landscape, is seen as so vital as to be worth 
almost any price.

Have you given up on live football on TV or are you just watching in other 
ways?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/premier-league-tv-football-televised>
And yet, arresting figures suggesting a decline in early season ratings have 
prompted an outbreak of soul‑searching at those broadcasters and 
head‑scratching among analysts. Early season ratings for live Premier League 
matches onSky Sports <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> are down by 
a fifth. On one particular Tuesday, BT Sport’s Champions League figures were 
down by 40%. Could the unthinkable be happening? Could fans finally be turning 
off? This has coincided with more deep-seated fears in the US, where NFL 
coverage, for which broadcasters and cable carriers have collectively shelled 
out more than $50bn for rights into the early 2020s, has suffered a 
double-digit decline in viewers this season.

A recent article in the Atlantic magazine 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/10/nfl-ratings-just-fell-off-a-cliff-why/503666/>
 posited four possible culprits: the presidential debates (short-term 
displacement of viewers), cord cutters (the phenomenon in the US of cable 
customers cancelling their subscriptions in favour of streaming services such 
as Netflix), Twitter streams (the ability to catch up with games without 
actually watching them) and Peyton Manning (not just him, but a perceived lack 
of superstars). The NFL commissioner, Roger Goodell, was forced on to the 
defensive last week. “There a lot of factors to be considered,” he said. “We 
don’t make excuses. We try to figure out what’s changing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F487994877b95a94217c2002823b54c956ebdcfae%2F71_12_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20unthinkable%20happening%20%E2%80%93%20are%20people%20finally%20switching%20the%20football%20off%3F%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20unthinkable%20happening%20%E2%80%93%20are%20people%20finally%20switching%20the%20football%20off%3F%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F487994877b95a94217c2002823b54c956ebdcfae%2F71_12_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
 Are changing viewing habits simply leading people to watch in different ways? 
Photograph: Michael Regan/Getty Images 
Could something similar be happening here? Is this a blip or a trend? Are 
changing viewing habits simply leading people to watch in different ways or is 
the vast smorgasbord of football on offer throughout the season finally 
starting to give viewers indigestion as the endless stream of action becomes a 
blur?

Beneath those isolated figures, the picture is inevitably a lot more complex. 
Sky and BT point to seasonal or one‑off factors that make year-on-year 
comparisons dangerous until later in the season. The Olympics, the weather and 
a comparative lack of heavyweight clashes so far this season have been cited as 
reasons for the drop in viewers. BT can reasonably point to the fact that 
matches involving teams with a smaller fanbase, such as Leicester City, in the 
Champions League are inevitably going to attract fewer viewers.

Perhaps inevitably, one reason its Champions League ratings are down and its 
Europa League figures are up is because Manchester United are playing on 
Thursday nights this season. Sky says that the first genuine heavyweight clash 
of the season – the disappointing goalless draw between Liverpool and United on 
the preposterously billed “Red Monday” – recorded the best figures for three 
years, with an average of 2.8m viewers.

Even apparently minor factors, such as the relegation of well-supported teams 
such as Newcastle United and Aston Villa, can have an effect on the numbers 
watching at home and in pubs. Both broadcasters can also reasonably point to 
technological and cultural shifts, which are not captured by the conventional 
ratings measures, as reasons why the figures are more difficult to parse than 
they once might have been.

BT Sport and Sky Sports heavily promote viewing through apps available on 
smartphones and tablets. BT’s viewing online and via its app is understood to 
have increased by 17% this season. In addition to pushing its Sky Go service 
for subscribers and an attendant new “match centre” app, Sky has focused 
significant investment in promoting its Now TV service. That allows 
non-subscribers to dip in and out of Sky Sports and other channels on a 
day-by-day basis and also does not feature in the headline ratings.

Simon Green, the head of BT Sport, told the Guardian that picking out ratings 
on linear television on individual match nights and comparing them with last 
season was only one factor by which they measured success.

“Viewing figures will fluctuate on a day-to-day basis and are influenced by 
many factors, including the team and the size of their fan base, other events 
happening on the day or even the weather,” he said. “Barb [the Broadcasters’ 
Audience Research Board] viewing figures are just one of many ways in which we 
measure the success of BT Sport and only give part of the picture.”

He added: “Viewing figures help us make decisions about programming and 
rights, but the most important measure is our overall business performance and 
these are reported every quarter to the City. BT is happy with the impact that 
BT Sport has made and the content that we are showing on the channels.”

He said the danger of stripping out figures for a single Tuesday was borne out 
by the fact that ratings across both Champions League nights were up on the 
corresponding week last season.

“Viewing figures on a Champions League night will depend on which teams are 
playing, what the stage of the competition is and who they are playing,” he 
said. “For match-day three we have had a cumulative sum in-match viewing figure 
of 2.3m versus 2.1m last season.”

At Sky Sports the managing director, Barney Francis, is similarly bullish, 
emphasising the breadth of choice provided by the broadcaster and, 
interestingly, pointing out that ratings in other sports – and the Football 
League – are up. “Sky Sports gives customers an unrivalled breadth of sport in 
a multitude of ways, encouraging them to engage with sport in the way that 
suits them,” he said. “This is demonstrated by our consumption; we’ve shown the 
top 15 most viewed Premier League games this season including Liverpool v Man 
United at 2.8m average, the highest ratings in three years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f26176fa05fa7757f3f7a7002c7fc167254c9fb%2F0_192_3894_2336%2F3894.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20unthinkable%20happening%20%E2%80%93%20are%20people%20finally%20switching%20the%20football%20off%3F%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20unthinkable%20happening%20%E2%80%93%20are%20people%20finally%20switching%20the%20football%20off%3F%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f26176fa05fa7757f3f7a7002c7fc167254c9fb%2F0_192_3894_2336%2F3894.jpg>
 The BT Sport team at White Hart Lane. Photograph: Catherine Ivill - AMA/Getty 
Images 
“Viewing of F1, EFL and cricket is up strongly year on year, and The Open saw 
a reach of 8m on TV and 2.8m unique users online. Through our growing digital 
platforms and apps, On Demand service and Now TV offering, there is something 
for every sports fan.”

These captains of the sports broadcasting industry, whose necks are ultimately 
on the line for the billions they have pledged to the sports they bring to 
their viewers, are of course biased witnesses. Could something else be going on 
here?

For years, the Premier League has fought a largely beneath-the-surface war on 
piracy. It has waged a high‑profile legal battle against pubs beaming in 
coverage from abroad while using specialist technology companies to try to 
close down illegal streams at source.

How Chris Sutton became the king of football’s cinematic miserablists | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/30/chris-sutton-football-angry-pundit-bt-sport>
But now that just about every household has fast enough Wi-Fi to make 
streaming illegal streams to a phone, tablet or laptop a reality, that effort 
feels increasingly like the modern equivalent of sticking a finger into a leaky 
dyke.

Up to now, a concerted effort by Sky and BT to ensure that they provide their 
subscribers with enough quality and breadth to make streaming illegally just 
too much hassle, combined with the fact their numbers have continued to grow 
regardless, has made it another dog that has failed to bark. But if those who 
have shelled out more than £5bn for domestic rights start to feel that their 
ratings are being compromised, expect them to put more pressure on the rights 
owners to do something about it.

Of course, for BT and Sky the only real metric that matters is whether people 
are giving up their subscriptions. If viewing patterns fluctuate and fans snack 
on football in different ways that is fine by them – as long as those 
supporters are still shelling out every month and are happy with the breadth 
and range of content and technology on offer.

Even more difficult to analyse is whether cultural factors are having an 
effect. Clearly, the internet, social media and video games are having an 
effect on the way that younger fans in particular interact with the game.

Are younger people watching football in a different way? Is the sport now so 
all-pervasive that actually watching a full match is becoming a tedious 
inconvenience if the relevant action and talking points can all be absorbed via 
osmosis on Twitter and other social media channels?

That might seem an extreme analysis, and certainly the sanctity and thrill of 
the live occasion remains for most fans, but it is one that Sky clearly 
recognises – for the first time this season, the broadcaster is pushing out 
selected goal clips for nothing over Twitter as matches take place. But the 
theory gives rise to an intriguing thought experiment – could the very ubiquity 
of the modern game, its endless noise and hype, eventually start to eat away at 
the exclusivity that has fuelled its growth over the past two decades. In 
short, will it finally eat itself? More likely is that fans will continue to 
make an “appointment to view” for the biggest matches but that they could 
become fewer and further apart.

BT Sport make their play for Saturday afternoon football viewers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/bt-sport-score-afternoon-viewers-soccer-saturday>
But it could also be true that as the market becomes ever more complex and 
austerity continues to bite, more viewers will start to feel that the amount 
they shell out every month to gorge on sporting action is an expense too far 
and look at ways to mitigate it - whether that is switching to an a la carte 
service such as Now TV or taking their chances with a streaming service.

In a recent note, the media analysts Enders said that the same factors that 
were driving US “cord cutters” were not present to the same extent in the UK. 
It doubted that the same dynamics existed in the UK market and recent results 
from Sky and BT showed continued growth.

There is certainly no sense of panic from the Premier League’s headquarters in 
Gloucester Place, with the overall feeling being that it is far too early to 
judge whether the early season numbers are a blip or a trend.

And yet, beneath the bullish exterior, senior broadcasting sources are also 
starting to quietly question whether rights owners are doing their bit in 
return for the billions poured into sport since the satellite television 
revolution began in the late 1980s. On both sides of the equation – rights 
owners and broadcasters – the stakes have been raised to almost unimaginable 
levels. What happens next will be fascinating. Stay tuned. Or not.
 