
World leaders called for the decriminalization of drugs on Monday, in a report 
released by a commission that includes the former UN secretary-general Kofi 
Annan and former presidents of Colombia, Mexico and Brazil.

The Global Commission on Drug Policy’s annual report 
<http://globalcommissionondrugs.us13.list-manage.com/track/click?u=ea76eb6390222b8a2c66fd01d&id=6a0dfd251b&e=b207daf9eb>
 recommended that countries should end civil and criminal penalties for drug 
use and possession in a report that follows the commission’s sharp criticism of 
the UN’s lackluster effort to combat drug abuse. Commission member Richard 
Branson, head of the Virgin group, called the UN’s latest meeting on drug 
policy “fatally flawed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/21/un-special-session-global-drug-policy-failure-critics-say>
” in April.

The former Swiss president and chair of the commission, Ruth Dreifuss, told 
the Guardian: “Politicians should show and prove to the people that what they 
are doing is to save the lives of these people and bring them to the health 
services they need to avoid overdoses and to create a climate so when these 
people are in need, they are able to find help.”

Legalisation of cannabis 'only solution to crime and addiction problems'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/uk-should-legalise-cannabis-adam-smith-institute-report>
The commission’s report 
<http://globalcommissionondrugs.us13.list-manage.com/track/click?u=ea76eb6390222b8a2c66fd01d&id=6a0dfd251b&e=b207daf9eb>
 highlighted effective decriminalization policies,such as in Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/24/from-cannabis-cafes-to-death-row-drugs-laws-around-the-world>
, where drug possession is not a criminal offense. It also denounced harsh 
penalties for drug-related offenses, such as in the Philippines where there 
have beenthousands of extrajudicial killings of drug users and dealers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/philippines-senator-calls-for-duterte-to-face-crimes-against-humanity-inquiry>
 following the election of president Rodrigo Duterte, who has publicly urged 
citizens to “go ahead and kill” addicts and dealers.

Global drug policy has largely been driven by punitive measures in recent 
decades, but drug use has not slowed. From 2003 to 2014, the number of people 
aged 15-64 around the world who had consumed an illicit drug in the past 12 
months jumped 33%, to 247 million.

The commission’s proposals for how to address the problem come amid a shift in 
global politics toward rightwing populism. This changing political climate 
could have a harmful impact on decriminalization efforts because conservative 
policy was rooted in ideology and was not “not really fact-oriented”, Dreifuss 
warned.

“I would say to really bring the issue [decriminalization] into rationality, 
which is what was lacking for so many years, will be quite difficult,” said 
Dreifuss. “But this is also why we are here and why we think a broad, global 
conversation about what is consumption, what are the drugs, what are the 
responses, what are the failure of the responses, is our duty.”

Commission member Michel Kazatchkine, former executive director of the Global 
Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria, said the trend toward rightwing 
politics should not interfere with decriminalization efforts.

He cited the recent US election, in which, despite Donald Trump’s victory in 
the presidential contest,marijuana legalization efforts succeeded in state 
elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/state-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare>
. “People understand that this is an issue about the human right to privacy, 
that there is no reason the state would interfere with the lives of the 
millions of people who use drugs without causing harm to anyone,” said 
Kazatchkine.

Fellow commission member César Gaviria, a former president of Colombia, also 
cited the election as an example of how drug policy can fall outside partisan 
politics.

But when looking for global political leadership to steer away from punitive 
drug policy, Gaviria warned not to look to the UN. “The only answer they have 
for everything is: the conventions, the conventions, the conventions,” Gaviria 
said dismissively of the international agency, which held its first special 
session on drugs in 18 years in April.

Three of these UN drug policy conventions are targeted in the commission’s 
report for breeding national policies that violate the UN’s own declaration on 
human rights.

“For example, the UN drug control treaties and over-reaching national laws 
have helped create a situation whereby 5.5 billion people around the world 
suffer from little or no access to adequate pain relief medication because of, 
among other reasons, restrictions placed on prescribing opiates and other pain 
medicines,” the report said. “This lack of access violates the international 
right to the highest attainable standard of health.”

The report specifically called for the abolishment of the death penalty for 
drug-related offenses, an end to criminal and civil penalties for drug 
possession and personal use, alternatives to punishment for those found with 
drugs, more research into regulatory models for drug use and for UN member 
states to remove penalization of drug possession as a treaty obligation.
 