
Blackouts, when I was a kid, were fun. The emergency candles would be 
collected from under the sink, Mum would crack open a packet of cards, or the 
Trivial Pursuit box, and in the newly low-lit illumination of our surroundings, 
we’d eat squares of chocolate and indulge low-tech amusements as if stolen into 
an unexpected, folksy holiday.

But to imagine a whole state blacked out, from horizon to horizon, erases the 
folksy glow from the childhood blackouts of my mind. In these hard-wired times, 
there’s a doom aesthetic that accompanies ideas of total darkness. This may be 
why last week’s state-wide blackout ofSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> – amid a terrible 
storm – has had such a heightened, emotional impact on the national imagination.

For South Australians, the shadows of the event were double: there was not 
only material darkness, but re-immersion into that state’s angry history of 
energy politics. The rapid and false claims by Barnarby Joyce and Nick 
Xenophon, among others, thatthe state’s high renewable energy targets were to 
blame 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/australia-news/2016/sep/29/south-australia-blackout-explained-renewables-not-to-blame>
are but the latest manifestation of ideological energy wars waged on South 
Australians.

'Wicked' windfarms and how to separate the facts of the blackout from the 
storm of spin | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/05/wicked-windfarms-and-how-to-separate-the-facts-of-the-blackout-from-the-storm-of-spin>
Hostilities began in the 1990s, with the privatisation of the state 
electricity commission, ETSA. The state’s power network that blacked out last 
week is not a public asset, but owned and operated byHong Kong based private 
company Cheung Kong Infrastructure Holdings 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/south-australia/sa-power-networks-owned-by-billionaire-li-kashing-makes-four-times-more-profit-out-of-us-than-its-uk-group/story-fni6uo1m-1226943633683>
, calling itself SA Power Networks.

Evidence has not emerged that any lack of network maintenance caused the 
towers to blow over or the lights to go out, and South Australia was certainly 
lucky to escape catastrophe. But given that the royal commission into 
Victoria’s Black Saturday fire disaster in Victoria did attributeblame for five 
of the most lethal fires to eroded maintenance standards 
<http://www.utilitymagazine.com.au/union-warns-privatisation-undermines-fire-safety/>
 in the wake of cost-cutting privatisation “efficiencies”, questions about the 
wisdom of selling off essential services like electricity – in South Australia 
or anywhere else – are timely and valid.

Because not only are there are proven cases of safety standards being eroded 
through electricity privatisation, we also know that Australians typically 
reject privatisation.

The privatisation of ETSA in South Australia was a brutal political battle and 
it followed an established privatisation narrative. Three out of four South 
Australians were opposed to the sell-off of the state asset when first mooted 
by then-Liberal premier John Olsen in the late 1990s, as a means of recouping 
funds lost to the obliged bail-out of the failed State Bank.

Olsen even went to the 1997 election promising that state power would not be 
sold. With the convenient post-election discovery of some kind of budgetary 
black hole – stop me if you’ve heard this one before – in 1999, Olsen convinced 
two Labor members of parliament, Terry Cameron and Trevor Crothers, to rat out 
their own party and back him in. While Labor in South Australia had taken a 
stand against privatisation that, in the era of economic rationalism, had not 
always been taken elsewhere, it was with the support of Cameron and Crothers 
that the asset was sold.

Privatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/privatisation-australia> is often 
spruiked to populations as a mean of deriving greater efficiencies from 
services, leading to lowered prices. Not only is there no evidence to suggest 
that privatisation has consistent or meaningful effects on lowered prices, but 
economist John Quiggin has identified that the ETSA sale has cost South 
Australians between $1bn and $2bn in lost revenue, as well as their control of 
an monopoly essential asset.

The ideological right similarly like to insist that a transition to renewable 
energy will drive up consumer costs – and, again, blamed the technology itself 
for the surge in South Australian electricity prices in July. But it was the 
privatised SA Power Networks who’d markedly increased power prices. The company 
exploited Australia’s flattery of private monopolies to squeezefour and a half 
times more profit out of each customer in South Australia 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/south-australia/sa-power-networks-owned-by-billionaire-li-kashing-makes-four-times-more-profit-out-of-us-than-its-uk-group/story-fni6uo1m-1226943633683>
 than it can manage from its sister operation in the UK. And not a single 
apologist for privatisation backed down when a report found that the July price 
surge was in part down toenergy companies “gaming” the system 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/australia-news/2016/aug/11/electricity-price-spikes-caused-by-energy-companies-gaming-the-system-report-finds>
.

Australians are hardly alone among populations 
<http://meteopolitique.com/fiches/eau/privatisation/Analyse/2005/a08.pdf> who 
see the transference of assets under their own democratic control to private 
corporate interests as unfair.

Why Liberals and other modern conservatives insist on privatisation is a 
matter of a small-state ideology broadly articulated by neoliberal political 
economist, Friedrich Von Hayek. Von Hayek’s thesis is that the state’s 
responsibility is to create opportunities for private competition rather than 
run systems of social service itself.

In Australia, the structure of the electricity grid  
<https://newmatilda.com/2016/09/29/power-games-the-real-reason-south-australia-lost-electricity-supply/>
and power distribution means ownership of power can only be a monopoly, whether 
privatised or not. But so doctrinaire is the insistence on neoliberal 
“competition” that the function of the Australian Energy Regulator is to 
effectively pretend that there is a competitive market, and instruct the 
monopoly-owners to price accordingly.

A storm is brewing with the states. And it’s entirely of Turnbull’s making | 
Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/a-storm-is-brewing-with-the-states-and-its-entirely-of-turnbulls-making>
It says something that the head of the ACCC – a longtime advocate of 
privatisation –has come out against electricity privatisations 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/australia-news/2016/jul/27/acccs-rod-sims-says-privatisations-severely-damaging-economy>
 as dangerous to the local economy. But under the Liberals, Australia is a 
country repeatedly exposed to ideological nonsense at the expense of material 
reality. The false attribution of blame to renewable energy for the blackouts 
is not only a case in point, but provokes an important question.

This is the climate change era, where extreme weather activity has wiped out 
the power supply of an entire state, set other states on fire, saturated yet 
others with floods - so shouldn’t essential services like electricity something 
be subject to democratic control? Do we really think that our best interests as 
a community be served by handing infrastructure over to a false economy of 
profiteering private interest?

The Western Australian treasurer, Liberal Mike Nahan, is eyeing electricity 
privatisation 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-07-17/western-power-a-divided-government-will-struggle-to-sell/7634290>
 with the pretext of his own state’s record debt and deficit. In Queensland, 
the LNP’s Tim Nicholls is making noise about privatising power if he wins the 
next state election. One has to wonder if the willingness of the Liberals, 
Nationals and their ilk to shout at the impossible boogeyman of wicked wind 
energy is an urge, conscious or instinctive, to distract us from listening to a 
clearer message – that an ideological priority of privatising electricity 
leaves communities vulnerable. There are, I fear, dark times ahead.

 * This article was amended on 8 October 2016 to remove a reference to Nick 
Xenophon voting in favour of the South Australian electricity privatisation. 
Xenophon opposed the privatisation bills at the third reading.  