
While Donald Trump turned a broadcasting career into electoral success, Nigel 
Farage has had to settle for the moment for going in the opposite direction. 
And, while the president-elect sends his views to millions on Twitter, the 
former (and possibly future) Ukip leader has opted for the moreold-fashioned 
public platform of a radio phone-in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/nigel-farage-to-host-lbc-radio-talkshow>
.

On Monday night, the politician who forced the EU referendum that led 
eventually to Brexit hosted his first talk show on the 7-8pm slot on the LBC 
radio station. He will appear on the station from Monday to Thursday, leaving 
Fridaysfree for fishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/nigel-farage-pro-brexit-flotilla-thames-eu-referendum-leave-campaign>
 orattending the inaugurations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/20/nigel-farage-invitation-donald-trump-inauguration>
 of friends who have become US president.

 Unusually for a presenter, Farage was quoted in the 7pm news bulletin for his 
views on Monday’sLondon Underground strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london>
. His show started with a sort of a capella jingle where a number of people 
name-checked him – all pronouncing his surname slightly differently culminating 
in a shout-out from Trump.

Distinguished envoy or sneering shock jock? It’s a no-brainer for Farage | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/nigel-farage-shock-jock-trump-middle-east-power>
 “This show is all about you!” Farage declared – although this remark 
paradoxically came in the middle of an opening monologue lasting several 
minutes. The show’s format seems to be that Farage throws out a question a 
night and the first was: “Is Theresa May holding her cards [on Brexit] too 
close to her chest?”

Should you ever be asked in a pub quiz who the first ever caller to The Nigel 
Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> Show was, the answer 
is Sarah in Clapham. She felt the PM was holding the deck at exactly the right 
distance but Farage disagreed. And Pip from Waltham Cross agreed with him: “Oh, 
dear. I voted Brexit and am becoming increasingly dismayed with Theresa May’s 
spectacular failure to launch.”

 Almost all the callers were Brexiters, unhappy with the present occupant of 
No 10 – and some were keen to suggest an alternative. Caller Carla argued: “We 
should have a Ukip government, Nigel, with you leading the negotiations.” Tony 
from Canary Wharf said: “You have changed world history.” Interestingly for 
psephologists, Tony described himself as a socialist – a Canary Wharf down a 
coalmine for the left, possibly.

LBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lbc> began life as a London-only 
station but digitalisation has opened it up to the world. Richard, calling from 
the Philippines at 3.20am local time, was a remain voter who wanted May to move 
more quickly. Catherine in Dallas said she would be worried if she were a 
British Brexiter. The chorus of approval was interrupted only at the very end 
by Chris from Manchester, who asked how Farage felt about duping the working 
people of Britain into voting for something that was bad for them.

 As Nick Clegg discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/02/nigel-farage-triumphs-over-nick-clegg-second-debate>
 when he underestimated Farage in TV debates before the European parliamentary 
elections in 2014 and againbefore the 2015 election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/02/leaders-debate-the-guardian-columnists-verdict>
, the Ukip man is a fluent and clear speaker. He sometimes swallowed 
mid-sentence, and was occasionally slushy, with Facebook coming out as 
“Faishbook.” But the hour passed quickly, helped by lengthy sections of adverts 
and trails for other LBC shows – possibly so that Farage could pop out for a 
fag.

 He can’t, though, fill four nights a week baiting May over Article 50. The 
test will be whether he can sustain his own and his listeners’ interest for an 
hour on theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/labour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time>
,Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/07/blast-kills-dozens-in-rebel-held-syrian-town-azaz>
 or (Monday night’s actual headline story) the collapse of theNorthern Irish 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>
.

 My guess is that LBC is gambling that Farage can deliver an interview with 
Trump, and his promise to present the show “from around the world” hints that 
he might be productive in Washington DC even if he doesn’t become UK ambassador 
there. Strikingly, Farage’s main UK rival for a Trump interview is Piers 
Morgan, who works for ITV’s Good Morning Britain, and Theresa May gave her 
first interview of 2017 to Sky’sSophy Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/how-sophy-ridge-got-her-money-shot-from-the-maybot>
 on Monday. BBC and ITN must be feeling nervous that political broadcasting is 
getting broader.

 Given how rude Farage was about the PM in his closing monologue (claiming she 
lacks the “energy, excitement or flair” to lead the country), “Theresa from 
Westminster” seems very unlikely to call The Nigel Farage Show. But the fact 
that “Donald from Washington” coming on the line cannot entirely be ruled out 
should ensure continuing focus on a show that, in its first episode, felt 
rather one-note.
 