
There is a popular misconception that video games bear little relation to 
reality. Unfortunately, this is hard to counter when the best-known characters 
are probably a speedy blue hedgehog and a plumber who lives in a magical 
mushroom kingdom. Indeed, even comparatively serious games such asSimCity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/mar/11/simcity-launch-problems>
, Civilization andPapers Please <http://papersplea.se/> take a highly abstract 
approach to culture, society and government, which sets them apart from 
real-life events.

This week, however, the maker of the fastidiously authentic video game 
Football Manager saidthe game was being updated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/want-to-know-how-brexit-will-work-play-football-manager>
 to simulate the economic effects of Brexit. The accurate portrayal of transfer 
costs and work permits will be tweaked, making it potentially more expensive to 
buy foreign players, and more problematic to get work permits for those from EU 
countries.

Predicting political events is rare in games – usually they are more reactive. 
Microsoft altered its Flight Simulator after 9/11, but only to remove the twin 
towers, while the release of the 2011 off-road driving gameMotorstorm: 
Apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/mar/16/motorstorm-apocalypse-game-review>
 was delayed after the major earthquakes in New Zealand and Japan, the latter 
also forcing the publisher Irem to cancel its Disaster Report series of 
earthquake survival games.

Less dramatically, it is reasonably common in the world of sports sims to use 
real-world data. EA draws player performance statistics from the real sporting 
season into its Fifa, NBA and Madden NFL titles, so your team in the game can 
mirror the week-by-week data of the real thing – including injuries. In Fifa 
17’s popular Ultimate Team mode – a cross between Fantasy Football and a Panini 
sticker album – players are more valuable if their real-life counterpart is 
performing well.So don’t rely on any Sunderland players right now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague/table>.

Plenty of games also use weather and day/night data, so that when you are 
playing, the conditions will mirror those in the genuine geographic location. 
Microsoft Flight Simulator uses real-time meteorological data to simulate 
conditions at airports around the world, so if it is foggy in Rio, it is also 
foggy in simulated Rio. Nintendo’s cute village simulatorAnimal Crossing 
<http://www.animal-crossing.com/> has a day night/cycle tied to the data in 
your handheld 3DS console, so if you are playing at night, the shops will be 
closed and your fellow villagers will be in bed. Insomniac players can still go 
fishing, though, as certain fish are only around after dark. The ingenious 
Gameboy Advance adventure Boktai: The Sun is in Your Hand came with a 
photometric light sensor that required players to – gasp – go outside to avoid 
the game’s vampire enemies.

Unsurprisingly, the game series that gets closest to Football Manager’s 
appropriation of Brexit is the in-depth political simulation Democracy, from 
independent studio Positech Games. “Democracy 3 had a lot of changes because of 
political events,” says designer Cliff Harris. “Mad cow disease became a thing, 
as did pension-fund scandals and global credit crunch events. Also, after
Democracy 3 <http://positech.co.uk/democracy3/> was released, we had to update 
it with a bunch of new policies including the mansion tax. And we had to add 
police drones. And Tasers.”

Fans of the game have created their own modification for the sim, Trump 
Nation, which imagines a near-future America under president Donald Trump. When 
the magazine PC Gamer tried it, it implemented a range of the billionaire’s 
favourite policies and then watched how the US would react: two senior members 
of his administration resigned almost immediately, there was a series 
of assassination attempts and, finally, the presidency toppled under an armed 
socialist insurrection. Spoiler alert!
 