
A victory for truth or a victory for pain? That’s the question everyone’s 
asking in Britain this week. I’m talking about Nurofen, of course. The 
Advertising Standards Authorityhas just banned 
<https://www.asa.org.uk/Rulings/Adjudications/2016/6/RB-UK-Commercial-Ltd/SHP_ADJ_338459.aspx#.V3ZCAzaU1dA>
 one of the company’s TV adverts for implying that Nurofen Joint and Back 
capsules really know their way around a woman’s body.

The commercial shows a lady with back pain taking a tablet, followed by a 
graphic of the Nurofen symbol moving through her body to her painful spine 
where it then stays, pulsing with relief. Its route is direct – it doesn’t take 
any wrong turnings, misapplying its goodness to, say, a pain-free elbow, thus 
creating a weird zone of anti-pain so that the woman has to bang it on 
something to restore balance – and, crucially, it doesn’t just send ibuprofen 
all over the body so anything that happens to be hurting, be it ear, knee, 
throat or bladder, does so slightly less.

Painkiller adverts have always been a bit like the credits to a Bond film, but 
with throbbing

The ad is implying, the ASA has ruled, that Nurofen Joint and Back is a 
specifically designed joint and back medicine, which makes a beeline for joints 
and backs where it demonstrates its special joint-and-back-ameliorating knack. 
And the ad shouldn’t imply that because it’s not true. Nurofen Joint and Back 
is basically just Nurofen, which is basically just ibuprofen. (Even within the 
world of the advert, how the tablet knows that the poor woman has back rather 
than joint ache is unclear. Perhaps it just got lucky and would have gone on to 
a nearby joint if the back had seemed OK.)

This ban surprised me because it feels like painkiller adverts have always 
been like this – a bit like the credits to a Bond film but with throbbing. The 
shape of a lady has got home with a headache, sinus pain or the telltale 
redness in her silhouette throat that heralds a cold. Paunchless outlines of 
humans containing livid pain zones have long been “neutralising” those 
malevolent glows with counteracting soothing glows in the same colour as the 
advertised product’s branding.

That’s how painkillers are pitched: clean, targeted, medicinal. “Feeling crap? 
Drug yourself up a bit!” is not a slogan that’s caught on. “Try smothering your 
body’s warning system with a chemical – hopefully everything will have sorted 
itself out by the time it wears off!” just doesn’t have the reassuring 
pharmaceutical feel that’s vital in building brand confidence.

And brand confidence is important here. Companies like Nurofen, Solpadeine or 
Panadol aren’t just selling whatever their various active ingredients are. 
Those can be purchased for a fraction of the cost. Boots sell packets of 16 
ibuprofen tablets for 35p; the same number of Nurofen Joint and Back capsules 
costs £3.79. So what is Nurofen doing to justify charging 10 times as much? 
It’s selling more than just ibuprofen – it’s selling an idea, a feel.

But that’s just for idiots, you may be thinking. That’s how they part the 
headachey fool and his money. Unfortunately, and surprisingly, experimental 
data doesn’t quite bear that opinion out.Ben Goldacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/series/badscience>, in his book Bad Science
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bad-science-2.html>, explained that a study 
of branded and unbranded headache pills found that “the packaging itself had a 
beneficial effect”, and one of comparable magnitude to whether or not the 
tablets contained any actual painkiller. So, “Whatever pharmacology theory 
tells you, that brand-named versionis better, and there’s just no getting away 
from it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpain-placebos-packaging-nurofen-joint-and-back-advertising-standards-agency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2daf550b505ebf25ed4a58e8140902847254d358%2F0_0_1948_2819%2F1948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20a%20pain%20to%20spend%20more%20money%20but%20it%20works&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpain-placebos-packaging-nurofen-joint-and-back-advertising-standards-agency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20a%20pain%20to%20spend%20more%20money%20but%20it%20works&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpain-placebos-packaging-nurofen-joint-and-back-advertising-standards-agency%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2daf550b505ebf25ed4a58e8140902847254d358%2F0_0_1948_2819%2F1948.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
This confusing manifestation of the placebo effect seems to mean that, if you 
have an inkling the branded version of a painkiller will work better, then it 
will feel like it does. And, in the field of painkilling, something feeling 
like it works and something working are precisely the same thing. Sadly, if 
you’re sceptical enough only to associate a painkiller’s efficacy with its 
active ingredient, this added brand-confidence-induced pain-assuagement won’t 
work on you. As with a deathbed atheist who suddenly misses the solace of 
religion, your analytical outlook on the world precludes such comfort.

Obviously this puts a different complexion on the profiteering of the branded 
tablet. I still reckon it is profiteering, fundamentally. I think the scheme 
was just to overcharge for painkillers – the fact that it caused an extra 
placebo effect is a happy accident rather than the conscious launch of a new 
alternative therapy to be administered by an advertising agency. Nevertheless 
it’s profiteering that’s coincidentally doing good. There are side effects: it 
makes people feel better.

Nurofen sells quite a range of products – as well as normal Nurofen, Nurofen 
Express and Nurofen Joint and Back, there’s Nurofen Migraine Pain, Nurofen 
Express Period Pain, Nurofen Tension Headache, Nurofen Sinus Pain Relief and 
Nurofen Sinus Pressure & Headache Relief – and they’re all basically just 
ibuprofen. But RB UK Commercial, which owns the brand, says “Research has shown 
that nine in 10 people search for products to treat specific symptoms, such as 
joint and back pain, and seven in 10 say pain-specific packs help them decide 
which product is best for their needs.” So could it be that buying a generic 
painkiller that happens to have the specific pain from which you’re currently 
suffering written on the packet makes you feel like the pain is more 
effectively killed? It feels more medicinal. It’s almost like you’ve been 
diagnosed.

Homeopathy won’t cure you – unless you have a little faith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/06/homeopathy-wont-cure-you-unless-you-have-a-little-faith>
It’s often said that a strength of alternative therapies such as homeopathy is 
that its practitioners, because they’re in a private healthcare environment, 
have time to listen to, and express concern about, a patient’s problems, in a 
way an overstretched NHS doctor doesn’t. The listening and concern alone make 
patients feel better, which is why homeopathy is an ideal treatment for anyone 
who doesn’t quite feel 100% but isn’t actually at all ill.

Perhaps Nurofen’s targeted packaging works like the homeopath’s avaricious 
affectation of interest – it somehow provides a fraction of the benefits of 
homeopathy. Not a fraction of theabsolutely-nothing-helpful-at-all that 
homeopathic remedies contain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2007/nov/16/sciencenews.g2>, but a 
fraction of the placebo effect brought about by having your ailment solemnly 
acknowledged.

All of which makes me slightly regretful about the ASA ruling. Those ads are 
inaccurate, so they probably ought to be pulled. Then again, if you’ve got a 
bad back, might not the thought of an angelic branded light, heading straight 
to the bit that hurts, be medicinal in itself? It might not be howibuprofen 
works, but perhaps soothing animation, like confidence-building branding, is a 
vital part of howNurofen works. The ads, the packaging, the £3.79, are arguably 
part of the treatment. The advert isn’t misrepresenting the medicine – itis the 
medicine.
 