
The nature of privilege is insulation; it protects those who have it from the 
scrutiny or consequence obliged of those who lack it.

Compare, if you will, these events of the last couple of weeks, and the 
political context of where they have occurred. The painful history of poor-man 
Duncan Storrar wasexhumed and splayed across several newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/13/duncan-storrar-qanda-personal-life-dragged-through-mud>
, punishment for his temerity to criticise the Coalition’s tax cuts for the 
rich on Q&A.

But while this saga of his public dissection took place, Wesley College – the 
posh student residence at the University of Sydney – closed ranks around 
students responsible for the naming and slut-shaming of female students whose 
rumoured sexual acts they documented in the college journal. The University of 
Sydney demanded the names of the harassers for punishment;Wesley refused to 
supply them 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/wesley-college-wont-hand-over-names-of-students-to-sydney-university-20160513-goukip.html>
. Privilege buys punishment that largely stays internal – and it’s this 
discretion of the college that, one presumes, is costed in the $20,000 a year 
parents choose to pay in residential fees.

Recent anonymous appearances by female Wesley students on the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2015/s4463463.htm> described a college 
culture of bullying, harassment, forced drinking and treatment of women that – 
at best – could be described as objectifying. The media have also reported the
recent storming of a Sydney massage parlour 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/university-of-sydney-wesley-college-students-infiltrate-massage-parlour-20160512-gota0b.html>
 by Wesley students, degrading and distressing its workers as part of a 
scavenger hunt prank.

It’s nothing new, and it’s not just Wesley. It’s the habit of privilege to 
indulge itself, and the University of Sydney’s colleges are a comprehensive 
example. Last week also revealed that students from St Andrew’s College were 
expelled after theyburnt a gay pride flag 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/st-andrews-college-at-university-of-sydney-in-ritualistic-humiliation-controversy-20160518-goxu16.html>
 following a college formal last semester. In 2009, a“pro-rape” Facebook page  
<http://www.smh.com.au/technology/elite-college-students-proud-of-prorape-facebook-page-20091108-i3js.html>
was created by students at the all-male St Paul’s college; in 2012, more than 
30 students were suspended 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/tertiary-education/college-throws-out-30-students-20120310-1ur5h.html>
 from St John’s College for engaging in gang bullying that resulted in a young 
woman’s hospitalisation.

In this culture, degradation of young women is historical and endemic. Back in 
1977, the National Times reported “that a group of St Paul’s students had held 
an awards ceremony where a student who raped a woman was applauded for 
committing ‘the animal act of the year’”.

It’s extraordinary to me that anyone would choose – let alone pay – for their 
child to be inculcated with the values of institutions that boast such a 
culture, but it’s clear some parents have no problem with it. Of the 33 St 
John’s students suspended amid the bullying controversy in 2012, 32 of them 
were represented by one of the boys’ own mothers before a “mock court” to 
appeal a ban on their contesting positions within the college student council. 
The other turned up with his own barrister. Within eight months, this same 
group of students who had bullied a girl into hospitalisation had won all but 
two of the places on the council executive. People buy into these institutional 
experiences because they occupy a place that only exists for those defined by 
their means to buy in.

There’s lesson here about the nature of privilege and power in this country 
that – in the midst of a class-lines federal election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/28/this-election-will-be-fought-on-class-lines-not-good-news-for-turnbull>
 – it behooves every citizen to appreciate. The Australian privileged live 
within a culture of exclusive spaces that structurally reinforce exceptions, 
excuses and exonerations for their behaviour that are never extended to the 
rest of us.

For some, the lessons start really young: “exclusive private school” Brighton 
Grammar has been in the news for promoting the belief that it’s thevictims of 
bullying who are to blame for their own abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/is-he-a-whinger-schools-anti-bullying-advice-labelled-victim-blaming>
. Boys from the expensive King’s School congratulating themselves forhurting 
sheep 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-05-19/sheep-tackling-video-prompts-cruelty-investigation-into-kings/7428312>
 have been condemned by veterinary and farming groups but defended by their 
school headmaster. What could be considered appropriate punishment ofXavier 
College students 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3293396/Private-school-students-Xavier-College-troll-public-school-rivals-night-final-English-exam.html>
 who decried their public school rivals as “povo fucks” short of being obliged 
to acknowledge them as their equals I’d surely love to know. Of course, if one 
attends a school like Haileybury, even the crime of glassing someone in the 
face is not one for which thejudge will be prepared to send you to jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/26/too-privileged-jail-lawyer-australia>
.

And the corridors of Australian power heave with those taught by or attracted 
to institutions that exclude on the basis of wealth, and who police a culture 
of self-exoneration. It shows.

As if parliament weren’t exclusive enough, how revealing is it that Malcolm 
Turnbull takes time out from his campaign to lunch – with whom, exactly? – in 
the cosy confines of theAthenaeum Club in Melbourne 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/2016/05/12/malcolm-turnbull-has-lunch-at-gentleman-only-athenaeum-club/>
 (which excludes female members), while he enjoys the membership of the 
similarly exclusive Australian Club elsewhere? What structural lessons of 
insulation has Turnbull learned from environments that guard discretion so 
fiercely?

I have not been poor for a long time. When you have been, you never forget | 
Suzanne Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/11/i-have-not-been-poor> 
Why else would Turnbull remain so unconcerned, these first two weeks of the 
election campaign, that he’s beennamed in the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/12/malcolm-turnbull-listed-in-panama-papers>
 as a former director of a British Virgin Islands company set up and 
administered by Mossack Fonseca to invest in a Siberian gold mine? Or found to 
havelunched with a mafia adviser 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/mafia-advisers-meetings-with-malcolm-turnbull-mps-20160522-gp0slh.html>
, who was a Coalition donor, in 2008?

Our British cousins are somewhat inoculated to the indulgence of their ruling 
class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/david-cameron-piers-gaveston-society-what-we-know-oxford-secret>
, theirs is the cynical shaken-headed mutter of“it was ever thus” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/worse-thing-piggate-wouldnt-surprised-6494690>
. In the new world, perhaps, the peasants are no longer so forgiving: the 
University of Sydney is bringing informer sex discrimination commissioner 
Elizabeth Broderick 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/university-of-sydney-cracks-down-on-scandal-ridden-colleges-20160519-goypux.html#ixzz49BGRAQ1C>
 to run a broom through its scandal-prone colleges, and the “nuclear option” of 
disaffiliating them from the university – despite the power of their business, 
judiciary and political alumni – is certainly on the table.

In the context of an Australian election, it’s a culturally significant sign. 
While the prime minister promises $50bn tax cuts to big business, lunches at 
the Athenaeum and unbothers himself with the fate of Duncan Storrars in his 
“new economy”, his popularity is on the slide. And it just may be that 
democracy is the one force against which privilege cannot insulate itself, 
after all.
 