
ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> increased underlying pre-tax 
profits by 18% to £865m in 2015 and predicted it would outperform the UK TV 
advertising market this year, boosted by attractions including the Euro 2016 
football tournament.

The UK’s biggest advertiser-funded broadcaster on Wednesday reported a 15% 
increase in revenue to £2.97bn last year, despite a 3% decline in audience 
share for its TV channels.

ITV still posted 6% growth in TV ad revenue to £1.72bn. But the biggest growth 
came from production arm ITV Studios, up 33% to £1.24bn; and online, pay and 
interactive, up 23% to £188m.

However, despite its strong results and an upbeat forecast for 2016 overall, 
investors took fright after ITV said it expected ad revenue to be flat in the 
first three months of the year before picking up in the second quarter with the 
European Championship, with the share price falling 3% in early trading.

The broadcaster said it would return £400m to shareholders with a special 
dividend of 10p a share in addition to a final dividend of 4.1

Non-TV advertising revenues, including production, online and sponsorship, 
grew 25% to £1.66bn, though this figure includes £441m of “internal supply” – 
money ITV Studios makes from commissions for the broadcaster’s own channels, 
such as Coronation Street.

Excluding this figure, non-TV ad revenue accounted for 42% of the total 
external figure, up from 37% in 2014, as the strategy of the ITV chief 
executive, Adam Crozier, of diversifying the business away from traditional TV 
advertising continued to make progress.

ITV Studios revenues exceeded £1bn for the first time, with 53% coming from 
outside the UK. Growth was driven partly by further acquisitions in the TV 
production sector,including The Voice producer Talpa for £355m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/12/itv-the-voice-producer-talpa-media-john-de-mol>
 andTwofour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/09/itv-announcing-acquisition-twofour-tv-production-company-educating-essex-splash>
, the company behind The Jump and Educating Yorkshire.

The company has also recently completed the £100m acquisition of UTV Media’s 
TV business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/19/itv-takeover-utv-media-television-channels>
, including the ITV franchise for Northern Ireland and Irish TV channel UTV 
Ireland.

ITV said the cash cost of its 2015 acquisitions was £406m.


 