
As many economies in Africa wrestle with the consequences of a slowdown in 
China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/13/africa-oil-giants-anxious-times-commodities-boom-oil-metals>
 and depreciating currencies, Ivory Coast has bucked the trend. The country is 
enjoying strong growth and focusing on infrastructure projects, job creation, 
and improving its business climate to win back investors after years of 
political paralysis.

Leading the economic charge is former Goldman Sachs trader Abdourahmane Cissé, 
the 34-year-old budget minister, who says theworld’s top cocoa producer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/20/ivory-coast-president-tours-countrys-first-chocolate-factory>
 is strong enough to weather external shocks, while stability is almost 
guaranteed.

Ivory Coast has been frozen in political stasis since rebels seized the north 
in 2002 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/sep/21/1>, causing the 
effective division of the former French colony and years of tensions, 
culminating in a four-month civil war that killed about 3,000 people in early 
2011 afterformer president Laurent Gbagbo refused to accept defeat at the 
ballot box 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/06/ivory-coast-election-stalemate-gbagbo>
.

Boom town: Abidjan flourishing as Ivory Coast heads to polls – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/oct/23/abidjan-flourishing-ivory-coast-election-in-pictures>
Gbagbo and youth leader Charles Blé Goudé are now on trial at the 
international criminal court for crimes against humanity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/laurent-gbagbo-trial-hague-icc-ivory-coast-civil-war>
. The short-lived conflict ended when Alassane Ouattara took office after a 
military intervention by France. Ouattarawas re-elected by a landslide  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/alassane-ouattara-wins-ivory-coast-election-by-a-landslide>
last year and, despite some fears of unrest, the poll was peaceful and seemed 
to confirm a return to stability.

The economy is booming – growth is estimated at 9% for  
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/cotedivoire/publication/the-might-of-the-elephant-using-its-growth-to-create-better-jobs>
2015 – and foreign money can be seenin the new malls and hotels springing up in 
the economic capital, Abidjan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/oct/23/abidjan-flourishing-ivory-coast-election-in-pictures>
. Ouattara, a former official at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), has 
spentbillions of dollars 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-ivorycoast-business-idUKKCN0RP0OC20150925> 
rebuilding roads and railways.

“There is a new vibe, you have a middle class that is gradually emerging … We 
have invested a lot in infrastructure,” says Cissé during a trip to London. He 
added that a return to violence was simply not an option. “Ivorians know what 
the price of peace is. They went through big issues when we had the trouble in 
2010. No one wants to go there again … Every Ivorian wants their kids to go to 
school.

Does the international criminal court help to end conflict or exacerbate it? | 
Alex Vines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/22/international-criminal-court-help-to-end-conflict-or-exacerbate-it>
“Because I come from the private sector, I always look at downside–upside 
risk. I used to be a trader so risk is part of my DNA. Since 2011, the 
president has wanted to put a strong focus on a diversified economy. Our 
economy now is really diversified.” He pointed out that the service sector now 
accounts for about a third of the economy.

One concern for observers, however, has been the ratio of debt to gross 
domestic product, which stands atabout 40% 
<http://www.indexmundi.com/cote_d_ivoire/public_debt.html>. Because some of 
that debt is in dollars, repayment costs are rising – a problem experienced by 
several African countries. Cissé says his government has factored this in.

“We know exactly what it is in our books and we manage it on a daily basis,” 
he says, noting that the stated level of concern for theWest African Economic 
and Monetary Union <http://www.uemoa.int/Pages/Home.aspx> is 70% 
<http://www.uemoa.int/Documents/Actes/Annexe1DEC_13_2003_CM.pdf>.

Yaya Touré: Africa's youth can be driving force to win the development game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/10/yaya-toure-africa-youth-driving-force-win-development-game>
“We are at 40%. We still have room, but we don’t want to go to 70% and that is 
why we are putting a strong emphasis on domestic revenues because if we make 
sure that we mobilise our resources internally, it gives us a bit more leverage 
to finance our economy,” says Cissé.

After visiting Abidjan in February, Mitsuhiro Furusawa, the IMF’s deputy 
managing director,said <http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2016/pr1682.htm> 
that to maintain growth Ivory Coast must reform the business environment and 
boost private sector investment. “Although declining … poverty, inequality and 
unemployment remain high and significant regional disparities still exist,” he 
cautioned, urging the government to mobilise revenues and maintain a 
disciplined fiscal policy, partly to counter external shocks and contain the 
increase in public debt.

Cissé said the government plans to spend $60bn (£42.5bn) on infrastructure 
between 2016 and 2020, with the private sector funding 68%.


Another priority is creating productive jobs for young people. In a report 
last December 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/cotedivoire/publication/the-might-of-the-elephant-using-its-growth-to-create-better-jobs>
, the World Bank warned robust growth was not leading to a significant decline 
in the poverty rate or higher incomes for people living below the poverty line. 
The bank’s economists recommended boosting productivity in self-employment, 
wage employment and agricultural employment.

Ivory Coast president tours country's first chocolate factory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/20/ivory-coast-president-tours-countrys-first-chocolate-factory>
As a first step, says Cissé, the government wants to focus on education. “Yes, 
you have to create jobs, but we also want value-added jobs. We want to have 
young people who, when they leave university, have the right skills to be 
employable … We invest 22% of the budget into education to make sure we have 
trained people who are ready for the market,” he says.

The government has also reduced the cost of creating companies by more than 
70% – Cissé said you could now create a company for less than $30 – and 
introduced a two-year tax break to help new firms. The government has also said 
20% of public tenders should go to small and medium-sized enterprises. The 
quota is not compulsory, but that will be reviewed at the end of the year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fivory-coast-entice-investors-stability-growth-infrastructure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3228f18d7584cbee3a4f8bc87f7e11cbfffcb3a5%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ivory%20Coast%20hopes%20to%20tempt%20investors%20with%20stability%20and%20a%20booming%20economy%20%7C%20Cl%C3%A1r%20N%C3%AD%20Chonghaile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fivory-coast-entice-investors-stability-growth-infrastructure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ivory%20Coast%20hopes%20to%20tempt%20investors%20with%20stability%20and%20a%20booming%20economy%20%7C%20Cl%C3%A1r%20N%C3%AD%20Chonghaile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fivory-coast-entice-investors-stability-growth-infrastructure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3228f18d7584cbee3a4f8bc87f7e11cbfffcb3a5%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 Buildings in the Plateau district in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Photograph: Joe 
Penney/Reuters 
The process of applying for public tenders has also been streamlined and the 
government is providing tax incentives for companies that hire students 
straight out of school and for a minimum of 12 months. “The president 
understands that we have a population of mainly young people and we need to 
make sure this becomes an asset rather than a liability,” Cissé said.

Key to attracting private investors is the business environment. Ivory Coast 
ranked 46th out of 189 countries for ease of starting a business in theWorld 
Bank’s annual Doing Business <http://www.doingbusiness.org/rankings> report, 
but stood at 142nd for ease of doing business.

The budget minister sees opportunities in natural resources, such as oil and 
gold, after years of underinvestment. “These are potential revenues for the 
future because we will continue to invest … and when the price goes a bit 
higher, I’m likely to collect a lot more money to finance the economy,” he says.

“There is an appetite [for investment] … We want to position ourselves as a 
place where there is stability, the business environment is attractive, and 
where you can do business and close your eyes, like you do in other countries, 
and have an interesting return.”
 