
Barring injury or a massive howler, the former Queens Park Rangers benchwarmer 
Júlio César 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/01/julio-cesar-brazil-> will be 
theSeleção’s No1 at the World Cup. This is bad news for his understudy, 
Jéfferson, who has a handful of caps, stretching back over four years and under 
two different managers. A it means only an accident can alter an uncomfortable 
statistic in the history of the national side: in the last 64 years, only two 
black goalkeepers have had the honour of starting for theSeleção in a World 
Cup. More shocking is the fact that MoacirBarbosa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/apr/13/guardianobituaries.alexbellos> 
and Nélson Dida, wore the No1 shirt 56 years apart.

When Dida played in the 2006 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> in Germany it was 
hailed as an overdue break of a racial barrier that never really went away in a 
country where black and poor footballers were originally banned from taking 
part in the game.

However, the situation still reflects an imbalance: according to the most 
recent figures, the number of black goalkeepers playing for Brazilian clubs has 
doubled since 2006, when they comprised 18% of the No1s. The percentage, 
however, is still below the average 53% of outfield players who are black.

It comes as no surprise then that out of 92 keepers called up for the Seleção 
between its foundation and the mid-noughties only 12 were black or mixed race.

The perceived year zero for the myth of the black goalie is 1950 when Brazil’s 
first hosting of the World Cup ended with the calamity of a2-1 defeat to Uruguay
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2014/jun/10/brazil-uruguay-1950-world-cup-final-video>
 in which Barbosa was blamed for the winning goal. From that 16 July to now 
black goalkeepers have been regarded as less reliable that white ones in Brazil.

Never mind the evidence that contradicts the theory, such as Waldir Peres’s 
fumble against the USSR in Spain 1982, or César’s clumsy coming off of his line 
for a cross in South Africa four years ago.

Barbosa was a natural choice for Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil>. Like many of his World Cup 
team-mates he was part of a Vasco da Gama squad that in 1948 became legendary 
by winning a South American club competition after beating the feared River 
Plate from Argentina to the title. Vasco conceded only three goals in six 
matches, a performance that enhanced the reputation of their goalkeeper.

At 5ft 9in, Barbosa was short for a keeper and had to compensate by 
anticipating crosses and long passes. Unlike many of his Brazilian colleagues, 
Barbosa did not plant his feet on the goalline and did not restrict himself to 
the six-yard box.

He also resorted to taking his own goal-kicks instead of leaving them to 
defenders. It all seemed to have been forgotten on that fateful 16 July. 
Barbosa was beaten trying to anticipate what looked like a carbon copy of the 
buildup to Uruguay’s equaliser. But instead of a low cross to the box, however, 
mercurial winger Alcides Ghiggia had a mis-hit shot that went in to win Uruguay 
their second world title.

Barbosa never lived it down, even though he played for the Seleção once again 
three years later. He died in poverty, singled out for what were really a 
collection of mismanagements by the Brazilian football authorities and the 
manager, Flavio Costa, as well as the simple truth that unexpected defeats are 
part of football.

The problem is that Barbosa’s plight outlived his 23-year career and affected 
other colleagues. While racism was hardly confined to goalkeepers – the great 
1958 World Cup winning team played their first match with a majority of white 
players, withPelé and Garrincha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/29/worlds-top-100-footballers-of-all-time>
 relegated to the bench – the other positions at least found balance. None of 
Brazil’s five World Cup wins have been achieved with a black No1 in the 
starting XI.

Come July, this once again could be the case.
 