
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> has said he 
is “ready to fight” through the intensive festive schedule that he believes can 
shape Liverpool’s challenge for the Premier League.

Liverpool lie second in the table, only six points behind the leaders, 
Chelsea, who visit Anfield at the end of January, and are on a high after a
dramatic stoppage-time derby win at Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 last week. However, their fitness and resources will be tested by three league 
games in seven days over the festive period, beginning with a home game against 
Stoke City on Tuesday.

Klopp’s team also host Manchester City on New Year’s Eve before kicking off at 
Sunderland 45 and a half hours later. The Liverpool manager, who admits it is 
unlikely Philippe Coutinho will recover froman ankle ligament injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/philippe-coutinho-liverpool-out-six-weeks-ankle-injury>
 in time to face City on Saturday, insists his squad can cope with the demands 
and emerge from the schedule with their Premier League credentials enhanced.

“It is a run that could do that [end a title challenge] but I am the type of 
guy who thinks you can make it work the other way around,” said Klopp. “It is 
all the same for all the teams, or nearly all the teams. We all have to go 
through it and in the end the teams who use all the different situations in the 
best way will be top of the table.

“We are better equipped than last year but then we were only together three 
months and of course it was my first time with a game on Boxing Day, but not my 
first time with games every three days. That was not the biggest surprise for 
me. Of course we are in another situation now but we know each other much 
better.

Liverpool will use progress not money to attract players – Jürgen Klopp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/liverpool-progress-money-transfers-jurgen-klopp>
“We have a big bunch of wonderful experiences together and that makes us all 
stronger. You have to play Stoke, City and Sunderland and they have all their 
things what they want to reach. It is difficult but not impossible and as long 
as it is not impossible I am ready to fight.”

Klopp expressed bewilderment at Liverpool’s fixture schedule when it was first 
announced the City game had been moved to a 5.30pm kick-off for broadcasting 
purposes. The club’s request to delay the Sunderland kick-off was rejected by 
the Premier League and Klopp insists he has come to accept the decision, albeit 
reluctantly.

The Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager added: 
“The only thing is what I spoke about a few times, the doors open and close. I 
cannot go to the Sunderland game and still talk about the Sunderland game and 
say: ‘Oh, we play again.’ I have never had this moment of 44 hours between two 
games in a family celebrating period for nearly everybody in the Christian 
world. Then you have to go out and play two games within 44 hours. That is a 
challenge.

“We have to accept it. We accepted it a long time ago, it is nothing. I have 
no problem with playing 27th or 26th and then playing 31st – no problem. The 
only thing I spoke one or two times about is the second game two days later, 44 
hours. It is like this and I have nothing to say. I had nothing to learn. I 
have no problem with Boxing Day, I love it. What I said before we can all have 
our Christmas at home and we play football. That is all cool. The only 
challenge we have is to find the solution of how to do it in 44 hours.”
 