
The last embers of daylight dance in silver streaks over the gunmetal grey of 
Bass Strait, out there to the left as we snake up the highway towards 
Devonport. A distant tanker marks the meeting of leaden clouds and horizon.


On our right is the monolith of the disused pulp mill, its totemic chimney 
breathless and rusting – metaphoric, perhaps, for Tasmania’s industrial decline 
– not least that of Burnie, a seaside town in the northwest that knows itself, 
proudly, as the “City of Makers”.

New-ish Burnie resident Jacqui Lambie, former Palmer United party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/palmer-united-party>, now 
independent senator, is at the wheel a big four-wheel drive emblazoned with her 
image and name. Other motorists slow while overtaking to grab an eyeful of 
Lambie, the 45-year-old who, having won her seat on the back of Clive Palmer’s 
significant resources in 2013, is now fighting hard to retain it without him.

She’s driving and talking – and talking. I’m scribbling furiously in the dying 
light, trying to record her thoughts that often seem to end either in an 
emphatic, “It’s bullshit” or “It pisses me off”.

If I make mistakes, I bloody well stand up and say so

I resort to the recorder.

She mentions her chief of staff – the exquisitely named, at least for a 
political spinner – Rob Messenger, who’s not in the car.

“He’d be rolling his eyes,” Lambie says. “He’d be saying, ‘The more you try 
and script her, the more you can’t bloody script her, and the more you try and 
script her, the more she goes off the damn script’. But what I’m saying is what 
I actually believe in and if I make mistakes, well I bloody well stand up and 
say so ... I say how my conscience is feeling. I can’t do it any other way ... 
and you know, I’ve got nothing to hide either.”

After winning her seat, some swiftly dismissed her (along with fellow PUP 
Glenn Lazarus and Motoring Enthusiast party senator Ricky Muir) as an 
unsophisticated parliamentary interloper and gauche populist. With her 
gravelly, amply projected voice, earthy language, penchant for blue eye shadow 
and items of canary yellow clothing, Lambie had come down from anywhere but 
central political casting.

She was compared, perhaps predictably, to Pauline Hanson. 

“No one compares me to her any more, which is good,” Lambie insists. “I’m my 
own person.”

The beltway scoffed when, after just a couple of days in the job in mid-2014, 
she labelled Tony Abbott “a political psychopath” and, with an honesty that at 
once defines and exposes her to self-harm, said everyone got into federal 
politics dreaming of becoming PM and she was no bloody different.

Hello girlfriend. Lambie was in the building.

She quickly won more attention by standing with PUP senators, the Greens, 
other crossbenchers and Labor to sink elements of Joe Hockey’s 2014 budget; 
supporting the government in repealing of the carbon and mining taxes; 
introducing a (failed) parliamentary bill toban the burqa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/19/jacqui-lambie-calls-for-ban-on-the-burqa-for-public-safety-reasons>
 (she insists on security grounds, though much of what she says would indicate 
otherwise); and finallyquitting PUP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/24/jacqui-lambie-resigns-from-palmer-united-party-ending-speculation>
 in late 2014 after spectacularly falling out with Palmer over his leadership 
style and policy differences.

In September 2014, the ABC’s Australian Story aired a revealing personal 
account <http://www.abc.net.au/austory/content/2014/s4079838.htm> of her 
difficult transition from injured former soldier with a pharmaceutical and 
alcohol addiction to a pivotal figure in balance of power politics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b11dbbc750a0da80fa25adc327a772b01be51d0%2F0_162_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jacqui%20Lambie%20on%20home%20turf%3A%20'I%20reckon%20I%20can%20do%2020%20more%20years'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jacqui%20Lambie%20on%20home%20turf%3A%20%27I%20reckon%20I%20can%20do%2020%20more%20years%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b11dbbc750a0da80fa25adc327a772b01be51d0%2F0_162_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Lambie with independent senator Nick Xenophon in May. The two have forged an 
unlikely bond in parliament. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP 
At year’s end she appeared in a women’s magazine photoshoot 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/senator-jacqui-lambie-reveals-she-does-botox-and-is-looking-for-love/news-story/1a80e9c98735d70c973f9b269adb6e81>
 draped in the Australian flag (again resonant of Hanson) and wearing, she 
says, $8 K-Mart jeans.

“That’s what I own, so that’s what I wore and I wasn’t thinking, ‘Hey, does my 
arse look big in these?’, because I don’t walk around asking if my arse looks 
big,” Lambie says and laughs.

We get on to the photoshoot after she gives character assessments of her 
Senate colleagues. She speaks warmly of her friend, independent South 
Australian senator Nick Xenophon, Lazarus and Muir. She also lauds the respect 
and support afforded her by Labor’s Penny Wong, Kim Carr, Stephen Conroy and 
“little Sammy” Dastyari. She loathes Liberals Cory Bernardi and Eric Abetz.

She also praises the Greens’ “Scotty” Ludlam, fellow Tasmanian senator Peter 
Whish-Wilson and Sarah Hanson-Young.

She's got resilience like no other woman I've seen
Jacqui Lambie on Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young 
“She’s got the toughest job on refugees and she tackles it head on,” Lambie 
says of Hanson-Young. “She wears her heart on her sleeve and no matter how many 
times they go at her and, you know, take the piss out of her, she stands. She’s 
got resilience like no other woman I’ve seen.”

She is less generous about Greens leader Richard Di Natale. 

 “I mean, here’s this guy, Di Natale, does his own photoshoot for a magazine 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/sam-dastyari-targets-greens-di-natale-as-senate-gets-heated/news-story/7508bfcc914d3547c1fd4ceed45634ba>
 [GQ] wearing a skivvy and suit worth thousands of dollars ... what’s that say 
to the battlers? That’s bullshit,” Lambie says.

 Having once criticised the Greens for having “destroyed all hope in 
Tasmania”, she now says: “I don’t support the Greens on their extreme 
environmentalism but on most of the social things I fall into the same 
category.”

 This points to the anomaly – some would argue, contradiction – of Lambie, who 
is as difficult to define politically as she is personally idiosyncratic.

 She’s hawkish on national security but in favour of tighter gun control. 
Pro-border protection and all for “stopping the boats” but she abhors offshore 
detention of women and children. She believes in climate change (though doesn’t 
stipulate a preferred means of mitigation), is pro-mining (except on prime 
agricultural land) and supports “sustainable forestry”.

 She supports the death penalty for Australians who fight for radical Islam, 
has expressed admiration for Russian president Vladimir Putin, proposes cutting 
foreign aid and has warned of the threat to Australia from China and Indonesia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F673cfa4fc94c6b91e0643f5a74989f9f0ceacd99%2F204_105_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jacqui%20Lambie%20on%20home%20turf%3A%20'I%20reckon%20I%20can%20do%2020%20more%20years'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jacqui%20Lambie%20on%20home%20turf%3A%20%27I%20reckon%20I%20can%20do%2020%20more%20years%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F673cfa4fc94c6b91e0643f5a74989f9f0ceacd99%2F204_105_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
 Lambie speaking in parliament, where her eclectic views have made her vote 
hard to pin down. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP 
She advocates a better deal for pensioners and the unemployed. Yet she was a 
primary advocate of contentious “tough love” social security measures, 
including the trial in Ceduna, South Australia, of thecashless welfare card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/09/fears-cashless-welfare-card-could-discriminate-against-indigenous-people>
.

The trial disproportionately affects Indigenous people but Lambie says it 
should apply to all social security recipients, regardless of ethnicity. She 
initially wanted it trialled inTasmania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania>, where second- and 
third-generation welfare dependence is endemic. In parts of the north, she 
says, one in two people receive some welfare.

Lambie identifies as Tasmanian Aboriginal 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/indigenous/aboriginal-elder-uncle-roy-maynard-defends-jacqui-lambie-over-indigenous-claims/news-story/d7f34b67648d38aed7f32ad280fa602c>
 through her mother’s family (though this has been contested). She first 
encountered Indigenous poverty during a gap year as a barmaid in Katherine, 
Northern Territory, in the late 1980s.

 “The thing I found more devastating in Katherine ... was they’d put these new 
houses in ... after 12 months when I left there was nothing left of them apart 
from the cement slab,” she says.

Jacqui Lambie accuses governor general of 'turning a blind eye' to defence 
abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/07/jacqui-lambie-accuses-governor-general-of-turning-a-blind-eye-to-defence-abuse>
“And I thought, ‘What can you do for them if they don’t want that?’ You know, 
giving them money and stuff, and someone gets paid one day and they go and 
spend their $300 at the bar and then their mate gets paid the next day – 
really? That was my biggest wake-up call.

 “You can start with that bloody welfare card – so that the kids are getting 
fed ... There are certain ways to look after the poor and sometimes you’ve got 
to do tough love.”

Lambie is a touchstone advocate for injured veterans and a big supporter of 
those Australians – firemen, police, military, ambulance officers – who make 
their living in uniform.

She says: “I’ve got veterans knocking on my door with physical injures and 
PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] and they’re fighting DVA [Department of 
Veterans’ Affairs] to get the right treatment. And yet the bloody government is 
spending millions on Anzac commemoration ... That makes me bloody wild ... 
really pisses me off.”

Up from the depths of despair

Lambie’s battle with DVA over a back injury she sustained in the army in 1997 
(she was in the military police and transport corps) resulted in her discharge. 
The department concluded she was a malingerer, withdrew medical care and 
cancelled her pension.


Constant chronic pain manifested in an addiction to prescription drugs and 
alcohol abuse. She rarely left her Devonport home, where her sons – especially 
her youngest, Dylan – cared for her. She attempted suicide by walking in front 
of a car in 2009.

 She says: “The last two or three weeks before I did it, I just didn’t care. 
It was just a matter of timing. I’d had a bit to drink one night, been around 
at some girlfriends’, and I just said, ‘This is it’. I knew I was going, I just 
didn’t know when. Last thing I remembered was looking out, watching the cars go 
up and down, and thinking ‘I’ve had a gutful’.

 “I ended up with major depression, alcohol abuse – you name it, I had it. But 
in saying that, had I not had the army training that I’d had ... I wouldn’t be 
where I am today.”

Jacqui Lambie has drawn out Clive Palmer's bullying and diminished his power | 
Paula Matthewson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/25/jacqui-lambie-has-drawn-out-clive-palmers-bullying-and-diminished-his-power>
She still lives with chronic pain but besides having regular injections into 
her lower back, she is drug free. She rarely drinks.

 “But if they stop the injections tomorrow, I’ll be back where I was ... I’m 
not taking any pharmaceuticals because they make me nuts,” Lambie confides.

She came to politics first by working briefly, in 2008, for former Labor 
senator Nick Sherry (who also survived a suicide attempt in the late 1990s). 
She had a brief flirtation with the Liberal party (she’d dismissed it as “a 
boys’ club”) in 2012 and sold her house to finance a run as an independent in 
2013. At the behest of Palmer, she joined PUP.

Despite falling out with him, Lambie praises Palmer’s kindness and generosity.

 “The best gift Clive ever gave me was sending me to America by myself for two 
weeks,” she says. “I pay credit where credit is due. It just didn’t work out 
between me and Palmer because I refused to back down. I had to put Tasmania 
first.”

Lambie’s learning curve was acute. She admits it continues.

 “My God, it was phenomenal,” Lambie says. “You know what? I look back and 
think, ‘You were just thrown in the deep end and it was either sink or swim’. 
But that’s probably the best way for someone like me – if you just chuck me in 
and say, ‘Sink or swim girlfriend’ ... Anyway, I’ve had to build that trust 
back up since leaving PUP and show that I’m worthy of what they [voters] voted 
me in for.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13595fa4f37b0382028d5e62b4efe9ada09d93f0%2F0_0_3896_2597%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jacqui%20Lambie%20on%20home%20turf%3A%20'I%20reckon%20I%20can%20do%2020%20more%20years'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jacqui%20Lambie%20on%20home%20turf%3A%20%27I%20reckon%20I%20can%20do%2020%20more%20years%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13595fa4f37b0382028d5e62b4efe9ada09d93f0%2F0_0_3896_2597%2F3896.jpg>
 ‘I was chaotic, PUP was chaotic, we were all chaotic.’ Lambie with Clive 
Palmer, Dio Wang, Motoring Enthusiast senator Ricky Muir and Glenn Lazarus. 
Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP 
“They weren’t angry that I’d left Palmer United but I was chaotic, PUP was 
chaotic, we were all chaotic. I couldn’t see two foot in front of me. 
Everything was just a fog, because I had so much pressure on me from him and a 
couple of things I came out and said in defence of him and I didn’t really want 
to but the pressure was on.”

In mid-2015, she revealed her son Dylan, having seen her through the worst of 
her own addictions, washooked on ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/10/jacqui-lambie-reveals-21-year-old-sons-ice-addiction-during-welfare-debate'>
. He is now in rehab. She plans a driving holiday with him after the election.

Lambie’s solicitor, Greg Isolani of KCI Lawyers, says: “Jacqui has rat 
cunning, a quick wit and a smart mouth. She used those traits and a dream to 
achieve to get into Senator Nick Sherry’s office for work experience. She had 
insight through this experience into the political process and she dared to 
dream – big.

She’s still a politician, but she doesn’t sound much like one
Voter at the Devonport Magpies football club 
“Whilst she cannot always absorb the nuances of legislation ... she has the 
ability to take in the big picture, to take a stand (think of the defence force 
pay increase and her refusal to pass any legislation until the diggers were 
looked after), to say no to university fees and to subsequently become the 
darling of students Australia-wide.

“She has formed strategic alliances and made genuine friends with the 
independents, relevant lobby groups.”

Isolani says she has had “the odd infraction”, such as the interview in which 
shestipulated that her ideal partner be well endowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/22/australian-mp-jacqui-lambie-sizes-up-male-suitor>
, but they didn’t sink her.

“She came out of it as being who she is – self-deprecating, down to earth, 
honest and a bit like someone we all know,” Isolani says.

Now, as the election looms, she is the head of the Jacquie Lambie Network – an 
affiliation of like-minded candidates who are running for the Senate in 
Tasmania, Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria.

 She says: “I’m a facilitator not a leader. If that comes in the future, who 
knows. It’s just my branding and a network of like-minded Senate candidates. I 
can’t tell people what to do and how to vote on different state issues, which 
is what being a senator is about. Otherwise it’d be like me and Palmer.”

On this cold night we stop at the rooms of the Devonport Magpies, the local 
Australian rules football club where the organisation Teen Challenge, a drug 
and alcohol rehabilitation service for young people, is warning the teenage 
players about the dangers of addiction. Lambie is trying to get federal 
financial support for Teen Challenge, which, she insists, is one of the best 
residential methods of rehab for victims of Tasmania’s ice epidemic. She’s 
greeted warmly.

“We get sick of politicians around here,” one of the footy dads says. “Only 
see them come election time. But she’s always buzzing round in that big car of 
hers, stopping to say ‘g’day’. She’s well known and liked ... she’s still a 
politician but she doesn’t sound much like one.”

Lambie says she felt disappointment with her at the height of the PUP chaos.

 She says: “Now that’s all turned around. I can’t go into the newsagency – it 
takes me an hour and a half in the morning to go one block and come back. You 
know, everyone wants to have a chat – and that’s great.”

 These days, she says, her life largely plays out publicly.

I just don’t see the difference between a man and a woman ... I don’t cry 
victim because I’m a woman

 “It’s a bit of a catch-22 because you’ve got no private life at all. You 
can’t umm ... God forbid if I took the chance and went picking up a one-night 
stand or something like that and they went out and gobbed off to the media ... 
You know, you don’t have any room to move. You can’t go down the street looking 
second best or anything like that.”

The battlers’ daughter and the wallaby slow braise

Lambie has offered to buy me dinner but the Teen Challenge meeting runs over 
time and she is due at another in nearby Ulverstone about the proposed major 
tourism initiative, the northwest coastal pathway to link a number of towns 
with bike and walking paths.


 The young KFC workers smile at her.

 “Hello senator,” one of them says. “Good to see you again.”

 We talk US politics. Donald Trump supporter?

Jacqui Lambie says grand mufti should be forced to wear ankle monitor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/18/jacqui-lambie-says-grand-mufti-should-be-forced-to-wear-ankle-monitor>
 She says: “[Recently] I walked into Glenn Lazarus’s office and Trump was on 
TV. We made eye contact and I knew exactly what he was thinking: hasn’t 
Australia just gone through this? Palmer – he was identical. The mannerisms, 
the behaviour. And it just scares me a little bit.

 “I think Hillary [Clinton] has definitely earned her stripes ... Also, I 
think when it comes to national security she’s right on top of it. And the way 
the world is going, if I was to have my pick, my vote would go to Hillary 
Clinton. She’s a lot more stable and she knows what’s going on. I think 
American should play safe – pick Hillary, get her in there ... I admire her. 
You know, you knock her down she gets back up.”

 The next morning we drive across the undulating magnificence of the Vale of 
Belvoir – a vast brown-green floor of velvety native grass and lichen bordered 
with eucalypt and rainforest – en route from Burnie to Cradle mountain. It’s 
resonant of the Scottish highlands.

 Lambie says she’d like to take her dad to Scotland one day. She goes on to 
speak of her mother – she is one of 20 children, giving rise to a gag she likes 
to tell: “It makes it easier for me to get a Senate quota because in parts of 
this state we’re all related.”

 Her father was a transport driver. She describes her extended family as 
“battlers”. The men and the women, she says, have worked hard and had tough 
lives.

 I mention her admiration of resilient Clinton. Is she a feminist?

 “I don’t really buy into it, because I just don’t see the difference between 
a man and a woman ... I don’t cry victim because I’m a woman. It just makes me 
fight harder and go after what I want. It’s like my mum says, ‘The sky’s the 
limit – it’s all yours; it doesn’t matter what your makeup is, go get it, 
girl.’”

 We meet Messenger at Cradle mountain. Lambie is pressuring the major parties 
to commit $30m to a tourist development, including a cable car, to enhance the 
walking experience around the mountain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b1769d96971bfb2098e545b415cc2c916ce175d%2F0_0_2362_3185%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jacqui%20Lambie%20on%20home%20turf%3A%20'I%20reckon%20I%20can%20do%2020%20more%20years'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jacqui%20Lambie%20on%20home%20turf%3A%20%27I%20reckon%20I%20can%20do%2020%20more%20years%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fjacqui-lambie-on-home-turf-i-reckon-i-can-do-20-more-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b1769d96971bfb2098e545b415cc2c916ce175d%2F0_0_2362_3185%2F2362.jpg>
 Jacqui Lambie poses for a picture with an admirer on Cradle Mountain. 
Photograph: Paul Daley for the Guardian 
 Messenger, a former Queensland state conservative and later independent MP, 
coaxes Lambie through a statement about the tourism development. He records her 
on a GoPro. Messenger uses Facebook to distribute her daily video recordings.

 Some close to Lambie speak critically of what they refer to as Messenger’s 
“undue influence” on her – especially on matters of radical Islam and her more 
extreme pronouncements, for example on the death penalty. She admits she relies 
heavily on him.

 “He’s done a lot of things – been an MP, in the RAAF, worked in theatre, 
journalism ... and he loves to read – he’s like a walking bloody encyclopaedia. 
Like I say, he’s the brains of the outfit. I’m just a walking, talking 
billboard.”

 In recent times, she says, he’s been leaving her to manage her own public 
appearances and media interviews, including a recent appearance on Annabel 
Crabb’s Kitchen Cabinet.

 Lambie had just moved into the house she bought earlier this year. She rarely 
has time to cook and was not very familiar with the oven.

 “I’d used it to heat up pizza and that – but that’s all,” she says.

 But she’d already decided to defer to an old favourite recipe for Crabb – 
wallaby slow braise (one whole small wallaby, tail removed; lots of garlic; a 
packet of instant French onion soup mix; chilli powder; salt; one can of Coke, 
cooked on low heat for about 10 hours).

 “Then they told me Annabel’s basically a bloody vegetarian – except fish. So 
that was OK – I used the oven to cook salmon and kipfler potatoes. Lovely. It 
all worked out in the end, like I knew it would.”

But will it all work out in the end for Senator Jacqui Lambie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jacqui-lambie>?

She is a strong favourite to retain her seat 
<http://www.themercury.com.au/news/politics/jacqui-lambie-likely-winner-in-july-poll/news-story/f54085567fab07f823c6a253db48a5df>
. And if she loses, she’ll be done with politics.

She says: “I mean, you start off at the bottom but you try and try and you get 
better ... If I lose, I’ll walk away. If I get back in this time, reckon I’ll 
be right for a while. I reckon I’ll do 20 more years.”

• Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 
<http://www.lifeline.org.au/> 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 
<http://www.suicidecallbackservice.org.au/> 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 
<http://www.kidshelp.com.au/> 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 
<http://www.mensline.org.au/>1300 78 99 78
 