
Extreme weight loss and tooth extraction: when method acting goes too far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jul/29/extreme-weight-loss-when-method-acting-goes-too-far>
Suicide Squad star Jai Courtney prepared for his role as gun-for-hire Captain 
Boomerang by eating magic mushrooms and stubbing cigarettes out on his arms, 
according toEmpire magazine <http://www.empireonline.com/>.

The Australian star told the magazine that he was on a Skype call with 
director David Ayer when he experimented with drug use and self-harm to get 
into character.

“That night I happened to eat some mushrooms,” said the actor 
<https://uk.movies.yahoo.com/jai-courtney-took-magic-mushrooms-and-self-harmed-094733974.html>
. “I did self-inflict some burns.”

Courtney has previously said he was told by Ayer to “find your inner shitbag” 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/new/Hysterical-Advice-Jai-Courtney-Got-Playing-Captain-Boomerang-Suicide-Squad-90517.html>
 when approaching the role of the caustic, aggressive (and – in the DC comics – 
racist) Boomerang. But he also revealed to Empire that the director had 
introduced an unusual means of developing the character’s look.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fjai-courtney-suicide-squad-prep-magic-mushrooms-cigarette-burns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d7695b4296714b31fa4ee5f7828090017aec616%2F0_75_4240_2545%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jai%20Courtney's%20Suicide%20Squad%20prep%3A%20magic%20mushrooms%20and%20cigarette%20burns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fjai-courtney-suicide-squad-prep-magic-mushrooms-cigarette-burns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jai%20Courtney%27s%20Suicide%20Squad%20prep%3A%20magic%20mushrooms%20and%20cigarette%20burns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fjai-courtney-suicide-squad-prep-magic-mushrooms-cigarette-burns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d7695b4296714b31fa4ee5f7828090017aec616%2F0_75_4240_2545%2F4240.jpg>
 Will Smith and Margot Robbie in Suicide Squad. Photograph: Warner Bros. 
Entertainment Inc 
“I turned up to discuss my look, expecting we’d have a long discussion and 
slowly he refine it,” says Courtney, “David [Ayer] just walked right in, picked 
up some clippers and started shearing chunks of hair off my head, Eventually he 
said, ‘You look like bad news.’ Then he left.”


Suicide Squad, a supervillian movie about a nefarious bunch of meta-humans 
rounded up by the government to save the world, is fast turning into this year’s
The Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/27/the-revenant-crew-danger-on-set-inarritu-leonardo-dicaprio>
 when it comes to stories of extreme preparation. Many of the casttattooed each 
other with the word “SKWAD” 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/02/margot-robbie-misspelled-tattoo-suicide-squad>
 on set, while Jared Leto, who plays a new iteration of The Joker, reportedly 
got so into character that he instructed an assistant to present the rest of 
the cast with a dead pig, before gifting his co-starMargot Robbie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/27/margot-robbie-bond-girl-007-movie-rumors>
 (who plays Harley Quinn) a live black rat.

'Tormented' Suicide Squad stars have on-set therapist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/01/suicide-squad-stars-have-on-set-therapist>
Leto, along with Will Smith (who plays the eagle-eyed sniper, DeadShot) 
reportedly had access to an on-set therapist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/01/suicide-squad-stars-have-on-set-therapist>
after Ayer encouraged them to get deep into their roles. The director, 
previously known for the second world war tank movieFury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/26/fury-review-stirring-macho-tank-drama-brad-pitt>
 and the LA cop drama End of Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/jake-gyllenhaal-end-of-watch>, 
apparently also instructed cast memberAdewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/13/adewale-akinnuoye-agbaje-interview>
 to listen to audio recordings of the Japanese cannibal killerIssei Sagawa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2001/feb/20/features11.g23> and told 
Joel Kinnaman to watch graphic military videos that the actor described as 
“horrific shit”.

 