
The former Labour minister who is now the BBC’s head of radio and education, 
is to take on responsibility for its religious affairs programming amid 
criticism that recent cuts have hit coverage.

James Purnell will add the role to his existing responsibilities, said the 
director general,Tony Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-hall>, 
following the departure earlier this month of Aaqil Ahmed, who was the 
corporation’s head of religion and ethics.

Hall said the decision meant the BBC was taking “one of the big issues of our 
times” seriously, and told an invited audience Purnell would make sureBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> output in television, radio and news 
was “joined up”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fjames-purnell-to-head-bbc-religious-affairs-programming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F583ef362bb0b83b1ce668273a8f4c81862e56cda%2F0_142_1306_784%2F1306.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Purnell%20to%20head%20BBC's%20religious%20affairs%20programming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fjames-purnell-to-head-bbc-religious-affairs-programming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Purnell%20to%20head%20BBC%27s%20religious%20affairs%20programming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fjames-purnell-to-head-bbc-religious-affairs-programming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F583ef362bb0b83b1ce668273a8f4c81862e56cda%2F0_142_1306_784%2F1306.jpg>
 Martin Bashir. Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
Hall also appeared to promote Martin Bashir, appointed religious affairs 
correspondent just two months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/26/martin-bashir-returns-to-bbc-to-cover-religious-affairs>
, to the more senior role of “religious editor”.

Roger Bolton, a broadcaster and trustee of Sandford St Martin, which aims to 
promote religious programming, was critical of the failure to replace Ahmed, 
the first Muslim to hold the post, wholeft the BBC earlier this month 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/scotland-factual>. Ahmed’s 
ability to commission programmes had already been axed as part of cost cuts in 
2015.

“If they think that’s the end of the process there will be a great deal of 
anger,” said Bolton of the decision to make one of Hall’s most senior 
lieutenants responsible.

Bolton, who also presents the Feedback programme for BBC Radio 4, said the 
danger was that “the BBC talks the talk but doesn’t appear to do anything else”.

Hall is also to invite religious leaders in the UK to a round table in January 
as part of an effort to do more to reflect the role of religion in Britain – 
not just in its news and current affairs, but also in its drama and factual 
programming.

Speaking at the Voice of the Viewer and Listener autumn conference, Hall 
described religion as “one of the big dividing issues of our time”. Asked if 
the rise in hate crime added to the concern he said it had.

Under recent changes, including the departure of Ahmed after seven years, the 
religion and ethics production team 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/scotland-factual> of BBC 
Studios will come under the management of Factual Scotland.

A BBC source said: “The BBC can and must do more to ensure that the important 
role faith plays is recognised and reflected in our programming.”


The source went on to reject accusations that the BBC was “in any way 
diminishing what it does around Christianity”. The Daily Mail, among others, 
has criticised the BBC forincreasing its coverage of other faiths 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3933968/BBC-increase-coverage-Muslim-Hindu-Sikh-religious-festivals.html>
 at the expense of Songs of Praise, for example.
 