
Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jared-kushner> are poised to become one of 
the most powerful couples in the US.

Donald Trump’s eldest daughter and her husband, who played crucial roles in 
directing Trump’s campaign, now sit at the helm of his transition team, along 
with Trump’s sons, and, on Monday, Trumpnamed Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jared-kushner-senior-adviser-donald-trump>
 a senior adviser to the president, an appointment that has raised questions 
about potential conflicts of interests and drawn accusations of nepotism.

Meet the Trumps: a look at America's new first family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/meet-the-trumps-melania-ivanka-americas-first-family-election>
Trump described his son-in-law, a New York real estate executive and publisher 
of the weekly New York Observer, as a “tremendous asset and trusted adviser 
throughout the campaign and transition” and praised him as “incredibly 
successful, in both business and now politics”. Ivanka, who serves as executive 
vice-president of development and acquisitions of the Trump Organization and 
has her own fashion line, is not expected to have a formal role in the 
administration.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20son-in-law%20behind%20the%20throne%3A%20Jared%20Kushner's%20rise%20and%20rise%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20son-in-law%20behind%20the%20throne%3A%20Jared%20Kushner%27s%20rise%20and%20rise%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise&media=>
The son-in-law behind the throne: Jared Kushner’s rise and rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/17/the-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise>
As the couple prepare to move 
<http://people.com/politics/ivanka-trump-is-moving-to-washington-d-c-and-shell-have-the-obamas-for-neighbors/>
 their family from New York to Washington, his appointment and her continued 
involvement in the family business open the administration up to new claims of 
conflicts of interest when it has far from resolved its approach to those of 
Donald Trump himself.

Ethics lawyers have also raised concerns that Kushner’s appointment will run 
afoul of federal anti-nepotism law, which prohibits any public official from 
hiring family members to an agency or office which he or she leads.

WilmerHale, a law firm contracted by Kushner, has said in a statement that he 
is “committed to complying with federal ethics laws” and has coordinated with 
the Office of Government Ethics. In a statement, Trump’s transition team said 
Kushner has “chosen to forego his salary while serving in the administration”.

Who is Jared Kushner? Trump's son-in-law at center of transition team drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/jared-kushner-ivanka-trump-transition-team-chris-christie>
Further complicating their roles, Kushner and Ivanka Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ivanka-trump> are centrally involved in 
their families’ businesses.

Kushner’s lawyers said that he intended to divest many of his assets, 
including foreign investments, before starting in his White House role. Some 
ethics lawyers have already said that that wouldnot go far enough 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/09/us/jared-kushner-assets-conflict-of-interest.html>
 to head off potential conflicts because his plans include selling to his 
brother, a venture capitalist, or to a family trust controlled by his mother.

Similarly, ethics experts have warned that if Trump puts his children, who 
currently serve as advisers on his presidential committee, in control of his 
business operations, as he has suggested, they would have to be entirely 
removed from government operations – and would not be able to attend meetings 
with foreign leaders like the one Ivanka Trump attended with theprime minister 
of Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/japan-confidence-trump-president-shinzo-abe>
.

Kushner is the oldest son of Charles Kushner, a New Jersey real estate 
developer and prominent Democratic donor, who was convicted and sentenced to 
two years in prison for tax evasion and retaliation against a federal witness – 
his brother-in-law. Charles Kushner hired a prostitute to entrap his 
brother-in-law, captured the encounter on camera, and sent the footage to his 
sister, the man’s wife.

Ivanka Trump and Kushner met in 2007 at a business lunch organized by mutual 
friends who intended it as a networking opportunity.

The empowerment trap: Ivanka Trump and the art of co-opting feminism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/ivanka-trump-feminism-us-election>
“They very innocently set us up thinking that our only interest in one another 
would be transactional,” Ivankatold Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.com/11739787/ivanka-trump-collection-the-apprentice-family/> 
in 2015. “Whenever we see them we’re like, the best deal we ever made!”

Almost immediately, the young couple became the source of “are-they or 
aren’t-they 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2007/04/jared_kushner_and_ivanka_trump.html>
” gossip column speculation. The New York press branded them with the couple 
name “J-Vanka”, and their true relationship status was revealed when paparazzi 
photos spotted the pair “making out 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2007/05/oh_jvanka.html>” while bowling. 

After dating for two years, they married in October 2009, at a lavish wedding 
attended by 500 guests at her father’s private golf course in Bedminster, New 
Jersey. Before their marriage, Ivanka converted to Judaism. Her husband comes 
from a devout Orthodox Jewish family, and they are raising their children in 
the Jewish faith.

In some ways, Kushner, the grandson of Holocaust survivors and the son of a 
once-prominent Democratic donor, and Ivanka, a businesswoman who calls herself 
a feminist and runs in a decidedly liberal social circle, seem an unlikely pair 
to prop up a political campaign – and soon, a presidency – that has been 
assailed as nationalistic, misogynistic, racist and antisemitic.

How did ‘less than stellar’ high school student Jared Kushner get into 
Harvard? | Daniel Golden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/jared-kushner-harvard-donald-trump-son-in-law>
They both come from wealthy – and controversial – east coast real estate 
families. They attended elite schools – he went to Harvard (and was accepted 
after his fatherreportedly 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/the-story-behind-jared-kushners-curious-acceptance-into-harvard>
 donated $2.5m) and New York University; she went to Georgetown and Wharton.

The seeming contrast invited some friends and acquaintances to muse 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/08/22/ivanka-trump-and-jared-kushners-power-play>
 that perhaps they are going along with Donald Trump’s political project out of 
a sense of familial duty and despite their personal views. But those questions 
faded as Kushner’s role in the campaign became clearer – and more influential – 
and after Ivanka introduced her father at the Republican national convention as 
“color-blind and gender neutral”.

“They’re believers,” Reed Cordish, a friend of the couple, told 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/08/22/ivanka-trump-and-jared-kushners-power-play>
 the New Yorker in August. “They are all in. They have been all in from the 
get-go, without hesitation.”
 