
Jason Day <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jason-day> bucked the trend on 
Friday afternoon, completing his round in 70 to be the only man in the second 
half of the draw to finish with an under-par total.

Phil Mickelson marches on with Henrik Stenson hot on his heels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/15/the-open-2016-day-two-report-phil-mickelson>
The world No1, dressed in a short-sleeved polo shirt and waterproof bottoms by 
the end of his round, battled in the worst of the weather and after making 
bogey at the 1st produced four birdies on the front nine, the one at the 6th 
with a long snaking putt up the green to go level. He turned at three under for 
the day and came back in two over for a 70, three shots better than his first 
round, which somewhat bizarrely was played in weather more suited for scoring 
well.

“We totally expected to have conditions that were going to be difficult, but 
not to the point where it was blowing 30 to 40 miles an hour with winds and 
rain coming in sideways,” said Day, who is one over for the championship. “I 
think I went through four gloves during that little time span, and it was 
coming down pretty heavy on me. My weather gear is totally soaked now, and I’ve 
got to somehow dry it out before tomorrow.”

The reigning US PGA champion should not need nearly as much gear on day three 
as the forecast suggests it will be cloudy with bright spells, although quite 
cool in the morning. There is a also a chance of brighter spells in the early 
afternoon and light rain later on, when the leaders will be finishing off their 
third rounds.

Day added that he played through the Saturday downpour in the 2011 Open at 
Sandwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/jul/16/the-open-golf-sport> but 
said Friday’s conditions were the worst he had experienced. “I was at Royal St 
George’s going back a few years and it felt like the rain was coming up 
underneath the umbrella. But for the little time span we had of that [today], 
that was pretty atrocious.

Soren Kjeldsen revels in Open rain and wind to blow away age doubts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/15/soren-kjeldsen-the-open-rain-wind-royal-troon>
“I couldn’t get home at 15 unless I hit three wood, but it was a three-shot 
par four, which was fantastic. At five, the par three, I’m aiming out towards 
the ocean. I hit a nice five iron up there and it drew another 60 yards at 
least. The ball’s moving a ton when the wind’s up but that’s just part of the 
Open Championship. It’s great.”

Day also acknowledged that his side of the draw, playing Thursday morning and 
Friday afternoon, had been unlucky to experience the worst of the conditions on 
both days but he would not be unhappy to get more of the same over the weekend. 
“I was kind of hoping for days like this where it is harder and more tough 
conditions over the next two days for everyone,” he added. “That should be a 
lot of fun.

“It’s nice to be able to come into a day like this knowing that I need to play 
good golf, get on top of my game and shoot 70. Get myself back to making the 
cut. Hopefully over the next two days I can get myself back into contention. 
That would be nice. Obviously I’m sitting here 11 [shots] back, and that sounds 
like a long way back, but you just never know how things go. I’ve got to keep a 
positive attitude.”
 