
Jeremy Corbyn has accused George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> of delivering a budget 
with “unfairness at its very core” with corporations benefiting from “mates’ 
rates” in a series of tax deals.

In one of his strongest performances at the dispatch box, the Labour leader 
saidthe budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-george-osborne-sugar-tax-growth-forecast-falls>
 marked the culmination of six years of failure as he reeled off a series of 
targets the chancellor has missed.

Our columnists verdict on the 2016 budget | Anne Perkins Aditya Chakrabortty, 
Gaby Hinsliff,
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-columnists-verdict-george-osborne-sugar-leadership>
“The budget the chancellor has just delivered is actually the culmination of 
six years of his failures,” he said as the deputy speaker,Lindsay Hoyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/mar/22/lindsay-hoyle-deputy-speaker-budget>
, intervened to discourage Tory MPs from heckling him.

Corbyn went on: “It’s a recovery built on sand on a budget of failure. He’s 
failed on the budget deficit, failed on debt, failed on investment, failed on 
productivity, failed on trade deficit, failed on the welfare cap, failed to 
tackleinequality in this country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/18/poverty-inequality-uk-poorer-countries-sustainable-development-goals-climate-change-womens-rights>
.”

Many Labour MPs, some of whom have been highly critical of Corbyn, expected 
him to falter as he delivered his first response to a budget as leader of the 
opposition. But Wes Streeting, theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP for Ilford North, praised 
Corbyn’s performance and joked that he must have eaten his Weetabix.

The Labour leader stuck to a largely pre-prepared script as he sought to 
deliver two core messages – Osborne has failed to meet his own targets as 
chancellor and has presided over growing unfairness.

On the first theme, Corbyn said: “Today he’s announced growth is revised down 
last year, this year, every year he’s forecast. Business investment revised 
down, government investment revised down. It’s a very good thing that the 
chancellor is blaming the last government – he was the chancellor in the last 
government.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fjeremy-corbyn-budget-unfairness-labour-george-osborne-mates-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04643c36ecde3506585b219295a923306836bec7%2F0_5_3358_1821%2F3358.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20says%20budget%20has%20'unfairness%20at%20its%20very%20core'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fjeremy-corbyn-budget-unfairness-labour-george-osborne-mates-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20says%20budget%20has%20%27unfairness%20at%20its%20very%20core%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fjeremy-corbyn-budget-unfairness-labour-george-osborne-mates-rates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04643c36ecde3506585b219295a923306836bec7%2F0_5_3358_1821%2F3358.jpg>
 Cameron, Osborne and Theresa May look on as Corbyn delivers speech to Commons. 
Photograph: PA 
On the theme of unfairness, he said: “This budget has unfairness at its very 
core, paid for by those who can least afford it. He could not have made his 
priorities clearer – while half a millionpeople with disabilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/15/disability-cuts-cutbacks-destroy-independent-living-budget>
 are losing over £1bn in personal independence payments, corporation tax is 
being cut and billions handed out in tax cuts to the very wealthy.”

Corbyn focused on Osborne’s overall record, rather than examining specific 
details of the budget, as he lambasted the chancellor’s achievements during the 
past six years at the Treasury. The Labour leader pointed to what he described 
as a gulf between what the Tories expect from the wealthiest and from ordinary 
taxpayers, as he highlighted what have been labelledsweetheart tax deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/03/george-osborne-google-tax-labour>
.

Osborne’s centre-ground budget shows he has his eyes on the big prize | 
Matthew d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/16/george-osborne-centre-ground-budget-chancellor>
He said: “The mates’ rates deals for big corporations on tax deals is 
something they will be forever remembered for. This is a chancellor who has 
produced a budget for hedge fund managers more than for small businesses.”

Corbyn made a point of mocking some of the chancellor’s grand rhetoric of 
recent years. “Five years ago – and it was great words – he promised a Britain 
carried aloft by themarch of the makers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/march-of-the-makers-osbornes-economy-manufacturing-output>
. Soaring rhetoric. Despite the resilience, ingenuity and hard work of 
manufacturers, the manufacturing sector is now smaller than it was eight years 
ago.

“Last year he told the Conservative conference ‘we are the builders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/conservatives-party-builders-george-osborne-conference>
’. But ever since then the construction industry has been stagnating. This is 
the record of a Conservative chancellor who has failed to balance the books, 
failed to balance out the pain, failed to rebalance our economy.”

Corbyn did welcome one measure – Osborne’s announcement of a sugar levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/mar/16/osborne-announces-soft-drinks-sugar-tax-and-tax-free-personal-allowance-budget-highlights-video>
: “[The chancellor] spoke at some length on the issue of ill health amongst 
young children and the way in which sugar is consumed at such grotesque levels 
within our society. I agree with him about that. I welcome what he said.”
 