
We see aerial footage, captured late at night, of a road in a remote location 
lined with trees and shrubbery. On ground level a hand reaches for a spade in 
long grass. Synthesisers and low-pitched rumbles provide creepy sound effects. 
The colour palette is grim and washed out: lots of greys and a ghostly veneer.


The scene plays like something out of a horror movie or True Detective. Then 
the voice of a steely narrator kicks in: “It was a crime that shocked the 
nation. A young woman brutally raped and murdered by a violent criminal who 
should never have been on the streets.”

Jill Meagher murder could have been prevented, says coroner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/jill-meagher-could-have-been-prevented-says-coroner>
The voice belongs to John Silvester, a long-time crime reporter for the Age. 
This program, Conviction, airs on Tuesday night: an hourlong ABC documentary 
examining the2012 murder of the Melbourne journalist Jill Meagher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/jill-meagher-could-have-been-prevented-says-coroner>
 and the process to convicther killer, Adrian Bayley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/13/jill-meagher-murderer-adrian-bayleys-jail-term-cut-by-three-years-on-appeal>
.

That opening re-enactment is, if not sensational, certainly borderline. It’s 
the kind of intro Silvester himself tends to be wary of.

“As a rule I don’t like re-enactments. I think more often than not they can 
look cheap and nasty,” he says. “But, as you saw, the actual crime was not 
re-enacted. I also don’t pretend to be a television reporter. I don’t write 
scripts, I tend to just talk.”

On the beat since 1979, Silvester – the son of a former Victoria police 
assistant commissioner – has won three Walkley awards and published more than 
30 books. Some of them formed the foundation of the long-running Underbelly TV 
series. Directed, produced, shot and edited by Terry Carlyon, Conviction 
focuses largely on the investigators who – after an emotional, high-profile 
case – imprisoned a person many believe would have become a serial killer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjill-meagher-conviction-and-getting-the-detectives-who-hunted-her-killer-to-talk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6e8d4a70445d588ff9d0c55dafd189cd72d3e3%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jill%20Meagher%2C%20Conviction%20and%20getting%20the%20detectives%20who%20hunted%20her%20killer%20to%20talk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjill-meagher-conviction-and-getting-the-detectives-who-hunted-her-killer-to-talk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jill%20Meagher%2C%20Conviction%20and%20getting%20the%20detectives%20who%20hunted%20her%20killer%20to%20talk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjill-meagher-conviction-and-getting-the-detectives-who-hunted-her-killer-to-talk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6e8d4a70445d588ff9d0c55dafd189cd72d3e3%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 Two investigators on the Jill Meagher case, Paul Rowe and David Butler, on 
Sydney Road in Melbourne, where the ABC radio producer was last seen. 
Photograph: ABC 
Silvester and Carlyon previously collaborated on an ABC program documenting 
police shootings <http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/trigger-point/DO1132V001S00>
, which, Silvester believes, paved the way for police cooperation in 
Conviction: “I think senior police saw that [Trigger Point] as pretty fair and 
balanced so there was probably some brownie points there,” he says. But, during 
those early discussions, their involvement was anything but guaranteed.

“There was certainly debate at the highest level about whether [the police] 
would cooperate with us. Because, one, some of their members were truly 
traumatised by this death and the investigation,” Silvester says. “And, two, 
they were concerned about letting out secrets of the interview room. So there 
was a debate. But, when we sat down with them, these stern men in dark suits, 
it became abundantly clear they wanted to tell their story.”

Silvester believes the Meagher case struck such a nerve with the general 
public because “we are judgmental”.

Jill Meagher murderer Adrian Bayley's jail term cut by three years on appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/13/jill-meagher-murderer-adrian-bayleys-jail-term-cut-by-three-years-on-appeal>
“She was young and pretty and working in a good job with a nice husband. We 
tend to unconsciously value such people’s loss as greater than others. But it 
was also the fact that Jill was doing something all of us do: she was walking 
home from the pub. And that’s not the sort of Melbourne that we know.”

The journo-cum-narrator (also associate producer) describes the case as one 
that exposed fundamental flaws in the justice system. Silvester says Bayley 
should have been in jail for a previous offence but successfully appealed: not 
on the conviction but the length of the sentence.The parole system has 
subsequently tightened 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/state-politics/victoria-brings-in-stricter-parole-laws-after-jill-meagher-murder/story-e6frgczx-1226669510864>
, making Bayley one of the most hated criminals within it.

“This is not because of the romantic notion that oh, you killed a lovely woman 
so we hate you. It’s much more base than that,” he says. “The parole system was 
totally reviewed and it’s now just harder to get paroled. There’s a lot of 
crooks in jail who blame Bayley for that. The fact was, the parole board was 
chronically underfunded. They still used hard copy. You’d go in there and 
there’d be manilla folders. Files and files and files.”

At one point in Conviction we watch news footage of Jill’s husband, Tom Meagher
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/22/jill-meagher-husband-two-years>
, fronting the media to warn the public against sharing information about the 
accused online. Many outraged users on social media had established that the 
killer had a substantial criminal record.

But, when a person appears in court, their record is suppressed in order for 
the jury to deal with facts of the case rather than the history of the accused. 
Sharing information about Bayley could have benefited his legal team if they 
were to argue the course of justice had been perverted. And, while inspiring in 
its sentiment, a protest of 30,000 people arranged on social media, Silvester 
says, “would have been much more problematic if Bayley had decided to plead not 
guilty”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjill-meagher-conviction-and-getting-the-detectives-who-hunted-her-killer-to-talk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca477ce2607d4e78335a59d2a6c55bf0e705ab9d%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jill%20Meagher%2C%20Conviction%20and%20getting%20the%20detectives%20who%20hunted%20her%20killer%20to%20talk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjill-meagher-conviction-and-getting-the-detectives-who-hunted-her-killer-to-talk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jill%20Meagher%2C%20Conviction%20and%20getting%20the%20detectives%20who%20hunted%20her%20killer%20to%20talk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjill-meagher-conviction-and-getting-the-detectives-who-hunted-her-killer-to-talk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca477ce2607d4e78335a59d2a6c55bf0e705ab9d%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 ‘But when we sat down with them, these stern men in dark suits, it became 
abundantly clear they wanted to tell their story’: John Silvester (centre) 
interviews David Butler for Conviction. Photograph: ABC 
The veteran journalist is no stranger to suppressing information for the 
greater good; he says crime reporters deal with it all the time. To illustrate 
the point, Silvester uses the following hypothetical situation involving a 
murder investigation. The only real lead the police have is that the killer may 
have been driving an orange Commodore. Do you then report about the Commodore, 
understanding it increases the likelihood of the vehicle being destroyed?

“No. In that case you’d sit back and let it run out,” he says. “I think it’s 
pretty cowardly to say ‘if I don’t write it somebody else will’, because 
ultimately a lot of the stories you write blur into insignificance. Do you want 
to remember at the end, oh yeah, that murder was not solved because the orange 
Commodore was burnt?”

Somebody who has reported on crime for as long as Silvester, and with such a 
high profile, inevitably becomes known on both sides of the law. Silvester 
acknowledges there are people stewing on their grudges in prison “who probably 
have too much time on their hands” but says he’s “fairly relaxed about it”.

“I mean, put this into perspective. If I was running around being timid when 
I’m reporting on it, where would that place us [in comparison to] the 
investigators from the Purana taskforce? Or from the homicide squad who deal 
with these people routinely?

“You might be shitty the police didn’t turn up on time when your house got 
burgled. You might be shitty police pulled you over and you got a speeding 
ticket. But I reckon any balanced person sitting and watching Conviction would, 
at the end of it, turn around and say ‘I’m so happy they are out there doing 
this work for us’.”

• Conviction airs on the ABC on Tuesday 27 September at 8.30pm
 