
John Kerry has signalled that the outgoing Obama administration is preparing a 
fight to ensure that Donald Trump does notwithdraw the US from the landmark 
Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
, to prevent catastrophic climate change.

“This is bigger than one person, one president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change>
,” the US secretary of state said in Marrakech, before his last address to the 
UN climate summit being held there. “We have to figure out how we’re going to 
stop this.”

President Obama is walking a fine line before leaving office, between an 
imperative to staunch the threat that climate change poses to US and global 
interests, and the need to respect the results of last week’s US election.

In a speech that pulled few punches, Kerry made a detailed and often emotional 
plea to the incoming US president to listen to faith leaders, military chiefs, 
businessmen, activists and – above all – climate scientists, beforeabandoning 
future generations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
 to the ravages of climate change.

Trump administration could roll back US environmental protection, critics fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
“I ask you on behalf of billions of people around the world,” he said. “Do 
your own due diligence before making irrevocable choices.

“No-one has the right to make decisions that affect billions of people based 
solely on ideology or without proper input.”

Minutes before he spoke, the US released the first long-term climate strategy 
under the Paris agreement 
<http://newsroom.unfccc.int/paris-agreement/first-long-term-climate-strategy-submitted-to-un-under-paris-agreement?utm_content=buffer2019d&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
, offering a blueprint for reducing national emissions by 80% by 2050, measured 
against 2005 levels.

That presentation, like Kerry’s words, was given added urgency by the UN 
forecasting that2016 will very likely be the hottest year on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record-un-says>
, setting a new high for the third year running.

Kerry said: “This year will contribute to the hottest decade in human history, 
which was preceded by the second hottest decade, which was preceded by the 
third-hottest decade. At some point even the strongest climate sceptic has to 
acknowledge that something is happening.”

In a meeting across from the room that Kerry spoke in, business leaders added 
their weight to the calls for the Paris agreement to be protected.
Paris explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=e0baea36-2bf8-4f56-8f46-ef7c35de261b>
Kevin Rabinovitch, the global sustainability director for Mars Inc, said: “We 
are a food business. We have supply chains all over the world and at the base 
of every business is a farm, which is exposed to the climate. Since climate 
change affects the raw materials we buy, we are affected by it and if we don’t 
prevent the consequences that have been predicted, they will have a real impact 
for our business.”

Kerry held out some hope of continued progress to slow climate change, 
outlining the unparalleled growth of the US renewable energy industry since 
Obama’s 2008 poll victory, citing a tripling of wind power since 2008, and a 
30-fold increase in solar capacity.


But he stressed that with new coal plants coming online in Asia and other 
parts of the world, the impressive gains made by renewables – starting from a 
low baseline – would not be enough to prevent a climatic disaster.

“The question now is not whether we will transition to a clean energy economy. 
That, we are already beginning to do,” Kerry told the packed hall. “But whether 
we will have the will to get this job done – whether we will make the 
transition in time ... to prevent catastrophic damage.”

“I’m not a Cassandra, but I am a realist,” he added. “Time is not on our side.”

Coal is still responsible for 30% of the world’s energy production, and 50% of 
its emissions, while renewables still only provide just over a tenth of the 
world’s power, Kerry noted.

His address was peppered with implicit and explicit references to the climate 
sceptic Trump. He said that government leadership was “absolutely essential” to 
the clean power transformation, and hinted that Trump’s promise to withdraw 
from the Paris climate pact might be tempered with the realities of office.

“I have learned that some issues look a bit different when you are in office, 
compared to when you’re on the campaign trail,” he said. “The truth is that 
climate change should not be a partisan issue in the first place.”


With a flourish, Kerry finished his address with a reference to his decision 
to carry his two-year-old granddaughter on to the stage to sign the Paris 
agreement. “Let us make clear to the world we will always remember the stakes. 
Let us stay clear to the goals made in Paris and redouble our efforts to meet 
them,” he said.

Delegates jumped to their feet for a spontaneous two minute standing ovation, 
in a collective release of emotion by delegates who remain uncertain and 
fearful at the prospect of a Trump presidency.

In London, the world’s leading energy watchdog warned that promises by Trump 
to revive the fortunes of the US coal industry may be doomed to failure.

The International Energy Agency (IEA), in its annual World Energy Outlook 
<https://www.iea.org/newsroom/news/2016/november/world-energy-outlook-2016.html>
, found that coal was “at an inflexion point” with a marked decline in 
consumption in the biggest market, China.

Fatih Birol, executive director of the IEA, told the Guardian in an interview: 
“Coal is losing ground because it is losing competitiveness. In the US gas is 
cheaper than coal.”

It would take major policy shifts to change these economics, he said. “Gas 
will be a very economic option [for decades] unless there are new government 
policies and new fiscal measures to change the balance.”

Birol issued a veiled warning to Trump that policy should be based on the 
realities of the energy sector: “We give the same advice to all leaders across 
the world: making decisions about the energy sector needs good information and 
an overview of developments, including technological improvements. Any decision 
making, in my view, needs to look at the latest data across the sector very 
carefully.”

He added: “Decisions taken [by governments] about the energy sector have very 
long lasting implications, and not just for this sector, but across the whole 
economy, and they have environmental and social impacts.”
 