
Less than five days after being helped from the pitch in pain and obvious 
distress with a damaged adductor muscle, Johnny Sexton was on Friday named in 
the starting XV to playArgentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> 
on Sunday. The surprising thing was that the news came as no surprise.

As early as Tuesday, when the Irish list of casualties growing at an alarming 
rate, the defence coach, Les Kiss, gave the broadest of hints that, given 
Sunday’s quarter final was knock out rugby and that Ireland had never been 
further, he would probably be pressed into action.

A day later another assistant coach, Greg Feek, reported that the 30-year-old 
fly-half had run more than 3kms before a statement from Mick Kearney, the team 
manager, on Thursday suggested that Ireland would start on Sunday with the same 
back division thatbegan the brutal pool match with France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/11/france-ireland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 which brought anend to the Test career of the Irish captain, Paul O’Connell  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/13/paul-oconnell-injury-ireland-world-cup>
and of the flanker Peter O’Mahony’s World Cup.

Nicolás Sánchez back at fly-half for Argentina’s quarter final with Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/16/nicolas-sanchez-fly-half-argentina-quarter-final-ireland>
On Friday Joe Schmidt, the head coach, added his rubber stamp saying: Sexton 
“trained fully this morning and we believe he is ready to go,” before 
suggesting that before kick off on Sundaythere was time for further improvement.

“We don’t take too many risks with injured players,” insisted Schmidt before 
saying Sexton had eased off on his kicking practice. “He kicked a bit yesterday 
and he kicked a bit today, but not as much as he usually would.” Only much 
later did Schmidt add: “He did everything required of an adductor.”

Given that Sexton’s kicking, both tactically and for points is central to 
Ireland’s game plan, Schmidt’s remarks seemed to suggest that he is giving his 
play maker as much time as possible to mend before facing a side which has 
often undermined Ireland.

In 1999 the Pumas announced themselves as a world power by beating Ireland in 
Lens, the surprise result of that tournament, and repeated their victory eight 
years later in Paris in a game which saw the end of Ireland’s shambolic 
campaign and the start of a period of rancour between the sides which included 
Argentinian allegations of bad sportsmanship and Irish claims of eye gouging.

This time Schmidt’s side face an Argentine side which gave the All Blacks the 
hurry-up for an hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/new-zealand-argentina-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 and which is playing some of the most expansive rugby in its history. They 
still have a big scrum and an efficient kicking game on to which their coach, 
Daniel Hourcade, has added an attack which has so far scored 22 tries and 
registered more points than any other team in the pool stages.

According to Schmidt, who has brought in Iain Henderson for O’Connell, Jordi 
Murphy for O’Mahony and Chris Henry for the banned flanker Sean O’Brien, 
Argentina are packed with talent from front to back. “You know this is a good 
back row when there isn’t room for [Juan Manuel] Leguizamón, even on the bench. 
And I do fear those back three. Their footwork is incredible.”

There was also time for the Kiwi to dismiss rumours that he had been 
approached to be England’s next coach. “I don’t know where that come from,” said
Schmidt, who has recently signed an extension to his Irish contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/22/joe-schmidt-ireland-contract-extension-2017>
.

“Personally I’m a fan of Stuart Lancaster and what he’s trying to do. I enjoy 
talking to him before and after matches, but I won’t be going after his job.”

Ireland Kearney; Bowe, Earls, Henshaw, Kearney; Sexton, Murray; Healy, Best, 
Ross; Toner, Henderson; Murphy, Henry, Heaslip (capt).Replacements Strauss, 
McGrath, White, Ryan, Ruddock, Reddan, Madigan, Fitzgerald.

Argentina Tuculet; Cordero, Moroni, Hernández, Imhoff; Sánchez, Landajo; 
Senatore, Fernández Lobbe, Matera, Lavanini, Petti, Herrera, Creevy (capt), 
Ayerza.Replacements Montoya, Noguera, Orlandi, Alemanno, Isa, Cubelli, De La 
Fuente, González Amorosino.
 