
Golfers tend to look upon world rankings as a consequence of success rather 
than a key incentive. Still, some figures leap out; Luke Donald a lowly 77th, 
Hideki Matsuyama at a career high of No6 and, suddenly,Jordan Spieth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jordan-spieth> shuffled down to No5.

How did this happen to Spieth? Only 12 months ago he had claimed two of the 
year’s four majors and taken possession of the FedEx Cup. Even Jason Day’sUS 
PGA Championship victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/17/jason-day-jordan-spieth-us-pga-whistling-straits>
 was insufficient to shift Spieth v McIlroy as the rivalry of choice. Perhaps 
commentators were a little too anxious to create the sense of dual detachment 
at the top. Maybe they just got the names wrong.

Padraig Harrington says Turkey’s troubles will make fans more welcoming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/padraig-harrington-turkey-troubles-fans-golf-rory-mcilroy>
Few could have predicted what happened next aside, perhaps, from Day’s 
continuation of his stunning form up to this year’s Masters. Spieth himself 
could not have legislated for Dustin Johnson finally coming of agewith a US 
Open triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/dustin-johnson-first-major-us-open>
 and Henrik Stenson’simperious march to the Open Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/henrik-stenson-phil-mickelson-open>
. McIlroy did not take delivery of a 2016 major but is still ranked above 
Spieth once more,at No2 <http://www.owgr.com/ranking>. 
Day-McIlroy-Johnson-Stenson-Spieth is the order of the leading ranking quintet.

Spieth would rightly balk at the suggestion he is yesterday’s man. His year 
was affected in no small part by a tiring – if lucrative – tour of the 
continents last winter, for which his management company need to take a share 
of blame. It is not as if Spieth will not have 20 years in which to rack up 
appearance fees. Interestingly, he was not in the field for the WGC-HSBC event 
in China last week which, while understandable on the grounds of past 
experiences, was a shame for what is a blossoming tournament.

Even when he is tearing up record books, onlookers tend to forget his relative 
youth; Spieth is still only 23. Had he continued at the rate of winning two 
majors per season, he would have set himself apart as a golfing phenomenon even 
beyond the scale of Jack Nicklaus or Tiger Woods. Even in this, a relatively 
lean year, Spieth still returned two PGA Tour titles and competed on other 
occasions.

Nonetheless, it is difficult to argue that fifth in the world is 
representative of Spieth’s talent. It is also tricky to separate this entire 
situation from a Sunday afternoon in Georgia, where Spieth’s hopes of defending 
the Masters wereended in such a calamitous fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-masterrs-2016-jordan-spieth-lee-westood>
. Spieth will not admit it, of course, but inevitable psychological scarring 
inflicted by what transpired around Amen Corner will not be removed until he is 
a major champion once more. Had he won another Green Jacket, who knows what 
further glories would have resulted. Instead, Augusta remains a wounding point 
of reference.

Spieth insists it was a technical flaw on the 12th hole of that Masters 
Sunday. This is intriguing, given the widely-held suspicion that Spieth’s swing 
is not robust enough to ensure winning longevity. The argument may well be 
overstated; Nicklaus, like Spieth, had plenty of moving parts when club met 
golf ball. The notion that Spieth’s success has been entirely due to putting 
can certainly be contradicted by the fact his statistics for that area of play 
were actually better in 2016 than 2015.

Tiger Woods to make comeback at Hero World Challenge in December
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/tiger-woods-comeback-golf-hero-world-challenge>
The wider point relates to Spieth’s handling of increased pressure, not 
primarily from expectant fans but from himself. He is not the first to discover 
epic years cannot readily be backed up by more of the same. It makes this 
winter a key one for him, as he looks to even discover middle ground between 
the glory of 2015 and the relative struggles of 2016. At the Ryder Cup, despite 
beingpart of a successful USA team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
, Spieth was outshone by Patrick Reed and cut a rather withdrawn figure. He 
looked a player in need of fresh impetus and direction.

Spieth will appear at this month’s Australian Open, the scene in 2014 of one 
of his finest ever rounds. The 63 to secure a six-shot win, in fact, has not 
been routinely bettered anywhere in golf. It is inevitable Spieth will shoot 
himself back into prominence before too long; for now, onlookers should 
appreciate the depth of talent in this sport which means one so brilliant, and 
recently dominant, is only ranked at No5. Spieth may well use it all as 
motivation.
 