
Wayne Rooney says José Mourinho has already created a winning mentality at 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> to 
boost the confidence of a team who have lacked such belief in recent years.

Marouane Fellaini rescues fan caught in crush during Manchester United 
celebrations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/28/marouane-fellaini-manchester-united-supporter-crushed-hull-city>
Mourinho’s United side secured their third successive victory of the new 
Premier League seasonat Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/hull-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday evening –Marcus Rashford scoring an injury-time winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/27/hull-city-v-manchester-united-premier-league-live>
 – and go into the international break joint top of the fledgling table.

The ill feeling that was evident around Old Trafford during much of Louis van 
Gaal’s reign as manager appears to have lifted before the derby against 
Manchester City on 10 September. Rooney, who created Rashford’s late goal with 
a fine run and pass from the byline, praised the impact that Mourinho had made 
in such a short space of time and said it had been crucial for United to start 
the season well after their struggles in the years sinceSir Alex Ferguson’s 
retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/08/alex-ferguson-retires-manchester-united>
.

“You look at the years when José won the title at Chelsea, they always started 
well, but I think the way it’s been for us the last two or three seasons, it 
was important for us as a team,” Rooney said. “José has brought that experience 
in, that winning mentality again. That’s showing in the players and it’s maybe 
lacked over the last couple of years.

“It’s early but you want to try to build momentum and especially going into 
the international break. To go there with three wins is important and with the 
next game being Man City it was a big win for us, even though it’s so early in 
the season. We know whatever happens against City isn’t going to define the 
season but it’s always nice to go into that break with the three wins.

“It’s a game players, staff, media, fans, everyone will be looking forward to. 
It’s a Manchester derby but also with José and Pep Guardiola at Man City. It’s 
exciting for everyone and exciting to play in.”

Rooney’s position in the United team has come under question this season. The 
30-year-old had not enjoyed the best of games at Hull before producing a 
telling piece of play in the dying moments to set up Rashford for a tap-in.

Mourinho praised the England captain’s display, insisting Rooney is not immune 
to being substituted but that his presence on the pitch until injury time was a 
tactical decision. “I can take him out. It’s no problem for me to take him out, 
no problem for him to be out,” he said.

“But I was just reading the game and feeling that playing with the two 
strikers, Marcus and Zlatan [Ibrahimovic], I needed [Henrikh] Mkhitaryan and 
Rooney just inside because the full-backs were the ones playing really wide on 
the touchline.

“I didn’t need wingers because at this moment the wingers were [Antonio] 
Valencia and Luke Shaw, so instead of wingers I needed people to play inside in 
that position and I know that he’s the guy with the vision for an assist and a 
feeling for the ball, and that he could perfectly be important, like he was.”
 