
Australia’s resources minister has predicted India’s demand for coal will 
increase, even as some analysts warned him against relying on “overly bullish” 
forecasts.


In a speech in Canberra, Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg> said China – which 
is undergoing an economic transition – was “not the only game in town” and 
strong economic growth in India would drive increased demand for Australian 
resources.

India is seeking to increase its own domestic coal production and also boost 
its reliance on renewable energy. Frydenberg acknowledged global demand for 
coal would fall as a percentage of the overall energy mix from 40% now to 30% 
in 2040, but saidIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> would become 
the largest coal importer in the world by 2020.

Coal price won't improve for years and mining downturn will last: professor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/09/coal-price-wont-improve-for-years-and-mining-downturn-will-last-professor>
Frydenberg said absolute demand for energy in Asia was rising because of 
dramatic increases in population, urbanisation and a rising middle class.

“The reality is that there will be significant demand for our energy and 
minerals going forward and this forms the basis for long-term optimism for 
these sectors of Australian industry,” he told the National Press Club on 
Tuesday.

“Consider this: today India has 18% of the world’s population but represents 
only 6% of global energy use.”


Last week, Frydenberg met with the Indian minister for coal, power and 
renewable energy, Piyush Goyal, who haspreviously suggested the country could 
stop importing thermal coal by 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/08/voters-coalition-seats-back-global-ban-new-coalmines-poll>
 except to supply coastal plants.

When asked on Tuesday to reconcile India’s ambitious target with his own rosy 
outlook, Frydenberg said there was a “real market for Australian coal, which is 
low in sulphur, low in ash”. He said when considered alongside “still evolving” 
carbon capture and storage technology, “the picture for coal is not one-sided”.

“When it comes to India, Goyal has made very clear that they still will need 
to import coal, they are looking for clean coal, or cleaner, that Australia has 
an important part to play,” Frydenberg said.

“We export $5bn worth of coal annually to them. It is their real key form of 
baseload power. They are investing in renewables, and that’s a fantastic story, 
but if they are going to expand the grid, the way to do that, he made it very 
clear, is coal and Australian coal has a role to play.

“I got the clarification that he will need Australian coal for some time to 
come.”

Pressed on whether that demand would increase, Frydenberg said: “Based on the 
arithmetic I have seen 
<http://www.industry.gov.au/Office-of-the-Chief-Economist/Publications/Documents/Coal-in-India.pdf>
, I think it will.”

But Tim Buckley, the director of energy finance studies at the pro-renewables 
Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis <http://ieefa.org/about/>
, urged the government to tread cautiously.

Adani freezes investment in Carmichael mine until world coal price recovers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/04/adani-freezes-investment-in-carmichael-mine-until-world-coal-price-recovers>
“Josh Frydenberg’s general disposition is very bullish for Australian coal but 
several of his points are factually inconsistent with the existing data,” said 
Buckley, a financial markets expert.

“For example, he doesn’t clarify the distinction between India’s increasing 
reliance on coking coal imports versus the declining Indian reliance on 
imported thermal coal, which is down 15% year on year.”

Buckley said while four-fifths of India’s coal usage comprised thermal coal, 
or the type used in power plants, just 20% comprised coking coal, or the type 
used in steel production. This meant that coal imports were likely to 
experience an overall decline, with India aiming to double its domestic thermal 
coal production by 2020.

“Energy minister Goyal has made it very clear his top priorities are driving 
improvement in grid efficiency, energy efficiency, solar, wind, hydo capacity 
expansions and a diversification away from coal over time,” Buckley said.

During his speech, Frydenberg also indicated the government was looking at 
ways to support mineral exploration in Australia, including using Geoscience 
Australia’s technical expertise to map deposits near the surface and to depths 
of hundreds of metres.

Frydenberg waded into industrial relations, saying the government wanted to 
“restore some balance” to union right-of-entry laws because officials had, in 
some cases, made hundreds of site visits over a short period of time.
 