

I haven’t always been a Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> supporter: there was a 
time before I could read, or knew how to tune the Bakelite wireless to the 
voice of Raymond Glendenning on Sports Report. But from the moment I became 
sportingly sentient – say, the age of five or six – I have been (as they didn’t 
much say then) a Fox. So, six and a half decades and counting. I did, 
initially, support a second team – Partick Thistle, from the grittier end of 
Glasgow. But that was because my infant mind believed they were called Patrick 
Thistle, and my middle name is Patrick. I eventually stopped supporting Thistle 
– such is the strange, irrational adhesiveness of fandom – when I was about 40; 
though of course I still instinctively check their results in my Sunday 
newspaper. But apart from this dalliance, I have been entirely monogamous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3dd485b49fbb6e5e463050bf85745d069feb1bd%2F258_252_2645_1959%2F2645.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3dd485b49fbb6e5e463050bf85745d069feb1bd%2F258_252_2645_1959%2F2645.jpg>
 Julian Barnes. Photograph: Roberto Ricciuti/Getty Images 
 Support for Leicester has been fashionable this season, of course: how many 
times have sympathetic voices spoken the words, “We are all Foxes now.” And 
generally, it’s been heartfelt, as was the thumbs-up from my Kurdish 
greengrocer after he invited me to confess my football allegiance over a 
plastic basket of veg. We are all Foxes now: that’s to say, this season 
Leicester became most football supporters’ second team; if their own lot 
couldn’t take the title, then better Leicester than some hated and despised 
rival. “Yes, I’ve been supporting the Foxes this season,” my friend Rachel 
Cooke confided. “I mean, after Sunderland, and then the Blades, of course, and 
Liverpool.” But it’s more than just a passing sentimental indulgence. Fandom 
routinely consists of a swirling mix of stupid love, howling despair and 
frantic self-loathing; but Leicester have also brought into violent focus what 
other supporters think of their own teams and managers. A long-standing Arsenal 
fan emailed me a couple of months ago – when everything could still have gone 
terribly, terribly wrong for Leicester – with his ideal scenario. “I hope you 
win,” he wrote. “And when you do, I hope that Arsenal fans, thinking of the 
£125,000 a week squandered on Per Mertesacker and Theo Walcott, will march on 
the Emirates and burn it down.” Well, I shan’t feel responsible if that happens.

 There are other reasons why “We are all Foxes now.” For a start, there is 
absolutely zero chance of Leicester winning the title again next year: it will 
be back to big money, big-city teams, Pep Guardiola, perhaps Mourinho, and so 
on. The Big Five (or Six) will once again be in charge. So we offer no 
long-term threat. But it is also because Leicester embody a kind of football – 
and ethos – which still speaks to the inner squaddie of most fans. They are – 
or at least, they seem to be – selfless, highly industrious, unbigheaded, 
romantically all-for-one-and-one-for-all, and prepared to scrap till the last 
minute of added time: the puritan virtues dressed in blue. They don’t have a 
bloated bench of internationals. They don’t rotate because there isn’t that 
much in the dressing room to rotate. They were all very cheap to buy: Riyad 
Mahrez, the players’ player of the year, cost £400,000 when he arrived from Le 
Havre (whereas Manchester United are currently about to spend £46m on a 
Portuguese midfielder). And – another item of appeal to the romantic – the 
Foxes are proving that there are such things as second acts in the life of a 
footballer; in some cases, even third and fourth acts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F007c59b080cf743d99417e8417418786532e1e44%2F0_0_5568_3712%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F007c59b080cf743d99417e8417418786532e1e44%2F0_0_5568_3712%2F5568.jpg>
 A large projection of Leicester striker Jamie Vardy is seen on the side of a 
building. Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
 To be a lifelong supporter of Leicester is to have spent decades poised 
between mild hopefulness and draining disappointment. You learn to cultivate a 
shrugging ruefulness, to become familiar with the patronising nods of London 
cabbies, and to cling to an assortment of memories, of pluses and minuses, some 
comic, some less so. Yes, we have won promotion to the top division every so 
often; but the fact of promotion logically implies an earlier relegation. Yes, 
we did win the League Cup; but what burns the soul are the four times we 
reached the FA Cup final and the four times we lost. When asked to name my 
three sharpest Leicester memories, they are of varied texture: a pathetically 
heroic Len Chalmers, in the days before substitutes were allowed, hobbling 
around in an FA Cup final against Spurs back in the black-and-white days (he 
played 60 minutes with a broken leg, whereas today’s softies collapse from the 
mildest case of ingrowing toenail); Keith Weller’s hilariously unstoppable own 
goal, volleyed from near the half-way line, a clip of which used to be part of 
Match of the Day’s introductory collage; and the moment, deep into extra time, 
when we beat Crystal Palace in the play-offs at Wembley in 1996. I was seated 
among tiers of incredulous Palace fans as Steve Claridge shinned the ball in 
from a distance of at least several inches. Yes, there have been some fine 
managers, glorious moments, and players like Banks, Shilton and Lineker. But 
more typically I think of that year not so long ago, when, weeks into the 
season, the team’s leading scorer was one of our defenders – with three own 
goals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F015b832eee270a7446b83b97e522c1f7058860bb%2F196_158_5326_3520%2F5326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F015b832eee270a7446b83b97e522c1f7058860bb%2F196_158_5326_3520%2F5326.jpg>
 Leicester City fans celebrate in their cars after their team’s improbable 
title win. Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
I long ago learnt to rationalise the situation. “Yes, Leicester City,” I would 
answer for the thousandth time. “But you see, supporting Leicester is very good 
training for supporting England. You get hardened to the disappointment, so it 
doesn’t hurt as much.” Actually, it probably hurts just as much when, every two 
years, England go out in the quarter-finals of this tournament, the preliminary 
rounds of that, or fail to qualify altogether. Which raises a dangerously 
alluring proposition. If Leicester can win thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, why shouldn’t England win 
the Euros on 10 July? There are good reasons, of course – called Germany, 
Spain, Italy and France – but then there were good reasons (Man City and 
United, Chelsea, Arsenal and Spurs) why the Foxes could never end up on top of 
the heap and king of the castle. And that’s another thing I’ve been noticing 
this season: that it’s impossible to talk about football except in cliches. 
This is not just the default linguistic position; it’s the only one. And so, 
all those phrases have come tumbling out of my mouth. “It’s been a 
roller-coaster of a season.” “It’s a massive six-pointer.” “They left 
absolutely everything out there on the pitch.” “I just hope we can dig out a 
result.” “We’re hoping the Blues will do us a favour on Monday night.” Not to 
mention all the reynardine stuff about the flying Foxes and the Fox in the box. 
When asked, “Are you still Dreaming the Dream?” I would automatically reply, 
“Yes, but I’m also beginning to Feel the Fear.” Still, everyone in football, 
apart from Eric Cantona, speaks the same way. Verbally, it’s a truly democratic 
sport.

Leicester’s title win: when our writers realised they had got it wrong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/06/leicester-premier-league-title-win-writers-got-it-wrong>
 Another of the season’s pleasures has been to see the professional 
sportswriters – and yes, let’s not forget to call them “pundits” – get it all 
so wrong. As the Guardian, with touching masochism, admitted in February, its 
football writers had jointly predicted at the start of the season that 
Leicester would finish 19th of the 20 teams in the Premier League. Unabashed, 
they continued on with their predicting: five of these eight house sages now 
decreed that the Foxes would definitely go on to win the title. Such confidence 
was, of course, extremely troubling to a Leicester supporter. Even more 
troubling were those statistical analyses which proved, either by historical 
comparison or analysis of upcoming fixtures, that Leicester were logically 
bound to win.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6088e2da20d0279c7ad6cee18ab838b8096a1442%2F0_51_4152_2597%2F4152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6088e2da20d0279c7ad6cee18ab838b8096a1442%2F0_51_4152_2597%2F4152.jpg>
 The crowd go wild after Leonardo Ulloa’s late winner against Norwich City on 
27 February. Photograph: Plumb Images/Getty Images 
 For most of the time since we went top of the Premier League, I was fairly 
phlegmatic about the likelihood of eventual failure. But as the run-in 
approached, my behaviour began to show the nerves my team seemed immune to – 
yes indeed, I was Feeling the Fear. I got snappy when people started saying, by 
way of advance consolation, “But you know, even if they don’t do it, it’s still 
been an amazing season.” No, it won’t have been, I silently replied. And I knew 
how much I really, really wanted Leicester to win when I saw them lose at the 
Emirates (disgraceful ref, of course) and then scramble a 1-0 victory at 
Crystal Palace.

 My attitude towards learning the results also changed. Traditionally I 
operate a news blackout on results from Saturday and Sunday teatimes until 
Match of the Day, occasionally becoming enraged when some football-loving 
“friend” poisons those hours of anticipation with an email headed 
“congratulations on another win” or “it was never a sending-off”. But as the 
spring advanced, I found myself checking the results immediately after the 
game. And then, unprecedentedly, following the live text-feed. I think watching 
a live feed is far worse than watching a live match. That awful minute-or-so’s 
delay between action you know has already taken place and the arrival of words 
to describe it allows for all kinds of foreboding. So, a key match at home to 
West Ham. 1-0, second half. Cruising, obviously – we never let a 1-0 lead get 
away from us nowadays. Then the slipping chug of the text-feed suddenly turned 
blue. Vardy sent off! What! Penalty! What! 1-1. Choker! In a blink, 1-2. 
Despair! Just a few minutes of added time. Oh well, make a cup of tea. Come 
back to more sudden blue. Penalty!!!!! 2-2. 10-man Foxes dig out a result! The 
Dream is still alive! What a peltingly dramatic match that had been to read.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed366eb52d2b6609ad9ad932df88289c40adb977%2F0_0_5275_3166%2F5275.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20my%20stupid%20Leicester%20City%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fjulian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed366eb52d2b6609ad9ad932df88289c40adb977%2F0_0_5275_3166%2F5275.jpg>
 Ulloa scores the last-minute penalty to give Leicester a 2-2 draw during the 
Leicester City v West Ham United match on 17 April. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for 
the Guardian 
 A few weeks ago, as the sharp-shirted buzzards of Match of the Day 
contemplated the season’s run-in, Alan Shearer recalled the time he won the 
title with the last “unfashionable” club to do so, Blackburn Rovers. Like 
Leicester, they had seemed to be moving effortlessly towards the title; but in 
the last weeks jitteriness took hold, until in the end, as Shearer put it, “We 
fell over the line.” This seemed an all too plausible parallel, and, being a 
realist (ie pessimist), I naturally pushed the prediction further: the Foxes 
would fall not over but just before the line, trampled into the May mud by 
Harry Kane and company. But that didn’t happen either. When Leicester took the 
title, it was with a lead of seven points and two games to go. There are going 
to be a lot of little boys in Leicester over the next few years bearing the 
names of Kasper and Wes and Robert and Danny and Riyad and Jamie, I can tell 
you.

 The team did it; Ranieri did it; Pearson began it all; the fans did it; the 
owners helped. Even Richard III is being given some talismanic credit for the 
spectacular change of fortune. But I would also like to claim a small assist 
myself. In March of last year, when the Foxes were mired at bottom of the table 
and seemingly bereft of all hope, I found myself in Santiago de Compostela. 
Behind the cathedral’s high altar is a gilt and bejewelled life-size bust of 
Saint James, reached from either side by a set of steps. Apparently it is 
traditional for hopeful and credulous petitioners to embrace the saint from 
behind while making a wish. This is not my kind of thing at all. But then it 
was explained that before setting off for each World Cup or European 
Championship, the Spanish squad climbs the steps, embraces the bust, and asks 
the saint for victory. So, in fully ironic mode, I gave old James a hug and 
requested him to ensure that Leicester City escaped relegation. As I came down 
the other side, I said to him under my breath, “And if you can do that, I might 
have to believe in you.” When the season ended with the Foxes not just safe but 
lower-mid-table, I felt a certain moral queasiness. And now look what he’s gone 
and done: talk about Saint James the Over-Deliverer. In which case – and this 
might be pushing our theological luck – there is the small matter of the 
Champions League next season. Then I’d really believe in you.

 * This article was amended on 7 May 2016. An earlier version stated that 
Holland were one of the reasons England may not win the Euros on 10 July. The 
Dutch national team did not qualify for Euro 2016. This has been corrected.
 