
There is only one story around the world at the moment, splashed across front 
pages and leading news bulletins: the former-bankrupt millionaire turned 
reality television star turned pussy-grabber turned president of the United 
States.


Donald Trump seems to have permeated everything, so it should come as no 
surprise that his name would come up in a conversation aboutQueen Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/queen-victoria>. Australian journalist and 
commentator Julia Baird’s 696-page book about the monarch has just been 
released, and when she meets me she has just wrapped up an interview with the 
national broadcaster about her impressions of the president-elect, who she 
joined for a New York Times editorial board meeting in January.

Victoria: The Queen <http://www.juliabaird.me/books/> began germinating in 
2008, when Hillary Clinton lost the democratic nomination to Barack Obama. 
Baird carried the idea with her as she followed Clinton’s ascension to 
secretary of state and Democratic nominee before the eventual defeat – a defeat 
which Baird partly attributes toClinton’s gender. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/donald-trump-woman-hillary-clinton-presidential-debate>

ITV didn’t need to embellish Queen Victoria’s life – it was wild enough already
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/03/itv-didnt-need-to-embellish-queen-victoria-life>
“I do wonder about the part the strong queens of England have played in the 
[nation’s] psyche towards the acceptance of women in politics, and what kind of 
women. We’ve got Margaret Thatcher, we’ve got Theresa May, yet still today 
America cannot vote in Hillary Clinton,” Baird says over a salad. We’re sitting 
in a cafe down the road from the ABC, where she hosts news analysis TV showThe 
Drum. <http://www.abc.net.au/news/analysis-and-opinion/>

Baird believes having strong female monarchs such as Victoria and Elizabeth II 
helped British people become comfortable with women in power.“Victoria was so 
tough and stubborn and sometimes rude, and refused to accept defeat. Refused to 
be told what to do,” she says. “She was micro reported on every second of the 
day and she behaved how she wanted to behave. That was quite different – she 
would’ve been a ‘nasty woman’ in Trumpian terms, without a doubt.”

When Baird set out to write Victoria, she wanted to examine how the queen 
wielded power during her reign and how far – or little it seems – our 
acceptance of powerful women has come. The book chronicles Victoria’s life, but 
unlike other histories of the queen it charts her role as an “incredibly 
powerful working mother”, and explores how she managed her nine pregnancies and 
raising children while the monarch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fjulia-baird-queen-victoria-would-have-been-a-nasty-woman-in-trumpian-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb89602ef272175a641aa79a4a63f97aadf0b3235%2F0_0_1869_2362%2F1869.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julia%20Baird%3A%20Queen%20Victoria%20would%20have%20been%20a%20'nasty%20woman'%20in%20Trumpian%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fjulia-baird-queen-victoria-would-have-been-a-nasty-woman-in-trumpian-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julia%20Baird%3A%20Queen%20Victoria%20would%20have%20been%20a%20%27nasty%20woman%27%20in%20Trumpian%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fjulia-baird-queen-victoria-would-have-been-a-nasty-woman-in-trumpian-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb89602ef272175a641aa79a4a63f97aadf0b3235%2F0_0_1869_2362%2F1869.jpg>
 Queen Victoria, aged four (oil on panel), by Stephan Poyntz Denning 
(1795-1864). ‘Victoria was a short tempered and defiant girl,’ writes Baird. 
‘She hated sitting still, hating taking medicine, and hated being told what to 
do.’ Photograph: Bridgeman Images/Harper Collins 
Baird says she was not particularly interested in royal history when she began 
the book, but after spending a year reading about Victoria was astounded by the 
myths the queen had been buried under, and the caricature she had become. In 
Baird’s words, she want to rescue Victoria from history.

The queen, of course, did not earn her title – although Baird would argue she 
fought for it. Instead, she was born to the right parents at the right time.


Baird contrasts Victoria’s indulged way of life with tales of what was going 
on beyond the palace walls: children being sexually assaulted in coalmines, 
pantless because of the heat; England’s ambivalence towards the the Irish 
famine, in which more than one million people starved. Victoria is depicted in 
the book as sympathetic to the plight of the working class – she donated the 
equivalent of roughly £200,000 in today’s money to the Irish. But it is likely 
she donated more to animal shelters over her lifetime.

My ‘insane’ Uncle Ed tried to kill Queen Victoria – he was treated with 
kindness | Penny Pepper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/insane-queen-victoria-kindness-bedlam-mental-healthcare>
She may have been born into “the madness of inherited power”, but that doesn’t 
make her reign any less interesting, says Baird. “Because we’ve had few women 
elected by popular vote to lead, it’s very instructive and interesting to look 
at the women who inherited [power],” she says. Besides, many elected leaders – 
most of them men – are born into power as well.

“There’s a fundamental thread running through western cultural thinking about 
the incompatibility of woman and power – that it’s surprising, that it’s 
secondary, that it only ever comes from someone else, under someone else’s 
tutelage or relation ... that it’s somehow less authoritative, [that their bad 
behaviour is] worse than others,” Baird says.

There’s a fundamental thread running through western cultural thinking about 
the incompatibility of woman and power
Julia Baird 
“What we often fail to portray is the incredible complexity of women in 
powerful roles, and what we’re capable of. [This is] largely because we are so 
blinkered by expectations of female behaviour – of what a powerful woman or a 
feminist looks like.

“Victoria said women weren’t suited for public life, but she spent several 
decades protecting and demanding an influential place in it,” Baird says. 
“[It’s] like a lot of women who say they are not feminist now, all the while 
they’re collecting pay cheques and expecting to vote and expecting to have 
property rights, and to have recourse if anyone were to assault them. Her power 
was assumed to have come from the men around her, especially from her husband.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fjulia-baird-queen-victoria-would-have-been-a-nasty-woman-in-trumpian-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63b25701d7ea88ade7d6ba5601df1d219c1e067e%2F0_0_2084_2362%2F2084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julia%20Baird%3A%20Queen%20Victoria%20would%20have%20been%20a%20'nasty%20woman'%20in%20Trumpian%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fjulia-baird-queen-victoria-would-have-been-a-nasty-woman-in-trumpian-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julia%20Baird%3A%20Queen%20Victoria%20would%20have%20been%20a%20%27nasty%20woman%27%20in%20Trumpian%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fjulia-baird-queen-victoria-would-have-been-a-nasty-woman-in-trumpian-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63b25701d7ea88ade7d6ba5601df1d219c1e067e%2F0_0_2084_2362%2F2084.jpg>
 In the period after Prince Albert’s death, Queen Victoria recreated sober 
mourning scenes for photographs with her daughters. ‘There was something almost 
spectacular in her grieving,’ says Baird. Photograph: The Royal Collection Trust
In many ways, Prince Albert – an intellectual reformer with a social justice 
bent – was a superior monarch to Victoria. But she has almost been crowded out 
of her own story by him: by his role in the “golden age” of her reign, and by 
her extended grieving over his death. 

The dominant narrative is that after Prince Albert died, when he was 42, 
Victoria withdrew from society and lost her way as queen. But while she did 
withdraw for a few years and wear black for the rest of her life – a kind of 
“widow superstar”, Baird says – “there was almost something spectacular in her 
grieving”. She maintained a very active role in politics and ruled for 40 years 
on her own.

The gulf between the image of Victoria the queen and Victoria the actual woman 
is partly her own creation. While attempting to stop Lord Gladstone from 
becoming prime minister – an outrageous intervention even for the time – and 
weighing in on wars, she was also writing and releasing hugely popular journal 
extracts, in which she portrayed herself as a likeable woman living a domestic 
life at Balmoral in the Scottish Highlands.

“I think it’s important to tell stories of women as fully human and 
complicated, and seek judgment [of women] that is not more excessive than that 
of a bloke. Why do so many women hate Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>? Why is a gut instinct to 
hate her? I think it goes back to that fundamental disconnect between women and 
power,” Baird says.

“The likability thing is a real burden, and it’s demonstrable: there is study 
after study that not only shows that women have to be more likable, but that 
they are genuinely considered less likable when they ask for more pay, or when 
they do certain jobs, or when they make tough decisions.”

Baird worked on the book across three continents, visiting London each year as 
she moved from New York to Philadelphia to Sydney with her two young children. 
When the project began, she was the deputy editor of Newsweek; since then she 
has worked in Australian radio and TV, written columns for the New York Times, 
andbeen diagnosed with cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/03/journalist-julia-baird-reveals-battle-with-cancer-that-had-her-gripped-with-terror>
 – all while reading and writing hundreds of thousands of words about the queen.


Baird carried her laptop with her everywhere, “grabbing the time” she could. 

“My little boy broke his leg and was in hospital and I had to live there with 
him for six weeks, and I just remember some of my friends coming in and saying, 
‘OK, go,’ and I would dash downstairs to the cafe and [write] as much as I 
could. I wrote out the coronation chapter when he was in hospital,” she says. 
“There was no neat pattern.”

Another was presented by the royal family itself: Baird was denied access to 
the royal archives for years. Eventually, Australia’s then-governor general 
Quentin Bryce put a good word in for her, a royal experience in the most 
classic sense: she got access based on the strength of her connections – not 
her PhD in history or book deal.

Censoring Queen Victoria review – how two men created an icon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/26/censoring-queen-victoria-review-yvonne-ward>
The royal archives also requested she censor the book, taking out one of the 
most revelatory parts, about Victoria’s relationship with her servant John 
Brown after the death of Prince Albert. The passage came from information Baird 
had found outside the archive. She rejected the request.

“There’s a lot of historians who are censored a lot of the time, I’ve seen 
it,” she says.

The secrecy around the monarch continues today; Baird says it’s hard to say 
what role Queen Elizabeth II is playing in 2016 without access to her letters 
or journals.


“The thing that I wrestle with [about the monarchy], I know a lot of Brits 
wrestle with, is the expense and the secrecy. Trying to get the material to 
report properly, to write properly about any of the royals – how closed the 
archives are is a real problem.”

Victoria: The Queen goes beyond the biography of a royal figure from 200 years 
ago; it is a contemporary tale of how women are expected to behave, and the 
conflicts between obligations to family and a career.

“Sometimes even the most prominent women have been buried by mountains of 
myths,” Baird says.
 