
Name: Rhik Samadder

Challenge: most jelly moved in 30 seconds

I am attempting to move the most amount of jelly with a teaspoon in 30 
seconds. No one has tried this before – not because it’s hard or dangerous or 
expensive, but because it’s so utterly pointless (yet specific) that no one’s 
even thought of trying. By definition, I cannot fail. Except I can. Marco, our 
surprisingly sardonic official Guinness adjudicator, informs me I must move at 
least 250g from one bowl to another to qualify as a record breaker. “We are the 
fun police,” he says wryly, then goes about proving it – testing the 
consistency of my jelly (must be mashed), the distance between my bowls (has to 
be 30cm) and capacity of my teaspoon (no more than 5ml). In the meantime, I 
practise my technique – shallow scoops, transported bowl to bowl in a fluid 
figure eight. I assume a broad stance, low, so I can rock laterally with my 
hips, minimising arm movement. In the distance, I can hear people laughing at 
me – they don’t think I’m ready for this jelly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC9VsX0D5rts&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC9VsX0D5rts>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC9VsX0D5rts&media=>
 Well jelz ... watch as Rhik moves jelly really fast to become world champion. 
“Go,” says Marco, and I realise I don’t know what 250g of jelly looks like. Is 
it a lot? I start shovelling. My technique’s out the window. Sometimes the 
jelly slides off the spoon completely. The amount I’ve moved is pathetic. It’s 
over quickly. “Three, two, one, stop!” On my desperate, final thrust, jelly 
flies off the spoon and on to Marco’s jacket.

Tension rises. Marco checks the scales and smiles. I’ve smashed it! He shakes 
my hand and presents me with a certificate, which declares me Officially 
Amazing. It means I am better than everyone in the room, I think. The Chariots 
of Fire theme starts to play in my head. I am a champion. Plus, I’ve learnt 
what 250g of jelly looks like (not very much).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frecord-breaker-best-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440775879555%2Fab455a42-0ca3-4001-b114-fd1d26a09c7f-1530x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Just%20how%20easy%20is%20it%20to%20break%20a%20Guinness%20World%20Record%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frecord-breaker-best-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Just%20how%20easy%20is%20it%20to%20break%20a%20Guinness%20World%20Record%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frecord-breaker-best-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440775879555%2Fab455a42-0ca3-4001-b114-fd1d26a09c7f-1530x2040.jpeg>
 Timber! Sophie’s tower takes a tumble. Photograph: Suki Dhanda 
Name: Sophie Heawood

Challenge: stack 29 toilet rolls in 30 seconds

What I recommend, if you’re trying to get into the book of Guinness World 
Records <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guinness-world-records>, is not 
going to Cornwall beforehand, falling down some wet rocks and being covered in 
cuts and bruises for the big day. Although if you want an excuse for why you 
didn’t break the world record for building a tower of more than 28 toilet paper 
rolls in 30 seconds, scabby limbs are quite a good one. Now there’s a sentence 
I have never typed before; I hope never to type it again.

Oh God, this was such a strange experience – a man from the actual Guinness 
World Records stands in the room with you, dressed in his natty blue uniform 
like a character from Trumpton as you try to give him something new. As you try 
to do something so ridiculous – in my case, move some piles of toilet rolls 
into one big tower of rolls that must not fall, so that he can take it back to 
his organisation, to his big book, as news. (And so he can give you the framed 
certificate that he has already written your name on and hidden in his bag.) 
This man, your gentle yet cruel master, quickly becomes the person you want to 
please most in the world. (Is it Stockholm syndrome?) My scabby limbs tried 
their best.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Y1VBurRieA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Y1VBurRieA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Y1VBurRieA&media=>
 Bog standard ... watch Sophie attempt to stack 29 loo rolls in 30 seconds. 
Of course there are strategies for winning things like this, for the way you 
build your piles, the way you move your arm, the science and precision of it 
all. There are people who devote all their time to perfecting such arts. I do 
not like these people. What I do like is that my tower, though it came in at a 
paltry 12 loo rolls, did not fall down. Soft, strong and not very long – that’s 
just how I roll.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frecord-breaker-best-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440694165472%2F78379ae9-a848-4872-842e-be3f0fd34e78-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Just%20how%20easy%20is%20it%20to%20break%20a%20Guinness%20World%20Record%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frecord-breaker-best-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Just%20how%20easy%20is%20it%20to%20break%20a%20Guinness%20World%20Record%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frecord-breaker-best-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440694165472%2F78379ae9-a848-4872-842e-be3f0fd34e78-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Are you ready to partay? Hannah in full swing. Photograph: Suki Dhanda 
Name: Hannah Jane Parkinson

Challenge: popping 38 party poppers in 30 seconds

Imagine, at parties: “And what do you do?” “Oh, I break world records, and in 
my spare time I write for the Guardian.” I don’t want to brag but I’ve won some 
things: football trophies, a pub quiz in a dingy Oxford bar, once. This was 
going to be a doddle.

I had to pop the most party poppers in 30 seconds. The first wobble in 
confidence came when I did a practice run the night before. I managed 16. The 
record stood at 38. My neighbours banged on the door to ask what was happening, 
and why was I weeping? Next, I was told the person who held my record also held 
the most records in the world. “Technique” was mentioned.

A row of poppers was laid out before me on a table, like miniature pots of 
paint. I was joined by Marco Frigatti, the adjudicator. Rhik, Sophie and I 
asked each other whether we had practised, all vehemently denying that we had; 
kids before exams. Frigatti had a little clicker,à la that 2006 Lynx advert 
<https://youtu.be/T6dVXfdJb-o>. I popped, I screamed, I sweated. Coloured 
string fell about me. I got 19. Actually I got 20, but Marco said the last one 
didn’t count as it wasn’t in time. “Um, isn’t this like in football where if 
even a bit of the ball is over the line it counts?” No, Marco said, it wasn’t.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFzg4AMvIBJo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFzg4AMvIBJo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFzg4AMvIBJo&media=>
 Pop star ... watch to see if Hannah claims the party popper world record. 
The worst part of failing was spying the pre-prepared framed certificate I 
would have received had I succeeded. Marco told me they shred the unused 
certificates because people had been rummaging through their bins.

What can I tell you about attempting to break a record? I know that after my 
failed attempt, I wanted to try again. It was exhilarating. I wanted Sophie and 
Rhik to break their records – less so Rhik, as he’s a good friend and I didn’t 
want him to lord it over me. But I wouldn’t have to worry about that, right?
 