
The number of new community-owned renewable energy projects of the sort backed 
by Jeremy Corbyn this week has plummeted aftera series of government decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/29/balcombe-balks-tax-changes-community-green-energy-solar>
 have made many proposals for wind and solar farms no longer viable.

Only 10 new community energy organisations have been registered so far this 
year, compared to 76 last year, according to new data from the trade body 
Co-operatives UK.

The fall has been directly attributed to policy reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/05/confusing-government-policy-biggest-threat-to-uk-clean-energy-says-top-academic>
 in the last two years as government ministersnoticeably cooled on renewable 
energy before and after the 2015 general election, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/10/uks-attractiveness-for-renewables-investment-plummets-to-all-time-low>
with subsidy rates slashed and tax relief ended.

These changes stand in stark contrast to the promises made this summer by 
Theresa May of a windfall for local residents from fracking operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/08/householders-will-have-wait-at-least-five-years-fracking-payments>
, which could amount to thousands of pounds per household.

Corbyn, the Labour leader, has put reversing Conservative energy policy at the 
heart of his environmental agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/07/jeremy-corbyn-energy-policy-300000-jobs-renewables-ban-fracking-climate-change>
 revealed this week. Billed as policies for “the 60 million not the Big Six” 
energy suppliers, the manifesto included pledges to ban fracking, generate 65% 
of electricity from renewables by 2030, and to restore the department of energy 
and climate change.He pointedly emphasised the role of community energy schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2016/sep/07/why-labour-is-putting-energy-reform-at-heart-of-its-green-agenda-jeremy-corbyn>
, which he said could help supply the 300,000 new jobs he envisages in green 
technology.

Community energy schemes, many of which are run or partly run by local 
volunteers and which invite residents to invest, can also benefit schools and 
other public buildings by reducing their energy bills. But they have suffered 
from the axing of key tax relief, increasingly complex regulations and the 
slashing of the feed-in tariffs meant to support the growth of solar panels.

MPs told ministers on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/09/uk-will-miss-its-2020-renewable-energy-targets-warn-mps>
 that key targets for renewable energy by 2020 were unlikely to be met. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/09/uk-will-miss-its-2020-renewable-energy-targets-warn-mps>

The revelations come even as polls continue to show strong support for 
community renewable energy generation, with two-thirds of people surveyed by 
Co-operativeEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> saying they 
would support community-owned renewable projects such as wind turbines and 
solar farms, and only 8% objecting.

Nearly six in 10 people thought the government should U-turn on the axing of 
tax relief on investments in community renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/05/treasury-tax-plans-will-decimate-community-energy-projects>
, which has been one of the key factors in discouraging new projects.

Just over half of people would support a wind turbine within two miles of 
their home, and 61% would support a solar farm.

Co-operative Energy and the Energy Saving Trust calculate that a 25p annual 
surcharge on consumer energy bills would pay for community renewable schemes to 
increase from only 200MW of generation capacity today to more than 3GW.

Ramsay Dunning, managing director at Co-operative Energy, said: “This poll 
data shows that the government’s recent hostility to further growth in onshore 
wind turbines and solar farms is out of kilter with the vast majority of the UK 
public, including Conservative party supporters. People want to see growth in 
local community owned projects.”

Ed Mayo, secretary-general of Co-operatives UK, the trade body which has 120 
community organisations as members, said the government’s changes meant people 
were being discouraged from schemes that provided a wide range of benefits and 
enjoy strong local support.

“Local communities have put in extraordinary efforts to encourage clean 
renewable energy in the face of extraordinary barriers put in their way by 
national politicians,” he said. “This hopeful and grassroots movement [has 
been] dealt a hammer blow, causing confusion and bringing growth to a virtual 
standstill.”

One example is Chester Community Energy, which aims to put 50kw of solar 
panels on a council-owned leisure centre. Fortunately for the organisers, they 
were in time to secure the old higher feed-in tariff rates before they were 
reduced. Without this boost, the scheme would not have gone ahead. Francesca 
Moore, a founding director, said: “We would not have done it. We would not have 
been able to give a return to investors. We might have been able to squeeze one 
percent but that’s not enough for people and we wouldn’t have been able to 
generate a community energy fund.”

Other proposed projects, including those by established community groups, are 
also facing financial troubles. Will Cottrell, chairman of Brighton Energy 
Co-operative which has raised more than £1m, said new projects were not 
feasible. “January’s feed-in tariff cuts mean that new projects are not 
financially viable. What’s the point in starting a community energy scheme when 
you can’t offer members interest [payments on their investment] or community 
funds?”
 