
More than 60% of juvenile detainees interviewed by the Human Rights Commission 
weren’t told or don’t remember being told of their rights when they were locked 
up, a new report has said.

In the organisation’s annual Children’s Rights report, the national children’s 
commissioner, Megan Mitchell, also specifically investigated juvenile detention.

This year saw a wave of incidents and revelations in multiple states about 
alleged mistreatment and abuse inside correctional facilities. The Northern 
Territory system is currentlyunder examination by a royal commission. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>

Victoria says it won't hold Indigenous children in adult jail but 15 others to 
remain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/victoria-says-it-wont-hold-indigenous-children-in-adult-jail-but-15-others-to-remain>
Mitchell continued recommendations that Australia ratify the optional protocol 
the the convention against torture and withdraw its reservation from an 
obligation under the convention on the rights of the child to separate children 
and adults in detention.

The Victorian government was set to face a legal challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/victoria-says-it-wont-hold-indigenous-children-in-adult-jail-but-15-others-to-remain>
 over juveniles being held in an adult facility following disturbances at 
Parkville youth detention centre.

On an average day in 2014-15 about 16% of children who were in contact with 
the justice system were in detention.

“Children and young people in youth justice detention don’t always know that 
they have the right to access the basic things they need,” Mitchell said.

“When we were confronted by shocking CCTV footage of children being mistreated 
in Don Dale youth detention centre in Darwin and other centres around 
Australia, many in the Australian community have asked: why is this happening 
in 21st-century Australia? Given it was known about by public officials, with 
at least one published report detailing the incidents, why was nothing done?”

Mitchell held nine workshops in Australian juvenile and adult detention 
facilities, speaking to almost 100 children and young people about their 
experiences.

She said 64% said they were not told about their rights or didn’t remember 
being told about their rights when they arrived at the various correctional 
facilities. Of the young people held in adult facilities, 60% said the same.

“Of the 25 respondents in youth justice centres, 52% indicated that they did 
not remember if they were provided with any information or no information was 
given,” Mitchell said.

She said 16% of respondents in juvenile facilities and 63% of respondents in 
adult facilities said the information they were given was mainly around rules 
and regulations.

“A 17-year-old male in Queensland told me: ‘[Told] nothing at all … Staff 
treat us like adults and expect us to know our rights – which we do not.’”

Mitchell’s survey found that 92% of children in juvenile centres and 85% of 
young people in adult centres were aware of specifically how to make a 
complaint about their treatment inside centres, however more than half 
identified reasons that would stop them doing so.

Youths detained in maximum security adult jail 'held in solitary confinement'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/27/youths-detained-in-maximum-security-adult-jail-held-in-solitary-confinement>
The biggest reason – given by 40% of those respondents – was fear of 
retribution by staff. Another 20% felt it would be a waste of time.

Mitchell also heard from detainees that basic toiletries such as shampoo and 
soap were sometimes linked to rewards systems.

Among the respondents young people in adult facilities reported feeling unsafe 
at a higher rate (25%) than young people in juvenile facilities (12%).

Other concerns included a report by one young person, citing the importance of 
freedom of religion, who “had to go through a lot of shit for the centre to 
recognise [his] conversion to Islam”.

Among the 12 recommendations Mitchell also called for an end to mandatory 
sentencing of children and young people in all jurisdictions, and for 
significant action on international law.


By ratifying the optional protocol on the conventions against torture, which 
Australia signed seven years ago, jurisdictions would be obligated to permit 
and install better oversight of youth justice processes and detention.

 “I can only wonder whether incidents like those at the Don Dale youth 
detention centre would have been prevented had the oversight mechanisms of the 
OPCAT been in place,” Mitchell said.

The report also called for the age of criminal responsibility to be raised 
from 10 to 12, for greater data collection on children held in detention and 
for the federal government to adopt justice targets relating to the high rates 
of Indigenous children incarcerated.

While the overall rate of children in detention reduced, the 
overrepresentation of Indigenous children and young people increased.

In every jurisdiction Indigenous children were more likely than non-Indigenous 
children to be incarcerated, ranging from double the rate in Tasmania, to 27 
times more likely in Western Australia. Other states and territories ranged 
between 13 and 21 times the rate.

In the Northern Territory, where 97% of juvenile detainees are Indigenous, the 
government has pledged to review and rewrite its youth justice act based on the 
recommendations the current royal commission returns.

On Friday the NT parliament passed a bill formally banning the use of 
restraint chairs against juvenile detainees in both youth and adult facilities.

The bill clarifies allowable restraints as handcuffs, ankle cuffs and 
waist-restraining belts, but bans the controversial restraint chairsseen in the 
Four Corners episode on Don Dale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/abu-ghraib-images-children-detention-australia-public-inquiry>
.

The bill also increases oversight measures including reporting requirements 
for every incident of restraint use.

The territory’s families minister, Dale Wakefield, said it did not mean youths 
would never be restrained and the changes made it safer for frontline workers.

Timeline of events in the Northern Territory's juvenile detention system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/01/timeline-events-northern-territory-juvenile-detention-system>
“This is about making sure that efforts to de-escalate behaviours are used in 
preference to difficult and dangerous restraint procedures,” she said.

“This makes it safer for our frontline workers. And it results in better 
outcomes for children that are in our care, many of whom come from a background 
of trauma and violence.”

The deputy opposition leader, Lia Finocchiaro, welcomed the amendment and said 
it formalised a ban announced by the former chief minister Adam Giles. Giles 
had declared an end to the use of restraint chairs on juveniles following 
outcry over the Four Corners report on Don Dale but it came just months after
his government passed legislation expanding the chair’s usage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/child-detainees-could-be-restrained-with-spit-hoods-under-proposed-nt-law>
.
 