
Current and former detainees of the Northern Territory’s juvenile detention 
centre have launched a class action against the NT government over their 
treatment, including fresh allegations of teargassing in April last year.

The social justice class action will allege the then children were subject to 
abuse, battery, and/or false imprisonment while being held in NT correctional 
facilities, as recently as July last year.

The class action announced on Wednesday is brought on behalf of detainees who 
were abused while in detention between 1 August 2006 and 23 December 2016.

“We do not suggest the members of this class action did not deserve to be 
deprived of their liberty but we do claim that when children are routinely 
subject to human rights abuses ... that they should be compensated and those 
who do it should be accountable,” Maurice Blackburn class action principal 
lawyer, Ben Slade, said on Wednesday.

Northern Territory juvenile detention royal commission given four-month 
extension
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/northern-territory-juvenile-detention-royal-commission-given-four-month-extension>
The lead applicants are Dylan Jenkings and Aaron Hyde, two men now aged 18 and 
20, who will claim compensation for alleged abuse they suffered as teenage 
detainees. At the date of application at least seven group members of the class 
action had claims against the NT government, but the lawyer representing the 
group believes there could be hundreds of potential claimants.

The case is expected to bring into question the legality of detaining children 
in isolated cells, as well as past laws around restraints. The application 
noted legislative changes made last year to the use of restraints on children, 
but said Hyde and Jenkings were still wrongfullyimprisoned and detained even 
under the previous laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/child-detainees-could-be-restrained-with-spit-hoods-under-proposed-nt-law>
.

According to a statement of claim filed in the federal court, Jenkings alleged 
in April last year staff members entered his cell at Don Dale, teargassed him 
and another detainee, and handcuffed them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fjuvenile-detainees-launch-class-action-against-northern-territory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0669f8edf9905e3150565d8723f3a8e036dbcee4%2F0_125_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juvenile%20detainees%20launch%20class%20action%20against%20Northern%20Territory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fjuvenile-detainees-launch-class-action-against-northern-territory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juvenile%20detainees%20launch%20class%20action%20against%20Northern%20Territory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fjuvenile-detainees-launch-class-action-against-northern-territory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0669f8edf9905e3150565d8723f3a8e036dbcee4%2F0_125_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 Dylan Jenkings is part of a class action case against the Northern Territory 
government over alleged mistreatment and abuse by guards inside youth 
correctional facilities. Photograph: - 
Jenkings accused guards of pushing him to the ground and punching him twice in 
the back of the head, before dragging him to another cell without CCTV and 
beating him with batons and shields. He also claimed he was handcuffed and 
kicked during another incident in July.

In mid-2012 Hyde, then 15, was allegedly removed from his cell at Don Dale by 
guards who used “more force than was reasonably necessary” and who struck him 
in the ribs and carried him out, slamming his head against two doorways. The 
statement claimed Hyde had been compliant when guards arrived.

He was allegedly left handcuffed to a fence with his arms above his head for 
an hour, and then placed in the isolation cell of the behavioural management 
unit. He also alleged his clothing was confiscated and he was left with only 
his underpants in the cell for two to three weeks.

It was also alleged when Hyde asked for a blanket because there was no 
mattress and he was cold, a female guard told him to masturbate to keep warm. 
The statement of claim alleged Hyde was kept in isolation for longer than the 
allowable 72 hour maximum on numerous occasions.

Royal commission tours Don Dale: 'This is where that young fella was held'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/royal-commission-tours-don-dale-this-is-where-that-young-fella-was-held>
Both applicants are currently incarcerated in Darwin’s adult prison. Hyde is 
serving an 11-year sentence with six years non-parole after hepleaded guilty 
<http://www.ntnews.com.au/news/northern-territory/aaron-hyde-jailed-for-11-years-over-crimes-stemming-from-icefulled-crime-spree/news-story/bc2169c34d96d4fe6cf39bf65f6423c9>
 to offences related to a crime spree which ended in a high-speed car crash and 
the death of his friend.

His mother, Tracey Hyde, told Guardian Australia when she read the statement 
of claim she questioned whether she had done the right thing by acting with 
“tough love” and putting faith in the justice system when he had told her he 
was being mistreated.

Aaron Hyde kept most of the detail from his mother out of concern he would 
worry her, she said, and many of the allegations shocked her. “Reading that in 
detail ... especially being handcuffed to the fence and having to soil yourself 
in front of other people, and up to three weeks in solitary with nothing and 
then a female guard telling him to pull himself to keep warm, that’s just 
unacceptable.

“I know he was in there because he was doing the wrong thing, and I have no 
issues with that, but that treatment is not conducive to rehabilitation.”

She questioned if his criminal behaviour would have escalated if he had not 
been allegedly mistreated while in detention as a teenager. “Some of these kids 
have done some pretty horrendous stuff but that doesn’t give guards the right 
to treat them the way they have. It’s obvious now that whatever they’re doing 
hasn’t worked,” she said.

“As a community I think we need to sit together and find out exactly what 
worked and what hasn’t worked and what options we have before us.”

Nicole Manison, acting chief minister of the NT, said the government was 
seeking legal advice and it would be “inappropriate to comment further” on a 
court matter.

Manison said the alleged incidents occurred prior to the Michael Gunner-led 
government taking office, and noted the changes already made to the Youth 
Justice Act. She said the NT government had committed to putting children “at 
the centre of government, for the benefit of all Territorians”.

“By working across all sectors of government we can tackle these complex and 
difficult issues at an early age to get these kids away from crime – and keep 
them out of the criminal justice system in the first place,” she said.

Inside the Don Dale detention centres – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gallery/2016/dec/08/inside-the-don-dale-detention-centres-in-pictures>
A royal commission into the protection and detention of children in the NT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
 is under way, investigating a decade of policy direction and allegations of 
abuse and mismanagement.

It was called by the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, following the broadcast 
of vision of several young detainees inside theDarwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/darwin> and Alice Springs youth and 
adult detention facilities being teargassed, beaten and restrained.

“The Territory’s juvenile justice system has been shown over and over again to 
not only have failed to rehabilitate those in its care, but have allowed many 
children to be abused by some of its own employees,” said Slade, who urged 
others to come forward.

Slade told media in Sydney, Maurice Blackburn had been approached by 
Darwin-based legal workers to look into some cases.

“We concluded that the evidence of assaults, battery and excessive use of 
isolation beyond the powers permitted by the Northern Territory’s Youth Justice 
Act was overwhelming,” he said.

They also determined alleged victims had a right to compensation, and because 
of an “extraordinary” six-month limitation period they commenced action 
immediately.

In a separate case, four other current and former detainees also sued the NT 
government last year, over their treatment inside Don Dale. The civil trial 
heard evidence from the detainees as well as a number of guards and senior 
staff members, and former corrections commissioner Ken Middlebrook.

The NT Labor government, which came to power in August last year, has pledged 
tocompletely rewrite the Youth Justice Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/25/use-of-restraint-chairs-on-nt-youths-to-be-banned-amid-wider-justice-review>
, based on recommendations from the royal commission, expected to be delivered 
at the end of this year.
 