
Royals make natural photographers, it seems. They are born not just with a 
silver spoon but a golden camera. First Prince Harry showedhis photojournalism 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/picturegalleries/royalty/11300980/Prince-Harry-visits-Lesotho-to-photograph-Sentebale-charity-projects-in-pictures.html>
 from Lesotho, and now the Duchess of Cambridgehas been honoured by the Royal 
Photographic Society <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38494382> for her baby 
pictures.

Could this recognition be a tiny bit sycophantic? The clue is in the 
institution’s name. The Royal Photographic Society was founded in 1853 and 
Queen Victoria and Prince Albertwere patrons 
<http://www.rps.org/about/history/history-of-the-rps>. Yet its new year 
announcement of lifetime honorary membership for Kate and slavish – sorry, 
lavish – praise of her “talent and enthusiasm” has irritated a few camera 
buffs. Sarcastic social media commenters went so far as to joke that she 
probably “knew someone”, and even compared her with Brooklyn Beckham, who also
points a camera about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/13/brooklyn-beckham-burberry-campaign-art-critics-verdict>
 from time to time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36438f6ecc41ca08045d7906648e046d8f4551a0%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kate%20Middleton%20is%20rightly%20honoured%20for%20her%20photographs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0they%20are%20full%20of%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kate%20Middleton%20is%20rightly%20honoured%20for%20her%20photographs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0they%20are%20full%20of%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36438f6ecc41ca08045d7906648e046d8f4551a0%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Princess Charlotte poses for a photograph at Anmer Hall, Norfolk. Photograph: 
The Duchess of Cambridge/AP 
Does the Duchess of Cambridge deserve to be singled out for her photography? 
The honest answer is that her pictures are good. Photography is a simple thing 
and has a lot to do with emotion. Most of us try to use a camera to praise the 
beauty of people we care about. Kate’s photographs of her children – she snaps 
other stuff too, but it is her portraits of George and Charlotte that are most 
memorable – are full of love. Seen with a parent’s eye, they are strong, 
characterful portraits. I would much rather look at these honest documents of 
familial love thanMario Testino’s fake flattery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/09/mario-testino-portrait-william-kate-children>
 of royal glamour.

Is the Duchess of Cambridge a photographic genius? No – because there is no 
such thing. The best photographs are a mixture of technical skill, appropriate 
equipment and simply being in the right place at the right time. If any concept 
of creativity is to survive in this technocratic millennium, we desperately 
need to take a more measured and honest view of what it is to take excellent 
pictures with a camera, like those Kate has been praised for.

A good place to start is the German theorist Walter Benjamin’s famous 1936 
essayThe Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction 
<https://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/philosophy/works/ge/benjamin.htm> – 
the most profound thing ever written about photography, as later writers such 
as John Berger and Susan Sontag acknowledged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec03188a0161381576ff957f8351b8bd4f369d56%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kate%20Middleton%20is%20rightly%20honoured%20for%20her%20photographs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0they%20are%20full%20of%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kate%20Middleton%20is%20rightly%20honoured%20for%20her%20photographs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0they%20are%20full%20of%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec03188a0161381576ff957f8351b8bd4f369d56%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 Prince George on his first day at the Westacre Montessori nursery school near 
Sandringham in Norfolk. Photograph: The Duchess of Cambridge/PA 
For Benjamin the revolutionary nature of the reproducible photographic image 
is that it destroys the “aura” that traditionally surrounded the unique work of 
art, and makes visual imagery functional, ordinary and available to everyone. 
It inaugurates a truly democratic visual age.

The Duchess of Cambridge <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/duchess-of-cambridge> 
is a paradoxical icon of this age. For she is not a professional photographer, 
nor is she claiming to be a great artist. Instead, she excels at photography in 
the only way most of us all ever can: by looking at what she loves.

Kim Kardashian looks at what she loves, too, and so does Sebastião Salgado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/18/sebastiao-salgado-photo-london-photography>
. If you want to take worthwhile pictures, concentrate on what really matters 
to you, be it your bum or the lost peoples of the Amazon. It is the scene that 
is wondrous, not the snapping of the shutter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb4884fe9ee88df3349e36ee83a3c25c37e97c5%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kate%20Middleton%20is%20rightly%20honoured%20for%20her%20photographs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0they%20are%20full%20of%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kate%20Middleton%20is%20rightly%20honoured%20for%20her%20photographs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0they%20are%20full%20of%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkate-middleton-photography-royal-photographic-society%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb4884fe9ee88df3349e36ee83a3c25c37e97c5%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 Prince George and Princess Charlotte. Photograph: The Duchess of Cambridge/PA 
The trouble is that with the easy availability of good camera technology and 
the infinite ways to publish images online, it is tragically easy to get 
confused into believing your snap of a summer sunset or a flower at Kew is a 
work of art. It is depressing to visit some beauty spot and see hundreds of 
cameras all taking the same image. That’s banality in motion. Do you really 
think your eye is better than all the other eyes looking through viewfinders 
and that your pictures are special just because you took them?

For “talent” is not what makes a photograph special. Only one thing matters in 
photography – and that is content. If you want to take a great photograph you 
need to discover something unique. If you are Salgado, that means travelling 
the planet in search of rare and vanishing scenes. For most of us, for 
amateurs, it means concentrating on what is close and special. It means 
photographing people and places you love, because the only thing that makes 
your photography unique is the uniqueness of that love. The Duchess of 
Cambridge understands this. I’d be proud to have taken her innocent and 
admirable photographs.
 