
The singer Katy Perry, a Hillary Clinton supporter, has produced a “Voting 
naked” video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pSd-3Yc1N3s>, urging people to 
vote in the US election. Madonna responded with her own “Voting naked” photo on 
Instagram, showing her bare shoulders, also urging people to back Clinton, 
saying that women need to support each other. “Women Run The World now – they 
have to get out and start supporting one another. No more misogynist feminists! 
No more misogony [sic]. Get out and vote,” wrote Madonna, with good intentions, 
albeit bad spelling.

The image was later deleted, along with the one where Madonna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> had photoshopped Clinton between 
her legs. (Stay classy, Ms Ciccone!) Both singers’ efforts did the job by 
causing a media flurry. Were their actions successful in a deeper feminist way? 
In my view, quite the opposite.

It’s obvious what they were trying to do; in fact, Perry says that her whole 
aim was to be click-bait. In fairness, Perry’s video is ditsy-humorous rather 
than sexualised. Her breasts and genitals are blanked out with dark, 
modesty-style strips; her hair is styled as a rat’s nest with lollipops 
sticking out of it. While it was still up, Madonna’s image merely gave the 
impression of nudity.

They’re not the first to use nudity to raise awareness. (Famously, there was 
the Peta campaign “I’d rather go naked than wear fur 
<http://www.peta.org/videos/id-rather-go-naked-than-wear-fur/>”, featuring 
various supermodels, one of whom, Naomi Campbell, went on to rather let the 
side down, by, you guessed it, wearing fur.) Moreover, they were doing it for a 
“good cause”, not out of a sense of the now-routine monetised, sexualised 
exhibitionism. (I don’t know about you lot, but, as a heterosexual woman, I’m 
officially bored with Kim Kardashian’s constant updates on the state of her 
tits and arse.) Compared with that, it’s pretty cool that Madonna supported 
Perry supporting Clinton.

However, there’s something worrying, something distinctly non-feminist about 
these “naked voting” efforts. In that, with the semi-exception of the actor 
Mark Ruffalo, a fellow Clinton supporter (who’d previouslyjokingly promised to 
go naked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/22/robert-downey-jnr-offers-up-a-naked-mark-ruffalo-to-enocurage-americans-to-vote-video>
 in his next film), there were no prominent males opting for the 
nudity-equals-attention option.

There were no equivalent men running around butt-naked with modesty strips and 
lollipops stuck in their hair or provocatively leaning their bare shoulders 
into the camera lens. So why did these incredibly famous, successful women do 
it?

To an extent, where’s the harm? This is an era where revenge porn verges on an 
epidemic and there have been wretched attempts to shame celebrities with their 
own stolen explicit images. It’s arguable that by exploiting their own nudity, 
Madonna and Perry are subverting the global sexualisation of women.

The logic here is that there’s a constant scrabble to look at famous women 
naked, to reduce them and all other women to body parts. Well, these famous 
women can play this game on their own terms and you’ll listen to their message 
too.

At which point, the argument frays and disintegrates. If a woman feels that 
the only way she can command attention is by taking her clothes off, then her 
“message” is a scream lost in a hurricane.

However good the cause, it doesn’t make up for the core rationale that the 
quickest, easiest way for a woman to get attention is to disrobe. Men simply 
don’t feel that they have to behave this way – they think the quickest, easiest 
way to get attention is to open their mouths.

The fact that both these successful women performed their well-intentioned 
“ethical” striptease on behalf of a female candidate just makes it seem even 
more skewed and desperate.

If, among other things, Clinton is fighting for respect for women beyond their 
worth (or lack of it) as sexual/post-sexual objects, then I’d wager that the 
very last thing she needs is for even her supporters to peddle sex.

Foxhunting? Call the dogs off for good
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fkaty-perry-naked-vote-reveals-more-than-she-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3463e84e23263d1a5aea93505d76bcf9a7feeb2c%2F0_139_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katy%20Perry%E2%80%99s%20naked%20vote%20reveals%20more%20than%20she%20wanted%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fkaty-perry-naked-vote-reveals-more-than-she-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katy%20Perry%E2%80%99s%20naked%20vote%20reveals%20more%20than%20she%20wanted%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fkaty-perry-naked-vote-reveals-more-than-she-wanted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3463e84e23263d1a5aea93505d76bcf9a7feeb2c%2F0_139_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Members of the Holderness Hunt in East Yorkshire, as a new poll found that any 
attempts to repeal the Hunting Act would be “deeply unpopular” among the 
majority of the British public. Photograph: John Giles/PA 
When are people who oppose the foxhunting ban going to accept they’re beaten? 
An Ipsos Mori poll says that any attempt torepeal the Hunting Act 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-09-30/hunting-ban-supported-by-84-of-voters/> 
would be “deeply unpopular” with 84% of the British public. The poll was 
commissioned by the League Against Cruel Sports, which could hardly claim no 
bias, but the findings are clear enough. There was also huge opposition to hare 
coursing (91%) and deer hunting (88%).

So by a huge majority, the British public would prefer that the hunting ban 
stay in place. Who’d have thought it? Well, actually, most people would. Common 
sense dictates that the only people who oppose the hunting ban are the 
relatively small number who hunt. Normal people are unlikely to say: “Well, I 
don’t hunt myself, but I still feel very strongly that they should repeal the 
law banning the practice of live animals being chased and ripped to pieces by 
hounds, pursued by horse riders in fancy dress costume.”

However much the pro-hunt lobby tries to frame this as an issue of personal 
freedom, most people are quite rightly repulsed by the idea of animals being 
made to suffer and die for what is effectively just a niche sporting pursuit. 
In 2016, the vermin control argument is also becoming silly. There are quite a 
few urban foxes these days. Should we start insisting that competitive cyclists 
chase them around the streets, followed by packs of braying hounds? Perhaps 
skateboarders could join in?

Polls such as this make a mockery of environment secretary Andrea Leadsom 
saying that she intends to take a “fresh look” at the foxhunting ban. Here’s 
your fresh look, Ms Leadsom – 84% against, and not likely to go down much in 
the near future.

Sooty and Soo: greatest glove story ever told?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fkaty-perry-naked-vote-reveals-more-than-she-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83ea8d90bb3d8df94cbd4fb5bc5bdef330e68660%2F248_730_3891_2335%2F3891.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katy%20Perry%E2%80%99s%20naked%20vote%20reveals%20more%20than%20she%20wanted%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fkaty-perry-naked-vote-reveals-more-than-she-wanted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katy%20Perry%E2%80%99s%20naked%20vote%20reveals%20more%20than%20she%20wanted%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fkaty-perry-naked-vote-reveals-more-than-she-wanted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83ea8d90bb3d8df94cbd4fb5bc5bdef330e68660%2F248_730_3891_2335%2F3891.jpg>
 Matthew Corbett with Sooty, Sweep and Soo. Photograph: FremantleMedia Ltd / 
Rex Feature 
Readers of a delicate disposition, please look away now – there is news of a 
Sooty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/13/sooty-bbc-television-harry-corbett>
-themed sex scandal. In the 1960s, there was a row when Sooty’s creator, the 
late Harry Corbett, suggested Sooty should have a girlfriend, Soo. Some people, 
including the show’s producer and a BBC governor, were scandalised, saying it 
would “introduce sex into a children’s programme”. The issue generated so much 
controversy the director general, Hugh Carleton Greene, had to intervene.

All of which has been revealed by Corbett’s son and Sooty-heir, Matthew, in 
the documentary,Sooty Ungloved, which just enjoyed its, ahem, “world premiere” 
in Guiseley, West Yorkshire, where the Corbett family lived for 35 years. I’ve 
yet to seeSooty Ungloved, but I’m imagining a Watergate-vibe, featuring Sweep 
interviewed with his face in semi-darkness.

In the end, the DG ruled Sooty could have Soo, but that the puppets must 
“never touch” (what sordid practices was Carleton Greene envisaging?). What a 
wonderful story, amusing, but also a bittersweet comment on the lost innocence 
of a nation. A lost opportunity, too; given the chance, Sooty and Soo could 
have achieved great things, enlivening school sex-education classes.

• Comments will be opened later today
 