
The concept of an industrial strategy seems like a topic that must have 
featured inYes Minister, the peerless 1980s political sitcom starring Paul 
Eddington and Nigel Hawthorne.

Yet, oddly, it never did. Still, the series did touch on some themes that look 
relevant now the policy is back in vogue, such as when Hawthorne’s Sir Humphrey 
was asked if he shouldn’t believe in policies he implements. “I have served 11 
governments,” he explains. “If I’d believed in all their policies, I’d have 
been ... committed to keeping out of the Common Market, and ... committed to 
joining it. I’d have been ... convinced of nationalising steel and of 
denationalising it.”

That seems prophetic given the way our governing party, after years of saying 
Whitehall must get out of the way of business, is suddenly enthusing about the 
PM’s new industrial strategy.

This week, two former business secretaries, Vince Cable and Michael Heseltine, 
plus erstwhile chancellor George Osborne, give evidence to the relevant select 
committee on this topic – where there may be questions on the HS2 rail link, 
one of Osborne’s previous efforts in this field. His successor, Philip Hammond, 
has already pooh-poohed that scheme, saying he believes easily deliverable 
projects are best – a credo dubbed the “Eddington principle” after its creator. 
That’s former BA boss Rod, not Paul.

The fund managers working for all of us

You may have noticed that another one of Theresa May’s big themes has been how 
we need a country that “works for all of us” – especially now everyone has 
given up pretending we’ve all been in it together.

This latest iteration of capitalism will get a high-profile boost starting on 
Sunday when “some of the world’s most influential asset owners, asset managers 
and policymakers” gather in New York to congratulate themselves on how they 
“are working to make capitalism more equitable, sustainable, and inclusive”.

Yes, it’s the third annual conference on inclusive capitalism, when a group of 
folk that manage combined assets of more than $38 trillion will convene to 
“commit to implementing business and investment practices in their companies 
that extend the opportunities of the economic system to everyone”.

Of course, it is almost impossible to satirise such an event.

It was founded and is run by the proletarian-sounding Lady Lynn Forester de 
Rothschild – but please don’t say that her Coalition for Inclusive Capitalism 
does not live up to its name. The event is invitation only.

Expect some margin of error over YouGov

One of the more fascinating debates had by watchers of the global economy over 
recent years has to be that wrangle about the efficacy of forecasters. Opinion 
pollsters, economists or City analysts, the argument goes: which group is the 
most useless?

Well, having slugged it out for years with some heroic misreads, we get a pair 
of these prizefighters in the same ring this week. The online opinion pollster 
YouGov is announcing full-year results, which means that some City 
number-crunchers are assembling guesses about what will be unveiled.

For the record Numis – which, as YouGov’s own broker, you’d assume has a good 
chance of getting close – now reckons pre-tax profits will come in at £11.7m. 
The caveat with that punt, however, is that the same firm quickly had to raise 
its profit estimate by 7% in August after YouGov made a trading statement.

But, what a match the pair seem to be. Like its rivals, YouGov spectacularly 
called the 2015 general election incorrectly, before following that up by 
getting this year’s EU referendum wrong too. Still, it has tried to claim it 
really got it right, despite erroneously calling the result 52-48 in favour of 
Remain on polling day.

Or as YouGov spins it: “The online polls were right.”
 