
Pep Guardiola is not used to going a month without a victory but a frustrating 
period forManchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> 
continues. Southampton produced a disciplined and dynamic display to deny City 
a first win since late September on an afternoon John Stones will want to 
forget.

Pep Guardiola: I will fight to find out why Manchester City are on bad run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-draw-southampton>
An error from the England centre-back handed Nathan Redmond a goal in the 
first half, the defender woefully misplacing a pass, and an effort of his own 
was ruled out moments later. Kelechi Iheanacho’s second-half equaliser could 
have prompted a swift resurgence but it is easy to see why thisSouthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> side have progressed so 
significantly in recent weeks.

Claude Puel has established a high-pressing attack and well-organised 
defensive unit. They thwarted City’s attempts at a comeback and the result 
means Guardiola has not won a league game in three for the first time since the 
end of the 2014-15 season at Bayern Munich. It is the first time he has gone 
without a win in five overall since 2009.

“We had problems creating in the buildup; it was slow,” said Guardiola. “We 
had problems to make the difference, one against one and two v one. In the 
second half the players changed their mentality, the way to rebel against the 
situation. Unfortunately we could not win. Again we conceded a goal when the 
opponent didn’t make anything. It’s difficult to recover the mentality from 
that.

“It happened in Glasgow [against Celtic]. What the opponents do, they don’t 
create too much and it’s not too easy when you give them [chances]. But I don’t 
think today that’s the reason why we didn’t win. The difference between the 
first half and second half was obvious.”

It is a strange conundrum that City remain top of the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> yet Guardiola arguably 
faces his biggest managerial challenge for many years. There was evident 
tension emanating from the stands throughout a challenging afternoon and even a 
smattering of boos at the half-time whistle.

Vincent Kompany and Sergio Agüero returned to the starting line-up after the 
4-0 defeat in Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/manchester-city-pep-guardiola-sergio-aguero>
, with Guardiola selecting a three-man defence including the Belgian, Stones 
and Aleksandar Kolarov. That defence was put under intense pressure by 
Southampton’s forward triumvirate of Redmond, Charlie Austin and Dusan Tadic 
and City were unable to register a single first-half shot on target for the 
first time in 15 matches under Guardiola.

Credit must go to Puel and Southampton, who never permitted Claudio Bravo an 
easy option when the Chilean goalkeeper was looking to distribute quickly. The 
Saints were similarly focused in defence, José Fonte and Virgil van Dijk 
demonstrating why they had conceded only seven Premier League goals before this 
match.

Goalmouth action was limited during an opening half played with little space. 
Jordy Clasie blazed over Bravo’s crossbar after a slick Southampton move on 20 
minutes and soon after Kevin De Bruyne almost slid Agüero through one-on-one.

However, the turning point came through Stones’s error, a major lapse in 
concentration from the defender in the 28th minute. The former Everton 
centre-half played a blind pass back to Kompany, misdirecting it severely and 
laying the ball on a plate for Redmond, who rounded Bravo to finish coolly.

Perhaps such faux pas should be expected as City adapt to Guardiola’s approach 
of consistently playing out from the back. Stones thought he had made immediate 
amends when finishing well from De Bruyne’s deep free-kick, only for the 
linesman to signal offside against Agüero.

Manchester City 1-1 Southampton: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/23/manchester-city-v-southampton-premier-league-live>
The atmosphere was subdued to say the least and City’s first valid shot came 
only in the 38th minute, although Ilkay Gündogan dragged tamely wide. Iheanacho 
replaced De Bruyne at half-time and City upped their intensity.

It was Iheanacho who brought them level in the 55th minute with a well-worked 
goal. Fernandinho sprayed a fine ball over the top for Leroy Sané, who pulled 
back across the penalty area for the Nigerian youngster to finish first time 
into the bottom corner.

City’s increased pressure coincided with a succession of yellow cards, as 
tempers rose. Iheanacho certainly added a new dynamic and almost squared for 
David Silva as blue shirts began to swarm forward in numbers.

Gündogan and Silva forced excellent saves from Fraser Forster before Austin 
had a fine opportunity after being fed by the substitute Sofiane Boufal, only 
to fire straight at Bravo. Jesús Navas was brought on to replace Kompany late 
on but City could not craft clear opportunities despite late pressure.

It was a rather tepid ending to City’s afternoon but one Southampton 
celebrated. Puel said: “I’m happy of course for the point, the spirit and 
fantastic mentality. It was a difficult game against a good team. They [City] 
can press well and make it difficult to play our game. I think in the second 
half we had good defensive organisation.

“It was important to change the team [after the defeat at Internazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/internazionale-southampton-europa-league-group-k-match-report>
]. Manchester City had more time to prepare. We finished the last game against 
Inter with big disappointment and it was important today to show our fantastic 
spirit and good organisation. It’s a good point for us.”
 