
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has named his 
former campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, to serve as counselor to the 
president, making her the most influential woman in the White House.

In a statement on Thursday, the president-elect said Conway “played a crucial 
role in my victory. She is a tireless and tenacious advocate of my agenda and 
has amazing insights on how to effectively communicate our message.”

Conway, a pollster and political strategist, has been serving as a key member 
of Trump’s transition team since his victory on 8 November. She came on board 
as campaign manager in August shortly after Trump had secured the Republican 
nomination, and after two others – Corey Lewandowski and Paul Manafort – had 
been fired from the position.

She quickly became one of the campaign’s most important and prominent 
surrogates, making frequent television appearances to defend Trump’s actions 
and remarks, however inflammatory they became.

When a 2005 video surfaced in which Trump can be heard bragging about grabbing 
women’s genitals without their consent,Conway remained steadfast in her defense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/sexual-assault-definition-trump-comments>
 of the then Republican nominee.

“That’s a very unfortunate phrase, and people really should stop using it,” 
Conway told CNN’s Dana Bash, admonishing people for using the words “sexual 
assault” to describe Trump’s remarks. “He did not say the word ‘sexual 
assault’.”

In so doing, Conway was credited with helping soften the campaign’s image, and 
improving the president-elect’s standing with women,particularly suburban white 
women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/kellyanne-conway-trumps-secret-weapon>
 who voted for him in droves.

Trump has touted Conway as an example of his support and promotion of women. 
The president-elect’s victory on 8 November “also shattered the glass ceiling 
for women”, Trump’s statement announcing her appointment read. Conway was the 
first female campaign manager for either major party to win a presidential 
general election.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20guide%20to%20Trump's%20cabinet%20of%20billionaires%20and%20bullies%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20guide%20to%20Trump%27s%20cabinet%20of%20billionaires%20and%20bullies%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video&media=>
A guide to Trump’s cabinet of billionaires and bullies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
But Conway came under fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/kellyanne-conway-liberal-feminism-shortfalls-politics-amy-schumer-lena-dunham>
 recently, for suggesting that mothers shouldn’t take up roles in the White 
House. At an event on women in politics earlier this month, Conway implied 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/valerie-jarrett-kellyanne-conway-232324> 
that it would be almost impossible to take up a position in the White House 
while also being a mother to her four children, all under the age of 12.

“I do politely mention to them the question isn’t would you take the job, the 
male sitting across from me who’s going to take a big job in the White House. 
The question is would you want your wife to,” said Conway, of conversations 
shehad with male colleagues. “Would you want the mother of your children to? 
You really see their entire visage change. It’s like, oh, no, they wouldn’t 
want their wife to take that job.”

Since helping guide Trump to his electoral victory, Conway has been considered 
a frontrunner for several White House positions.

She has helped shape the Trump cabinet, notably clashing with other senior 
members in Trump’s camp over the possible nomination of Mitt Romney for 
secretary of state,whom she publicly  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/mitt-romney-donald-trump-secretary-of-state-kellyanne-conway>
criticized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/mitt-romney-donald-trump-secretary-of-state-kellyanne-conway>
. Media reports suggested that Trump was angry about her intervention but she 
then tweeted a photo of herself and the president-elect working harmoniously in 
his office.

In Conway’s new role as counselor, she “will continue her role as a close 
advisor to the president and will work with senior leadership to effectively 
message and execute the Administration’s legislative priorities and actions”, 
the Trump transition team’s statement said.


The role of counselor to the president is not a position all presidents 
appoint. It is usually an influential adviser role with a focus on 
communications. The last person to hold that title was John Podesta, who served 
under Barack Obama before leaving to run Hillary Clinton’s campaign in February 
2015.

Conway told MSNBC’s Morning Joe show <http://on.msnbc.com/2h5wrcS> on 
Thursday: “Essentially, my major concern is and will always be my four 
children, but I’m very convinced this is a family-friendly West Wing and White 
House … And I’m also just excited to work with the senior team that’s already 
in place, to support them how I can.

“It’s a weighty responsibility. But if you have the president’s ear and his 
trust and you’re honored and humbled enough to have this opportunity, I think 
it’s very difficult to say no. And the president-elect is a very persuasive 
man.”

She added that Trump “probably would want my number one priority to be what it 
has been, which is to be a more discreet adviser and somebody who helps him to 
effectively – supports him in his effective connecting and communicating with 
America.”

Conway founded her polling and research firm, the Polling Company, in 1995. 
She has been a key conservative strategist for several candidates, including 
Newt Gingrich during the 2012 presidential race. She also served as an adviser 
to Vice-President-elect Mike Pence during his campaign for governor of Indiana.

In the 2016 race she initially supported Texas senator Ted Cruz before 
switching allegiance to Trump, whose racially charged rhetoric she defended. At 
a recent Harvard Institute of Politics review of the election, Conway demanded: 
“Do you think I ran a campaign where white supremacists had a platform? Are you 
going to look me in the face and tell me that?” The Clinton campaign 
communications director, Jennifer Palmieri, replied: “It did, Kellyanne, it 
did.”

Conway’s Twitter page 
<https://twitter.com/KellyannePolls?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 biography says simply: “We won.”


Reuters contributed to this report.
 