
Efforts to stabilise a Syrian ceasefire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/22/us-and-russia-agree-to-enforce-new-syria-ceasefire>
 and restart stalled peace talks face an uphill struggle in Vienna as the 
external powers most deeply involved in the crisis try to narrow their 
differences.

John Kerry, the US secretary of state, and Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign 
minister, are co-chairing a meeting of the International Syria Support Group on 
Tuesday in an attempt to patch up anagreement reached in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/syria-cessation-of-hostilities-full-text-of-the-support-groups-communique>
 on a cessation of hostilities and expedite the delivery of humanitarian aid to 
besieged areas.


As well as the UK, France, the EU and the Arab League, the 17-member group 
includes Saudi Arabia and Turkey – which are seeking the overthrow of the 
Syrian president,Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad> – and Iran, his most 
important regional ally. Neither the Syrian government nor opposition are 
taking part.

Homesick, lonely, sleepless – and these are the lucky child refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/homesick-lonely-sleepless-and-these-are-the-lucky-child-refugees>
Kerry spent the weekend in Jeddah in an apparent effort to persuade the Saudis 
to ensure that the anti-Assad rebels they support go along with the latest 
diplomatic effort, despite them having walked out of thelast round of Geneva 
talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/08/syrian-peace-talks-resume-un-envoy-bashar-al-assad>
.


Philip Hammond, the UK foreign secretary, said the focus was “humanitarian 
access and an implementable cessation of hostilities.”

Staffan de Mistura, the UN envoy overseeing the indirect negotiations, is also 
in the Austrian capital seeking support for a new round to keep the diplomatic 
route open, despite the apparentlyunbridgeable gaps between the Syrian parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/oct/09/who-backs-whom-in-the-syrian-conflict>
. He has said he wants talks to resume by the end of May.


De Mistura has estimated that more than 400,000 people have been killed in the 
five-year conflict, which hasdisplaced more than half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/mar/09/a-visual-guide-to-the-war-in-syria-what-happened-and-where-we-are-now>
 of Syria’s pre-war population of 23 million.


Arab and western officials involved said they do not expect significant 
achievements from the talks. The conventional wisdom regarding the current 
situation in Syria is thatRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is 
calling the shots and the US is working with it, despite the two countries’ 
ostensible disagreement about Assad’s fate.


“We are dealing with tactical steps, but there is nothing beyond them,” one 
senior Gulf diplomat told the Guardian.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fsyria-civil-war-life-damascus-not-lose-hope-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20goes%20on%20in%20Damascus%3A%20'We%20cannot%20give%20up%20and%20lose%20our%20hope'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fsyria-civil-war-life-damascus-not-lose-hope-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20goes%20on%20in%20Damascus%3A%20%27We%20cannot%20give%20up%20and%20lose%20our%20hope%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fsyria-civil-war-life-damascus-not-lose-hope-video&media=>
Life goes on in Damascus: ‘We cannot give up and lose our hope’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/11/syria-civil-war-life-damascus-not-lose-hope-video>
Syrian rebels insist that Assad must go. The Damascus government has dismissed 
talk of a “political transition” and refers only to the creation of a national 
unity government that could include opposition elements alongside the current 
regime, though the president dismisses most of his opponents as “terrorists”.

No mention of Assad is expected in the Vienna communique. But Frank-Walter 
Steinmeier, the German foreign minister, said: “There can be no lasting future 
for this country with Assad. This is why we must start negotiations here in 
Vienna ... about what a transition government could look like.”

According to the timetable laid down in the first Vienna talks last autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/syria-could-be-weeks-away-from-big-transition-says-john-kerry>
, the transition is supposed to begin by August. If it does not, Saudi Arabia 
has hinted that it may provide heavier weapons to rebel forces. Kerry has 
referred vaguely to a plan B, but few expect dramatic change in Barack Obama’s 
final months in the White House.


Turkey and Qatar, key supporters of rebel groups, are resisting efforts by the 
Russians to include Kurds and regime-friendly opposition elements in the Geneva 
talks. But other Arab countries are alarmed at the strength of the Nusra Front, 
al-Qaida’s Syrian affiliate, and the Saudi-backed Jaysh al-Fateh.


Riyad Hijab, the head of the rebel higher negotiations committee, has insisted 
that there will be no return to Geneva unless Syrian civilians are protected 
from regime airstrikes, sieges are broken and thousands of prisoners are 
released.

“Kerry has been making noises about consequences for violations of the 
ceasefire, but I don’t think they have much to offer, or anything that will 
change things in a significant way,” one opposition adviser said.

Rebels are sceptical about the value of diplomacy. “Syrians don’t need more 
theatrical meetings in Geneva or Vienna but food, medicines & safe zones,” 
tweeted one opposition network@RevolutionSyria 
<https://twitter.com/RevolutionSyria>. “While the world talks ‘peace’ 
...Assad’s gangs are busy literally butchering people in Syria.”

Earlier this month, a surge in bloodshed in Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/russia-united-nations-discuss-aleppo-truce-syria>
 wrecked the 10-week-old partial truce sponsored by Washington and Moscow that 
had allowed the UN-brokered talks to carry on.


Meanwhile, opposition activists reported shelling over the weekend in the 
besieged town of Daraya, where aid deliveries have been blocked by the Syrian 
government and children were filmed making cake out of mud. The UN has said
conditions imposed by the regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/08/starvation-in-syria-remains-weapon-of-war-despite-partial-ceasefire>
 are “unacceptable.”

The US and Russia have been urged to act on their commitment to investigate 
attacks with significant civilian casualties. Human Rights Watch said they 
should open investigations into anairstrike on a camp for displaced people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/syrian-military-denies-airstrikes-refugee-camp-russia-aleppo-un-war-crime>
 and the killings of civilians by armed groups in a majority Alawite village 
earlier this month.


Moscow and Washington are the co-chairmen of the ISSG’s ceasefire taskforce, 
based in Geneva. “These recent attacks should be a test for the resolve of the 
US and Russia to put an end to the unlawful killing of civilians inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>,” said HRW’s Nadim Houry.

The opposition National Coalition also called on the ISSG to establish a task 
force to deal with the plight of thousands of detainees and “forcibly 
disappeared persons” who are assumed to be held by the Syrian government.
 