
Former prime minister Kevin Rudd’s failed “secret” plan for a national museum 
for Indigenous Australians 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/revealed-kevin-rudds-lost-plan-for-a-national-museum-of-indigenous-australians-in-canberra-20160926-grp39r.html>
 highlighted a negligent omission in this country’s celebration and 
preservation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture and 60,000-year 
civilisation.

In 2009 Rudd, it seems, had in mind a “significant architectural monument and 
educative institution” in the vein of or Washington’s Smithsonian National 
Museum of the American Indian or, perhaps, the recently dedicatedNational 
Museum of African American History and Culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/24/smithsonian-museum-african-american-history-culture-slavery-dc-music>
.

But Labor rolled him, the idea died and was never, apparently, resurrected 
when he was back as prime minister in 2013.

The Gweagal shield and the fight to change the British Museum's attitude to 
seized artefacts | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/25/the-gweagal-shield-and-the-fight-to-change-the-british-museums-attitude-to-seized-artefacts>
Rudd, it should be said, was not the first prominent Australian to determine 
the need for such a museum. Indeed, plenty of people continue to agitate behind 
the scenes for an institution rooted not only in history, anthropology and 
archaeology but in living culture, which would fill the present yawning void.

Museology, especially in the Indigenous space, is on the edge of a significant 
global reformation. The Smithsonian is in some ways at the vanguard.

Increasingly, museums that supposedly serve as portals into Indigenous worlds 
must re-evaluate whether their primary purposes rest in collecting or 
repatriating, keeping or returning. These vexing questions are challenging some 
of the world’s oldest collecting institutions with significant Aboriginal 
holdings, including theBritish Museum, which has some 6,000 Indigenous 
Australian pieces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/25/the-gweagal-shield-and-the-fight-to-change-the-british-museums-attitude-to-seized-artefacts>
 in its collection.

The British Museum is under increasing pressure, not least from Australian 
Indigenous peoples, to permanently return items in its collection, many of 
which were acquired under circumstances that were at best ambiguous or at worst 
extremely violent, as frontier conflict raged across the Australian continent 
in line with dispossession and pastoral settlement, after invasion in 1788.

In Canberra earlier this year Richard West, chief executive of the Autry 
Museum of the American West and founding director of the Smithsonian American 
Indian museum, said that in the past decade both museums had returned tens of 
thousands of objects to contemporary native communities in the US and other 
parts of the Americas.

“In the early days I would occasionally receive a letter decrying my purported 
decimation, as the director of the NMAI, of the native collection over which I 
presided,”he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/mar/22/indigenous-treasures-briefly-on-loan-to-australia-are-about-to-be-taken-away-again>
.

My response was simple, and it ran along these lines. First I am required to 
abide by federal laws with which, by the way, I happen to agree. Second the 
NMAI’s collections originally consisted of almost 1,000,000 objects, and we 
have to date repatriated 30,000 of them which leaves us with 970,000 – I think 
we will be able to remain in business as a museum. In addition, as direct 
collateral of repatriation, both the NMAI and the Autry learned much more about 
their native collections.

Meanwhile John Carty, the new head of anthropology at the traditionally 
conservative South Australian Museum, says he is determined to “open the 
museum’s custodianship” of the collection and to start new discussions about 
best-practice models of curating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
artefacts.

“There are many questions, many discussions, to be had about how and why 
museums must really only hold these things in trust for their owners – there 
are big discussions about how some materials should be reconnected with their 
people and country of provenance, loaned to them or, indeed, even returned,”he 
said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/sep/03/an-indigenous-curator-for-indigenous-artefacts-south-australia-breaks-new-ground>
.

So, precisely what functions should any new institution dedicated to 
celebrating and showcasing Indigenous Australian history and culture serve?

Canberra already has the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander Studies (AIATSIS) – a celebrated research and collecting institution 
with an extraordinarily rich collection of archives, material and oral history, 
and much else besides. (It is, unfortunately, not physically capable of 
mounting large public exhibitions.)

The National Museum of Australia also has a significant holding of Indigenous 
material. So, too, does the National Gallery of Australia (the only national 
institution in Canberra with a monument dedicated to the many tens of thousands 
ofIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> who died in 
frontier conflict).

Significantly, the national museum is also the repository of remains belonging 
to hundreds of Indigenous Australians whose bodies were stolen – after murder 
in frontier conflict, from institutions or from their graves – and amassed in 
collections throughout the world.

Museums <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums> in every Australian 
state have holdings of Indigenous human remains that cannot – for a variety of 
reasons – be returned to country.

There is a pressing need for a “keeping place” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/oct/13/keeping-place-for-stolen-indigenous-remains-should-take-priority-over-anzac-centre>
 for these remains. The national capital would be the ideal place for it. Why 
not, then, combine such a keeping place with a memorial to those Indigenous 
people killed in the frontier war – and a museum/educational institution 
dedicated to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, culture and history?

Such an institution could serve as a repository for Indigenous items returned 
from overseas museums such as the British Museum (which invariably cite as an 
impediment to repatriation the unavailability of suitable permanent keeping 
places for precious items in Indigenous communities). It could be a hub for 
repatriated items that could be returned temporarily to country or loaned to 
other smaller regional museums and galleries.

The primary aim of the collection function of the museum could be reconnecting 
– physically, spiritually and in a literal sense of ownership – communities 
with long lost, significant cultural items.

If mutually agreeable conditions could be met, such items could be returned to 
country or be hubbed in and out of Canberra to communities, nearby galleries 
and museums, as part of the conditionality of repatriation. But they would 
belong once again to communities to which they’d be taken on visitation.

Keeping place for stolen Indigenous remains should take priority over Anzac 
centre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/oct/13/keeping-place-for-stolen-indigenous-remains-should-take-priority-over-anzac-centre>
Think, then, of a kind of reverse museum – one that exists not to appropriate 
and amass the cultural property of Indigenous people, but rather to repatriate 
them, to effectively turn collections back over to country.

Successive federal governments have stalled on the need for a keeping place. 
Tony Abbott, self-declared prime minister for Indigenous affairs, sat on a 
report recommending the immediate establishment of a keeping place.

The Rudd-Gillard-Rudd governments, cognisant of the need, never moved on it.

Rudd, of course, was the PM who apologised (in tightly legal terms so as to 
avoid reparations) to the stolen generations. But he never moved adequately on 
acknowledging the evils frontier war and the many other malevolent elements of 
Australian history that stemmed from invasion, violent dispossession and 
assimilation.

There is a pressing need for a cutting edge museum/keeping place for the 
Indigenous Australian.

But best we keep it out of the hands of the politicians.
 