
A woman who was kidnapped and held captive for three weeks after leaving her 
northernCalifornia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> home to jog 
was found safe on the side of a rural road bound in restraints, a local sheriff 
said Friday.

Authorities were looking for two armed women they believe abducted Sherri 
Papini, 34, on 2 November, Shasta County sheriff Tom Bosenko said in an 
interview on Good Morning America.

Papini was found around 4.30am on Thanksgiving morning near Interstate 5 and 
was able to flag down a driver, Bosenko said. The driver called authorities, 
who connected the mother of two to her husband by cellphone.

“She was very emotional to be released and hear her husband’s voice and then a 
few hours later to be reunited with him,” the sheriff said.

Papini was treated at a Sacramento-area hospital for unspecified injuries and 
released. Officials said they were not aware of a motive for the kidnapping and 
did not know if Papini knew the women who kidnapped her. She was found about 
150 miles south of where she disappeared in Redding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fkidnapped-california-jogger-sherri-papini-found-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F958373266f9acc9a18b5295f881ada15c624006a%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kidnapped%20California%20jogger%20found%20safe%20on%20roadside%20in%20restraints%2C%20sheriff%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fkidnapped-california-jogger-sherri-papini-found-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kidnapped%20California%20jogger%20found%20safe%20on%20roadside%20in%20restraints%2C%20sheriff%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fkidnapped-california-jogger-sherri-papini-found-alive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F958373266f9acc9a18b5295f881ada15c624006a%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Redding sheriff Tom Bosenko shares details of Sherri Papini’s case. 
Photograph: Andrew Seng/AP 
Investigators have spoken with Papini but hoped to get more information soon 
in the effort to uncover what had happened over the last three weeks, Bosenko 
said. They did not have information on where she was kept or if the abduction 
was planned or impulsive.

“Obviously she was emotional and quite upset, but elated to be freed, and so 
we were able to get some information from her,” Bosenko said. “Then, in the 
days following this, we will be following up with her.”

Family members previously called her a “super mom” who would never abandon her 
family. Her husband reported her missing when she failed to pick up their two 
young children from daycare, something her family members said was completely 
out of character,according to the Sacramento Bee 
<http://www.sacbee.com/news/local/crime/article116905068.html>. 

Her cellphone, headphones and a few strands of hair 
<http://www.sacbee.com/news/local/article114313103.html> were found near where 
she was last seen.

Her husband was cleared as a suspect after passing a polygraph test and 
allowing the sheriff’s office to search the family’s computers and property 
with a warrant. Before she was found, he said he was “getting very angry and 
frustrated” and “scared for my wife”.

Rod Rodriguez III, who identified himself on Facebook as the father-in-law of 
both Sherri and Keith Papini, her husband, posted a message of gratitude to a 
local crime watching group on Facebook on Thursday afternoon.

“On behalf of Sherri’s family I want to thank all of you so much for your 
support and prayers which were answered this morning,”he wrote. 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/1525604334396831/permalink/1693699344253995/> 
“The way the community came together and assisted us is simply astonishing and 
so appreciated by all of us. I don’t know how we can repay our debt of 
gratitude to all of you.”

Rodriguez went on to thank law enforcement for working “tirelessly” on the 
case and said that while the family had no details on the case, they were 
“joyous” Papini was found alive. “This is a Thanksgiving beyond belief for all 
of us,” he said.

Police had received more than 400 tips in the case, but Papini’s release was 
not the result of a $100,000 reward that was offered, Bosenko said.

Papini’s disappearance happened months after three women were murdered in a 
nine-day period while jogging in broad daylight. The women’s murders happened 
in Michigan, New York City and Massachusetts and are probably unrelated – but 
their deaths in typically safe circumstancesrenewed a conversation about 
women’s safety <http://www.runnersworld.com/running-while-female> while running.

A survey released by Runner’s World magazine 
<http://www.runnersworld.com/running-while-female> last week showed that 54% of 
women at least “sometimes” are concerned they could be physically assaulted or 
receive unwanted physical contact on a run, compared to 7% of men.
 