
A man who broke into a family home and stabbed a mother of two to death while 
she was on the phone to her husband has been given an indefinite hospital order.


Nicola Cross, 37, was killed defending her two small children on the night of 
14 September 2015 while her husband was away on business.

The terrified mother phoned her husband, Dan, after Marcin Porczyński, a car 
mechanic who lived a few streets away, smashed his way into the house at about 
11.30pm in a psychotic state.

Last Friday at St Albans crown court he pleaded not guilty to murder, but 
guilty to manslaughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/16/man-pleads-guilty-to-killing-woman-while-her-husband-listened-on-phone>
 on the grounds of diminished responsibility.

It emerged during the police investigation that he had paranoid schizophrenia 
and had been hearing voices telling him to save children who were being starved.

After killing Cross, 37, he tried to take her two young children away from the 
house in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire.

On Monday, Judge Andrew Bright QC ordered that Porczyński should be detained 
at Rampton secure hospital in Nottinghamshire under a hospital order with a 
restriction without limit of time.

Cross’s husband was in court to hear the judge tell Porczyński: “The 
circumstances in which you killed Nicola Cross were utterly horrific and 
senseless and represent the worst possible nightmare of every husband and 
parent.

“You have devastated the lives of the Cross family and left two young children 
to grow up without the wonderful mother who so loved and cared for them.

“Those responsible for deciding if and when you should ever be released back 
into the community will need to look long and hard at the full circumstances of 
the dreadful killing which your mental illness led you to commit.

“The paramount consideration which must govern any decision about your release 
must be the safety of the public.

“You must not be released until those responsible for your care and treatment 
are completely satisfied that you no longer pose a danger and that you will be 
subject to qualified medical supervision which will be sufficient to ensure the 
safety of the public in whichever country you may choose to live.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnicola-cross-killer-marcin-porczynski-held-indefinitely-secure-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3fa226c5ba2b32d1da0a9b85afb0a9c322883c%2F0_333_2142_1284%2F2142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Killer%20of%20Nicola%20Cross%20to%20be%20held%20indefinitely%20in%20secure%20hospital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnicola-cross-killer-marcin-porczynski-held-indefinitely-secure-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Killer%20of%20Nicola%20Cross%20to%20be%20held%20indefinitely%20in%20secure%20hospital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnicola-cross-killer-marcin-porczynski-held-indefinitely-secure-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3fa226c5ba2b32d1da0a9b85afb0a9c322883c%2F0_333_2142_1284%2F2142.jpg>
 The court was told that Porczyński should remain on medication for the rest of 
his life. Photograph: Hertfordshire police/PA 
On Friday, consultant forensic psychiatrist Dr Philip Joseph told the court 
that Porczyński needed medication for the rest of his life. He may wish to 
return to Poland but there would need to be assurances that he remained on 
medication so he did not lapse into psychosis and pose a danger to the public, 
whether in Poland, in the UK, or any other country in future.

The judge told Porczyński, who appeared via a video link from Rampton: “As you 
were breaking in, Nicola Cross was on the phone to her husband, Daniel. 
Although Nicola Cross tried to reason with you and heroically did her best to 
protect herself and her two young children from you, she was completely 
defenceless against the vicious knife attack you launched upon her.”

Bright said “no one could fail to be deeply moved” by the victim impact 
statements of Daniel Cross, Nicola Cross’s mother and her sister and “the 
account they give of the devastating effect which her death had upon each of 
them and upon the two young children she left behind”.

He said: “It is plainly necessary for the protection of the public from 
serious harm to impose a restriction order because there is currently a serious 
risk that you would commit further offences if set at large.”
 