
In a feat that breaks one of the most obscure world records in science, a team 
of chemists has created a microscopic circular triple helix, or put in more 
simple terms, the tightest knot ever made.

Researchers in Manchester in the UK built the knot from a strand of atoms 
which curls around in a triple loop and crosses itself eight times. Made from 
192 atoms linked in a chain, the knot is only two millionths of a millimetre 
wide – around 200,000 times thinner than a human hair.


The construction of the knot is more than a demonstration of the precise 
control with which chemists can now manipulate objects on the atomic scale. In 
learning how to weave with strands of atoms, scientists hope to make possible a 
whole new world of materials.


“We know how revolutionary knotting and weaving were for people in the stone 
age. It had an impact on clothing, tools, fishing nets and so on. Maybe we’ll 
see just as great advantages from being able to do this with molecular 
strands,” said David Leigh, a professor of chemistry at the University of 
Manchester.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvccGHnIw8ds&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvccGHnIw8ds>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvccGHnIw8ds&media=>
 X-ray crystal structure of a molecular knot with eight crossings. Credit: 
Robert W. McGregor/ www.mcgregorfineart.com 
The tightness of a knot is defined by the distance between points where the 
rope, string – or chain of atoms, in this case – cross each other. For the 
Manchester group’s circular triple helix, each crossing point is a mere 24 
atoms apart. “That’s very, very tight indeed,” said Leigh. “It is definitely 
the most tightly knotted physical structure known.”


The beauty of mathematics – in pictures | Alex Bellos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland/gallery/2014/may/14/beauty-visions-mathematics-pictures>
Building molecular knots has become something of a passion for Leigh. The 
latest knot beats the record his own team set four years ago when they created 
a so-calledpentafoil knot <http://www.catenane.net/pages/2012knot_hologram.html>
 from 160 atoms. That knot bested an even earlier effort called atrefoil knot 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201105012/abstract> with three 
crossing points. “There are actually billions of different knots known to 
mathematicians,” Leigh said in a comment that hinted at a busy future.


The new knot, designed and built with research associate Jonathan Danon and 
others, assembles itself from a solution that contains four strands of carbon, 
nitrogen and oxygen atoms. When mixed with iron and chloride ions in a heated 
solvent, the atomic threads form the basic shape of the knot in about a day. In 
a second step, the ends of each strand are fused together to make a continuous 
loop of atoms. The metal and chloride ions are then washed away, leaving only 
the knot behind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fknotty-professors-chemists-break-world-record-to-create-tightest-knot-ever-made%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14751df681f5490d3799dfc355228462a6a6467d%2F0_0_8376_5917%2F8376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Knotty%20professors%3A%20chemists%20break%20world%20record%20to%20create%20tightest%20knot%20ever%20made&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fknotty-professors-chemists-break-world-record-to-create-tightest-knot-ever-made%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Knotty%20professors%3A%20chemists%20break%20world%20record%20to%20create%20tightest%20knot%20ever%20made&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fknotty-professors-chemists-break-world-record-to-create-tightest-knot-ever-made%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14751df681f5490d3799dfc355228462a6a6467d%2F0_0_8376_5917%2F8376.jpg>
 Assembly of a molecular knot. Photograph: David Leigh, University of Manchester
“These strands we are knotting are so small that you can’t grab the ends and 
tie them like you would a shoelace. Instead we use a chemical process called 
self assembly, where we mix the organic building blocks with ions that the 
building blocks then wrap around to make crossing points in the right places,” 
Leigh said.


The scientists designed the knot with help from computers and pipe cleaners, 
but until they mixed all the components together, were unsure whether it would 
work. The confirmation they hoped for came in x-ray crystallography images that 
revealed the exquisite symmetry of the molecular knot. “It’s a beautiful 
structure,” Leigh said.


The scientists have already found a use for the pentafoil knot they made in 
2012. In recent work, it became clear that the knotted backbone of the 
pentafoil structure made it a good catalyst for chemical reactions.


“Knots should be just as important, versatile and useful in the molecular 
world as they are in our everyday world,” Leigh said. “But if we can’t tie 
different sorts of knots, we won’t know what those properties are and how to 
make use of them.”
 