
HM Revenue & Customs has been asked by an influential Labour MP to launch an 
urgent investigation into an aggressive tax avoidance scheme used by 
recruitment agencies that is depriving the taxpayer of “hundreds of millions” 
of pounds.

Frank Field, the chairman of the House of Commons work and pensions select 
committee, also asked that Jon Thompson, chief executive and permanent 
secretary to HMRC, looks into recouping any revenues lost afterdetails of the 
scheme were revealed by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
 on Tuesday.

Revealed: temp agencies' avoidance scheme costs taxpayers 'hundreds of 
millions'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
In his letter to HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc>, Field said: 
“Given the potential scale of this racket, and the size of the sums that 
taxpayers otherwise have to pay, might you please consider launching an urgent 
investigation into recruitment agencies’ tax arrangements? Might you also act 
swiftly to recoup all of the monies that may have been squirrelled away by 
those agencies found to have been avoiding tax in this way?”

The Labour MP has also tabled a written parliamentary question to Philip 
Hammond asking about an HMRC investigation. Field asked the chancellor: “Having 
a Britain that works for all of us, as the prime minister wishes, means that 
HMRC prevents tax being optional. We need an inquiry, and for it to be followed 
up with firm action, to bring an end to double standards on tax.”

Guardian undercover footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/15/revealed-how-employment-agencies-avoid-tax-video>
 shows Patrick Griffin of Premier Payco, a provider of the schemes, outlining 
how workers’ contracts are being transferred from a single employment agency 
into a web of thousands of tiny companies to benefit from an accumulation of 
small tax breaks, and how each of these tiny companies is ostensibly run by 
overseas directors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-mp-frank-field-calls-for-urgent-investigation-tax-avoidance-scheme-hmrc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe002ca6d2d5d447093bb8b93a7b0de716d7568d2%2F86_68_3898_2339%2F3898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20MP%20calls%20for%20urgent%20investigation%20into%20tax%20avoidance%20scheme&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-mp-frank-field-calls-for-urgent-investigation-tax-avoidance-scheme-hmrc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20MP%20calls%20for%20urgent%20investigation%20into%20tax%20avoidance%20scheme&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-mp-frank-field-calls-for-urgent-investigation-tax-avoidance-scheme-hmrc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe002ca6d2d5d447093bb8b93a7b0de716d7568d2%2F86_68_3898_2339%2F3898.jpg>
 Frank Field: ‘We need an inquiry, to bring an end to double standards on tax.’ 
Photograph: PA 
Last year, HMRC advised anybody using such a scheme to notify it to “avoid the 
costs of litigation and minimise any interest and penalties due on underpaid 
national insurance”.

However, despite that warning, the Guardian understands that there has been a 
spike in the number of firms marketing similar schemes since April, when the 
government closed down a different tax avoidance scheme widely used by the 
employment agency sector.

Jolyon Maugham QC, a tax barrister at Devereux Chambers,said on Tuesday that 
“the loss to the exchequer of this sort of abuse runs into the hundreds of 
millions, if not billions, of NICs [national insurance contributions], and 
prospectively VAT.”
Field’s move came as Labour and trade unions also called on the government to 
take action. Rebecca Long-Bailey, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, 
said such agencies were “exploiting loopholes in the law in their pursuit of 
profit”.

Iain Wright MP, the chairman of the business select committee which is 
conducting an inquiry into the future world of work and rights of workers, 
added: “There are two questions with temporary employment agencies. First, is 
the flexibility used in agencies’ business models when a lot of the workers 
they employ should be on full time contracts? And secondly, are they just 
conning a whole range of people, whether that is the individual or the general 
taxpayer?

“Tax receipts are going down because these companies are distorting proper tax 
rules with disingenuous arguments, as well as the issues we saw with the likes 
of Sports Direct, where agencies which employed temporary workers on behalf of 
the companies charge fees to workers for insurance or for payment cards that 
allow them to receive their wages. There is a larger question about where 
agencies go from here.

“These are the sorts of questions our inquiry is interested in tackling.”
 