
Labour and trade unions have called on the government to take action after a 
Guardian investigation found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
 that an aggressive tax avoidance scheme used by temporary recruitment agencies 
is depriving the taxpayer of “hundreds of millions” of pounds a year.

Agencies have made large sums by using “contrived” financial arrangements to 
slash their employer’s national insurance bills and by exploiting VAT rules 
originally designed to benefit very small businesses.

Guardian undercover footage shows Patrick Griffin of Premier Payco, a provider 
of the schemes, outlining how workers’ contracts are transferred from a single 
employment agency into a web of thousands of tiny companies, to benefit from an 
accumulation of small tax breaks, and how each of the companies is ostensibly 
run by overseas directors.

Rebecca Long-Bailey, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said such 
agencies were “exploiting loopholes in the law in their pursuit of profit”.

“Not only do these kind of tax avoidance schemes place workers employed by 
agencies involved in an unacceptably precarious position, not knowing what will 
happen to their jobs should the company be investigated, they deny the 
exchequer significant revenue,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-trade-unions-demand-action-temp-agencies-tax-avoidance-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9134d8eff27c45228f795469cdf380422dde973%2F1321_0_4201_3840%2F4201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20and%20unions%20demand%20action%20on%20temp%20agencies%E2%80%99%20tax%20avoidance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-trade-unions-demand-action-temp-agencies-tax-avoidance-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20and%20unions%20demand%20action%20on%20temp%20agencies%E2%80%99%20tax%20avoidance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-trade-unions-demand-action-temp-agencies-tax-avoidance-scheme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9134d8eff27c45228f795469cdf380422dde973%2F1321_0_4201_3840%2F4201.jpg>
 Rebecca Long-Bailey. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The government had “failed to tackle tax avoidance head on” and had reduced 
the ability of HMRC officials to do so, Long-Bailey said. “Labour will shut 
down these aggressive schemes through our tax transparency and enforcement 
programme to get a fair deal for workers and for the Treasury.”

The construction union Ucatt said it hoped the Guardian investigation would 
prompt the government to take action. Its acting general secretary, Brian Rye, 
said: “Maybe with this latest example of what we consider criminal behaviour, 
HMRC will finally allocate the resources to clean up the dodgy world of 
employment agencies and put a stop to the daylight robbery carried out against 
the British taxpayer and the British construction worker.”

Last year, HMRC advised anybody using such a scheme to notify it to “avoid the 
costs of litigation and minimise any interest and penalties due on underpaid 
national insurance”.

However, despite that warning, the Guardian understands that there has been a 
spike in the number of firms marketing similar schemes since April, when the 
government closed down a different tax avoidance scheme widely used by the 
employment agency sector.

How can you tell if a temp agency is using a tax avoidance scheme?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/temp-agency-tax-avoidance-scheme-national-insurance>
Asked about the ethics of profiting at the expense of the taxpayer, the 
Guardian footage shows Griffin saying: “All I can do is explain to you what our 
product does. It’s right for some businesses and it’s wrong for other 
businesses. I’ve sat where you’re sat and you make your own judgments and 
decisions on that. All I can do is present to you the case that what we’re 
doing is effective, it works and it complies with all of the laws as they’re 
currently written.”


Griffin said his company has a QC’s opinion stating that the Premier Payco 
scheme legally helps clients avoid taxes, because it is based on “genuine” 
commercial relationships between the interacting companies and had not been 
created specifically to avoid tax.


However, not all tax lawyers agree. Having been shown Premier Payco marketing 
documents and viewed sections of the Guardian’s undercover footage, Jolyon 
Maugham QC, a tax barrister at Devereux Chambers, said: “It’s a not 
particularly sophisticated piece of failed tax avoidance because, having read 
through the document, I have no real doubt that the scheme doesn’t work.

“So what it does, it piles up tax liabilities in a [tiny] shell company and it 
does so in a way that the organisers of the scheme know that those tax 
liabilities will never be met. So that shell company will fold if HMRC ever 
catches up with it and HMRC – and indeed by extension the rest of us – will be 
kept out of the tax that we need to fund schools and hospitals, and pensions 
and social care.”

Maugham said the salesman was “doing a soft-shoe shuffle on what is the 
critical question of law, which is whether one of the main purposes of these 
arrangements is to obtain a tax saving. As I listen to [Griffin’s] answer and 
as I read the documents you’ve been provided with, it’s abundantly clear to me 
that this is one of the main purposes.

“It is perfectly reasonable to think the loss to the exchequer of this sort of 
abuse runs into the hundreds of millions if not billions of NICs [national 
insurance contributions], and prospectively VAT,” he said.

More than 7m Britons now in precarious employment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/more-than-7m-britons-in-precarious-employment>
The sale of these schemes is being ramped up despite concern about their 
efficacy, the Guardian understands.

The HMRC notice followed a BBC report on similar arrangements being marketed 
by asupplier called Anderson Group <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-32914372>
.

In the notice 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/spotlight-24-employment-allowance-avoidance-scheme-contrived-arrangements-caught-by-existing-rules/spotlight-24-employment-allowance-avoidance-scheme-contrived-arrangements-caught-by-existing-rules>
, HMRC said: “Attempted avoidance schemes like this, which seek to use 
artificial and contrived arrangements to get an unintended advantage, do not 
work. HMRC’s firm view is that such schemes are notifiable under thedisclosure 
of tax avoidance schemes 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/disclosure-of-tax-avoidance-schemes-overview> 
rules. Anyone who comes within the meaning of a promoter for such a scheme who 
has not notified it under the Dotas rules could be liable for a fine of up to 
£1m.”

The employment agencies identified by the Guardian as using these schemes 
supply temporary labour to some of the UK’s best-known brands, as well as the 
public sector.


Premier Payco, which claims to have 6,000 workers enrolled on its system, 
cites recruitment group MTrec as one of its clients. MTrec supplies workers to 
the NHS and a series of industrial clients.

HRGO, an agency that uses a similar product, has a major contract with support 
services group G4S and says it supplies workers to the NHS as well as the 
prison service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-trade-unions-demand-action-temp-agencies-tax-avoidance-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87fe60438054394b14450effa4f46630055af3f4%2F497_55_2885_1731%2F2885.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20and%20unions%20demand%20action%20on%20temp%20agencies%E2%80%99%20tax%20avoidance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-trade-unions-demand-action-temp-agencies-tax-avoidance-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20and%20unions%20demand%20action%20on%20temp%20agencies%E2%80%99%20tax%20avoidance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Flabour-trade-unions-demand-action-temp-agencies-tax-avoidance-scheme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87fe60438054394b14450effa4f46630055af3f4%2F497_55_2885_1731%2F2885.jpg>
 A number of the companies identified by the Guardian as using avoidance 
schemes supply workers to the NHS. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA 
Another employment agency called Jark, which also places its workers with the 
NHS as well as FTSE 100 companies such as Shell and Burberry, is understood to 
be using an employment allowance product supplied by financial services group 
Contrella.

Because each mini employment company created in these schemes employs only two 
or three workers, the taxes it has to pay on its wage bill are small. That 
small tax bill can be effectively eradicated by each mini company claiming a
£3,000 government subsidy <https://www.gov.uk/claim-employment-allowance> 
called the employment allowance, which can only be claimed once by a company 
and was designed to help very small businesses create more jobs or increase 
wages.

The mini employment companies can also generate an additional windfall by 
charging VAT at 20% but paying it back to the government at about 12%, 
exploiting arrangements designed to free very small businesses with revenues of 
less than £150,000 a year from red tape.

Marketing materials produced by Premier Payco and seen by the Guardian claim 
the company has 6,000 temporary workers enrolled in its scheme. Along with 
similar products supplied by providers such as Contrella and Anderson Group, 
one employment agency insider calculates that the exchequer is losing about 
£100m a year from the schemes alone.

A spokesman for Premier Payco said: “We are confident that we operate within 
all relevant guidance and legislation, and we constantly review the regulatory 
landscape to ensure our ongoing compliance by reference to leading counsel, tax 
advisers and employment specialists.”

Anderson Group said that it had taken QCs’ advice on the services to ensure 
the arrangements were legal and compliant with any relevant legislation, and 
that it had offered schemes on behalf of a client. Contrella did not respond to 
invitations to comment.

Among the agencies using this type of arrangement, HRGO and Jark said they 
took compliance seriously and had taken legal advice before signing up with any 
suppliers of this type of scheme. MTrec did not respond to invitations to 
comment.

Burberry and G4S said they had not benefited from any of the tax arrangements 
of their employment agencies. Shell declined to comment.
 