
In the wake of the Brexit vote, a lot of Australians are asking: how did it 
come to this?

The media is now recording the phenomenon of “Regrexit” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/06/25/politics/uk-referendum-regrexit/>: that’s 
“leave” campaign voters taking to the internet to disavow their nation-changing 
decision. Suggestions by leave campaigners that EU membership fees would be 
reinvested in the beleaguered National Health Service have beenexposed as a lie 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/brexit-latest-nigel-farage-nhs-pledge-350-million-pounds-eu-referendum-vote-leave-lie-a7100706.html>
. There are decisiveleave-voting towns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/25/view-wales-town-showered-eu-cash-votes-leave-ebbw-vale>
 now waking to the realisation that their economies were sustained by EU 
investment, andbegging for protection 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/brexit-cornwall-issues-plea-for-funding-protection-after-county-overwhelmingly-votes-in-favour-of-a7101311.html>
 that’s unlikely to come.

From an intercontinental distance, watching the new British misery of a 
collapsed pound devaluing trillions of UK investments in pensions and 
threatening British jobs is confounding. A look at the results map exposes that 
the communities most vulnerable to these economic shocks and collapses voted 
leave.

Australian election 2016: John Howard says Coalition hasn't ruled out more 
industrial relations reform – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/27/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-politics-live>
Why did traditional British Labour voters in working class areas vote for 
Britain to leave the EU? How could they?

I lived in Britain for 10 years, and like any curious international who lived 
anywhere out of London, I can tell you the answers are obvious, and economic.

Britain has deregulated its labour market more than Australia has. The central 
tenets of Thatcherism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/14/margaret-thatcher-20-changes-britain?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 were not reversed by Labour successor, Tony Blair.Others have explained 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/themargaretthatcheryears/1895878/Margaret-Thatcher-inspiration-to-New-Labour.html>
:

Blair’s programme for the 1997 election confirmed all Mrs Thatcher’s 
free-market reforms of a deregulated, non-planned, largely privatised economy 
with a flexible labour market, marginalising the trade unions and local 
authorities.

The manufacturing industries Thatcher smashed were not revived. Low-paid 
service industry jobs proliferate, minimum wage is shockingly low, staff 
protections are tiny.Zero-hours-contracts 
<http://www.ier.org.uk/blog/public-sector-privatisation-leads-increased-exploitation-workers>
 – where you are not guaranteed work but you must turn up to work whenever your 
boss calls you in or lose your job – are everywhere.

And compounding the misery of work is a society stripped of its most basic 
infrastructure. “Austerity” just means cutting funding to things that 
conservatives do not like: universal healthcare, welfare, public education and 
all other means to equalise society. British prime minister, David Cameron, has 
made plenty of economic excuses to slash funding to these services for the past 
six years and everything fromlibraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/27/loss-libraries-entrench-inequality-poor-family>
, to community centres, to homeless shelters even tocovered market 
<http://www.thenorthernecho.co.uk/news/14252853.Council_cuts__Libraries_to_close_and_covered_market_to_be_sold_off_as_Darlington_Council_outlines___12_5m_cuts_plan/>
s, have been stripped, sold off or shut.

What’s been done to run down health, education, welfare and community 
development have left entire communities of exploited, low paid or unemployed 
workers to fend for themselves.

When you are presiding over the piece-by-piece privatisation of a beloved 
health service, the reduction in funding to local schools, making universities 
inaccessible to all but the rich, and allowing workplace exploitation, in order 
to head off electoral defeat, you need a scapegoat.

So for the past decade and a half, the Tories and their allies in the press 
have seeded a demonisation of “immigrants” and the “foreigners” who make 
decisions in the European parliament in Brussels as the source of Britain’s 
woes.While only 6% of the British workforce 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/06fc7c9a-0e1d-11e6-b41f-0beb7e589515.html#axzz4Ck3fuqHY>
 are those who’ve travelled there from EU countries, their mere difference to 
the locals is enough to render them an easy target for blame-campaigns run by 
politicians and tabloids who don’t want British workers to identify the real 
problem: cushy industrial relations laws for rich British capitalists who 
themselvessoak up tax concessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/14/uk-uncut-vodafone>, exploit 
workers and who personally have the cash to pay for health and education so 
have no care if it’s taken away from others.

Stop me if any of this sounds familiar. Like maybe a Liberal party election 
launch on Sunday, where Malcolm Turnbull invoked the spectre of refugees, 
asylum seekers, boat arrivals, border security, yet again, while advancing his 
detail-starved “plan” to hand $50bn in tax cuts to Australia’s richest 
corporations at the direct expense of health funding, education and the very 
shared fabric of our society.

Or DON’T stop me, stop Turnbull, as more of Turnbull means more of the same 
conservative politics, the same pursuit of conditions here that have divided 
Britain into a country that’s eating itself. Out campaigning for his Liberal 
mates on Monday, former prime minister John Howard has helpfully reminded 
everyone of the obvious: that the Coalitionhas not ruled out proceeding with 
more labour market deregulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/27/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-politics-live?page=with:block-577081dfe4b0be24d34f63a9#block-577081dfe4b0be24d34f63a9>
 after the election.

Attacks on unions. The smashing of independent workplace tribunals. The 
“flexibility” of supply chain contracting, more outsourcing, cuts to penalty 
rates and easier mass retrenchments. An insistence that black is white, up is 
down, and a plan to outsource Medicare piece by piece is somehow not a process 
of privatisation. Listen to the rhetoric of “flexibility” and a “new economy” 
suggested by Turnbull but never explained in his economic “plan” and then look 
how happily he and Peter Dutton and the rest of them will ramp up the rhetoric 
about refugees, or terrorists, or any other code word for “brown people” they 
can find.

Malcolm Turnbull's attack on independents 'remarkably arrogant', say senators
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/27/malcolm-turnbulls-attack-on-independents-remarkably-arrogant-say-senators>
The good news that Australians must recognise in this election is that Bill 
Shorten is not Tony Blair nor Jeremy Corbyn, nor is he Kevin Rudd or Julia 
Gillard. For the first time in too long a time, the AustralianLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> is advancing an 
articulate, outright alternative to the economics on offer from the other side.

It does, actually, make a difference that Labor is fighting not only for the 
funding of Medicare, but for its value to us as a nation. It makes a difference 
that their economic vision is one where investing in an education system for 
all children is the means to foster invention, creativity and 
entrepreneurialism. It is a crucial difference that they are pursuing overdue 
fairness mechanisms in the taxation system, a royal commission into activities 
of the banks and it means everything that they are going to election with 
nuanced, detailed strategy to fight – actually fight – against the exploitation 
of Australians in the workplace.

I understand the result of the Brexit vote because for all my degrees and 
fancy education, circumstances compelled me into in the hard and miserable 
low-wage economy when I lived in Britain. I got out because I could come home, 
and it’s to protect this home that I write this now.

Ahead of our own momentous decision this week, please imagine your own life in 
a Turnbull future of unprotected wages and conditions, run-down infrastructure, 
tax cuts for the rich and no hope for anyone without wealth, and then you tell 
me you wouldn’t seize at any vicious, mad, self-defeating action if it just let 
you enjoy, whatever the consequences, having someone – anyone – to blame.
 