
Seumas Milne remains on the staff of the Guardian and Observer while Labour 
pays him to work as its director of strategy. As a colleague on leave, he has 
the right to be treated with a gentleness journalists would not usually extend 
to spin doctors who do not enjoy his advantages. I therefore write with the 
caution of a good corporate man and the cheeriness of a co-worker when I say 
Milne could not do a better job of keeping the Tories in power if rogue MI5 
agents had groomed him at Winchester College, signed him up at Oxford 
University and instructed him to infiltrate and destroy theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party.

He is what the far left becomes when it crashes through the looking glass. 
Milnedefended Stalin’s one-party communist state 
<https://shirazsocialist.wordpress.com/2012/09/29/seamas-milne-on-stalins-missing-millions/>
 but is now turning England into a one-party Tory state. He says he fights for 
the working class and dispossessed, while ensuring the continuation of a 
rightwing government that will protect the interests of his upper-middle class. 
He says he is a socialist but bends the knee anddoffs the cap to Putin’s 
capitalist kleptocracy 
<http://leftfootforward.org/2015/03/projecting-the-kremlin-line/>. He says he 
is principled, but what is striking about Milne and the rest of the Corbyn 
“insurgency” is their vacuity. For whatis the far left now? What does it want? 
It will tell you at length what it is against, but what is itfor?

Corbyn’s and Milne’s equivalents in the 1930s knew who they were. They were 
Marxists. They wanted the state to control the means of production, 
distribution and exchange. They had a kind of integrity but their precision was 
their undoing. An audience would applaud as they denounced inequality and 
oppression. For who wants to support oppression? But when the old Marxists told 
their listeners that communism was the solution, most decided they wanted 
nothing to do with totalitarian control. Their successors have no ideology, 
only an L-shaped hole where a leftwing programme should be.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F28%2Flabour-membership-should-decide-policy-leader-jeremy-corbyn-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440745828361%2FKP_405683_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20membership%20should%20decide%20policy%2C%20not%20the%20leader%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F28%2Flabour-membership-should-decide-policy-leader-jeremy-corbyn-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20membership%20should%20decide%20policy%2C%20not%20the%20leader%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F28%2Flabour-membership-should-decide-policy-leader-jeremy-corbyn-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440745828361%2FKP_405683_crop_640x360.jpg>
August 2015: Labour membership should decide policy, not the leader, says 
Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/aug/28/labour-membership-should-decide-policy-leader-jeremy-corbyn-video>
Example: even I was impressed when Corbyn and McDonnell persuaded the best 
leftwing economists to advise them. I should have known better. “Danny” 
Blanchflower told me that all he ever heard was “Jeremy is against austerity”. 
Good, Blanchflower replied, but what policiesshould we pursue? Answer came 
there none.Blanchflower resigned 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/economy/2016/01/opposing-austerity-not-enough-labour-s-leaders-need-lessons-economics-fast>
.Thomas Piketty never attended a meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/thomas-piketty-quits-as-adviser-to-jeremy-corbyn>
 and the whereabouts of Joseph Stiglitz remain a mystery.

The further you peer into it, the deeper the L-shaped hole becomes. Corbyn is 
against imperialism, except whenthe imperialist is Milne’s Russia 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/jeremy-corbyn-putins-latest-useful-idiot-europe-1515028>
. He wants to stop Trident but saidwe should still spend billions building 
worthless submarines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/21/jeremy-corbyn-trident-compromise-michael-fallon-faslane>
 without nuclear warheads to keep the unions happy. The cowardice of it all is 
shameful. But consider the political advantages.Three-quarters of Labour 
members are middle class 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/07/middle-class-university-graduates-will-decide-future-labour-party>
 and just over half have a degree. A practical programme of redistribution 
would not only hurt the super-rich but them too. Large numbers would hurt 
enough to think again about giving Corbyn support. Instead of asking them to 
bear pain, the 21st-century far left allows them to enjoy socialism without 
tears. Contrary to Stalin’s apologists, it maintains you can make an omelette 
without breaking eggs.

Anyone can be against austerity and poverty, spin and the Westminster bubble, 
the bankers and the corporations, if there is no price to pay. Students can 
project their hopes on to the blank slate Corbyn offers them. Old 
soixante-huitards and the militants of the Thatcher era can refight the battles 
of their youth as painlessly as the Sealed Knot refights the Civil War. 
Wykehamist Marxists can stand shoulder to shoulder with exhibitionist 
celebrities; wild intellectuals with the justifiably furious shop stewards.

Empty leftism gave Corbyn control of the Labour party, but little else. He has 
thelowest popularity rating of any opposition leader in history <http:>. The 
public sees a political movement that doesn’t want to govern them and does not 
much like them either. Government necessarily involves the trade-offs the far 
left pretends need never trouble us. Labour’s founding constitution of 1918 
said its first purpose was toestablish and retain, in parliament and in the 
country, a political Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/08/secret-recording-neil-kinnock-jeremy-corbyn-step-down-speech-to-mps-in-full>
. The far left has to reject it because it can never win elections without 
losing its illusions.

Millions want the parliamentary opposition Labour’s founders promised

As the opposition collapsed last week, Paul Mason insisted 
<https://twitter.com/novaramedia/status/753273755552641025> that Labour must be 
transformed from a party that seeks to govern into a “social movement”. Mason, 
along with Michael Gove, Boris Johnson and Milne, is part of a group of 
journalists who have poisoned public life by taking braggart swagger and 
cocksure certainties of newspaper punditry into politics. But in this instance, 
he was authentically reflecting “the people” or, rather, that tiny section of 
“the people” who pay £3 and click on a link to show they agree with him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjeremy-corbyn-greets-jubilant-supporters-after-nec-vote-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20greets%20jubilant%20supporters%20after%20NEC%20vote%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjeremy-corbyn-greets-jubilant-supporters-after-nec-vote-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20greets%20jubilant%20supporters%20after%20NEC%20vote%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjeremy-corbyn-greets-jubilant-supporters-after-nec-vote-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn greets jubilant supporters after NEC vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/12/jeremy-corbyn-greets-jubilant-supporters-after-nec-vote-video>
Jon Lansman, head of Momentum backed him and declared in words that should be 
engraved on his tomb that“winning is the small bit that matters to elites that 
want to keep power themselves”. 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/07/momentum-chief/> Only a smug member of 
the haute bourgeoisie 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/Jeremy_Corbyn/12060177/The-cheerleader-for-Corbyn-who-supports-sons-schemes-to-sell-off-homeless-hostels.html>
 could come out with such a reckless justification for perpetual rightwing rule.

Vacuity leads not only to political impotence but political fear. 
Uncomprehending hatred fills the empty space where policy should be and brings 
with it the threat of violence that hovers above Labour like yellow cigarette 
smoke in a Munich beer hall. It was thought that the killing of Jo Cox might 
alter the mood. But the misogyny, homophobia, antisemitism, death threats, rape 
threats and insane conspiracy theories againstLabour MPs endure.  
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/crime/angela-eagle-suffers-treacherous-lesbian-abuse-as-police-probe-death-threat-a3295601.html>
The foul climate shows that Corbynism has sociopathic consequences. When his 
supporters believe that all they need do to oppose austerity, the bankers, etc, 
is to say they are against them, then, by definition, their opponents cannot 
have honest objections, only evil intentions. Like sin, they must be purged.

If you are going to fight the heirs of communism, you should not accept 
Marxist theories of historical inevitability. Labour has vast problems but it 
does not need to be reduced to a rump of seats in London and Lancashire. 
Millions want the parliamentary opposition Labour’s founders promised. They 
need it now when the right has taken the opportunity the far left has gifted 
them to go on the rampage. There is one prediction about the Labour party I can 
make, however: if Corbyn does not go, and Labour does not change, it is 
inevitable that the whiff of violence will be replaced by the stench of its 
death.
 