
Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> has been elected 
mayor of London, reclaiming the post for Labour after eight years of 
Conservative rule and becoming the first Muslim mayor of a major western 
capital.

Khan took 1,310,143 votes (57%) after second preferences were taken into 
account, beating ConservativeZac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith> into second place on 
994,614 (43%). His tally gave him the largest personal mandate of any 
politician in UK history.

The 45-year-old son of a Pakistani bus driver beat Zac Goldsmith at the end of 
a sometimes bitter campaign during which the Conservatives accused Khan of 
being “dangerous” and “pandering to extremists”.Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> complained that Goldsmith’s 
campaign was Islamophobic.

In his victory speech Khan said he was “deeply humbled by the hope and trust” 
voters placed in him, adding: “I want to thank every single Londoner for making 
the impossible possible.”

He added: “I’m so proud that Londoners have today chosen hope over fear and 
unity over division.”

The convincing win will provide solace to the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, 
after a poor set of election results overnight in Scotland, England and Wales. 
Khan becomes the first Labour leader at City Hall since the Conservatives’ 
Boris Johnson unseated Ken Livingstone in 2008.

Whatever your politics, let’s have more Ruths and fewer Zacs | Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/vote-ruth-davidson-zac-goldsmith>
“Cosmopolitan London will be reflecting on this result that London is capable 
of putting race, religion and identity to one side,” said Prof Tony Travers, 
director of LSELondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. “This is 
concrete evidence of that.”

Even before the result was announced, Conservatives turned on Goldsmith’s 
campaign. Lady Warsi, a former chairman of the Conservative party, described it 
as an “appalling dog-whistle campaign” and said it “lost us the election, our 
reputation and credibility on issues of race and religion”.

Roger Evans, the outgoing deputy mayor, said Goldsmith’s “very foolish” 
campaign left a “negative legacy which we in London are going to have to clear 
up long after the people who ran Zac Goldsmith’s campaign have gone on their 
way”.

“I hope we don’t do this stupid thing again by trying to bring Sadiq down by 
saying he is an extremist,” added Andrew Boff, a senior Tory on the London 
Assembly. “He is not an extremist. He went out and engaged with people with 
orthodox religious views. Dialogue is not assisted by shutting people out.”

Even Goldsmith’s sister, Jemima, tweeted: “Sad that Zac’s campaign did not 
reflect who I know him to be – an eco friendly, independent-minded politician 
with integrity.”

From pints to propaganda... it's the London mayoral election awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/05/from-pints-to-propaganda-its-the-london-mayoral-election-awards>
Labour also secured 12 seats on the London Assembly, the Conservatives took 
eight while the Greens and Ukip took two each and the Liberal Democrats were 
reduced to one.

The result paves the way for Khan to implement a manifesto programme that he 
promised would make him “a mayor for all Londoners”.

The son of a bus driver, Khan was the fifth of eight children in his family 
and grew up on a council estate. He has promised to make solving London’s 
housing crisis a key priority, and has said he will freeze fares on public 
transport for four years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sadiq%20Khan%3A%20London's%20new%20mayor%20-%20video%20profile&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sadiq%20Khan%3A%20London%27s%20new%20mayor%20-%20video%20profile&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile&media=>
Sadiq Khan: London’s new mayor - video profile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/07/sadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile>
He said he would set a target that half of all new homes should be “genuinely 
affordable”, promised to boost landlord licensing and to name and shame rogue 
landlords. Oxford Street would be pedestrianised, he said. He would restore the 
capital’s air quality to legal and safe levels and be “the most pro-business 
mayor yet”.

In continental Europe, where the mayoral election made headline news, the 
focus was firmly on Khan’s religion and family background rather than his 
politics. Headlines in France, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Germany 
included: “The first Muslim mayor of London 
<http://tempsreel.nouvelobs.com/monde/20160505.AFP4289/le-travailliste-et-musulman-sadiq-khan-en-passe-de-devenir-maire-de-londres.html>
”, “First Muslim mayor of a major European capital 
<https://www.letemps.ch/monde/2016/05/05/fils-milliardaire-chauffeur-bus-pakistanais-sera-nouveau-maire-londres>
” and “The green millionaire vs the leftwing Muslim 
<http://www.nrc.nl/handelsblad/2016/05/04/de-groene-miljonair-vs-de-linkse-moslim-1618245>
”. (The US Drudge Report, meanwhile, went with: “Developing – first Muslim 
mayor of Londonistan.”)


Khan led Goldsmith, the MP for Richmond Park, for almost the whole campaign, 
but his lead narrowed over the last fortnight from 16 points to nine points on 
polling day, according to YouGov.

Global press reaction to Sadiq Khan a mix of curiosity and ignorance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/london-mayor-global-press-reaction-sadiq-khan-curiosity-ignorance>
There was speculation that the antisemitism row surrounding Labour, which 
resulted in the suspension of Naz Shah MP and Ken Livingstone from the party, 
could dent his hopes. Khan did come second to Goldsmith in the Barnet and 
Camden constituency, which has a large Jewish population, leading to 
speculation the controversy may have affected the result.

“The Conservatives will have to have a postmortem,” said Travers. “They would 
have been better hacking away at Jeremy Corbyn day and night as a strategy.”

Goldsmith’s campaign, overseen by the firm led by the Tory election strategist 
Lynton Crosby, sought to paint Khan, whose family are from Pakistan, as a 
supporter of Muslim extremists.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fzac-goldsmith-congratulates-sadiq-khan-on-election-success-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zac%20Goldsmith%20congratulates%20Sadiq%20Khan%20on%20election%20success%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fzac-goldsmith-congratulates-sadiq-khan-on-election-success-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zac%20Goldsmith%20congratulates%20Sadiq%20Khan%20on%20election%20success%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fzac-goldsmith-congratulates-sadiq-khan-on-election-success-video&media=>
Zac Goldsmith congratulates Sadiq Khan on election success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/07/zac-goldsmith-congratulates-sadiq-khan-on-election-success-video>
It sent leaflets to Hindu, Sikh and Tamil voters warning that Khan was 
“dangerous” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/30/battle-london-mayor-dirtiest-fight-zac-goldsmith-sadiq-khan>
. It did not mention that he was a Muslim, but several recipients felt it was 
divisive “gutter politics”. Another letter warning that Labour wanted totax 
gold jewellery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/mar/16/london-mayor-race-negatives-hindu-jewels-leaflets-misfired>
 owned by many Indian families was also seen as stoking community tensions.

The home secretary, Theresa May, described the former transport minister as 
“unsafe” to run London at a time when we face “a significant threat of 
terrorism”, because of his history of defending extremists when he was a human 
rights lawyer.

Boris Johnson, who repeatedly joined Goldsmith on the campaign trail, had 
said: “In Islam and the Labour party there is a struggle going on, and in both 
cases Khan – whatever his real views – is pandering to the extremists.”

Khan is a married father of two who became a partner in a human rights law 
firm aged 27. He chaired the human rights group Liberty and was elected to 
parliament in Tooting in 2005. He became transport minister in the last year of 
Gordon Brown’s government.

If, as expected, Khan stands down from parliament, the result is set to 
trigger a byelection in Tooting, which Labour holds with a less than 3,000-vote 
majority requiring a 2.7% swing for the Conservatives to strike back.
 