
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs are calling for a 
change in party rules to make it easier to expel members who espouse 
antisemitic views.


Amid concerns that the leadership is failing to act decisively in the wake of 
a series of cases of alleged antisemitism, the Labour MPs Wes Streeting and 
Anna Turley are calling for new rules to ban the use of antisemitic, 
Islamophobic or racist language.

Streeting, a former president of the National Union of Students and now Labour 
MP for Ilford North, told the BBC: “We’ve now got a problem where too many of 
our Jewish members and people out there in the country think the Labour party 
is apathetic to antisemitism and it isn’t a place for Jewish members.

Has Labour under Corbyn really gone soft on antisemitism? | Tony Klug
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/labour-party-corbyn-antisemitism-anti-jewish-british-left>
“I think we’ve got to make sure that this party, with its historic commitment 
to tackling all forms of prejudice, including antisemitism, is still a place 
for Jewish people.”

Streeting is being supported by Turley, the Labour MP for Redcar.

Lord Levy, Tony Blair’s former fundraiser, has said he might quit the Labour 
party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/20/labour-peer-lord-levy-warns-he-could-quit-party-over-antisemitism>
 if it fails to do more to confront antisemitism. Recent examples have included 
Vicki Kirby, a former Labour parliamentary candidate who was readmitted to the 
party after being suspended for making offensive comments about Jews.She was 
then suspended again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/15/labour-suspends-activist-vicki-kirby-over-antisemitism-claims>
.

Jeremy Newmark, from the Jewish Labour Movement, endorsed the rule change on 
the grounds that the current rules do not match public pledges by the 
leadership to tackle antisemitism. Newmark told the Today programme on BBC 
Radio 4: “Everybody’s talking about zero tolerance of antisemitism but it’s 
become apparent because of a spate of incidents over the last couple of months 
that the rules and processes of the party don’t provide adequate provision to 
deal with it.”

A Labour spokeswoman told the BBC: “We welcome the contributions of Labour’s 
affiliates and members in this important debate. Rule changes can be submitted 
to Labour’s annual conference where they are democratically agreed by 
delegates.”
 