
Large companies should publish their tax returns and whistleblowers who expose 
financial wrongdoing must have protection under the law, aLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party-commissioned report into 
reforming tax collection has proposed.

Responding to growing concern about repeated failures by HM Revenue and 
Customs to tackle avoidance by multinationals and wealthy individuals, the 
shadow chancellorpublished proposals on Thursday for overhauling the tax agency 
<http://www.john-mcdonnell.net/labour_publish_the_first_stage_report_of_its_hmrc_review>
.

John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell> said that 
HMRC was now in “disarray” due to staff cuts. “With the appropriate levels of 
investment … we think we could achieve a fair and just taxation system, which 
would overcome some of the issues we now have for investment in our public 
services.”

The report was produced by a panel of 14 experts and will inform official 
Labour proposals expected in spring 2017. It recommends an independent 
supervisory board forHMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc>, 
consisting of stakeholders appointed by the chancellor, to “act as a bulwark 
against corporate capture and inertia”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Flabour-radical-overhaul-hmrc-tax-avoidance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd942d6c06e63acb2feace014d5f4266d1299978b%2F0_83_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20plans%20radical%20overhaul%20of%20HMRC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Flabour-radical-overhaul-hmrc-tax-avoidance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20plans%20radical%20overhaul%20of%20HMRC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Flabour-radical-overhaul-hmrc-tax-avoidance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd942d6c06e63acb2feace014d5f4266d1299978b%2F0_83_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor. 
HMRC’s board is dominated by individuals previously connected with major 
corporations and large accountancy firms known for marketing avoidance schemes, 
the panel of experts said. It has no members representing small businesses, 
ordinary taxpayers, HMRC’s own staff, or claimants of benefits.

The new supervisory board would provide a point of contact for whistleblowers 
wanting to expose tax cheats. It would also support policies to protect the 
jobs and income of whistleblowers, who would get broader protection under the 
law. There is also a recommendation that whistleblowers should receive “a 
possible share of the taxes and penalties recovered as a direct result of the 
information provided by them”.

The panel was led by Prem Sikka, professor of accounting at the University of 
Essex, and included representatives from campaign groups such as theTax Justice 
Network <http://www.taxjustice.net/> and the High Pay Centre 
<http://highpaycentre.org/>.

HMRC is in thrall to big business. It can no longer do its job | Prem Sikka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/hmrc-thrall-big-business-tax-collection-labour>
Sikka writes in the Guardian on Thursday that HMRC has been “thwarted” by lack 
of resources and is “no longer fit for purpose” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/hmrc-thrall-big-business-tax-collection-labour>
.


He said: “For 100 years we have been publishing company accounts. Tax 
information is an important part of corporate governance. We feel this 
information should be publicly available.”

Sikka proposes that “all large companies” must make their tax returns public 
by filing them alongside their yearly accounts. The documents, which would be 
free to access online through the Companies House database, would include all 
related documents such as advice from QCs and accountancy firms recommending 
particular avoidance schemes.

Tribunal cases against tax cheats should be handled more quickly – many tax 
cases can take a decade to resolve and the first-tier tribunals have a backlog 
of 30,000 cases waiting to be heard. It recommends the recruitment of more 
judges, focused on tax matters.

HMRC is under fire for failing to bring to account wealthy individuals and 
large corporations. Its response to a series of high-profile scandals, 
including the revelations about HSBC’s Swiss private bank and the sweetheart 
deals negotiated by multinationals with Luxembourg, has been muted. Of the 
3,600 potential wealthy UK taxpayers exposed by the HSBC Files, only one has 
been prosecuted by HMRC.


In January, the agency said it had abandoned its criminal investigation into 
the bank’s alleged collusion in illegal activities. HMRC bosses have told 
parliament that the agency investigates just 35 wealthy individuals a year.

HMRC claims to have only 70 staff examining data released by the Panama Papers 
on more than 300,000 offshore companies. “This may well suffer the same fate as 
the HSBC inquiry,” the Labour report warns.

A spokesman for the tax office said: “We welcome any debate about how HMRC can 
operate more effectively, but expect a proper acknowledgment that HMRC achieved 
another year of record-breaking performance in collecting tax and securing 
compliance yield, while continuing to deliver efficiencies.

“Last year we collected £536.8bn in tax and duties – £19bn more than the year 
before.”


The panel of experts want greater resources for the tax agency. HMRC has lost 
more than one-third of its staff since 2005, with further cuts planned. Unions 
are fighting plans to replace 170 local offices with 13 regional centres.

Responding to the proposals, Lorna Merry, president of the HMRC group at the 
Public and Commercial Services Union, warned that office closures would leave 
the agency “haemorrhaging” valuable experienced staff, including investigators 
and minimum wage inspectors.

She said: “This is a really important piece of work. Someone needs to look 
hard at HMRC and what its for and who its for. The issues of small businesses 
and ordinary taxpayers are being ignored.”
 