
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> will urge 
the public to join him in taking on the political establishment in 2017, in a 
new year video message aimed at cementing his reputation as a combative 
outsider.

In the video shot at Westminster, Corbyn describes 2016 as “a year that will 
live long in all of our memories” and says he understands some of the concerns 
that led to the Brexit vote.

Labour plans Jeremy Corbyn relaunch to ride anti-establishment wave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/labour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist>
“People didn’t trust politicians and they didn’t trust the European Union,” he 
says. “I understand that. I’ve spent over 40 years in politics campaigning for 
a better way of doing things, standing up for people, taking on the 
establishment and opposing decisions that would make us worse off.”

He promises to fight against a Brexit deal that would safeguard the interests 
of City banks or continue “corporate handouts” to big businesses, saying: 
“Labour was founded to stand up for people, and we founded the institutions 
that do that day in and day out, like our NHS. We are the party that listens to 
you and makes Britain better. Let’s do that, together, in 2017.”

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> strategists have taken a 
deliberate decision to play to Corbyn’s strength as an unpolished political 
maverick who has notoriously refused to toe the party line throughout several 
decades as an MP.

The Labour leader has appeared more assured since he convincingly saw off Owen 
Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/26/owen-smith-frustrated-and-disappointed-but-hopeful-for-the-future>
’s leadership challenge in September, with his opponent admitting that Corbyn’s 
performance at the dispatch box has improved.

Corbyn also knows Labour will be under intense scrutiny in the months ahead. 
Close allies, including the shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, have 
acknowledged that the party needs to try to close the gap with the 
Conservatives in the polls.

In the video, in which he appears in a tailored navy jacket against the south 
bank skyline of County Hall and the London Eye, Corbyn reflects on the past 
year, saying: “Every day I see the political system letting down the people of 
this country; how decisions made in Westminster are making people’s lives 
harder.”

He cites rising homelessness, the crisis in social care funding and the 
increasing prevalence of low pay and insecure jobs. “Millions of people can’t 
plan their lives because, whether on temporary or zero hours contracts, they 
don’t know what job or what hours they’ll have from day to day, week to week or 
month to month. And for many, pay is so low that it doesn’t make ends meet.”

Labour is attempting to gear up for a potential snap general election in early 
2017, although no candidates have yet been selected for key seats. MPs with 
marginal seats in former industrial areas far from Corbyn’s Islington 
constituency doubt his appeal extends beyond the metropolis.

The party may have a battle on its hands to maintain the Copeland constituency 
that will shortly be vacated by Jamie Reed, the Corbyn critic who is leaving 
parliament to work for the nuclear site Sellafield.

Corbyn was blamed by many of his pro-EU MPs for failing to fight hard enough 
to win the referendum, but his allies believe that his cautious tone, in which 
he encouraged voters to stick with the EU “warts and all” better reflected the 
public mood.

May is no Henry VIII – but Brexit has dragged us back to a very Tudor chaos | 
Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/may-henry-viii-brexit-tudor-jeremy-corbyn>
John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, the 
shadow chancellor, sparked outrage among some in his own party recently by 
citing the “enormous opportunities” Brexit could bring. Corbyn’s new year 
message reiterates his stance that Labour “accepts and respects the result of 
the referendum”.

After the shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, pushed the government to 
promise to produce a plan before legislating to invoke article 50 in the new 
year, Corbyn hinted that Labour might do more to try to influence the process. 
“We won’t be blocking our leaving the European Union, but we won’t stand by,” 
he said.

Corbyn’s more combative tone was evident in a Guardian interview earlier this 
week, in which he compared Theresa May’s wish to usethe royal prerogative to 
take Britain out of the EU with Henry VIII. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/jeremy-corbyn-you-are-not-henry-viii-theresa-may-brexit-deal-commons-vote>

The Labour leader makes no reference to his own turbulent year, which saw him 
face down scores of shadow cabinet resignations and a vote of no confidence by 
172 of his own MPs – an overwhelming majority. Most backbenchers believe it is 
unlikely he will face a fresh threat to his leadership in 2017.
 