
In an expression of the kinder, gentler politics that has famously infused the 
Labour party in the past year, John McDonnell recently told a rally of 
Corbynistas that the Labour MPs trying to depose the leader are “fucking 
useless”. The vituperation is entirely mutual. The root cause of the party’s 
rolling crises is as easy to identify as a solution to its agony is hard to 
find. Labour has a leader who has totally lost the confidence of his colleagues 
in parliament. They fear that he is taking them on a trajectory that will end 
with the party’s worst election collapse since the 1930s. The MPs do not have 
the backing of a large chunk of the party selectorate that picks the leader. 
Much of that selectorate is wildly unrepresentative of the voters thatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> must persuade if the party is to 
survive as a plausible opposition, never mind become a viable competitor for 
power.

This is the Gordian knot that Labour MPs have been trying to unpick ever since 
Jeremy Corbyn became their unexpected and unwanted leaderlast September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/12/jeremy-corbyn-wins-labour-party-leadership-election>
. One of their persistent errors has been to assume that he and those behind 
him play by the conventional rules of a parliamentary party. Many Labour MPs 
started off thinking that after decades as a backbench rebel, Mr Corbyn would 
make at least some effort to try to master the skills of leadership. Even when 
this was palpably not the case, they clung to a hope that there might be a 
peaceful way to broker a solution.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fjeremy-corbyn-offers-hand-of-friendship-to-rebel-mps-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20offers%20%E2%80%98hand%20of%20friendship%E2%80%99%20to%20rebel%20MPs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fjeremy-corbyn-offers-hand-of-friendship-to-rebel-mps-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20offers%20%E2%80%98hand%20of%20friendship%E2%80%99%20to%20rebel%20MPs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fjeremy-corbyn-offers-hand-of-friendship-to-rebel-mps-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn offers ‘hand of friendship’ to rebel MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/21/jeremy-corbyn-offers-hand-of-friendship-to-rebel-mps-video>
There has been much talk that the attempt to unseat Mr Corbyn was meticulously 
planned. The truth is that Labour MPs would not have acted this summer but for 
the Brexit vote. It was the shock of that, combined with collective horror 
about Mr Corbyn’s response to it, which finally pushed them into despairing 
action. When 65 frontbenchers resigned, they assumed he would realise that his 
game was up. They were wrong. He does not regard an inability to staff a 
parliamentary team as sufficient grounds to quit. In a ballot of Labour MPs, 
172 of them declared that they had no confidence in the leader, with just 40 
offering continued support. Every single living former leader urged him to 
recognise that this was unsustainable. Neil Kinnock has declared that he would 
have walked in those circumstances. Of course he would. Any previous leader of 
any of our parties would not have endeavoured to carry on when he had lost the 
support of his colleagues by a margin of more than four to one. But to think Mr 
Corbyn would resign in these circumstances was to mistake him for someone who 
thinks that parliament matters. “He could take us into the next election and 
lose 100 MPs and even then he wouldn’t think he had to go,” says one Labour 
parliamentarian.

One Labour MP who is usually a reliable interpreter of the party's mood thinks 
'Owen has a massive mountain to climb'

So now they have reached the last resort. The leadership challenge has not 
been mounted in any great expectation that it will succeed. Labour MPs can see 
the essential ridiculousness of triggering a contest a year after the last one 
with the incumbent the favourite to win the leadership again. This is an act of 
utter despair by people who believe they have run out of any other options.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-makes-appeal-labour-party-members-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20McDonnell%20makes%20appeal%20to%20Labour%20members%3A%20%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99ve%20got%20to%20stop%20this%20now%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-makes-appeal-labour-party-members-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20McDonnell%20makes%20appeal%20to%20Labour%20members%3A%20%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99ve%20got%20to%20stop%20this%20now%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-makes-appeal-labour-party-members-video&media=>
John McDonnell makes appeal to Labour members: ‘We’ve got to stop this now’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/24/john-mcdonnell-makes-appeal-labour-party-members-video>
One of the great ironies about this is that no one looks happier than Mr 
Corbyn. When he launched his campaign last week, he looked more invigorated 
than at any time since he became Labour leader.

The prospect of spending the next nine weeks having to reapply for his 
position would have infuriated and depressed any other party leader I have 
known. Yet he declared himself to be “excited” by the prospect and I believe 
that. He now has a whole summer ahead of him when he doesn’t have to talk to 
his MPs or try to muster an effective opposition to the Tories. He can spend 
the summer doing what he most loves, which is communing with devotees who 
already agree with him rather than trying to engage with swing voters. He will 
travel from one Momentum rally to another Momentum rally telling his supporters 
that they are building a wonderful grassroots movement and in turn being hailed 
by his audiences as a hero. At his campaign launch, he was already suggesting 
what he’d do with the fruits of victory by talking about deselection of Labour 
MPs.

Do they have a chance of deposing him before the zealots in the constituencies 
start moving to unseat them? On the positive side for the challenge, it will be 
a binary choice between Mr Corbyn andOwen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith>, the Anyone But Corbyn 
candidate from the party’s soft left around whom MPs have coalesced. Angela 
Eagle had the guts to be the first to put her head above the parapet and 
displayed further quality of character when she stood aside for Mr Smith after 
he received more support from MPs. You could not have had a challenge in the 
name of “unity” with two “unity” candidates. At least the attempt to dislodge 
Mr Corbyn has avoided that absurdity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-mutiny-desperation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f823a89a9574339c04709763cee8c9ab1e29fed%2F0_216_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20is%20fighting%20for%20its%20life%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20has%20never%20looked%20happier%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-mutiny-desperation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20is%20fighting%20for%20its%20life%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20has%20never%20looked%20happier%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-mutiny-desperation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f823a89a9574339c04709763cee8c9ab1e29fed%2F0_216_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Owen Smith speaks at the first rally of his campaign for the Labour leadership 
at Friends’ Meeting House, Manchester last week. Photograph: Jack Taylor/Getty 
Images 
The odds nevertheless look heavily stacked against the challenger. Members of 
Mr Smith’s team describe it as “tough, but doable”. They think that Mr Corbyn 
has lost support among long-standing members since last summer, but accept that 
he is probably ahead among those who have paid £25 to get a vote as a 
registered supporter. Quite a lot of MPs who are desperate for the challenge to 
succeed fear that it has come too soon. In their view, Labour activists needed 
to be given more time to come to their own conclusion that Mr Corbyn was 
leading them towards calamity. One MP expresses the anxiety of many that Mr 
Smith’s bid will run into a wall of “indignation” among party activists that 
Labour parliamentarians are trying to “bully” the membership. One of the 
challenger’s most formidable tasks is to prevent the Corbyn camp from defining 
this as a battle between “MPs” versus “Members”, “Westminster” versus “The 
People”. Some Labour MPs already sound reconciled to the attempt failing, but 
justify it on the grounds that “at least we can say to ourselves that we tried 
to do something”. One Labour MP who is usually a reliable interpreter of the 
mood of the party thinks “Owen has a massive mountain to climb”.

There was a small example of what the challenger is up against when he went to 
an event in Manchester on Friday and bumped into a woman wearing a T-shirt 
emblazoned with the slogan “I Voted Corbyn”. Rather to the consternation of 
members of his campaign team, Mr Smith devoted 20 fruitless minutes trying to 
win her over.

The core Corbynistas are not going to be shaken from their devotion to St 
Jeremy. If anything, the mutiny by MPs is only hardening their zeal. For them, 
it is heresy even to suggest that there might be some problems with what is 
happening to a party in which the atmosphere has become so poisoned that 
meetings of its local branches have been suspended because bullying and 
intimidation have become so rampant.

For Mr Smith to have a hope of winning, the constituency he must persuade are 
those you might call “soft Corbynistas”. That is why he is eschewing an 
ideological challenge to Corbynism – “I am just as radical as Jeremy”– and 
making his case on the grounds of competence.

There is certainly plenty of material for him to work with here. There is also 
perhaps a readier audience among at least some of the Labour membership to hear 
an argument about the importance of being a viable opposition. In today’s
Observer, Neale Coleman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/21/neale-coleman-quit-jeremy-corbyn-labour-sidelined-policy>
, Mr Corbyn’s former head of policy, expresses his fear that the party is 
heading for a disastrous defeat under a leader who never showed any capacity 
when they worked together to go beyond sloganeering. Two former shadow 
ministers, neither of whom could be labelled as anything but leftwing, have 
explained their resignations by releasing anguished inside accounts of how 
their positions were made impossible by the Corbyn regime.

Thangam Debbonaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/jeremy-corbyn-labour-mp-had-to-wait-six-weeks-to-find-she-did-not-have-shadow-cabinet-role>
 has described how she was appointed as a shadow culture minister without her 
knowledge while she was in the middle of cancer treatment and then unappointed, 
again without being told, when Mr Corbyn realised he’d given away part of 
someone else’s role. Lilian Greenwood, the former shadow transport secretary, 
concludes a detailed account of how she was undermined by saying: “Through my 
own personal direct experience I know that Jeremy operates in a way that means 
progress… is impossible. He is not a team player, let alone a team leader.”

Being a functional opposition matters to Labour MPs and to anyone else who 
hopes not to live in a perpetual Tory state. It matters to many Labour members 
too. The coming weeks will test whether it matters sufficiently to enough of 
the current Labour selectorate to do something about it.

The contest is already turning ugly. Still, some people will be happy. Mr 
Corbyn will enjoy himself wandering among the devoted. The media will have a 
juicy Labour civil war to report as a diversion from trying to explain the 
complexities of withdrawal from the EU. Just a pity about the country, which 
has never more needed an effective opposition and has never so lacked one.
 