
Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/hillary-clinton-progressive-politics-supporters-donald-trump-win>
 made critical errors in its handling of Latino voters, giving them the 
impression they were being patronised and taken for granted in a way that 
depressed turnout and could have cost her the White House, a prominent leader 
of the Hispanic business community has charged.


Hillary Clinton once believed anything possible. Now her tragedy is ours | 
Jill Abramson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/hillary-clinton-progressive-politics-supporters-donald-trump-win>
Javier Palomarez <http://ushcc.com/about/team/>, president and chief executive 
of the US Hispanic Chamber of Commerce (USHCC), made an impassioned critique of 
the tactics deployed by the Clinton campaign in its attempt to garner Latino 
support.

While he defended the former US secretary of state herself as being an 
excellent candidate, he accused her senior advisers of giving poor advice about 
how best to woo his community, leading in his view to the disaster of election 
night in which national exit polls suggested Donald Trump secured 29% of the 
Hispanic vote.

“We thought this election cycle would be different,” Palomarez told the 
Guardian. “Unfortunately,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> was advised once again by 
Beltway advisers who knew it all, had the models and the projections, but who 
called it wrong.”

The USHCC was singularly invested in the outcome of Tuesday’s election, as it 
hadendorsed Clinton 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/latino/us-hispanic-chamber-commerce-endorses-hillary-clinton-john-kasich-n564236>
 for the presidency – the first time it has done so for any candidate in its 
38-year history. The chamber is the largest Hispanic business organization in 
the country, with 4.2m businesses on its books that contribute $668bn to the US 
economy.

Palomarez was especially scathing about the decision to choose Tim Kaine, a 
senator from Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/22/tim-kaine-vice-president-running-mate-hillary-clinton>
, as Clinton’s running mate, passing over the rising Hispanic starJulián Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/18/democrats-new-generation-hillary-clinton-vp>
, currently housing secretary within the Obama administration.

I have to believe that if she had a​n​ Hispanic standing beside her … today 
she would be president-elect
Javier Palomarez 
“I have to believe that if she had a Hispanic standing beside her she would 
have got more of the young vote, more of the Hispanic vote, and today she would 
be president-elect,” he said.

He blamed the decision on what he called the “young white Ivy League- educated 
kids” who were advising Clinton.

Palomarez is convinced the top team around the Democratic nominee came to the 
conclusion that given Trump’s extremist comments aboutcriminal Mexicans 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C6QEqoYgQxw>, the Latino vote was secure and 
could be taken for granted.

“Somewhere along the line they decided that they had the Hispanic vote in the 
bag and there was no need to worry about it,” he said, “but you have to ask 
today: did that strategy of blowing off the Hispanic vote work for them?”

Palomarez’s comments are some of the sharpest criticisms to be leveled at the 
Clinton campaign since the autopsy began following her unexpected defeat in 
Tuesday’s presidential election. The Latino vote had always been a central part 
ofDemocratic strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2016/jan/25/us-hispanic-latino-voters-us-election-2016>
, with hopes high that a “sleeping giant” would finally be stirred to action by 
Trump’s virulent anti-immigrant message.

But nationwide exit polls 
<http://www.cnn.com/election/results/exit-polls/national/president> suggest 
that the promise failed to materialize. They show that Clinton took 65% of the 
Latino vote, down from Barack Obama’s 71% in 2012, while Trump’s 29% share was 
actually two points up on Mitt Romney.

Clinton’s pollsters, Latino Decisions, have vociferously disputed the exit 
polls, arguing that they give a completely false picture of what happened on 
election day. The polling company claims the exit polls grossly underestimate 
precincts with high proportions of minority voters in them.

Matt Barreto <http://www.latinodecisions.com/about/our-team/matt-a-barreto/>, 
Latino Decisions’ principal pollster to the Clinton campaign, told the Guardian 
that in his opinion Palomarez’s criticisms were reflective of widespread 
frustration at Trump’s victory.

“If Clinton had won,” he said, “people would now be praising the campaign’s 
Latino outreach – they are frustrated not with the campaign, but with the 
outcome of the election.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
The campaign itself also disputes any suggestion that it underplayed the 
importance of the Latino vote. Clinton emphasized several policy pledges 
directed at Hispanics, including a promise to extend Obama’s Daca and Dapa 
programs that grant legal status to millions of undocumented immigrants as well 
as a vow to push for comprehensive immigration reform to forge a pathway to 
citizenship for all 11 million undocumented people currently living in the 
shadows.

“The campaign made a strong and robust effort to reach Latino voters, and you 
could see the results of that in excellent turnouts in Colorado, Nevada, New 
Mexico, Virginia and even Florida,” saidStephanie Valencia 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/author/stephanie-valencia>, Obama’s deputy 
Latino vote director in 2008 and an informal adviser to the Clinton campaign 
this year.

But Palomarez said advice given to Clinton directly from the USHCC appeared to 
have been overruled by the candidate’s most senior advisers. He personally 
counseled her to make Castro her vice-presidential pick in a private meeting in 
October 2015 in San Antonio, Texas, where she was attending a presidential Q&A 
hosted by the USHCC.

In their Beltway brilliance, her advisers thought a white guy who could speak 
Spanish, Tim Kaine, would be enough
Javier Palomarez 
“I was very candid with her,” he said. “I said we believe it is time to put a 
Hispanic on the ballot. But in the end, in their Beltway brilliance, her 
advisers thought that going with a white guy who could speak Spanish, Tim 
Kaine, would be enough for the Hispanic electorate.

“We adore Tim Kaine, but if you think a Spanish speaker is a replacement for a 
bona fide Hispanic, absolutely not, and the numbers have shown that.”

Palomarez also complained that when the USHCC invited Clinton to attend its 
annual national convention in Miami in October, the largest gathering of 
Hispanic business leaders in the country, her advisers decided against her 
appearing even though she happened to be in the same city at the time.

Instead, Clinton appeared at a rally with Al Gore 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/12/us/politics/hillary-clinton-al-gore.html?_r=0>
, the Democratic presidential candidate who lost to George Bush in the 
contentious 2000 election.

“How did that go for them?” Palomarez said. “She went with Al Gore, and she 
went the way of Al Gore.”

Palomarez also accused the Clinton campaign of being culturally wide of the 
mark in its pitch to Hispanics. “The campaign was patronizing,” he said. “They 
tried to take a shortcut to us. We all love Jennifer Lopez and Marc Anthony, 
but the kids who turned up to see them at Clinton events were there for the 
music not for the candidate.


Privacy experts fear Donald Trump running global surveillance network
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/11/trump-surveillance-network-nsa-privacy>
“The campaign did not pay real attention to the issues that Hispanics care 
about – economic arguments, job creation, innovation. I resent the fact that 
they seemed to think we are all in one bucket when in fact Hispanics are very 
diverse.

“As a result she lost a portion of the Hispanic vote that could very easily 
have been hers, it was there for the taking.”

Palomarez argued that Florida, a state that Trump was under intense pressure 
to win with its large crop of 29 electoral college votes, could have swung to 
Clinton if more attention had been paid to Hispanic voters.Exit polls 
<http://www.cnn.com/election/results/exit-polls/florida/president> showed 
Clinton taking 62% of the Latino vote in the state to Trump’s 35%.

Again, those figures are disputed by Latino Decisions. Its research 
<http://www.latinodecisions.com/files/6514/7880/5462/PostElection2016.pdf>, 
based on official voting data released by precincts, tells a different picture 
for dominant Hispanic areas.

For example, Kissimmee in central Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/florida-battleground-state-voter-registration>
, where there has been a large influx of Puerto Ricans in recent years, voted 
heavily for Clinton. In some parts, the Latino vote was as high as 80% for the 
Democratic candidate, with as little as 17% for Trump.
 