
After this match it was hard to know which stretched credibility further: 
Claudio Ranieri’s claim that he did not notice the 30,000 people in the stadium 
wearing Jamie Vardy masks, or the fact thatLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> are the English champions.

The last time Leicester hosted Everton, in May, they were presented with the 
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> trophy; 
here all that was on display was a petty public relations stunt and a sad 
contrast between the title winners of last season and this Leicester side. 
Everton did not need to excel to claim their first away win since September.

Leicester City give fans 30,000 Jamie Vardy masks to wear in protest at ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/leicester-city-jamie-vardy-masks-protest-ban>
Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> finished looking like 
accomplished travellers but overall this was a low-quality contest that made 
for particularly painful viewing for supporters of the home side. That included 
Vardy, who sat in the stands as he began his three-match suspension for his red 
card against Stoke City. Leicester had been so aggrieved at the Football 
Association’s rejection of an appeal against that ban that the club arranged 
for masks of their striker to be handed out before kick-off. Some kind of 
protest? Ranieri said he knew nothing about it. That, at least, was wise.

Vardy’s punishment must have felt particularly severe in view of the calibre 
of play he had to watch. The first 45 minutes were wretched, amounting to a 
late but compelling entry for the worst half of football in 2016. Everton were 
especially pallid initially and must have reinforced Ronald Koeman’s eagerness 
to bring in new blood during the January transfer window.

Koeman’s side improved in the second period, however, finally summoning the 
wit to take advantage of the fact Leicester had been forced to deploy a 
weakened defence because of the bans of Robert Huth and Christian Fuchs. The 
home team’s replacements were a veteran, the 36‑year‑old centre-back Marcin 
Wasilewski, and a novice, the 20-year-old Ben Chilwell. The latter performed 
well but the former’s lack of pace alongside Wes Morgan in central defence was 
exposed by Everton in the 51st minute.

Ronald Koeman: Steve Walsh has Everton set up for transfer window
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/25/ronald-koeman-steve-walsh-everton-transfer-window>
All it took was a long punt over the home defence by the visiting goalkeeper, 
Joel Robles. Kevin Mirallas set off in pursuit of it, easily outrunning the 
lumbering centre‑backs. Kasper Schmeichel was unable to prevent the Belgian 
from firing Everton into the lead.

That was Everton’s first strike on goal in the match. Their only previous 
attempt in the general direction of the target, a feeble header by Ramiro Funes 
Mori after a cross by Mirallas, was so inoffensive that most statisticians are 
unlikely to have recorded it as a shot.

Leicester had gone only a little closer, Daniel Amaratey forcing a routine 
save from Robles in the 10th minute with a respectable shot from 20 yards after 
a neat exchange with Shinji Okazaki. There was a grievous lack of creativity 
from both sides.

Ranieri tried to change that at half-time by replacing introducing Danny 
Drinkwater for Okazaki. After Everton took the lead and began to grow in 
confidence Ranieri threw on Riyad Mahrez, too. Of his decision to omit from the 
starting lineup the Premier League player of the year last season, the manager 
later said: “He’s not in good form and I want to stimulate him. He must give 
more for the team.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fleicester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93ffd0fd814d5718e24cc64988d73f5d828b2c50%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%E2%80%99s%20gloom%20darkens%20after%20Romelu%20Lukaku%20seals%20win%20for%20Everton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fleicester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%E2%80%99s%20gloom%20darkens%20after%20Romelu%20Lukaku%20seals%20win%20for%20Everton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fleicester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93ffd0fd814d5718e24cc64988d73f5d828b2c50%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Leicester City fans entertain themselves with Jamie Vardy masks during a 
turgid first half. Photograph: Mike Egerton/PA 
Leicester supporters were also in the mood for telling home truths. They booed 
Ranieri’s third substitution, not because they had anything against the new 
arrival, Leonardo Ulloa, but because the man he replaced, Demarai Gray, had 
been Leicester’s brightest attacker. Ranieri said the switch was made for the 
sake of team balance. Ulloa’s header within moments of arriving was easily 
saved by Robles. That was the closest Leicester came to infiltrating Everton’s 
three-man defence.

Everton controlled the game as it wore on, with Tom Davies a vibrant midfield 
presence after his introduction midway through the second half. Idrissa Gueye 
should have made certain of victory in the 82nd minute but shot over the bar 
from close range after a low pass across goal by Romelu Lukaku. In the 90th 
minute Lukaku did the job himself, racing on to another long ball forward 
before outmuscling Morgan, outwitting Wasilewski and finishing smartly. What 
began as dreary fare ended up as a highly satisfying trip for Koeman’s team.
 