
In July last year Claudio Ranieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/claudio-ranieri> was enjoying a break in 
Italy when he received a phone call from Steve Kutner, his agent, that would 
end up changing the face of English football in a way no one could have 
imagined. Kutner had been attempting to convince Jon Rudkin, Leicester City’s 
director of football, that Ranieri was worth considering as the Premier League 
club’s new manager and finally there was news of a breakthrough.

Ranieri was out of work at the time but keen to return to management, in 
particular in England, where he had fond memories from his time in charge of 
Chelsea and still owned a property in London going back to those days at 
Stamford Bridge more than a decade earlier. Several Championship clubs had been 
sounded out without success when Nigel Pearson’s sacking at Leicester presented 
Kutner and Ranieri with a window of opportunity.

Kutner sensed that Leicester were sceptical about Ranieri, yet he refused to 
be discouraged. He submitted Ranieri’s CV, listing the distinguished clubs the 
64-year-old had managed, together with his record – a Copa del Rey and Super 
Cup winner with Valencia, Coppa Italia winner at Fiorentina, plus second-place 
finishes in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, Ligue 1 and twice in 
Serie A – and kept chipping away. “I just wanted to get Claudio in front of 
them, because I was sure that they would be impressed,” Kutner says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fwalt-disney-wouldnt-script-this-leicester-city-the-peoples-champion&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Walt%20Disney%20wouldn't%20script%20this'%20%E2%80%93%20Leicester%20City%20champions%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fwalt-disney-wouldnt-script-this-leicester-city-the-peoples-champion>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Walt%20Disney%20wouldn%27t%20script%20this%27%20%E2%80%93%20Leicester%20City%20champions%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fwalt-disney-wouldnt-script-this-leicester-city-the-peoples-champion&media=>
‘Walt Disney wouldn’t script this’ – Leicester City champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/may/02/walt-disney-wouldnt-script-this-leicester-city-the-peoples-champion>
. 
Leicester eventually came round to the idea of an interview. Ranieri jumped on 
a plane to London and together with Kutner met up with Rudkin, Susan Whelan, 
the chief executive officer, Andrew Neville, the football operations director, 
and Aiyawatt Srivaddhanaprabha, the vice-chairman.

Ranieri was Ranieri: charming, extremely passionate and knowledgable. There 
was a feeling that he clicked with Srivaddhanaprabha, who knows his football 
inside out – Francesco Totti and Gabriel Batistuta were brought up in 
conversation as Ranieri ran through some of the strikers he has worked with – 
and the Italian’s enthusiasm for management impressed other board members.

Confirmation the talks had gone well arrived a few days later, when Ranieri 
and Kutner were invited back for further discussions, this time with Vichai 
Srivaddhanaprabha, Aiyawatt’s father and Leicester’s owner, also in attendance. 
The more time the Leicester board spent with Ranieri, the more they came to 
realise that his appointment made sense.

That is not to say that anyone involved in making that decision thought for 
one moment that Ranieri would be walking around the King Power Stadium pitch 
following the final home match of the season with a Premier League winners’ 
medal draped around his neck. It is a story that is as beautiful as it is 
absurd.

The Leicester Supremacy – a triumph that was never supposed to happen | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/leicester-city-champions-premier-league>
Leicester, after all, were 5,000-1 rank outsiders and when it emerged that 
Ranieri decided to decorate his office at the King Power Stadium at the start 
of the season with an individual photograph of every other Premier League 
manager (he wanted to make them feel welcome after a match), it was tempting to 
wonder how long it would be before someone else was occupying his chair and 
asking for those black and white images to be packed away into a box never to 
be seen again.

Ranieri’s appointment was viewed in that light and there is no point in 
pretending otherwise.On the afternoon the Italian was unveiled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/20/claudio-ranieri-defends-record-leicester-city-gary-lineker>
 at the King Power Stadium – seven days after Gary Lineker had echoed the 
thoughts of many with a tweet that read: ‘Claudio Ranieri? Really?’ – Whelan 
and Rudkin sat alongside the new Leicester manager in what felt like a show of 
support as much as anything. It was a measure of the mood at the time that 
Whelan asked the supporters to trust the board’s judgement when it came to 
their decision to sack Pearson and replace him with Ranieri.

Nine months later, and on the eve of claiming the Premier League title, some 
wonderful footage emerged of Ranieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/28/claudio-ranieri-emotional-as-he-watches-tribute-from-leicester-fans-video>
 in the stand at the King Power Stadium watching clips of Leicester supporters 
from across the city, starting with Vicky on a fruit and veg stall in the 
market and including a railway employee speaking on behalf of “virtually 
everyone at the station”, expressing their heartfelt gratitude for everything 
he has done for their football club. “God” and “Legend” were among the words 
used to describe Ranieri and, in the context of what has unfolded during this 
incredible season, who are we to argue?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb99ef6314274d4d253a742c3d610101d2edd7d6%2F0_230_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb99ef6314274d4d253a742c3d610101d2edd7d6%2F0_230_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Claudio Ranieri and his assistant Steve Walsh watch pre-season training. Walsh 
badgered him to sign N’Golo Kanté, saying ‘Kanté, Kanté, Kanté!’, and the move 
proved inspired. Photograph: Plumb Images/Getty Images 
Leicester’s success under Ranieri will go down as one of the greatest 
achievements in sport, never mind the insular world of English football, and as 
the mind wanders forward to Saturday evening’s home game against Everton and 
the moment when Wes Morgan steps forward to pick up that 25kg Premier League 
trophy, the obvious question to ask is how on earth have they done it?

The truth is that even those on the inside at Leicester shake their heads in 
disbelief, half-expecting to rub their eyes one morning and realise it was all 
a dream. Nobody at Leicester would dare to claim that they saw this coming, yet 
that is not to say that they struggle to come up with reasons why everything 
has spectacularly fallen into place, chief among them being the exhilarating 
mix of team spirit and talent within a group of players who possess a rare 
commodity in a game awash with money: hunger.

An obvious place for the fairytale to start is at the end of last season, 
before Ranieri took over and when Pearson and his players pulled off the “great 
escape”, winning seven of their last nine matches to haul themselves off the 
bottom of the table and up to 14th place. Described as a “miracle” by Ranieri 
on the day he was presented to the media, that turnaround hinted at the 
potential (comfortable mid-table) in a team that Pearson had strengthened by 
the time he was sacked on 30 June.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fclaudio-ranieri-emotional-as-he-watches-tribute-from-leicester-fans-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Claudio%20Ranieri%20emotional%20as%20he%20watches%20tribute%20from%20Leicester%20fans%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fclaudio-ranieri-emotional-as-he-watches-tribute-from-leicester-fans-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Claudio%20Ranieri%20emotional%20as%20he%20watches%20tribute%20from%20Leicester%20fans%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fclaudio-ranieri-emotional-as-he-watches-tribute-from-leicester-fans-video&media=>
Claudio Ranieri emotional as he watches tribute from Leicester fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/28/claudio-ranieri-emotional-as-he-watches-tribute-from-leicester-fans-video>
Robert Huth’s loan deal from Stoke City had been turned into a permanent move, 
and Christian Fuchs and Shinji Okazaki had joined from Schalke and Mainz 
respectively. Steve Walsh, the club’s joint assistant manager and head of 
recruitment, was busy chasing another target that was far from straightforward 
but would turn into one of the best Premier League signings of the summer.

N’Golo Kanté was the player’s name, and Ranieri – as he would later admit – 
did not know much about him. Ranieri was far from alone in that respect – 
plenty of other Premier League managers have since questioned how he slipped 
under their radar – but Walsh and his recruitment team had done their homework. 
David Mills, Leicester’s senior scouting coordinator, had been to see Kanté 
play for Caen, and clips and statistics were put together to highlight the 
midfielder’s talent.

Ranieri, however, still needed convincing about the player’s physique. A few 
months down the line, on the back of some superb performances from the 
Frenchman, Ranieri recalled how Walsh would constantly badger him during 
pre-season, saying: “Kanté, Kanté, Kanté!” In the end Ranieri was won over,
Leicester handed over £5.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/03/leicester-city-sign-ngolo-kante-caen>
 and the rest is history. High quality on the pitch and low maintenance off it, 
Kanté drives a Mini and lives a simple life that involves tackling and smiling; 
occasionally both at the same time. He has been a revelation and everybody at 
Leicester loves him.

Claudio Ranieri proves nice guys do not always come second | Owen Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/claudio-ranieri-leicester-premier-league-champions>
In Walsh, Ranieri saw a friendly face when he arrived in Austria. The two 
worked together at Stamford Bridge, where Walsh was a scout for 16 years, and 
Ranieri knew how highly the former school teacher, who has been a central 
pillar of Leicester’s success with his remarkable track record of uncovering 
rough diamonds, was regarded by Rudkin and the club’s owners.

Ranieri, crucially, was happy to work with the club’s existing staff, 
including Craig Shakespeare, who also holds the title of assistant manager and 
has a close rapport with the players; he is out on the training field with them 
every day. Rather than seeking to make sweeping changes, which may have 
affected his chances of getting the job in the first place, Ranieri chose to 
complement what was in place by bringing in three staff of his own.

Paolo Benetti, who has worked with Ranieri since 2007, was named as the club’s 
third assistant manager and is seen as someone for the manager to bounce ideas 
off. Andrea Azzalin was appointed first-team science and conditioning coach, 
working under Matt Reeves, Leicester’s head of fitness and conditioning. A 
goalkeeping coach was also brought in but quickly departed. Mike Stowell, the 
first-team coach, fulfils that role and is well respected. Anyone who coaches 
Kasper Schmeichel with his father Peter watching – the former Manchester United 
goalkeeper often drops in at the training ground – needs to have a bit about 
them.

In some respects Leicester’s success under Pearson was a hindrance as well as 
a help to Ranieri initially. The team had momentum from the previous campaign, 
and the feeling among the players was that there was little need for anything 
to be altered. Pearson was an extremely popular manager inside the dressing 
room and whatever the rights and wrongs of the club’s decision to dismiss him, 
many of the Leicester players felt a sense of loyalty to him and liked his 
methods, including the fact that he gave them a voice and, in the case of the 
more senior members of the squad, courted their opinion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feda86c0cf6ad1c4b4ed863c1a8cd1b7a0b68ba5c%2F0_32_3628_2177%2F3628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feda86c0cf6ad1c4b4ed863c1a8cd1b7a0b68ba5c%2F0_32_3628_2177%2F3628.jpg>
 Danny Drinkwater, here celebrating with Leonardo Ulloa, right, after the 
striker’s last-minute equaliser against West Ham, was made a mainstay of the 
team to terrific effect. He was unable to get into the side at the end of last 
season. Photograph: Tom Jenkins/the Guardian 
In that sense Ranieri came to realise he would not be able to impose his way 
at Leicester and get everyone to blindly follow. It was a case of old habits 
die hard, especially when they delivered results. Players saw the five-a-sides 
on a Friday as a staple diet of their week and were not afraid to express their 
thoughts on the type of sessions being put on and how long they lasted. There 
was, in short, a resistance to change and, to an extent, Ranieri learned to go 
with the flow.

Tactically, however, Ranieri quickly made his mark. During pre-season he 
decided that playing with a three-man central defence – a system that worked 
extremely well for Pearson and the players at the end of last term – should be 
scrapped. Although it felt like a big call at the time, Ranieri got it spot on 
and the same has also been true with his team selection and substitutions – all 
of which flies in the face of the popular characterisation of him as a man who 
was forever saying twist instead of stick at Chelsea.

'Ranieri for President!' Leicester City fans across the world celebrate a 
miracle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/ranieri-for-president-leicester-city-fans-across-the-world-celebrate-a-miracle>
Early on Ranieri took a shine to Danny Drinkwater, who was unable to get into 
Leicester’s team at the end of last season but finishes this one hoping to go 
to Euro 2016 with England, and he has had no qualms about overlooking Gokhan 
Inler, the Switzerland captain who wassigned as a replacement for Esteban 
Cambiasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/14/leicester-agree-gokhan-inler-deal-napoli>
. Inler, a player Ranieri was keen to sign and rated highly, was not even on 
the benchagainst Swansea 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/football/2016/apr/24/leicester-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
 last Sunday, when the manager dropped Marc Albrighton and was rewarded with an 
impressive performance from Jeffrey Schlupp. The feeling that Ranieri can do no 
wrong was confirmed when Albrighton came off the bench and scored Leicester’s 
fourth.

The “Tinkerman” has become the “Thinkerman” at Leicester, yet one thing that 
will never change with Ranieri is that warm, infectious personality. He has 
brought humour and light to Leicester, privately as well as publicly, 
occasionally mixing up his words with comical consequences and, in true Ranieri 
fashion, laughing at himself in the process. Self-deprecation comes easily to 
Ranieri, whocalled himself “a bell” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/29/claudio-ranieri-leicester-city-box-office-manchester-united>
 on Friday before realising amid the laughter that he was straying close to 
inadvertently insulting himself.

That comment was made after another rendition of “dilly-ding dilly-dong” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/may/01/leicesters-claudio-ranieri-explains-dilly-ding-dilly-dong-video>
 – the wake-up call for those not paying attention on the training pitch or in 
meetings – and a catchphrase that Ranieri’s staff and players have a permanent 
reminder of at home. At the end of one of the meetings at the training ground 
just before the visit to Liverpool on Boxing Day, Ranieri handed out a neatly 
boxed brass bell, engraved with his name, to everybody in the room. The only 
thing missing was a Father Christmas outfit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b3ac4485a498c74cc721fbf84825b93f3b8b2f9%2F0_93_3306_1984%2F3306.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b3ac4485a498c74cc721fbf84825b93f3b8b2f9%2F0_93_3306_1984%2F3306.jpg>
 Jamie Vardy, whose voice sets the volume in Leicester’s dressing room, 
celebrates here after scoring at home to Manchester United. The team’s 
dejection at drawing that match told Ranieri much about the hunger and belief 
in his squad. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Ranieri, however, is no fool. By that stage Leicester were enjoying the view 
from the top of the table and the manager was keeping a lid on expectations 
with his expert handling of the media. Press conferences started with a 
handshake for everybody in the room, invariably finished with laughter and in 
between there was constant talk of hitting 40 points. He even referenced the US 
president at one stage when asked about the title. “I’d like to say: ‘Yes we 
can!’ But I am not Obama,” Ranieri said, smiling.

Behind the scenes ambition was growing. In a colourful and eclectic dressing 
room where Jamie Vardy’s voice sets the volume and Huth’s dry sense of humour 
provides the comedy value, the team spirit and determination, as well as the 
individual talent, was shining through and, in many people’s eyes, inspiring 
Ranieri every bit as much as his players. He needed to look no further than the 
dejection among his players after the1-1 draw with Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/28/leicester-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 in November to see the hunger and belief burning within.

Claudio Ranieri says Leicester players deserve to be champions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/claudio-ranieri-leicester-champions-jamie-vardy>
Vardy’s opening goal in that fixture saw him make history as the first player 
to score in 11 successive Premier League matches and, for all the talk about 
the camaraderie within the squad, it is impossible to overlook the significant 
individual contribution made by the England striker, who has scored 22 goals 
and set up another six, and two of his team-mates, Kanté and Riyad Mahrez, all 
of whom were named onthe PFA player of the year shortlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/13/pfa-awards-leicester-city-vardy-mahrez-kante-dimitri-payet>
.

Mahrez arrived in 2014 from Le Havre for €450,000 and it seems laughable now 
that not so long ago Marseille’s chairman ridiculed the possibility of signing 
the 25-year-old. Walsh, on another one of his many scouting missions, had gone 
to watch Ryan Mendes, who is now at Nottingham Forest, but ended up being taken 
in by a slender winger with dexterous footwork. That night Mahrez produced the 
same trick that led toLeicester’s third goal against Stoke City 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/football/2016/jan/23/leicester-city-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 a few months ago and left Philipp Wollscheid looking like a man who knew that 
he had been nutmegged but could not work out how.

Mahrez has been unplayable at times this season and if ever there was a 
performance that clinched the votes for thePFA player of the year award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/leicester-riyad-mahrez-pfa-player-of-the-year>
, it was duringFebruary’s 3-1 victory at Manchester City 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/football/2016/feb/06/manchester-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. It was Mahrez at his best, when it mattered most, and provided a seminal 
moment in Leicester’s season; the players and staff sensed for the first time 
that something truly special was happening.

Watching that game everything seemed a little surreal as Leicester, four days 
after beating Liverpool 2-0, took City apart at the Etihad. It was hard to 
suppress a smile when a message was sent out via Leicester’s official Twitter 
account with 20 minutes to go that read: “So if you’re just joining us... #lcfc 
are leading 3-0 and Robert Huth is on a hat-trick.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa723d0346a121c060a0d5deb1e451496e5676086%2F0_27_4824_2895%2F4824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa723d0346a121c060a0d5deb1e451496e5676086%2F0_27_4824_2895%2F4824.jpg>
 The strength of the team spirit at Leicester is notable. Here Riyad Mahrez, 
outstanding this season, shows his cooking skills after the squad were rewarded 
by Ranieri for a clean sheet with a visit to a pizzeria.
 Photograph: Getty Images 
Yet it was the response to a setback eight days later, on Valentine’s Day, 
that provided the greatest indication of what Leicester were capable of 
achieving this season. After playing against Arsenal with 10 men for more than 
half an hour, following Danny Simpson’s red card, Leicesterconceded in the 95th 
minute and lost 2-1 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/football/2016/feb/14/arsenal-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. It was the cruellest of defeats, their lead at the top was cut to two points 
and everyone, inside and outside the club, wondered how the players would 
respond to not just losing but the gut-wrenching manner of that defeat.

Leicester City's march to glory: how a stellar season unfolded, game by game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-city-premier-league-glory-season-game-by-game>
Ranieri, in what turned out to be a superb piece of management, took advantage 
of their early elimination from the FA Cup and gave the players a week off 
training to escape and forget about football. When they returned to the pitch 
the answer to whether being beaten against Arsenal would break their resolve 
was emphatic. Leicester won six and drew one out of the next seven matches to 
take 19 points out of 21. Arsenal, for the record, collected nine.

By now Leicester’s team had a familiar look. Schmeichel in goal; Simpson, 
Morgan, Huth and Fuchs at the back; Mahrez, Drinkwater, Kanté and Albrighton in 
midfield; and Okazaki playing just behind Vardy up front. Two compact banks of 
four, across defence and midfield, leaving opponents little room to play 
through them, and a deep-lying forward who never stops running operating behind 
a predator with the lightning pace to finish off their devastating 
counterattacks.

Seven of that XI have started at least 33 of 36 league games this season. Of 
the other four players, Okazaki has made the fewest starts with 27. Settled and 
consistent, the team is also vastly experienced. Schmeichel and the back four 
in front of him, together with Okazaki and Vardy, are aged 29 and over. They 
are men – not boys – and it has shown in their mental strength during the 
run-in.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004ad17e46cdf5faa5b0908ad5d7f28d93a04bc5%2F0_90_4796_2877%2F4796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20triumph%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20an%20extraordinary%20season%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fleicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004ad17e46cdf5faa5b0908ad5d7f28d93a04bc5%2F0_90_4796_2877%2F4796.jpg>
 Shinji Okazaki scores Leicester’s winner at home to Newcastle. He is one of 
seven regular starters aged 29 or over and that experience has shown in the 
team’s mental strength during the run-in. Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty 
Images 
Good fortune has played a part in their injury record and made it easy for 
Ranieri to pick the same team, yet pinning everything on luck overlooks the 
expertise and technology within the medical and sports science departments at 
Leicester, where Dave Rennie, the head physio, and Reeves leave no stone 
unturned.

The club has invested in a Cryo Chamber unit, where players are exposed to 
temperatures of -135 degrees to aid their recovery. They use other technology 
that is more commonplace at the highest level, such as theCatapult GPS system 
<http://www.catapultsports.com/uk/> and Polar Team2 heart-rate monitors 
<http://www.polar.com/uk-en/b2b_products/team_sports/polar_team2_pro>, 
regularly issue electronic questionnaires to gauge everything from energy 
levels to sleep patterns but, perhaps most importantly of all, strive to create 
an environment where everybody talks to each other.

In the end it is about a meeting of minds. Ranieri wants players training and 
the medical staff need to minimise the risk of injury, so sometimes it is a 
case of searching for that middle ground, even if that means sticking an 
exercise bike on the side of the pitch during a tactical session and getting a 
player to pedal away while the manager makes his point. That is what happened 
at Leicester’s training ground a few weeks ago and meant that the player in 
question knew his role come matchday and never aggravated his injury in the 
leadup. Everyone was happy.

It is not rocket science and, as we know from watching Leicester this season, 
nor does it need to be. In a game that is often overcomplicated and 
increasingly obsessed with statistics, the percentages show that Ranieri’s team 
are in the bottom three for possession and that only West Bromwich Albion have 
a lower pass completion rate, yet the only table that matters – in the absence 
of one that quantifies teamwork – showsLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> with an unassailable lead 
at the top of the Premier League. We should all enjoy that sight.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fchampiones-leicester-city-players-celebrate-premier-league-win-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Champions!'%20Leicester%20City%20players%20celebrate%20Premier%20League%20win%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fchampiones-leicester-city-players-celebrate-premier-league-win-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Champions%21%27%20Leicester%20City%20players%20celebrate%20Premier%20League%20win%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fchampiones-leicester-city-players-celebrate-premier-league-win-video&media=>
‘Champions!’ Leicester City players celebrate Premier League win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/may/02/championes-leicester-city-players-celebrate-premier-league-win-video>
.  