

Leicester City have completed one of the most remarkable stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/01/dilly-ding-dilly-dong-leicester-city-season-premier-league-ranieri>
 in the history of English football by winning the Premier League title. 
Written off as relegation candidates at the start of the season, when the 
bookmakers madeLeicester 5,000-1 outsiders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/01/leicester-city-win-premier-league-bookmakers-mugs>
 to be crowned champions, they secured the first top-flight title in the club’s 
history after Tottenham were unable to beat Chelsea on Monday night.

The Leicester Supremacy – a triumph that was never supposed to happen | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/leicester-city-champions-premier-league>
Spurs had to win at Stamford Bridge to extend the title race after Leicester’s 
point at Manchester United on Sunday.They drew 2-2, handing Claudio Ranieri’s 
side the prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
.

After flying back to England on Monday night having had lunch in Italy with 
his 96-year-old mother, Ranieri said: “I’m so proud. I’m happy for my players, 
for the chairman, for the staff atLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>, all our fans and the 
Leicester community. It’s an amazing feeling and I’m so happy for everyone. I 
never expected this when I arrived.”

It is an incredible tale on so many levels, not least the fact that Leicester 
were so nearly relegated from the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2015/apr/21/leicester-city-relegation-greatest-escape-premier-league-best-11s>
 last season. They spent 140 days at the bottom of the table and looked set for 
an immediate return to the Championship until they won seven of their last nine 
matches under Nigel Pearson to climb clear of the bottom three.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fleicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43cc0cc62af99a1b2c3fcd543d973d1e953f5753%2F0_149_5568_3342%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20City%20win%20the%20Premier%20League%20title%20after%20a%20fairytale%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fleicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20City%20win%20the%20Premier%20League%20title%20after%20a%20fairytale%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fleicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43cc0cc62af99a1b2c3fcd543d973d1e953f5753%2F0_149_5568_3342%2F5568.jpg>
 Mark Clattenburg, fifth from right, tries to keep the Tottenham and Chelsea 
players apart during a tempestuous game. Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty 
Images 
When Ranieri took over from Pearson in the summer his appointment was widely 
mocked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/14/claudio-ranieri-leicester-city-nigel-pearson>
. Ranieri mentioned only a few weeks ago that he was aware he had been 
installed as the favourite to be the first Premier League manager to be sacked 
yet, in keeping with his image, the Italian never returned fire on his critics.

Instead, he quietly went about the job of transforming Leicester into title 
challengers, only admitting that they were in the race four matches before the 
end of the season. He changed their targets step by step, from getting to 40 
points, qualifying for Europe and securing their place in the Champions League 
group stage, and now the final box – doing the unthinkable and winning the 
league – has been ticked off.

Leicester’s Claudio Ranieri proves nice guys do not always come second
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/claudio-ranieri-leicester-premier-league-champions>
The Leicester players celebrated the greatest night of their footballing lives 
at Jamie Vardy’s house, in Melton Mowbray, where they gathered towatch the 
Spurs match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/may/02/championes-leicester-city-players-celebrate-premier-league-win-video?CMP=share_btn_tw>
. Their captain, Wes Morgan, said: “It’s the best feeling of my career and I 
couldn’t be prouder that it’s as part of this team. Everyone’s worked so hard 
for this, nobody believed we could do it, but here we are,Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> champions and deservedly 
so.”

It is a narrative that belongs to a different era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/apr/28/leicester-premier-league-nottingham-forest-1978-parallels>
 – Nottingham Forest, in 1978, were the last first-time winners – and means 
that Ranieri, at the age of 64, has finally won a major league. He finished 
second in the Premier League with Chelsea in 2004 and was twice a runner-up in 
Serie A, and once in Ligue 1. Now the man José Mourinho described in 2008 as 
having “the mentality of someone who doesn’t need to win” has a Premier League 
title on his CV.
 