
Every year at about this time, a Russian cargo plane deposits many tonnes of 
equipment on an ice floe one degree off the north pole. There, at the 89th 
parallel, engineers begin construction of a private ice air strip and base camp 
for scientists, adventurers and, more than ever, wealthy tourists.

Northwest Passage, Canada: going with the floe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/29/northwest-passage-canada-arctic-going-with-the-floe>
From the camp, it’s a seven- to 10-day trudge by dog sled or ski – or, for 
those less fit or in a hurry, a 40-minute helicopter ride – to get to a 
location where they can legitimately power up the satellite phone and call 
someone to say: “Hello! Can you hear me? I’m at the north pole.” The price of 
placing that call starts at £13,500 (flights not included).

The extreme cold, lack of facilities and unpredictable Arctic weather allow 
for no lingering or reflection, and there are only about four weeks when the 
sea ice is solid enough to attempt the journey. Only this year, the ice air 
strip developed a huge crack, stranding the 2016 class ofArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> adventurers in Norway while 
engineers try injecting water into the gap in the hopes of freezing it over, or 
begin looking for another ice floe.

The polar regions have been warming twice as fast as anywhere else due to 
climate change

But we are running out of ice floes. And we are running out of time to put 
systems in place to deal effectively with the enormous changes remaking the 
Arctic – before there is a human and environmental catastrophe.

As rapidly as the tour groups, research cruises and explorers claiming to bear 
witness to climate change are rushing into the Arctic in search of adventure, 
the Arctic, or at least that part of it that has existed as ice for thousands 
of years, is retreating.

The ice cover over the Arctic ocean is disappearing at a far faster clip than 
scientists had anticipated even a decade ago, bringing a rush of visitors and a 
scramble for one of the last great untapped repositories of oil and gas, faster 
shipping routes, and mining, fishing, and tourism opportunities that will 
overwhelm local communities and infrastructure.

This winter has been freakishly warm, even for the Arctic. The polar regions 
have been warming twice as fast as anywhere else due to climate change. Those 
changes have consequences well beyond the Arctic, altering ocean currents and 
jumbling weather patterns.

But nowhere are the real-time effects of climate change as visible as in the 
Arctic.It was 21.7C (71F) at the Klawock weather station in south-eastern 
Alaska last month 
<https://scienceforthefuture.wordpress.com/2016/03/31/alaska-hits-70-degrees-in-march-for-first-time-ever/>
, a record. The Arctic sea ice cover, at its winter peak, was the lowest in the 
satellite image history, which will likely set up even more melting this 
summer, according to scientists. Alaska has already had its first wildfire of 
the year, in what should usually be the snow-bound month of February. Last 
December broughttemperatures around 30C above normal at the north pole 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/weather/12075282/North-Pole-temperatures-spike-above-freezing-as-Storm-Frank-sends-warm-air-north.html>
.

It’s these staggering changes that have opened up the Arctic to commercial 
possibilities and to tourism. The private camp on the ice floes did not exist 
in 2000. Until 2007 theNorthwest Passage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/20/chilling-history-exhibition-northwest-passage>
 – another fabled destination – was thought to be too clogged with ice even in 
the summer months for transit without an icebreaker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F174b72b227893a6cfaf39bed6d582452e4c2349e%2F0_14_1424_854%2F1424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20not%20turn%20the%20Arctic%20into%20an%20adventure%20playground%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Goldenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20not%20turn%20the%20Arctic%20into%20an%20adventure%20playground%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Goldenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F174b72b227893a6cfaf39bed6d582452e4c2349e%2F0_14_1424_854%2F1424.jpg>
 An 1851 illustration showing HMS Investigator trapped in the Northwest 
Passage. Photograph: AP 
This summer the Northwest Passage will become a mass tourism destination, with 
a scheduled sailing in August of the Crystal Serenity 
<http://www.crystalcruises.co.uk/northwest-passage-cruise/anchorage-to-new-york-city--7320>
, a luxury cruise liner carrying more than 1,000 passengers and crew. The 
32-day cruise from Anchorage to New York is sold out, with prices from $22,000 
up to $120,000 for a deluxe state room. But where outsiders seek profit and 
adventure, local people see risk and the destruction of their culture and way 
of life.

Well before the chasm opened up in the north pole base camp, indigenous people 
were familiar with the treacherous ice conditions across the Arctic. Native 
communities on the Bering coast rely on a frozen platform of 1 metre or more to 
hunt and fish and travel in a region where there are almost no roads. But in 
recent years snowmobiles have been breaking through thinning ice. This winter 
Bering Sea hunters complained they were running out of room to set pots for 
crab fishing, or trap seal and other animals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60c90829631ab70d02ec2982c59a681f4ef617e6%2F0_159_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20not%20turn%20the%20Arctic%20into%20an%20adventure%20playground%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Goldenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20not%20turn%20the%20Arctic%20into%20an%20adventure%20playground%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Goldenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60c90829631ab70d02ec2982c59a681f4ef617e6%2F0_159_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 An Alaskan Inupiat hunter. Photograph: Laurent Dick/AP 
Those risks do not deter adventure seekers. On the contrary, the US and 
Canadian coastguards report they are called out increasingly to rescue tourists 
kayaking or skiing across remote and unfamiliar terrain. Such operations are 
immensely costly, given the distances and extreme conditions. On 4 March, it 
took two coastguard helicopters, a C-130 military transport plane and 24 highly 
trained rescue personnel to recover two British tourists from a ski trip gone 
wrong in the Bering Strait, according to the coastguards. And in several of the 
past few years there have been more adventure cruises than government ships 
transiting the strait. Shipping traffic overall through the Arctic has doubled 
since 2008, with some estimates of a 30-fold increase in shipping by 2020.

The prospect of rescuing some 1,000 people, many of them elderly, from the 
freezing waters of the Northwest Passage isterrifying for local people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/28/us-canada-arctic-cruise-ship-titanic-emergency-training-coast-guard>
 (even if the Crystal has given assurances it will sail with an icebreaking 
escort vessel carrying two helicopters) and for the US and Canadian emergency 
response agencies whose nearest bases are hundreds of miles away. Once the 
liner enters the Canadian Arctic it will dock at ports of call with populations 
half as numerous as the paying customers aboard.

The US and Canadian coastguard will carry out drills for a mass rescue from 
the Crystal in Anchorage next week. But some local communities, such as the 
town of Nome are scheduled to receive disaster training only after the Crystal 
sails by.Just as terrifying for people who live off the land is the idea of an 
oil spill fouling remote Arctic waters and the seals, walruses and bird life 
they depend on for food. US government marine biologists have already been 
tracking oiled wildlife off the Bering Strait, as well as a mysterious illness 
among seals.

Ships venturing into the newly open waters of the Arctic are still allowed to 
use heavy fuel oil, which is a major source of black carbon. The powerful 
climate pollutant darkens ice and snow, speeding its warming. Arctic 
governments have singled out the risk of a heavy fuel oil spill as the single 
biggest threat to marine wildlife and the local economy. Heavy fuel oil is 
banned in Antarctic waters. Cruise lines, which use the same ships to operate 
at both poles, have committed to using less polluting fuels. But heavy fuel oil 
is still lawful for the Arctic, and the default choice for many cargo ships.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb341bbe9a0bbb517de6e7080035dd8be820eb7c7%2F0_159_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20not%20turn%20the%20Arctic%20into%20an%20adventure%20playground%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Goldenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20not%20turn%20the%20Arctic%20into%20an%20adventure%20playground%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Goldenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Farctic-adventure-playground-climate-change-polar-ice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb341bbe9a0bbb517de6e7080035dd8be820eb7c7%2F0_159_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Footprints leading to the north pole. ‘If tourists really cared about the 
Arctic, it would make more sense to stay home.’ Photograph: Daisy 
Gilardini/Getty Images 
It is too late to stop climate change entirely. Many of the changes under way 
in the Arctic are now inevitable, even with all the good intentions 
encapsulated inlast December’s Paris climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 agreement. But it is not too late to stop treating the Arctic as a great 
adventure playground for the rich and the restless – and protect the polar 
region for the people who live there.

It is still possible to limit the scope of future climate effects, with deeper 
cuts on greenhouse gas emissions, especially within the next few years. The 
first port of call should be a ban on drilling for oil and gas in the Arctic. 
And there is still time to prevent an even dirtier version of an Exxon Valdez 
or BP oil spill in pristine Arctic waters. On 18 April, the environmental 
council of the International Maritime Organisation will meet in London, and 
campaign groups are pressing for a ban on heavy fuel oil in the Arctic.

A number of the adventurers holed up in Norway waiting for the repairs to the 
ice runway claim to be making their epic journeys in the name of conservation – 
saying they need to go now, before the Arctic is ice-free. “These rapid 
environmental changes will likely consign epic, long range, polar ice 
expeditions to the pages of history,” one expedition lamented. Giving up on the 
chance to make that call from the other side would no doubt be a personal 
tragedy for explorers or well-heeled adventure tourists.

But if they really cared about the Arctic, it would make more sense to stay 
home andtake up an equally challenging mission: pressing political and business 
leaders for a ban on oil and gas drilling and the use of heavy fuel oil. It 
might not rival the bragging rights of a polar phone call, but it could help 
preserve that last great open space for the people who live there and future 
generations.
 