
I’m in the USA this week for the second time this year, so I wasn’t surprised 
when the Guardian reported that, according to a new study, increasing numbers 
of American teens from low-income communities aretrading sex to stay fed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/12/teens-america-hunger-food-poverty>
.

Not just trading sex, of course, they’re also selling drugs and turning to 
crime because their parents can’t afford to feed them. “We heard the same story 
everywhere,” said one of the report authors, having surveyed low-income kids 
across 10 different American cities.

Last week another American piece entitled “20 ways to help your employees 
struggling with food insecurity” 
<http://womenlifenow.com/20-ways-to-help-your-employees-struggling-with-food-insecurity-and-hunger/>
 went viral.

Christian Porter's welfare figures are designed to shock. Pay them no respect 
| Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/22/christian-porters-welfare-figures-are-designed-to-shock-pay-them-no-respect>
How much Australians may wish to emulate America has become a prescient 
question. Because while it’s estimated that up toone in seven American 
households are currently experiencing “food insecurity” 
<http://www.worldhunger.org/hunger-in-america-2015-united-states-hunger-and-poverty-facts/>
, pursuing American-style economic policy is very much the flavour of 
Turnbull’s returned Coalition government.

Their hunger is to cut corporate tax, increase workforce casualisation and 
punish the unemployed.

When Turnbull talks of “flexibility” and “innovation” in industrial 
discussion, these are euphemisms for stripping awards, busting unions and 
keeping wage growth low.

This is the “trickle down” ideology of the American neocons, which absolves 
the state of the responsibility for job creation, denies income support like 
pensions and welfare, and refuses to add to the collective wealth through 
provision of universal access to healthcare and education. The idea is to rely 
on a barely-regulated labour market as the mechanism togenerate incomes for 
working families 
<http://inequality.stanford.edu/_media/pdf/pathways/winter_2008/Smeeding.pdf>.

It’s all founded in fanciful notions of free markets and self-reliance but the 
result of decades of this thinking in the US is entrenched material inequality 
and social mobility near to frozen; withinherited wealth emerging as a major 
determinant of future wealth. 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/03/24/death_of_meritocracy_how_inheritance_is_poisoning_the_american_economy/>

Last week, Americans celebrated a rise in median household income from 2014 
levels, but accounting for inflation,income is still about 2.4% lower than in 
1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/13/household-income-increase-poverty-us-census-report>
.

 Living is hard in the richest country on Earth. A 2014 report from the 
Economic Policy Institute reported 
<http://www.epi.org/blog/united-states-leads-wage-work-lowest-wages/> that of 
26 nations, the US had the lowest-paid work in the OECD as well as the highest 
incidence of it, although it isn’t because Americans are working any less hard. 
The lowest 10% of American workers achieved a 64.9% productivity increase from 
1979-2013. Alas, their wages declined by 5% over the same generation.







Minimum wage here is a tiny $7.25 an hour. And there are 35 million Americans –
26% of the workforce <http://www.raisetheminimumwage.com/pages/demographics> – 
presently working for less than US$10.55 an hour.

With today’s exchange rate, that’s under AUD $13.98. And while it’s calculated 
that buying consumer goods in Americacosts around 8% less 
<http://www.numbeo.com/cost-of-living/compare_countries_result.jsp?country1=Australia&country2=United+States>
 than doing so in Australia, our minimum wage is not only AUD $17.70 an hour, 
but our casuals receive an additional25% loading on their pay 
<https://www.fairwork.gov.au/how-we-will-help/templates-and-guides/fact-sheets/minimum-workplace-entitlements/minimum-wages>
 – Americans don’t – and our minimum wage workers are only10% of our adult 
workforce 
<https://melbourneinstitute.com/downloads/hilda/Bibliography/Other_Publications/pre2010/Healy_etal_AFPC_1_MW_workers.pdf>
.

Inequality is growing in Australia 
<https://theconversation.com/income-and-wealth-inequality-how-is-australia-faring-23483>
 but we’ve so far avoided the worst of American exploitation due to fundamental 
differences in values expressed by more economically egalitarian social policy.

 In the 1980s, US governments decided to accept high levels of unemployment as 
a favour to business drive down wages and encourage competition among 
unemployed workers for lower pay. In Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/27/australia-australian-welfare>
 the Hawke-Keating Accord was a bargain struck between unions and government; 
unions agreed to wage restraints in return for the state’s provision of a 
“social wage”, Medicare, accessible higher education, family tax benefits and 
the superannuation scheme.

Strong Australian unions fought for the right to collectively bargain 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/rearvision/bosses-and-workers-in-australia/6407092>
 industry-wide awards and establish minimum labour standards and workplace 
conditions. American unions don’t have this power; they exist worksite by 
worksite, and are limited in representing even those members in collective 
bargaining if they have less than 50%+1 of a site signed up.

But recent events have revealed the Coalition’s intention is for an erosion of 
these Australian standards. There’s their punitive work-for-the-dole schemes, 
omnibus bills to cut pensions and strip public services, and ongoing attacks on 
unions. Since their re-election, there’s beenChristian Porter’s “revolutionary” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/australia-does-not-have-a-welfare-problem-we-have-a-poverty-problem>
 abandonment of job creation as a means to address unemployment, favouring 
instead to target resources to humiliating the unemployed.

There’s also their intervention in the United Firefighters Union 
<http://www.smh.com.au/victoria/emergency-services-staff-condemn-malcolm-turnbulls-push-to-change-workplace-laws-20160919-grj9xe>
 dispute in Victoria is a means of creating opportunities to accommodate free 
and volunteer labour in the workforce, and therefore weaken enterprise 
bargaining.

To fight racism, we need to craft a better 'we' and ditch the 'us' and 'them' 
| Tim Hollo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/to-fight-racism-we-need-to-craft-a-better-we-and-ditch-the-us-and-them>
Similarly, they’re unmotivated to regulate the proliferation of labour 
subcontractors like Uber or Airtasker. This week, Unions NSW released a report 
that exposed AirTasker as undermining award rates and conditions, with Unions 
NSW secretary Mark Morey explaining to me that Airtasker’s very platform 
encourages workers to undercut one another’s rates to “bid” in competition for 
jobs.

“The minimum award for data entry is $23.53,” is the example Morey gives, “but 
the the recommended rate from Airtasker is $17 an hour.” Taking out the 15% 
that Airtasker deducts, that reduces payment to $14.45, almost $10 beneath the 
award. This is also without industrial protections like workers compensation, 
equipment or anything else – and it’s a means of establishing a labour market 
that exists outside of collective standards.

It is the heavier regulatory touch that has so far spared us the unfair fate 
of our American cousins. Why the Coalition or anyone else would seek to tear at 
the fabric of Australian egalitarianism given the impoverished example of 
American alternative can only be a matter of ideology – one that insists that 
wealth is for the wealthy, and scraps are for everyone else.

 