
What’s going for it? If Yorkshire appeals but you find Leeds too urban and 
sprawling, and York too touristy and twee, then squint between the two on a map 
and you’ll find Tadcaster, a small market town not making much fuss. If you 
head there, you won’t need to look for it so much as sniff it out, since Tad 
has been dominated by its brewing industry for, ooh, about 800 years, thanks to 
the limestone water. As a result, the town may smell a little fruity, but it’s 
actually quite pleasant: the Sam Smith’s brewery (not to be confused with the 
pop star) still employs a cooper, a signwriter and an ostler, its shire horses 
making local deliveries five days a week. If this sort of thing was happening 
anywhere near London, they’d be spaffing on about their artisan values in a 
chunky hipster typeface and hoiking up their prices. As it’s the friendly 
people of Tad doing what they’ve always done, they just get on with it. The 
town sits astride the river Wharfe, is surrounded by fields, and is in a very 
flat bit of Yorkshire, so kids can ride their bikes for hours as if 
PlayStations never happened. Perhaps.

The case against Compared with more majestic small Yorkshire towns, Tad can 
feel a bit drab.

Well connected? Driving is excellent, as the A1 and M1 both pass nearby, while 
the A64 neatly joins Tadcaster to York and Leeds. Leeds Bradford airport is a 
45-minute drive. Tadcaster no longer has a station, but nearby Ulleskelf and 
Church Fenton do, with trains to Leeds, York and Sheffield. Buses to York and 
Leeds.

Schools Primaries: St Joseph’s Catholic 
<http://www.st-josephs-tadcaster.n-yorks.sch.uk/> and Riverside 
<http://www.riverside.n-yorks.sch.uk/> are both “good”, says Ofsted; 
Tadcaster East <http://www.tadeast.com/> “requires improvement”. Secondary: 
Tadcaster Grammar <http://web.tgsbec.com/> is “good”.

Hang out at... Sapori di Napoli <http://saporidinapoli.co.uk/> on Westgate for 
good Italian food, or theTea Lounge 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Tea-Lounge/262641787124230> for tea and 
sandwiches (unbelievably, you have to book).

Let’s move to Ramsgate, Kent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/16/lets-move-to-ramsgate-kent> 
Where to buy Station Road is a leafy area seconds from the centre, while on 
the other side of the river are more modern estates. It’s all a bit cheaper 
than York. Large detached houses in neighbouring villages, £380,000-£450,000. 
Detacheds in town, £200,000-£380,000. Bungalows, £165,000-£325,000. Semis: 
£150,000-£270,000. Flats: £80,000-£235,000. Rentals: two- to three-bed house, 
£600-£800pcm. Flats, £425-£550pcm.

Bargain of the week 18th-century, Grade II-listed house, with planning 
permission for two more houses in its enormous garden, £550,000 with
rentonandparr.co.uk 
<http://www.rentonandparr.co.uk/search/tadcaster/3-bedroom-detached-house-for-sale-in-tadcaster/full_details_adv/914168>
.




From the streets




Dan Cruces “Tadcaster community swimming pool is beautiful, and the staff are 
all volunteers.”

Gillian Lodge “Great place to live and bring up children, low crime rate. Two 
great butchers.”

Caroline Anderson “Lovely walks along the river, under the 1840s viaduct that 
never actually became a railway.”

• Live in Tadcaster? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne. Have a favourite haunt or pet 
hate? If so, please emaillets.move@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 24 November.
 