
It was the most thrilling bureaucratic document I’ve ever seen for just one 
reason: it was dated the 21st day of the month of Thermidor in the Year Six. 
Written in sepia ink on heavy paper, it recorded an ordinary land auction in 
France in what we would call the late summer of 1798. But the extraordinary 
date signaled that it was created when the French Revolution was still the 
overarching reality of everyday life and such fundamentals as the distribution 
of power and the nature of government had been reborn in astonishing ways. The 
new calendar that renamed 1792 as Year One had, after all, been created to 
start society all over again.


In that little junk shop on a quiet street in San Francisco, I held a relic 
from one of the great upheavals of the last millennium. It made me think of a 
remarkable statement the great feminist fantasy writer Ursula K Le Guin had 
made only a few weeks earlier. In the course of aspeech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/20/ursula-k-le-guin-national-book-awards-speech>
 she gave while accepting a book award, she noted:

We live in capitalism. Its power seems inescapable. So did the divine right of 
kings. Any human power can be resisted and changed by human beings.

That document I held was written only a few years after the French had gotten 
over the idea that the divine right of kings was an inescapable reality. The 
revolutionaries had executed their king for his crimes and were then trying out 
other forms of government. It’s popular to say that the experiment failed, but 
that’s too narrow an interpretation. France never again regressed to an 
absolutist monarchy and its experiments inspired other liberatory movements 
around the world (while terrifying monarchs and aristocrats everywhere).

Americans are skilled at that combination of complacency and despair that 
assumes things cannot change and that we, the people, do not have the power to 
change them. Yet you have to be abysmally ignorant of history, as well as of 
current events, not to see that our country and our world have always been 
changing, are in the midst of great and terrible changes, and are occasionally 
changed through the power of the popular will and idealistic movements. As it 
happens, the planet’s changing climate now demands that we summon up the energy 
to leave behind the Age of Fossil Fuel – and maybe with it some portion of the 
Age of Capitalism as well.

A little revolution in a Big Oil town, a fracking ban in the Big Apple
Jeremy Miller (@JeremyJ_Miller) 
Pic from my back patio of @chevron <https://twitter.com/Chevron> Richmond 
refinery. I bet they'll call it "flaring." I call it#roguecorporation 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/roguecorporation?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/d1o250F2jt <http://t.co/d1o250F2jt>
 <https://twitter.com/JeremyJ_Miller/status/545791939237261312> December 19, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/JeremyJ_Miller/status/545791939237261312> 
To use Le Guin’s language, physics is inevitable: if you put more carbon 
dioxide into the atmosphere, the planet warms, and as the planet warms, various 
kinds of chaos and ruin are let loose. Politics, on the other hand, is not 
inevitable. For example, not so many years ago it would have seemed inevitable 
that Chevron, currently the third biggest corporation in the country,would run 
the refinery town of Richmond, California, as its own private fiefdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/07/chevron-richmond-standard-news-oil-california-refinery-election>
. You could say that the divine right of Chevron seemed like a given. Except 
that people in Richmond refused to accept it, and so this town of 107,000 
mostly poor non-white people pushed back.

In recent years, a group of progressives won election 
<http://richmondconfidential.org/2014/11/06/scenes-from-an-upset-at-rpa-headquarters-exhaustion-and-doubt-turn-to-exhilaration/>
 to the city council and the mayor’s seat, despite huge expenditures by 
Chevron, the corporation that also brought you gigantic oil spills onshore in 
Ecuador and offshore in Brazil, massive contamination from half a century of 
oil extraction in Nigeria, and Canadian tar-sands bitumen sent by rail to the 
Richmond refinery. Mayor Gayle McLaughin and her cohorts organized a little 
revolution in a town that had mostly been famous for its crime rate and for 
Chevron’s toxic refinery emissions, whichperiodically 
<http://richmondconfidential.org/2014/12/18/city-officials-press-ahead-with-lawsuit-following-2012-chevron-refinery-fire/>
 createemergencies 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2013/8/6/chevron_to_pay_2_million_for>, sometimes 
requiring everyone to take shelter (and pretend that they are not being 
poisoned indoors), sometimes said – by Chevron – to be harmless, as withlast 
Thursday’s flames 
<http://www.insidebayarea.com/business-headlines/ci_27174056/chevron-refinery-incident-draws-criticism-raises-concerns-about?source=rss>
 that lit up the sky, visible as far away as Oakland.

As McLaughin put it <http://billmoyers.com/2014/10/30/mayor-gayle-mclaughlin/> 
of her era as mayor:

We’ve accomplished so much, including breathing better air, reducing the 
pollution, and building a cleaner environment and cleaner jobs, and reducing 
our crime rate. Our homicide number is the lowest in 33 years and we became a 
leading city in the Bay Area for solar installed per capita. We’re a sanctuary 
city. And we’re defending our homeowners to prevent foreclosures and evictions. 
And we also gotChevron <https://www.theguardian.com/business/chevron> to pay 
$114m extra dollars in taxes.

For this November’s election, the second-largest oil company on Earth 
officially spent $3.1m to defeat McLaughin and other progressive candidates and 
install a mayor and council more to its liking. That sum worked out to about
$180 per Richmond voter 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/191129/what-does-it-take-one-small-city-vanquish-oil-giant>
, but my brother David, who’s long been connected to Richmond politics, points 
out that, if you look at all the other ways the company spends to influence 
local politics, it might be roughly ten times that.

Nonetheless, Chevron lost. None of its candidates were elected and all the 
grassroots progressives it fought with billboards, mailers, television ads, 
websites and everything else a lavishly funded smear campaign can come up with, 
won.

The billionaires and corporations engage in politics all the time, everywhere. 
They count on us to stay on the sidelines

If a small coalition like that can win locally against a corporation that had 
revenues of$228.9bn <http://fortune.com/fortune500/chevron-corporation-3/> in 
2013, imagine what a large global coalition could do against the fossil-fuel 
giants. It wasn’t easy in Richmond and it won’t be easy on the largest scale 
either, but it’s not impossible. The Richmond progressives won by imagining 
that the status quo was not inevitable, no less an eternal way of life. They 
showed up to do the work to dent that inevitability. The billionaires and 
fossil fuel corporations are intensely engaged in politics all the time, 
everywhere, and they count on us to stay on the sidelines. If you look at their 
response to various movements, you can see that they fear the moment we wake 
up, show up and exercise our power to counter theirs.

That power operated on a larger scale last week, when local activists and 
public health professionals applied sufficient pressureto get New York Governor 
Andrew Cuomo to sign legislation banning fracking statewide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/17/new-york-state-fracking-ban-two-years-public-health>
. Until the news broke on last week, the outcome had seemed uncertain. It’s a 
landmark, a watershed decision: a state has decided that its considerable 
reserves of fossil fuel will not be extracted for the foreseeable future, that
other things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/17/new-york-state-fracking-ban-two-years-public-health>
 – the health of its people, the purity of its water – matter more. And once 
again, the power of citizens turned out to be greater than that of industry.

Just a few days before the huge victory in New York, the nations of the world 
ended theirmost recent talks 
<http://unfccc.int/meetings/lima_dec_2014/meeting/8141.php> in Lima, Peru, 
about a global climate treaty – andthey actually reached a tentative deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/15/lima-climate-deal-what-was-agreed-and-what-wasnt>
, one that for the first time asks all nations, not just the developed ones, to 
reduce emissions. The agreement has to get better – to do more, demand more of 
every nation – by theglobal climate summit 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/12/15/us-climatechange-lima-idUSKBN0JT0G320141215>
 in Paris in December of 2015.

It’s hard to see how we’ll get there from here, but easy to see that activists 
and citizens will have to push their nations hard. We need to end the age of 
fossil fuels the way the French ended the age of absolute monarchy. As New York 
state and the town of Richmond just demonstrated, what is possible has been 
changing rapidly.

In the shadow of terrible news from scientists, new technology that works – 
and a new kind of activism
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419353017331%2F3646f489-88f6-4bea-a363-5d6e461cf6a6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20leave%20behind%20the%20age%20of%20fossil%20fuel.%20Welcome%20to%20Year%20One%20of%20the%20climate%20revolution%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s%20leave%20behind%20the%20age%20of%20fossil%20fuel.%20Welcome%20to%20Year%20One%20of%20the%20climate%20revolution%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419353017331%2F3646f489-88f6-4bea-a363-5d6e461cf6a6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 New technologies are only solutions if they’re implemented and the old, 
carbon-emitting ones are phased out or shut down. Photograph: Andy Katz/Andy 
Katz/Demotix/Corbis 
 If you look at innovations in renewable energy technologies – and this may be 
an era in which engineers are our unsung heroes – the future seems tremendously 
exciting. Not long ago, the climate movement was only hoping against hope that 
technology could help save us from the depredations of climate change. Now, as 
one of the six great banners carried in the 400,000-strong September climate 
march in New York City proclaimed, “We have the solutions.” Wind, solar and 
other technologies are spreading rapidly with better designs, lower costs and 
many extraordinary improvements that are undoubtedly but a taste of what’s 
still to come.


In parts of the United States 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/24/business/energy-environment/solar-and-wind-energy-start-to-win-on-price-vs-conventional-fuels.html>
 and theworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/13/wind-power-is-cheapest-energy-unpublished-eu-analysis-finds>
, clean energy is actuallybecoming 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/huge-utility-says-clean-energy-now-costs-less-than-fossil-fuels>
cheaper 
<http://about.bnef.com/press-releases/global-study-shows-clean-energy-activity-surges-developing-world/>
 than fossil fuels. The price of oil has suddenly plunged, scrambling the 
situation for a while, but with one positive side benefit: it’s pushed some of 
thefilthier 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/analysis/2385140/what-does-oil-at-usd70-a-barrel-mean-for-the-green-economy>
 carbon-intensive, cutting-edge energy extraction schemes below the 
cost-effective point for now.

The costs 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/markets/2014/01/31/renewable-energy-winning/5082181/>
 of clean energy technology have themselves been dropping significantly enough 
thatsober financial advisers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/13/mark-carney-fossil-fuel-reserves-burned-carbon-bubble>
 like the head of the Bank of England are beginning to suggest that fossil 
fuels and centralized conventional power plants may prove to bebad investments 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-26455763>. They are also talking 
about “the carbon bubble 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/plum-line/wp/2013/10/30/how-the-carbon-bubble-will-pop/>
” (a sign that the divestment movement has worked in calling attention to the 
practical as well as the moral problems of the industry). So the technology 
front is encouraging.

That’s the carrot for action; there’s also a stick.

If you look at the climate reports by the scientists – and scientists are 
another set of heroes for our time – the news only keeps getting scarier. You 
probably already know the highlights: chaotic weather, regular records set for 
warmth on land and at sea (and 2014 heading for anall-time heat high 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/2014-to-be-hottest-year-ever-measured/>
),355 months in a row 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/10/21/temperatures-have-been-above-average-for-355-straight-months/>
 of above-average temperatures,more 
<http://www.newsweek.com/key-ice-sheet-antarctica-losing-everest-sized-volume-ice-every-two-years-study-289669>
 icemelting faster 
<http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/greenland-melt.html>, more ocean 
acidification <http://pmel.noaa.gov/co2/story/Ocean+Acidification>, the “sixth 
extinction 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/the-sixth-extinction-earth-is-on-the-brink-of-another-massive-loss-of-animal-species-but-this-time-the-calamity-isnt-an-asteroid-or-ice-age-9132053.html>
”, the spread of tropical diseases,drops 
<http://350africa.org/2014/12/12/8-ways-climate-change-is-already-affecting-africa/?utm_content=bufferf9f2c&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
 in food productivity with consequentfamines 
<http://www.climatenewsnetwork.net/climate-renews-famine-risk-to-africas-sahel/>
.

So many people don’t understand what we’re up against, because they don’t 
think about the Earth and its systems much or they don’t grasp the delicate, 
intricate reciprocities and counterbalances that keep it all running as well as 
it has since the last ice age ended and an abundant, calm planet emerged. For 
most of us, none of that is real or vivid or visceral or even visible.

For a great many scientists whose fields have something to do with climate, it 
is. In many cases they’re scared, as well assad 
<http://grist.org/climate-energy/climate-depression-is-for-real-just-ask-a-scientist/>
 and unnerved, and they’re clear about the urgency of taking action to limit 
how disastrously climate change impacts our species and the systems we depend 
upon.

Everything’s coming together while everything’s falling apart
Jamie Henn, 350.org 
Some non-scientists already assume that it’s too late to do anything, which – 
as premature despair always does – excuses us for doing nothing. Insiders, 
however, are generally convinced that what we do now matters tremendously, 
because the difference between the best- and worst-case scenarios is vast, and 
the future is not yet written.

After that huge climate march, I asked Jamie Henn, a cofounder of and 
communications director for350.org <http://350.org/>, how he viewed this moment 
and he replied, “Everything’s coming together while everything’s falling 
apart,” a perfect summary of the way heartening news about alternative energy 
and the growth of climate activism exists in the shadow of those terrible 
scientific reports. This brings us to our third group of heroes, who fall into 
the one climate category that doesn’t require special qualifications: activists.

New technologies are only solutions if they’re implemented and the old, 
carbon-emitting ones are phased out or shut down. It’s clear enough that the 
great majority of fossil fuel reserves must be kept just where they are –in the 
ground 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/11/13/1179251/iea-report-fossil-fuel-boom-is-a-climate-disaster-in-the-making/>
 – as we move away from the Age of Petroleum. That became all too obvious 
thanks to a relativelyrecent calculation 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2013/09/17/1892241/hansen-climate-sensitivity-uninhabitable/>
 made by scientists and publicized and pushed by activists (and maybe made 
conceivable by engineers designing replacement systems). The goal of all this: 
to keep the warming of the planet to 2°C (3.5°F), a target established years 
ago thatalarmed scientists 
<http://www.livescience.com/41690-2-degrees-of-warming-too-much.html> are now 
questioning, given the harm that nearly 1°C of warming is already doing.

Dismantling the fossil-fuel economy would undoubtedly have the side effect of 
breaking some of the warping power that oil has had in global and national 
politics. Of course, those wielding that power will not yield it without a 
ferocious battle – the very battle the climate movement is already engaged in 
on many fronts, from the divestment movement to the fight against fracking to 
the endeavor to stop theKeystone XL pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/keystone-xl-pipeline> and others like 
it from delivering the products of the Alberta tar sands to the successful 
movement to shut down coal-fired power plants in the US and prevent others from 
being built.

From Texas to Keystone and another tunnel in Canada, this movement is bigger – 
and better – than it looks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17827dca350643583d42ddab1c03ebde83fbb612%2F0_286_5184_3110%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20leave%20behind%20the%20age%20of%20fossil%20fuel.%20Welcome%20to%20Year%20One%20of%20the%20climate%20revolution%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s%20leave%20behind%20the%20age%20of%20fossil%20fuel.%20Welcome%20to%20Year%20One%20of%20the%20climate%20revolution%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17827dca350643583d42ddab1c03ebde83fbb612%2F0_286_5184_3110%2F2000.jpg>
 Small-town Nebraska, alongside the would-be XL pipeline, has been one of many 
leading areas of activism leading the fight against Keystone development. 
Photograph: Nati Harnik/AP 
If everyone who’s passionate about climate change, who gets that we’re living 
in a moment in which the fate of the Earth and of humanity is actually being 
decided, found their place in the movement, amazing things could happen. What’s 
happening now is already remarkable enough, just not yet adequate to the crisis.

The divestment movement 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/global-warmings-terrifying-new-math-20120719>
 that arose a couple of years ago to get institutions to unload their stocks in 
fossil fuel corporations started modestly. It is now active on hundreds of 
college campuses and at other institutions around the world. While the 
intransigence or love of inertia ofbureaucracies 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/175817/tomgram%3A_rebecca_solnit,_evacuate_the_economy>
 is a remarkable force, there have been notable victories. In late September, 
for instance, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund – made fat upon the wealth of John 
D Rockefeller’s founding role in the rise of the petroleum industry –pledged to 
divest its $860m in assets from fossil fuels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/22/rockefeller-heirs-divest-fossil-fuels-climate-change>
. It is just one of more than 800 institutions, including church denominations, 
universities, cities, pension funds and foundations from Scotland to New 
Zealand to Seattle, that have already committed to doing so.

The Keystone pipeline could have been up and running years ago, delivering the 
dirtiest energy from Alberta, Canada, to the US Gulf Coast with little fanfare, 
had activists nottaken it on 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175435/tomgram%3A_bill_mckibben,_jailed_over_big_oil%27s_attempt_to_wreck_the_planet/>
. It has become a profoundly public, hotly debated issue, the subject of 
demonstrations at dozens of presidential appearances in recent years – and in 
the course of this ruckus, a great many people (including me) were clued in to 
the existence of the giant suppurating sore of sludge, bitumen andpoison 
<http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-11-21/canadas-tar-sands-oil-boom-yields-toxic-wastewater-lakes>
 lakes that is the Alberta tar sands.

Canadian activists have done a similarly effective job of blocking other 
pipelines to keep this landlocked stuff from reaching any coast for export. One 
upshot of this: quite a lot of the stuff is now being put on trains (with
disastrous results 
<http://www.tarsandsblockade.org/tar-sands-spill-train-derailment-minnesota/> 
when they crash and, in the longer term, no less disastrous outcomes when they 
don’t). This exceptionally dirty crude oil leaves behind extremely high levels 
of toxins in the mining as well as therefining process 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2012/10/tar-sands-oil-refinery-detroit>.

As the Wall Street Journal recently reported 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/protests-slow-pipeline-projects-across-u-s-canada-1418173235>
:

The Keystone XL pipeline was touted as a model for energy independence and a 
source of jobs when TransCanada Corp. announced plans to build the 1,700-mile 
pipeline six years ago. But the crude-oil pipeline’s political and regulatory 
snarls since then have emboldened resistance to at least 10 other pipeline 
projects across North America. As a result, six oil and natural-gas pipeline 
projects in North America costing a proposed $15 billion or more and stretching 
more than 3,400 miles have been delayed, a tally by the Wall Street Journal 
shows. At least four other projects with a total investment of $25 billion and 
more than 5,100 miles in length are facing opposition but haven’t been delayed 
yet.

The climate movement has proved to be bigger and more effective than it looks, 
because most people don’t see a single movement. If they look hard, what they 
usually see is a wildly diverse mix of groups facing global issues on the one 
hand and a host of local ones on the other. Domestically, that can mean Denton, 
Texas,banning fracking 
<https://www.texastribune.org/2014/12/15/dissecting-denton-how-texas-city-baned-fracking/>
 in the November election or theshutting down 
<http://content.sierraclub.org/coal/victories> of coal-powered plants across 
the country, or the movement gearing up in California for animmense 
anti-fracking demonstration 
<http://act.350.org/signup/rcl-signup/?akid=5751.184515.MbOh-T&rd=1&t=1> on 7 
February.

It can mean people working on college divestment campaigns or rewriting state 
laws to address climate change by implementing efficiency and clean energy. It 
can mean the British Columbian activists who, for now, have prevented a tunnel 
from being drilled for a tar-sands pipeline to the Pacific Coast thanks to a 
months-long encampment, civil disobedience and many arrests at Burnaby Mountain 
near Vancouver. One of the arrestedwrote 
<http://www.vancouverobserver.com/opinion/battle-people-vs-pipelines-round-one-went-people>
 in the Vancouver Observer:

[S]itting in that jail cell, I felt a weight lift from my shoulders. One that 
I was only partially aware that I have been carrying for years now. I am 
ashamed by Canada’s withdrawal from the Kyoto Treaty and our increasingly 
contemptible position on climate change. If these are the values of our society 
then I want to be an outlaw in that society.


This is the biggest of pictures, so find your role

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0418c470424267fee4a7791430c393fc07abf3c%2F214_0_1433_2148%2F1334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20leave%20behind%20the%20age%20of%20fossil%20fuel.%20Welcome%20to%20Year%20One%20of%20the%20climate%20revolution%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s%20leave%20behind%20the%20age%20of%20fossil%20fuel.%20Welcome%20to%20Year%20One%20of%20the%20climate%20revolution%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fage-of-fossil-fuel-year-one-climate-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0418c470424267fee4a7791430c393fc07abf3c%2F214_0_1433_2148%2F1334.jpg>
 Earlier this month, hundreds of Peruvian children formed the image of a tree 
on the beach to send a message to the world. It’s a start Photograph: Martin 
Bernetti/AFP/Getty Images 
Just before that September climate march in New York, I began to contemplate 
how human beings a century from now will view those of us who lived in the era 
when climate change was recognized, and yet there was so much more that we 
could have done. They may feel utter contempt for us. They may regard us as the 
crew who squandered their inheritance, like drunkards gambling away a family 
fortune that, in this case, is everyone’s everywhere and everything. I’m 
talking, of course, about the natural world itself when it was in good working 
order. They will see us as people who fiddled while everything burned.

They will think we were insane to worry about celebrities and fleeting 
political scandals and whether we had nice bodies. They will think the 
newspapers should have had a gigantic black box above the fold of the front 
page every day saying “Here are some stories about other things, BUT CLIMATE IS 
STILL THE BIGGEST STORY OF ALL.”

They will think that we should have thrown our bodies in front of the engines 
of destruction everywhere, raised our voices to the heavens, halted everything 
until the devastation stopped. They will bless and praise the few and curse the 
many.

There have been heroic climate activists in nearly every country on the 
planet, and some remarkable things have already been achieved. The movement has 
grown in size, power, and sophistication, but it’s still nowhere near 
commensurate with what needs to be done. In the lead-up to the UN-sponsored 
conference to create a global climate treaty in Paris next December, this 
coming year will likely be decisive.

You are a citizen of this Earth and your responsibility is not private but 
public, not individual but social.

So this is the time to find your place in a growing movement, if you haven’t 
yet – as it is for climate organizers to do better at reaching out and offering 
everyone a part in the transformation, whether it’s the housebound person who 
writes letters or the 20-year-old who’s ready for direct action in remote 
places. This is the biggest of pictures, so there’s a role for everyone, and it 
should be everyone’s most important work right now, even though so many other 
important matters press on all of us. (As the Philippines’s charismatic former 
climate negotiator Yeb Sano notes, “Climate change impinges on almost all human 
rights. Human rights are at the core of this issue.”)

Many people believe that personal acts in private life are what matters in 
this crisis. They are good things, but not the key thing. It’s great to bicycle 
rather than drive,eat plants 
<http://www.climatenewsnetwork.net/diets-effects-on-emissions-give-food-for-thought/?utm_source=Climate+News+Network&utm_campaign=99e9e38a9e-Diet_effects_on_emission11_14_2014&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_be2a364987-99e9e38a9e-38631833>
 instead of animals, and put solar panels on your roof, but such gestures can 
also offer a false sense that you’re not part of the problem.

You are not just a consumer. You are a citizen of this Earth and your 
responsibility is not private but public, not individual but social. If you are 
a resident of a country that is a major carbon emitter, as is nearly everyone 
in the English-speaking world, you are part of the system, and nothing less 
than systemic change will save us.

The race is on. From an ecological standpoint, the scientists advise us that 
we still have a little bit of time in which it might be possible, by a swift, 
decisive move away from fossil fuels, to limit the damage we’re setting up for 
those who live in the future. From a political standpoint, we have a year until 
the Paris climate summit, at which, after endless foot-shuffling and evading 
and blocking and stalling and sighing, we could finally, decades in, get a 
meaningful climate deal between the world’s nations.

We actually have a chance, a friend who was at the Lima preliminary round 
earlier this month told me, if we all continue to push our governments 
ferociously. The real pressure for change globally comes more from within 
nations than from nations pressuring one another. Here in the United States, 
long the world’s biggest carbon-emitter (until China outstripped us, partly by 
becoming the manufacturer of a significant percentage of our products), we have 
a particular responsibility to push hard. Pressure works. The president is 
clearly feeling it, and it’s reflected in the recentUS-China agreement 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/12/world/asia/china-us-xi-obama-apec.html> on 
curtailing emissions – far from perfect or adequate, but a huge step forward.

How will we get to where we need to be? No one knows, but we do know that we 
must keep moving in the direction of reduced carbon emissions, a transformed 
energy economy, an escape from the tyranny of fossil fuel, and a vision of a 
world in which everything is connected. The story of this coming year is ours 
to write and it could be a story of Year One in the climate revolution, of the 
watershed when popular resistance changed the fundamentals as much as the 
people of France changed their world (and ours) more than 200 ago.

Two hundred years hence, may someone somewhere hold in their hands a document 
from 2021, in wonder, because it was written during Year Six of the climate 
revolution, when all the old inevitabilities were finally being swept aside, 
when we seized hold of possibility and made it ours. “Any human power can be 
resisted and changed by human beings,” says Ursula K Le Guin. And she’s right, 
even if it’s the hardest work we could ever do.

Now, everything depends on it.

 * This essay originally appeared at TomDispatch 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/175938/>.  