
Two Lithuanian men have been found guilty of trafficking two of their fellow 
countrymen, taking all but £20 of the wages they received over several months 
for working in food factories that supply many leading supermarkets.

The victims, Edvinas and Edgarus Subatkis, were found still wearing the same 
clothes in which they had made their journey to Britain. They had also lost 
weight dramatically since leaving Lithuania – about 15kg (2st 4lbs) in the case 
of Edvinas.

Fellow Lithuanians Linus Ratautas and Konstantin Sasmurin introduced the twins 
to recruitment firms, where Ratautas helped them fill in registration forms 
with his own bank details.

Payment for the work the Subatkis brothers undertook was deposited directly 
into Ratautas’s bank account. The twins were given just £20 over the four-month 
period they worked and a small amount of food each week: bread, margarine, 
onions, ketchup, and occasionally a little mince.

They were found working in a chicken factory owned by the largest poultry 
processor in the UK, the 2 Sisters Food Group, whose factory in Flixton, 
Suffolk, supplies meat to many leading British supermarkets, including 
Sainsbury’s, Tesco, Asda and M&S.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Flithuanian-gangmasters-jailed-in-modern-slavery-and-trafficking-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0cee976f4aee20f0ab934058c3b13523307b83a%2F0_139_3923_2355%2F3923.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lithuanian%20gangmasters%20jailed%20in%20modern%20slavery%20and%20trafficking%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Flithuanian-gangmasters-jailed-in-modern-slavery-and-trafficking-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lithuanian%20gangmasters%20jailed%20in%20modern%20slavery%20and%20trafficking%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Flithuanian-gangmasters-jailed-in-modern-slavery-and-trafficking-case%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0cee976f4aee20f0ab934058c3b13523307b83a%2F0_139_3923_2355%2F3923.jpg>
 The 2 Sisters chicken factory in Flixton, Suffolk. Photograph: Si Barber for 
the Guardian 
The twins said their convicted gangmasters had repeatedly threatened them with 
violence. If they were to tell anyone about their conditions or try to get out 
of their “agreement”, Edvinas and Edgarus were warned they would have their 
bones broken, be “dug under” or “fed to the crabs”, which the brothers 
understood to mean that they would be killed. They were hungry, frightened and 
very reluctant to speak.


After several weeks, however, the Flixton factory’s human resources manager 
was alerted to a problem and interviewed the brothers. The manager, in turn, 
reported his concerns immediately to the Gangmaster Licensing Authority (GLA).

In a ruling at King’s Lynn crown court earlier this month, Ratautas and 
Sasmurin were each sentenced to three and a half years in prison for 
trafficking and money laundering. They were also given the first ever slavery 
and trafficking prevention orders (STPOs) relating to labour exploitation in 
the UK.

Sentencing the pair, the recorder Mark Dennis highlighted the harm done by 
their “grossly degrading and cruel behaviour”.

“Once lured here and met by you, [the brothers] were in reality controlled by 
you physically and financially. You pocketed their earnings … for your own 
financial gain and greed, picking on vulnerable persons who were not in a 
position to resist or extricate themselves from your grasp,” he said.

“I start on the basis for forced labour but there are obvious elements of 
slavery and servitude which cannot be ignored.”


The Subatkis twins were used as forced labour and their experience is typical 
of a growing pattern of exploitation in the UK made possible by a supply chain 
that relies of layers of sub-contracting in which traffickers can thrive. The 
pair were employed at the 2 Sisters factory via the Staffline recruitment 
agency, as signed up by Ratautas.

They were vulnerable young men, brought up partly in care in Lithuania. 
Edvinas has learning disabilities and Edgarus is of limited education.

Both had been in trouble with the Lithuanian authorities in the past, so when 
offered work in the UK in 2013, the two men, then 26, saw the chance of a fresh 
start.

They were lured from Lithuania on the promise of good jobs, housing and all 
their essentials being provided. They agreed to pay an £800 fee for transport 
and employment, even though it is illegal to charge workers for finding work in 
the UK.


They were taken to 3 Crittens Road, in Great Yarmouth, a damp, mouldy and 
barely furnished three-storey house occupied by several other Lithuanians, 
where they shared a single mattress in a room with two other men. When they 
asked for the things they had been promised, they were told they had to pay off 
their £800 debt first.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Flithuanian-gangmasters-jailed-in-modern-slavery-and-trafficking-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9214dbe7d8aef3cd574fc7ceaca5738cbfdfad0%2F0_148_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lithuanian%20gangmasters%20jailed%20in%20modern%20slavery%20and%20trafficking%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Flithuanian-gangmasters-jailed-in-modern-slavery-and-trafficking-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lithuanian%20gangmasters%20jailed%20in%20modern%20slavery%20and%20trafficking%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Flithuanian-gangmasters-jailed-in-modern-slavery-and-trafficking-case%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9214dbe7d8aef3cd574fc7ceaca5738cbfdfad0%2F0_148_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
 The Great Yarmouth house where Edvinas and Edgarus Subatkis were housed. 
Photograph: Si Barber for the Guardian 
At first they were put to work at Norbert Dentressangle’s pea processing plant 
in Lowestoft, where they were signed up by the Jark recruitment firm on site. 
The plant supplies a frozen food giant whose products are sold as own-label 
frozen peas in many high street retailers.

Their gangmasters later moved them to 2 Sisters in Flixton.

Enforcement agencies say this was not an isolated incident. The conviction of 
Ratautas and Samuris came as the government admitted in a recent consultation 
paper that “serious and organised crime gangs are infiltrating legitimate 
labour supply chains in several sectors” in the UK.

This week the government introduced last-minute amendments to the immigration 
bill in the House of Lords committee stage to increase the powers, remit and 
parliamentary oversight of the GLA to tackle labour exploitation. The STPOs 
prohibit the convicted men from acting as gangmasters again.

According to court papers, the two Jark and Staffline employees who registered 
the twins under the eye of the gangmasters have resigned. All the companies 
involved in the Subatkis case say they have strong anti-slavery policies in 
place and 2 Sisters acted quickly once the case was brought to their attention.

The agencies and both the pea and chicken factories said they had rigorous 
procedures in place to guard against trafficking and exploitation and that 
these had been updated since the Subatkis case.

A spokesman for 2 Sisters told the Guardian: “Once we were aware of the 
situation, we acted swiftly and decisively. The UK food industry depends on 
migrant labour, and our processes and systems lead the sector.

“Unfortunately, even the best systems can occasionally be breached. We work 
closely with the GLA and are the biggest supplier partner in the Stronger 
Together anti-slavery initiative.”

XPO Logistics, which owns the Norbert Dentressangle pea factory, said it took 
its responsibilities to its employees “extremely seriously”. Mark Simmons, the 
company’s HR director, told the Guardian: “Our pea processing facility at 
Oulton Broad employs around 150 people in peak season, around half of which are 
agency staff provided by Jark.

“Jark has been licensed with the Gangmasters Licensing Authority on a 
continuous basis since July 2008. Our service level agreement with Jark covers 
all relevant legislation and our internal training procedures.”

The supermarkets told the Guardian they did not tolerate slavery or 
trafficking and said they had imposed audits and codes of practice on 
suppliers, and joined an industry-wide initiative to prevent it. Sainsbury’s, 
Tesco, Asda and M&S said that organised crime could occasionally penetrate 
these systems despite their best efforts, a position echoed by the GLA.

The GLA’s chief executive, Paul Broadbent, said: “No matter how robust and 
secure company systems and structures are, organised criminality can and will 
infiltrate the legitimate supply chains in their endeavours to exploit workers.

“I am satisfied that in this case, all that could have been done to keep 
criminals out of the supply chain was done. The companies involved worked with 
us closely and swiftly to resolve this serious issue.”

The Subatkis twins meanwhile are adrift. They have been provided with 
emergency housing and are supported by charities in the UK through the national 
referral mechanism for victims of trafficking. They have no family to turn to 
and no work in the UK, but feel unable to go back to Lithuania for fear of 
reprisals from associates of Ratautas and Sasmurin.

• This article was amended on 25 January 2016 to clarify details of the 
slavery and trafficking prevention orders given to Ratautas and Sasmurin.
 