
It was the manner of victory at Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, not only Ross Barkley’s dangerous challenge, that has left its mark on Jordan 
Henderson. For a Jürgen Klopp team to chase three points until the last is not 
uncommon butto come through at Goodison Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/19/everton-v-liverpool-premier-league-live>
 with a show of resilience, defensive organisation and strength in depth bodes 
well for what lies ahead in the eyes of the Liverpool captain.

Liverpool’s matchwinner Sadio Mané will head to Gabon with a heavy heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/liverpool-sadio-mane-africa-cup-of-nations-senegal>
“As long as you win the derby that is the main thing,” Henderson said. “But we 
are very pleased with how we won – going to Goodison and dominating, especially 
in the second half, defending solidly as a team, winning the ball back quickly 
and keeping a clean sheet. That’s important.”

The Liverpool midfielder has heard the doubts aired over the team’s defensive 
resolve in recent weeks. Ronald Koemantouched on the subject before Monday’s 
derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/everton-ronald-koeman-liverpool-defensive-frailties-merseyside-derby>
 when insisting his Everton team could take encouragement from the 20 Premier 
League goals Liverpool had conceded this season. He forgot to mention that 
Everton had also conceded 20 before Sadio Mané made it 21 in stoppage time at 
Goodison Park.

Ultimately, and despite Liverpool not touching the ball once inside the 
Everton penalty area until the 27th minute, Simon Mignolet was untroubled 
throughout.Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> departed 
with a second successive clean sheet in the absence of the injured Joël Matip 
and their first 1-0 win in the Premier League since beating Sunderland at the 
Stadium of Light on 30 December last year.

Henderson said: “It was a big plus for us. We are very pleased with keeping a 
clean sheet and also in the last game as well [the3-0 win at Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/middlesbrough-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
]. We have looked solid in the last couple of games, which is pleasing.

“It is always a tough game at Goodison, so to play the way we did was 
pleasing. We gave everything for the 90 minutes and we looked pretty solid 
defensively. We defended really well as a team. We were pleased with the goal 
but also pleased with the clean sheet. It was a bit hectic in the first half, a 
typical derby game, fast and wild, but I felt we dealt with that pretty well 
and at the end of the first half we started to dominate the ball and we took 
that into the second half when we were pushing for the winner.”

Liverpool’s rise to second in the Premier League behind Chelsea – who visit 
Anfield at the end of next month – is as unsurprising to their captain as the 
resolve they showed against Everton’s initial barrage.

“I said at the start of the season that I had a lot of confidence and belief 
that we could be high up the table,” the England international said. “I saw no 
reason, when I looked at the manager and the squad and the way the summer had 
gone, why we could not challenge for trophies. It isn’t a surprise to me that 
we are doing well. It could be better. There are games we have lost that we 
could have drawn, games we have drawn that we should have won. There are also 
things for us to improve – we know that – but it is pleasing that in the 
majority of games we have been at a high level.

“I know I always say: ‘Focus on the next game’ but that is the truth. You 
can’t focus on the final outcome and start talking about what you might achieve 
when there is so much work to do. We have got to keep looking at the next 
challenge. If you take your eye off the ball, that is when you encounter 
problems. That is why we will just focus on the next performance and see where 
that takes us.”

The introduction from the substitutes’ bench of Daniel Sturridge and Emre Can 
gave Liverpool added impetus in the defining final stages of the derby. For 
Henderson, Sturridge’s return from a month out with a calf injury – and at a 
time when Philippe Coutinho is sidelined and Manéwill soon be bound for the 
Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/liverpool-sadio-mane-africa-cup-of-nations-senegal>
 – gives Klopp’s team another lift.

“Daniel has been frustrated that he hasn’t been involved but he has not let it 
affect him and around the place he has stayed happy and quite chilled,” 
Henderson said. “You know when he gets fit he is a big plus because he has so 
much quality. When he comes on and when he plays, you know he is going to 
produce magic and create goals. I don’t think he struck the shot as clean as he 
would have liked but the key was the way he got himself an extra half-yard. 
That is what he is brilliant at, with the close touch and movement. He gets the 
space, he gets away, the shot is a bit scruffy but we have got a goal because 
of it.

“We all know the talent he has. Everyone knows what a big player he can be for 
us. All the big stuff a striker needs to do, he is brilliant at. We just need 
him to stay as fit as we can. When he is fit, he is one of the best around and 
he has shown that over the years. It’s only a matter of time before he scores 
in the Premier League again and hopefully that will be the start of another one 
of those runs.”
 