
Jürgen Klopp has said he will pursue signings who are interested in 
Liverpool’s progress more than financial might and his existing squad could 
cover Sadio Mané’s departure to the Africa Cup of Nations. The Liverpool 
manager is keen to strengthen his attacking options in January withSenegal’s 
Mané bound for Gabon and Danny Ings out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/04/jurgen-klopp-ings-mane-liverpool-january-transfer>
 for the season with a serious knee injury. But he insists Liverpool will not 
be seeking a short-term solution or held to ransom by potential targets in the 
often difficult winter window.

Liverpool’s matchwinner Sadio Mané will head to Gabon with a heavy heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/liverpool-sadio-mane-africa-cup-of-nations-senegal>
Klopp said: “It is not only China that is looking for good players but a lot 
of other clubs, and they might have more money to offer. I can say we don’t 
want to convince players with money. We want to convince them with the way we 
go. We want to have players who are ready to develop and it’s not a message for 
the winter transfer window – it’s a message for the next few years. We have 
already really good players and if someone wants to be a part, they are welcome.

“In this window, I would say if you don’t have the biggest injury problems in 
the world then you shouldn’t do things you can do in the summer. Then you solve 
one problem and create another for the summer. But, as always, we have our eye 
on the market. That doesn’t mean we can do what we want.

“Firstly, I am really happy with the squad. Second, Sadio is not around from 
January but we have options – we can change our system and do a lot of things.

“If we had five other wingers already to replace Sadio then we wouldn’t have 
the atmosphere that we have now in the squad. We can change the system. A lot 
of our players are versatile. The players need to be open and I am sure they 
are.”

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> will again be 
without Philippe Coutinho against Stoke City on Tuesday and Klopp admits it is 
unlikely the influential Brazilian will meet his target of facing Manchester 
City at Anfield on New Year’s Eve.

Coutinho has been sidelined for four weeks with ankle ligament damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/philippe-coutinho-crutches-jurgen-klopp-hopeful>
 and his manager confirmed: “Unfortunately we don’t have him back in [team] 
training. He makes his own training and that is the big difference. We don’t 
have him in full training so there is no reason to think about when he is back. 
We cannot rush the situation. We don’t want to rush it. We have only to accept 
the more or less bigger steps in his improvement with us.

“It was a serious injury and so we need to wait. Whenever he is back the 
season is long enough that he can help us but we cannot rush it because there 
are a few games now. More or less he is on track. It is a lot about experience. 
He was in a very good way and then it was a little bit more difficult because 
of a reaction in the ankle and we had to cool down the situation a little bit. 
I don’t think it will be long-term but the game everyone is dreaming of is 
City: it was clear from the first second of the injury this would be extremely 
unlikely but it was the words of Phil so we will try to do it. At this moment 
it is not more likely than before but I don’t want to say it is not possible.”
 