
The mayor of London has ordered an independent inquiry into the soaring 
conversion costs for the former Olympic Stadium that is now home toWest Ham 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited>, after it emerged 
the bill had risen by another £51m to £323m.

The Labour mayor Sadiq Khan, elected to succeed his Conservative predecessor 
Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> in May this year, 
claimed that the finances of the London Stadium had been left in a “total and 
utter mess by the previous administration” as the cost of the conversion 
ballooned.

Violence at West Ham: who is to blame and what must be done?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/27/six-areas-of-contention-west-ham-united-london-stadium>
The increase, partly accounted for by increased costs involved in moving the 
retractable seats installed to convert the stadium into “football mode”, takes 
the overall cost of the stadium to £752m.

West Ham, the anchor tenants in the stadium during the winter because of a 
controversial deal in which theypay a basic £2.5m a year in rent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/15/in-numbers-west-ham-deal-for-olympic-stadium>
, contributed £15m towards the overall conversion costs with the rest largely 
borne by the taxpayer.

The cost of the conversion of the stadium to retrofit the largest cantilevered 
roof of its kind and 21,000 retractable seats was originally slated at £154m 
when West Hamsigned a tenancy deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/22/west-ham-tenants-olympic-stadium>
 following a protracted and tortuous tender process. That then rose to £193m 
due to complications with the roof and was finally set at £272m last year. The 
overall conversion cost is now likely to be £323m, with newfound issues 
concerning the retractable seats part of the reason for the rise.

The cost of the seats has risen from £300,000 to as much as £8m, while it is 
understood that plans for the hi-tech digital screen and “wrap” that will 
surround the stadium have also increased the final bill.

“The mayor is deeply concerned about the finances of the Olympic Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-stadium>, which have clearly been 
left in a total and utter mess by the previous administration at City Hall,” a 
spokesman for Khan said.

“The former mayor announced just last year that the total cost for 
transforming the stadium was £272m. In reality this is £323m – a difference of 
more than £50m. Sadiq has ordered a detailed investigation into the full range 
of financial issues surrounding the stadium.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f699f46a0bc33a3f893d94142ddf99d83fb9d38%2F0_38_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20mayor%20Sadiq%20Khan%20orders%20inquiry%20into%20West%20Ham%20stadium%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20mayor%20Sadiq%20Khan%20orders%20inquiry%20into%20West%20Ham%20stadium%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f699f46a0bc33a3f893d94142ddf99d83fb9d38%2F0_38_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The cost of installing new seats at the London Stadium has risen towards £8m. 
Photograph: Nick Potts/PA 
The latest rise in costs comes at a delicate time when the finances and 
operation of the London Stadium are under renewed scrutiny. Significant 
teething troubles surrounding West Ham’s move into the stadium came to a head 
last week when there was widespread focus oncrowd trouble at their EFL Cup tie 
with Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/west-ham-ban-200-supporters-trouble-chelsea-london-stadium>
.

The future of the stadium has been controversial since well before the 2012 
Olympic Games. Determined to retain the athletics track as promised, ministers 
and officials originally left any decision on the stadium’s future hanging in 
order to proceed with construction.

When Johnson was elected in 2008 he abandoned plans to reduce the capacity to 
25,000 and resolved to find a solution involving a top-flight football club 
that could support a larger stadium.

West Ham won a bitterly fought battle with Spurs, who wanted to knock the 
stadium down and rebuild it for football, only for the process to collapse 
under legal challenge. Instead, West Ham were awarded a 99-year tenancy 
agreement under terms that also allow athletics, concerts and other sports to 
coexist in the stadium.

Under the terms of the deal, only revealed following a lengthy freedom of 
information fight by campaigners, the costs of operating the stadium are met by 
the special purpose vehicle owned by theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Legacy Development Corporation and 
Newham Council. In turn, it subcontracted the operation of the stadium to the 
French company Vinci.

Newham Council, which invested a £40m loan for a stake in the E20 Stadium 
Partnership, said that the independent review would also report jointly to the 
council.

“I fully support the mayor of London’s call for an independent review into the 
cost overruns of the London Stadium’s transformation works. It is clear the 
transformation costs are considerably higher than previously reported and we 
have a duty to taxpayers to scrutinise this,” said the Newham mayor, Sir Robin 
Wales. “As co-owners of the stadium, the review will report back to Newham 
Council and the GLA.”

West Ham’s home discomforts risk bursting bubble around new ground | Owen 
Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/west-ham-olympic-stadium-troubles>
Both Newham Council and Khan’s office said that they believed the stadium 
would ultimately succeed as a multi-sport venue. “We remain committed to the 
future of the stadium as a venue for football and other sporting and cultural 
activities,” said the spokesman for Khan. “We are confident that London will 
host a fantastic World Athletics and Para Athletics Championships in 2017.”

The new inquiry was welcomed by campaigners. John O’Connell, chief executive 
of the TaxPayers’ Alliance, said: “For too long the details of this shabby deal 
were kept in secret and lacked proper scrutiny soSadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> is absolutely right to look 
again at the case.

“But instead of focusing our anger on West Ham for taking advantage of this 
ludicrously generous taxpayer funded subsidy, we should instead be demanding 
explanations from those that signed off on this agreement and ask how they ever 
thought that this offered value to those of us footing the bill.”
 