
What a place Olympicopolis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/27/latest-vision-olympic-park-olympicopolis-arts-quarter-east-london>
 could be. The cultural building project, part of a£1.3bn 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2016/03/08/olympicopolis-queen-elizabeth-olympic-park-london-masterplan-allies-morrison-odonnell-tuomey/>
 development in the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, could be for its generation 
what the Pompidou Centre was for the 1970s: a vortex of architectural and 
artistic energy with the power to change everything, one that could drag the 
creative centre of London towards its former badlands in the east. It includes, 
after all,a new venue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/05/olympicopolis-east-london-arts-hub-stratford-boris-johnson>
 for Sadler’s Wells theatre, the V&A’s “new museum for the digital age” and a 
“fashion cluster” for theRoyal College of Fashion 
<http://newsevents.arts.ac.uk/44129/2020-vision-ual-olympicopolis-elephant-castle/>
. It could convert the giddy Olympian optimism of 2012 into wonders that will 
unfold over decades. It could be, to use the favourite adjective of eternally 
amazed sports broadcasters, incredible.

But according to three venerable architects, quoted by the Architects Journal 
<https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/dull-as-ditchwater-cook-alsop-and-ritchie-slam-olympicopolis-design/10009442.article>
 – Royal Academicians, still with fire in their bellies from their 1960s youths 
– it will not. “Dull as ditchwater,” saysWill Alsop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/will-alsop>, who likes to turn 
bright, splashy paintings into bright, splashy buildings. “This group of 
buildings readily sinks into the soft corners of one’s brain,” says Sir Peter 
Cook, 80 this year, and the most talkative member of theradical 1960s group 
Archigram <https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2002/feb/24/2>, “in the same 
way that under-amplified Vivaldi can be fed to you in a gift shop.” “Tried and 
tired,” says Ian Ritchie, who recently completed a wavy translucent building 
for aneuroscience research centre 
<http://www.ianritchiearchitects.co.uk/projects/sainsbury-wellcome-centre/> at 
University College London.

All three oppose the style in which Olympicopolis is being designed: careful, 
orderly, curveless, white/cream/beige/brown, mostly right-angled. In the case 
of Cook, his outburst is a continuation of recent attacks on what he calls the 
“biscuit boys”, architects who “enjoy what I call the grim, biscuit-coloured 
world”, which presumably refers to the dry, flat, brownish brickwork they 
employ. This style, sometimes also called the New London Vernacular, is now the 
pervasive way of designing everything from large speculative housing blocks to 
thoughtful arts centres. British architecture,says Cook 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2016/02/05/peter-cook-dull-period-british-architecture-riba-awards-2016/>
, is now in a “dull period”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cce4402714ee7e6b39ab1e330f5f1369dde2f0d%2F0_612_4000_3388%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cce4402714ee7e6b39ab1e330f5f1369dde2f0d%2F0_612_4000_3388%2F4000.jpg>
 ‘The rise of biscuitism’: plans by architects Allies and Morrison, O’Donnell 
and Tuomey and Josep Camps and Olga Felip for new spaces for the V&A, Sadler’s 
Wells and the Royal College of Fashion, plus two residential skyscrapers, on 
the Stratford waterfront. Photograph: Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park 
To which the first thing that needs to be said is that the RA Three’s version 
of exciting has been given some chances in recent history and hasn’t looked 
like the answer. It includes Alsop’s troubled cultural projects inWest Bromwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/aug/14/public-inevitable-end-arts-centre-architecture>
 andLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/jul/20/europeancityofculture2008.arts>, 
one built and the other cancelled, the shortcomings of which were nothing but 
tedious for those affected by them. Before the rise of biscuitism, the default 
style for speculative housing blocks was a sub-Alsopian splurge of garish 
cladding, which was worse.

The fundamental weakness is that the ensemble doesn’t seem to rise to the 
extraordinariness of the project

As part of Archigram, Cook started out by championing fluid, adaptable, 
colourful, free-form architecture that would use the latest technologies to 
free people’s lives and would be the opposite of the rigid monuments of 
previous generations. As can be seen at acelebratory exhibition 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/peter-cook-ra-floating-ideas> at 
the Royal Academy, he offered blancmange, not biscuits, irradiated with 
artificial colouring. He contributed to the movement that led, indeed, to the 
Pompidou Centre. He backed the work ofthe late Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/03/zaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore>
. Dramatic and sometimes magnificent shapes were invented. Unfortunately, 
though, free-form architecture of the kind Cook backed had a habit of being 
expensive, impractical and difficult to build, which meant that its fullest 
realisation would be by despots and elites for whom money was no object. The 
end results were as rigid and unliberating as the monuments against which they 
were supposed to react.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2ec9c05d6370ae59984c4a56ebdacc5cd128e5e%2F0_0_4500_2648%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2ec9c05d6370ae59984c4a56ebdacc5cd128e5e%2F0_0_4500_2648%2F4500.jpg>
 Ole Scheeren’s early scheme, ‘a three-dimensional city of making, performance 
and interaction’. Photograph: © Buro-OS 
On the 2012 site, next door to Olympicopolis, you can see why its makers 
wouldn’t want to go the same way again. There is the fatuousArcelorMittal Orbit 
sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/23/carsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride>
, which, despite a recent effort to enliven it by adding a slide, couldn’t be 
more dull. There isHadid’s Aquatics Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/25/olympics-aquatics-centre-opens-london>
, the undoubted majesty of which came at a huge cost in money, steel and 
practical shortcomings. There is the Olympic Stadium, in which Cook was 
involved, possessed of a certain spare elegance, but which somehow lost its 
Archigrammy fun-ness on the way from design to realisation.

Ole Scheeren's proposal shows a level of ambition and invention that seems to 
have been too much for the LLDC

Yet looking at the images so far released of Olympicopolis, and while 
exercising due caution over the fact that the designs have not yet been 
revealed in their entirety, you have to say that Cook and co have a point. The 
different elements of the project are dutifully lined up in a row, thin, fat, 
little, large, like conscript soldiers at their first parade. The open spaces 
look generic, standard, nice-enough, ho-hum. Each block is variegated in its 
surface treatment, but somewhat pointlessly so. The V&A building has 
projections of solid over void that promise some drama but don’t seem enough to 
puncture the polite boredom of the whole.

The team that won the competition to design Olympicopolis is a judicious 
mixture of Allies and Morrison, who are experienced and proficient, with 
O’Donnell and Tuomey, who have shown themselves capable of artistic excitement 
in theirprevious building for the London School of Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/07/rowan-moore-the-five-most-inspiring-buildings-of-2014>
, and the youthful adventure of a Catalan pair, Josep Camps and Olga Felip. 
Perhaps the choice is too judicious, though, as its whole is less than the sum 
of its parts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4b29581db688a30920d2ba29536619062631606%2F0_0_4000_2222%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4b29581db688a30920d2ba29536619062631606%2F0_0_4000_2222%2F4000.jpg>
 Scheeren’s Olympicopolis. Photograph: © Buro-OS 
The fundamental weakness is that the ensemble doesn’t seem to rise to the 
extraordinariness of the project – its piling up of art, design, dance and 
fashion, plus two residential skyscrapers to help pay for it all, next to a 
canal, in a place that not so long ago was a wilderness. Rather, the collective 
design behaves as if such things happen every day. The urge seems to be to make 
normal what is not. The impression is not that the forms of creativity these 
buildings will contain might be transformed by unprecedented inventions in the 
future, but that they will carry on in much the same way as now.

London's Olympic legacy: a suburb on steroids, a cacophony of luxury stumps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/03/london-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids>
It could have been different. Indeed the London Legacy Development 
Corporation, which isin charge 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/our-story/the-legacy-corporation> of 
making Olympicopolis happen, commissioned something different at an earlier 
stage in the process, when it asked the architectOle Scheeren 
<http://www.dezeen.com/tag/ole-scheeren/>, a former colleague of Rem Koolhaas’s 
who manages to be based in both Beijing and Berlin, to offer proposals of what 
might be done. This was a preliminary exploration, not a final project, but it 
could and should have been the basis for what is now being designed. It shows a 
level of ambition and invention that seems to have been too much for the LLDC.

Scheeren’s idea, kept under wraps by the LLDC and published here for the first 
time, was to pile up, overlap and intersect the different institutions, such 
that they would share foyers and terraces. The project’s publicly accessible 
spaces would climb through it to make a multi-level promenade. It would be one 
building and several, in which each institution would have its identity, but 
the whole would be a three-dimensional city of making, performance and 
interaction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90128fcfdfb5d41681501b1385679fe44dab3c7%2F0_115_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90128fcfdfb5d41681501b1385679fe44dab3c7%2F0_115_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
 ‘So much human energy in one place’: the plan for Ole Scheeren’s 
Olympicopolis. Photograph: © Buro-OS  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F178fb564822c71b80e740bd80b128363da62fb46%2F0_1150_9933_4788%2F9933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Olympicopolis%3A%20the%20design%20we%20might%E2%80%99ve%20had&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Flondon-olympicopolis-arts-quarter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F178fb564822c71b80e740bd80b128363da62fb46%2F0_1150_9933_4788%2F9933.jpg>
 … and a cross-section view. Photograph: © Buro-OS 
The excitement would come not from the forced theatrics of unusual shapes, but 
from the intrinsic drama of putting so much human energy in one place, and it 
is this excitement that has been diluted to the point of vanishing. The 
different institutions have been divided up, each with their own plot, in a way 
familiar to Victorian builders of cultural enclaves. There is little guiding 
idea, little statement of the specific ways in which this might be a place like 
no other. This is the result of decisions made more by managers and politicians 
than by architects, but the architects don’t seem to have done much to 
challenge it.

What the Olympicopolis row reveals is a void in contemporary architecture, 
which neither careful thoughtfulness nor rhetorical form-making is able to 
fill. It is not about straight lines against curves or colour against 
monotones, but about the art of finding what is latent in every project, 
whether extraordinary or everyday, and making the most of it. It means fighting 
the constant pressure to revert to the standard. Otherwise, architecture will 
be condemned to an endless cycle of taste, of action and reaction. Biscuit, 
blancmange, biscuit, blancmange, biscuit, blancmange. Is there nothing else on 
the menu?
 