
One of Britain’s best known nightclubs, Fabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric>, has been forced to close 
permanently after its licence was revoked following the drug-related deaths of 
two people.

After deliberation that lasted into the early hours of Wednesday morning, the 
local council decided that searches by security staff at theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> venue had been “inadequate and in 
breach of the licence”.

Fabric: a nightclub that thrived by taking dance music seriously
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/fabric-closure-dance-music-london-nightlife>
“People entering the club were inadequately searched,” Islington borough 
council’s decision 
<http://collateral.vuelio.uk.com/RemoteStorage/Islington/Releases/6380/Fabric%20-%20Main%20Review.pdf>
 read.

It added that covert police operations suggested people were openly buying and 
taking illegal drugs on the premises and that staff should have been aware of 
it. “Staff intervention and security was grossly inadequate in light of the 
overwhelming evidence that it was abundantly obvious that patrons in the club 
were on drugs and manifesting symptoms showing that they were.

“This included sweating, glazed red eyes and staring into space, and people 
asking for help.”

Leading figures who played at the venue, one of the most important for fans of 
electronic music, joined regulars in expressing their sorrow at the decision. A
Change.org petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/save-london-s-nightlife-stop-the-closure-of-fabric> 
to halt the closure of the club had reached almost 150,000 signatures.
dj hype (@DJHYPE_PLAYAZ) 
For 15 years i was priviliged to be part of greatest underground club in the 
world ,,i am lost for words right now ,,#FabricReview 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FabricReview?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/DJHYPE_PLAYAZ/status/773316400018522112> September 7, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/DJHYPE_PLAYAZ/status/773316400018522112> Friction 
(@friction) 
So 150,000 voices can't even be heard. We had no chance. #fabricreview 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/fabricreview?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/friction/status/773314078634827776> September 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/friction/status/773314078634827776> 
Jacob Husley, who initiated the petition and has worked at the club’s Sunday 
night party for the past eight years, said of the decision: “We are in shock. I 
am feeling a mixture of disbelief and anger and sadness … It would be a 
devastating blow for London and culture, and clubs across the UK. It sets a 
precedent.”

He did not know whether the club’s owners would appeal but said he hoped “we 
are not finished with this”.

Others wondered if the site now faced the same prospect as other legendary 
music venues such as Manchester’s Haçienda –now luxury flats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/feb/16/remembering-lost-music-venues>
.
mistajam (@mistajam) 
I can't believe they've revoked @fabriclondon 
<https://twitter.com/fabriclondon>'s license. Is this the future for it? 
#Haçienda <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Ha%C3%A7ienda?src=hash> #FabricReview 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FabricReview?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/QBQPIVFLY0 
<https://t.co/QBQPIVFLY0>
 <https://twitter.com/mistajam/status/773313249345466368> September 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mistajam/status/773313249345466368> 
The chair of the Night Time Industries Association, Alan Miller, said 
<https://twitter.com/wearethentia/status/773311587012710400> he would start a 
grassroots fund to help save the club.

The Metropolitan police had asked the council to shut down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/fabric-london-nightclub-close-weekend-deaths-teenagers>
 the 2,500-capacity nightclub after the deaths of two teenagers in the space of 
nine weeks. One died after collapsing outside the club in August, while another 
died in late June.


In documents provided to the council, superintendent Stuart Ryan wrote: “If 
the premises is permitted to remain open and operating in its current form, 
then there is a strong possibility that further drug-related deaths will occur.”

In the early hours of Wednesday morning, Scotland Yard confirmed that the 
decision had been taken to close Fabric, adding that police had “felt the need 
to act due to concerns about the safety of those attending the club due to the 
supply of class-A drugs in the venue and the recent deaths of two young men”.

A spokesperson added: “We support this decision made by Islington council’s 
licensing committee.

“London has a world renowned nighttime economy and people should be able to 
enjoy it safely, without concerns of serious crime. The Met is committed to 
working in partnership with those responsible for this sector to ensure that 
this happens.”

Fabric had called the deaths of the two teenagers a tragedy and closed its 
doors temporarily to allow an investigation to take place. Prior to that, it 
had “operated without incident” for two years, it said.


“We’ve always had a fantastic relationship with police and particularly the 
council. Only eight months ago, a judge tested all our systems and said we’re a 
beacon of best practice,” the club’s co-founder Cameron Leslietold the Guardian 
earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/05/fabric-nightclub-closure-uk-nightlife-drugs-death>
.

How we made: Ben Kelly and Peter Hook on the Haçienda club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jul/02/how-we-made-hacienda-club> 
“Eleven weeks ago another licensee, from a venue that had a death, was sent to 
visit us to see how we managed things. How can this suddenly have changed 
overnight in such a damning way?”


Fabric’s campaign to stay open had been backed by the London mayor 
<https://www.change.org/p/save-london-s-nightlife-stop-the-closure-of-fabric/responses/35801>
, Sadiq Khan, though he said it was not in his gift to intervene in licensing 
issues. Ahead of the ruling, Khan said: “London’s iconic clubs are an essential 
part of our cultural landscape … My team have spoken to all involved in the 
current situation and I am urging them to find a common sense solution that 
ensures the club remains open while protecting the safety of those who want to 
enjoy London’s clubbing scene.”

The MP for Islington, Emily Thornberry, also wrote on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=1270309743019070&id=142202379163151>
 that she believed Fabric should stay open.


“As a parent, my heart goes out to the family and friends of anyone who has 
lost loved ones at such a young age. But we must guard against the assumption 
that dangerous drug use would cease simply if we were to close a nightclub like 
Fabric.”

Fabric did not respond to requests for comment.

 