
The chairman of the London Legacy Development Corporation, responsible for the 
formerOlympic Stadium <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-stadium> that 
is now home to West Ham United, has resigned after an inquiry was announced 
into soaring costs at the venue.

David Edmonds had been chairman of the LLDC, which operates the Queen 
Elizabeth Olympic Park and co-owns the London Stadium with Newham Council, 
since September 2015 but has been heavily involved in the legacy project since 
2009.

His departure is expected to be the first of several from the LLDC board after 
the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan,announced an inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/sadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry>
 into the cost of converting the stadium into a dual-use athletics and football 
venue. Originally slated at £160m, the bill is now estimated to stand at £323m.

Ongoing operational costs have also risen, chiefly because the amount it costs 
to move the seats in and out over the summerhas soared from £300,000 to £8m per 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/west-ham-stadium-losses-retractable-seating-problems>
.

Edmonds, a former chairman of NHS Direct and telecoms regulator Oftel, 
previously held senior roles at the LLDC’s predecessor, the Olympic Park Legacy 
Company, and E20 LLP, the joint venture that houses the stadium.

The situation, which Khan has blamed on his predecessor Boris Johnson, has 
been described by a spokesperson for the mayor as “a total and utter mess”.

West Ham stadium faces losses for years due to retractable-seating problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/west-ham-stadium-losses-retractable-seating-problems>
On Thursday the mayor’s spokesperson said: “Sadiq will now be looking to 
secure the very best possible candidate for this important role. He believes 
the stadium will continue to be a world-class sports and entertainment facility 
hosting major events.”

Some of the LLDC board members were due to leave in any case as their terms 
were up but the impending review is likely to make uncomfortable reading.

With West Ham negotiating hard for their £2.5m-a-year tenancy deal, soaring 
conversion costs and the liquidation of their original seating contractor have 
led to a cashflow crisis that makes it unlikely the stadium will break even for 
many years. Other members of the board include the Sport England chairman, Nick 
Bitel, and the former Arsenal managing director Keith Edelman.

On Thursday another former chair of the LLDC said it may be necessary to forgo 
the athletics track, the retention of which has been a priority throughout, in 
order to make the stadium sustainable.

“The additional costs have come from the removal and storage of the seats and 
the time taken to do that,” Daniel Moylan, a former adviser to Johnson who 
chaired the LLDC in 2012, told LBC. “The hard question has to be asked about 
whether you can continue to use the stadium without demounting them the whole 
time.

“That means you wouldn’t have an athletics track but is that the bullet that 
eventually has to be [bitten]?”

Such an outcome is highly unlikely however, given that the stadium is hosting 
the world athletics championships next summer and UK Athletics has a 50-year, 
legally binding contract for priority use of the stadium throughout July.
 