
“Everybody within the sound of my voice is in drag, right now, whether you 
know it or not”, Emmy winner RuPaul Charlestold reporters 
<https://twitter.com/asmith83/status/775305869814890496> after his Sunday night 
win for best reality show host at the Creative Emmys.

The uninitiated probably didn’t know that he was referring to one of his 
(many) aphorisms: in this case, the oft-spoken observation that “We’re all born 
naked but the rest is drag”. It’s also a line in entertainer RuPaul’s single
Born Naked <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztQUcl2v-tU> – which, as he would 
say, is available on iTunes – that served as the final challenge for the top 
three contestants on season seven of RuPaul’s Drag Race.

You can’t, as RuPaul said in 1984 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G2RHMYRB4YE>
, “spread the RuPaul message to the world” unless you’re willing to create a 
few synergies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DztQUcl2v-tU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DztQUcl2v-tU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DztQUcl2v-tU&media=>
But it took a lot of nights <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PCyY8uxQgL0> 
working <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mANejj6o3Xs> New York’s club scene 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dlssfzFyWdI> in the 80s before the 
breakthrough moment that gave him that ability to go worldwide. RuPaul – who, 
contrary to many drag conventions, always used his birth name – started out as 
an entertainer in thenew wave <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KiXdIdAgHzE> band
Wee Wee Pole <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fq0CoYdAeVM> in Atlanta. After 
moving to New York in 1984 and working and perfecting his act, including drag, 
in the city’s infamous club scene, he burst into the mainstream in 1993 with 
the not-remotely-grunge dance track and music videoSupermodel of the World 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jlXAyWN_C94>. The single, and RuPaul’s 
unapologetic drag persona, catapulted him into the spotlight, even if a few 
uncomfortable moments (like beinggroped on stage 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/2579474/milton-berle-rupaul-vmas-1993/> and called a 
“she-he” 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/the-10-craziest-beefs-in-mtv-vma-history-20150901/milton-berle-vs-rupaul-1993-20150901>
 by Milton Berle at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards) undoubtedly detracted from 
the experience.

RuPaul's Drag Race: empathy and naked emotion are the point, not winning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/rupauls-drag-race-political-correctness-identity-gender>
From there – and almost always in drag – he went on to make more albums, write 
and release an autobiography, launch an eponymous talkshow on VH1, be the face 
of MAC cosmetics, get character roles in several movies, start his own record 
label and, in 2008, sign on to produce and host RuPaul’s Drag Race. (RuPaul 
Charles has since begun hosting the quiz showGay for Play 
<http://www.logotv.com/shows/gay-for-play-game-show-starring-rupaul> on Logo, 
which is not, despite the title, a look at self-declared straight men who work 
as performers in gay pornography. )
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frupaul-drag-race-emmy-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30e6e5e8699b2f47dc47901c384d1e074f25c50a%2F0_462_2284_1370%2F2284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Long%20to%20reign%20over%20us%3A%20all%20hail%20RuPaul's%20Emmy%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frupaul-drag-race-emmy-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Long%20to%20reign%20over%20us%3A%20all%20hail%20RuPaul%27s%20Emmy%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Frupaul-drag-race-emmy-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30e6e5e8699b2f47dc47901c384d1e074f25c50a%2F0_462_2284_1370%2F2284.jpg>
 You better work: RuPaul on, er, Des O’Connor Tonight. Photograph: 
REX/Shutterstock 
It was in the role of host of Drag Race (and Drag U, and Drag Race All-Stars) 
that most people who had been following RuPaul finally got to get to know 
RuPaul Charles, who shares with his alter ego a biting wit and a love of 
dramatic ensembles (witness the pink-with-white-polka-dots suit in which he 
accepted his first-ever Emmy right under the nose of style guru and Project 
Runway mentor-hostTim Gunn 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/lifestyles/style/ct-tim-gunn-clothes-american-women-20160910-story.html>
). But like a lot of mothers, Mama Ru, as she’s affectionately called by many 
Drag Race contestants, offers a bit more tough love on stage, while RuPaul 
Charles, carefully tucked away behind the scenes, offers sage advice and 
pointed questions backstage as contestants compete to show Mama Ru that they 
have the charisma, uniqueness, nerve and talent to be America’s next drag 
superstar (as though any of them can surpass RuPaul herself).

RuPaul’s Drag Race: 10 best moments of TV’s most fabulous reality show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/07/rupaul-drag-race-10-best-moments-logo>
And though he claimed to be surprised at his win on Sunday, on the show, he’s 
both Gunn and Heidi Klum: mentor and host, style guru and fashion model, the 
person who tells contestants to “make it work” (a Gunn-ism adopted by some Drag 
Race queens) and the person who sometimes scolds them when it spectacularly 
doesn’t work at all. How was RuPaul not the obvious choice for best reality 
show host?
 