
ROBIN RELIANT

The Fiver knows only too well that doing the same thing over and over again 
rarely ever leads to that thing becoming better, more relevant or more wanted. 
We’d have thought that Robin van Persie, at the wise old age of 33 and sporting 
more shades of grey than that book about special cuddling, would know that too. 
But apparently not. You see, the Fenerbahce striker, who faces his former club 
Manchester United in Big Vase tonight, seems to be under the impression that if 
it wasn’t for Lord Ferg being so unreasonable and deciding to jack it in at 71, 
he may well still be doing goals at Old Trafford instead of gradually fading 
away in Istanbul.

“It could have been that I could have been a player for Manchester United 
today,” sniffed Van Persie, while looking mournfully at a puddle of hot salty 
water beginning to pool around his shoes. “When I signed that was the idea, 
that [Lord Ferg] would stay on for a few more years, but in football things 
change, you can’t plan your own path or your coach’s path. In this world you 
have to deal with how it comes.” Indeed, Van Persie’s career path followed a 
gradual upwards trajectory until it hit an extraordinary height, plateaued and 
then suddenly crashed to earth, a bit like the bird that clearly lost its mind 
and flew so high it slammed into the windscreen of the aeroplane carrying 
Fenerbahce to Manchester yesterday, causing it to make an unexpected landing in 
Budapest.

Robin van Persie can remind Manchester United, and Fenerbahce, of quality | 
Emre Sarigul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/20/robin-van-persie-manchester-united-fenerbahce-europa-league>
The only danger posed to aircrafts from high-flying objects tonight will come 
if José Mourinho chooses to rest many of those who participated in Monday’s 
sleepover at Anfield and start Wayne Rooney, who could perhaps have a cosy chat 
with Van Persie about impending irrelevance. “Wayne is working well,” cheered 
Mourinho. ”He’s one of those who is responsible for the atmosphere that the 
players can breathe because he’s positive, he’s a good example.” Rooney has 
fond memories of playing Fenerbahce at Old Trafford, of course. He scored a 
hat-trick against them on his club debut, back when the only thing bigger than 
his on-pitch influence was the size of mobile phones and thatsteamy hit by Eric 
Prydz that led to a complaint against Weird Uncle Fiver 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QQSYo_pC-QA> and the subsequent cancellation 
of his gym membership.

With Manchester United lying third in Group 97 of this year’s Big Vase they 
need a good result tonight if they’re to give their hopes of qualifying for the 
knockout stages a boost. Whether they get one perhaps hinges on how much of a 
flying one Mourinho gives about the competition. So far, he is spoken about it 
with about as much enthusiasm as Granny Fiver talks about impending dental 
appointments. And with the match coming as it does sandwiched between Liverpool 
and Chelsea, don’t expect to see anything special in the Special One’s 
treatment of Thursday night football. It could be a good night for Van Persie 
to feel relevant again.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Paul Doyle 6pm BST for hot MBM coverage of Internazionale 2-2 Southampton 
while Gregg Bakowski will be on hand for Manchester United 2-1 Fenerbahce. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“I wouldn’t pay €70 to watch the derby, it’s ridiculous, I’d watch the game in 
a bar” – Deportivo defender Raul Albentosa takes exception to the ticket 
pricing strategy for his side’s Galicia derby at Celta Vigo on Sunday.

FIVER LETTERS

“Many thanks for the link to the darts movie [yesterday’s Last Line]. A 
combination of the Fiver’s advice, Mourinho’s dark arts, Friday / Monday / 
Tuesday / Wednesday / Thursday Night Football’s disruption of the civic order, 
and the cumulative nonsense of beauts like Barton, Balotelli, Bendtner, and 
Solo have nudged me past the tipping point. STOP FOOTBALL, START DARTS!” – Mike 
Wilner.

“As a current resident of Westchester, can I assure David Carr [yesterday’s 
Fiver] that I would much rather be watching West Ham versus Manchester City. 
Why anyone would choose non-league Scarborough v Rochdale ahead of Premier 
League teams is beyond me - are you the Newcastle United fan David Carr that I 
once worked with? Perhaps that would offer a clue. By the way Westchester is 
the current home of New York City FC’s training ground, in the aptly named 
Purchase - could there be a more apt pairing?” – David Dein.

“In response to Scott Henderson [yesterday’s letters], whatever Second Chance 
Steve may be called once the inevitable happens, in the meantime he is 
currently both the former former and future former boss of Derby? I think that 
covers it. But then, doesn’t becoming former happen to us all in the end, and 
therefore aren’t we all in fact living in the future former tense? (I think I 
need to lie down now).” – Hugh J Martin.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is… Mike Wilner.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Hear ye! Hear ye! AC Jimbo and co have been chewing over the midweek fat in 
Football Weekly Extra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/oct/20/messi-hat-trick-poops-peps-return-to-barcelona-football-weekly-extra>
. And tickets are still availablefor the next live show in London 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/football-weekly-live-in-london-26602443625>
.

BITS AND BOBS

Hull City’s 6-1 tonking at Bournemouth last week has suitably impressed some 
suits in the Far East, with aconsortium said to have agreed a £130m takeover of 
the club. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/hull-city-sale-speculation-130m-far-east-consortium-bid>

Nottingham Forest’s owner, Fawaz al-Hasawi, has been asking potential buyers 
of the club for an annual salary that could rise above £1m and a series of 
financial demands that include an extraordinary clause entitling him to 
whatever the players earn in bonuses.So far, so normal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/nottingham-forest-owner-hasawi-salary-player-bonuses>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Flooking-mournfully-at-a-puddle-of-hot-salty-water-pooling-around-his-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa896c9cc977616eab441fdd3bef0dfa28f526790%2F0_123_2058_1234%2F2058.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Looking%20mournfully%20at%20a%20puddle%20of%20hot%20salty%20water%20pooling%20around%20his%20shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Flooking-mournfully-at-a-puddle-of-hot-salty-water-pooling-around-his-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Looking%20mournfully%20at%20a%20puddle%20of%20hot%20salty%20water%20pooling%20around%20his%20shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Flooking-mournfully-at-a-puddle-of-hot-salty-water-pooling-around-his-shoes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa896c9cc977616eab441fdd3bef0dfa28f526790%2F0_123_2058_1234%2F2058.jpg>
 Bonus ball. Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images 
Pep Guardiola has leapt to the defence of his ball-on-the-floor goalkeeper 
Claudio Bravo. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/manchester-city-pep-guardiola-barcelona-champions-league>
 “I’m sorry but until the last day of my career as a coach I will try to play 
from our goalkeeper,” wept the Manchester City manager. “There will be no 
change [of goalkeeper]. It stays the same. Football is a game of mistakes. He 
knows what he did.”


Africa Cup of Nations holders Ivory Coast will do battle with Togo, Morocco 
and DR Congo in Group C of this year’s competition. Here’sthe draw in full. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/africa-cup-of-nations-draw-algeria-senegal-gabon>


The bad news? Andy Carroll is still suffering from knee-gah. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/andy-carroll-no-nearer-comeback-knee-injury-west-ham>
 “Originally it was four to six weeks – and we were fuming about it, it was a 
shocking prognosis – but now it’s way longer than that so all that I can say is 
he’s working really hard, he’s progressing, but its slower than we expected,” 
trilled West Ham boss Slaven Bilic. The good news? Club-record signingAndré 
Ayew’s back in training. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/andy-carroll-no-nearer-comeback-knee-injury-west-ham>
 “We were expecting him back later, in December or late November, so we are 
delighted that he’s back and now we’re going to see.”


On Saturday the Hammers face Sunderland, who have problems of their own. “It’s 
probably lost its identity at times trying to be a club it’s not,” parped the 
Black Cats’ chief suit Martin Bain. “The job is to build, almost rebuild. It’s 
apparent that we’ve got a journey to embark upon.”

And Rudi García has been appointed as Marseille’s newest manger – his first 
task, Paris Saint-Germain away …

STILL WANT MORE?

Floating head in a jar Jonathan Wilson explains how and why Antonio Conte can 
break free fromthe shackles of Chelsea’s past when they face Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/20/antonio-conte-jose-mourinho-chelsea-manchester-united>
.

Sid Lowe chews over Pep Guardiola’s decision to omit Sergio Agüero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-pep-guardiola>
 on his return to Camp Nou. AndMichael Cox reckons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/pep-guardiola-trick-barcelona-manchester-city-etihad>
 we’ll see more of the same in the return fixture.

Frank de Boer is getting all hot under the collar at Inter – and not in a good 
way,reckons Ed Aarons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/frank-de-boer-inter-era-europa-league-southampton>
.

Jonjo Shelvey has misplaced his ‘childish attitude’ and can’t remember where 
he left a stone of weight, all thanks to Rafa Benítez.That’s according to 
Louise Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/20/jonjo-shelvey-rafael-benitez-newcastle-united-liverpool>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Flooking-mournfully-at-a-puddle-of-hot-salty-water-pooling-around-his-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8152b6217ebee8ddf9fb32bc59994ecc67a7949d%2F0_254_3005_1803%2F3005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Looking%20mournfully%20at%20a%20puddle%20of%20hot%20salty%20water%20pooling%20around%20his%20shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Flooking-mournfully-at-a-puddle-of-hot-salty-water-pooling-around-his-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Looking%20mournfully%20at%20a%20puddle%20of%20hot%20salty%20water%20pooling%20around%20his%20shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Flooking-mournfully-at-a-puddle-of-hot-salty-water-pooling-around-his-shoes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8152b6217ebee8ddf9fb32bc59994ecc67a7949d%2F0_254_3005_1803%2F3005.jpg>
 Lean and mean. Photograph: Chris Vaughan/CameraSport via Getty Images 
Here’s an excellent tale on how Sassuolo have made it from the Italian 
equivalent of jumpers for goalposts to the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2016/oct/20/sassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie>
 in 10 short years.

Ricardo Rodríguez to Chelsea and a fire sale at Manchester City? It can only be
today’s Rumour Mill. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/football-transfer-rumours-chelsea-to-sign-ricardo-rodriguez-roma-to-raid-manchester-city>

And Joey Barton, karate football and, “Remember the name … !!!!!” all feature 
in this week’s Classic YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/classic-youtube-sport-videos-football-f1-boxing>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

UNDILUTED! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/gorilla-drank-litres-blackcurrant-juice-escaping-london-zoo-enclosure>
 