
Borage, marjoram, and certain types of lavender are among the flowers most 
attractive to bees, a study that tested what many gardeners already knew has 
found.

Scientists at the University of Sussex repeatedly counted flower-visiting 
insects that foraged on 32 popular summer flowering garden plant varieties, in 
a specially planted experimental garden on the campus. In the second and final 
year of study, additional gardens were set up to check the results.

Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> accounted for 85% of the 
visitors to the garden. Bumblebees were the most frequent visitors, followed by 
honeybees and a few solitary bees.

Highly bred varieties of lavender, including grosso, hidcote giant and gros 
blue were the most attractive to bumblebees, along with large single-flowered 
dahlias. Honeybees made a beeline for the blue borage flowers, and marjoram, a 
popular herb with small pinkish white flowers, was the best all-rounder, 
popular with honeybees, bumblebees and other bees, as well as hover flies, 
which accounted for 9% of the visitors, and butterflies and moths, just 2%.
 A painted lady butterfly on a bowles mauve wallflower. Photograph: Krys 
Bailey/Alamy 
Bowles mauve everlasting wallflower (Erysimum linifolium) was the most 
attractive plant for the butterflies which visited the garden. The perennial 
lamb's ears (Stachys byzantina) was popular with an unusual species of bee, the 
wool carder bee, which apart from feeding on it, uses the hairs of the plant 
for nest-building.

The least attractive flowering plant to insects was the pelargonium – a 
popular bedding plant in parks and gardens which is often incorrectly called a 
geranium. It was visited by virtually no insects. The study found that the most 
popular plants attracted 100 times as many bees and other insects as the least 
popular.

The study, published today in Functional Ecology – the journal of the British 
Ecological Society 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2435.12178/full> – also showed 
that some cultivated varieties and non-native flowers such as lavender from the 
Mediterranean and dahlias from Mexico can be helpful for wildlife in the UK, 
and open-flowered varieties attract many more bees and other insects than 
pom-pom, or double flowered varieties, which make it difficult for insects to 
reach the flower's pollen and nectar. White and pink hybrid lavenders were 
visited as much as blue hybrid varieties, suggesting that how long the plant is 
in bloom and the size of the flowers are more important for the bees than the 
colour of the flowers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4u2LeTPGo9w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4u2LeTPGo9w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4u2LeTPGo9w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Francis Ratnieks, professor of apiculture at Sussex University, said: "The 
most important message from this study is that choosing flowers carefully makes 
a big difference to pollinators at zero cost. It costs no more to buy bee 
friendly flowers and they are not more difficult to grow and are just as 
pretty. The flowers don't have to be native, wild flowers."

Bumblebees and other wild bee species are threatened by habitat loss and 
intensive agriculture which has virtually wiped out wildflower meadows in the 
UK.Honeybee colonies have been hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/13/honeybee-colonies-england-winter>
 by parasites, pesticides and poor nutrition.

Ratnieks said: "Bees are not as common as they used to be. What the public can 
do to reverse the trend is to provide the nectar and pollen they need by 
planting bee-friendly flowers in their gardens."
 