
Brazil already owe Neymar big time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/28/brazil-neymar-chile-world-cup-dream>
 and news of the nasty knocks he took against Chile left the whole of Brazil 
holding its breath. More recently, however, the absence of their invisible 
player has come sharply into focus.

Without any of the adulation or allure of Neymar, who has declared himself fit 
to face Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/02/neymar-brazil-colombia-world-cup-quarter-final>
, Luiz Gustavo has swiftly turned into the most unlikely hero for Brazil. 
Against Chile, Neymar was left battered and bruised and but still recoveredto 
dispatch a penalty in the shootout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/29/brazil-chile-world-cup-2014-last-16-match-report>
 after two team-mates missed. Gustavo’s yellow card – his second of the 
tournament – and his subsequent suspension leaves a hole in theSeleção for 
their quarter-final against Colombia on Friday in Fortaleza.

While Neymar has driven Brazil forward with four goals, the Wolfsburg man and 
reported Real Madrid target has been the engine powering them. In 390 minutes 
on the pitch over four games (including 30 minutes of extra time against 
Chile), Gustavo ran more than a marathon. He clocked 46.1km and 6km more than 
the star of the show, even if Neymar has got through plenty of work, chasing 
down numerous punts forward. The biggest surprise, though, is that Gustavo also 
ran 16.3km with the ball at his feet, once again outshining the Barcelona 
forward. Add to that the fact he has recovered the ball 34 times, the fourth 
highest total in theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> so far, and it is 
easy to understand why Brazilians are fretting so much about how to replace him.

“A guy in my position on the pitch cannot think twice. Unfortunately I fouled 
an opponent and got the second booking but I am proud to have helped the team,” 
Gustavo said.

He sounded like a pragmatic German player because Gustavo is effectively made 
in Germany. Never breaking into any major Brazil side, he arrived at Hoffenheim 
in 2008 and three years later moved to Bayern Munich. Such was his impact there 
that many Bavarians still bemoan Gustavo’s absence, once again through 
suspension, from theirinfamous home Champions League final against Chelsea in 
2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/19/bayern-munich-chelsea-champions-league-final>
. Gustavo fell down the pecking order following the record signing of Javi 
Martínez and it was quite the surprise when Luiz Felipe Scolari plucked him out 
of the shadows before Brazil’s Confederations Cup campaign – his last call-up 
had come two years before.

But Gustavo was an immediate hit: he slotted so well into the holding role 
that comparisons with Gilberto Silva and his performances in the 2002 World Cup 
winning side started popping up. Never mind that a few weeks ago a Brazilian TV 
channel ran a story where people on the streets of Rio failed to recognise a 
picture of Gustavo. “People don’t see what he does but Gustavo is one of the 
most important players in my team,” Scolari said before the game against Chile.

Now, the manager and the team have to do without Gustavo, who has also been 
one of their best passers so far. The obvious choice is the return of Paulinho, 
arguably biggest disappointment in theSeleção’s campaign, which would allow 
Fernandinho to adopt a more defensive role and cover for the Tottenham man’s 
inevitable forward runs. “Gustavo has been outstanding forBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> and the team will miss him but I 
have played in a more conservative way for Manchester City before and I can 
definitely hold back to allow Paulinho more freedom,” said Fernandinho.

Easier said than done. Even with Gustavo’s remarkable statistics, Brazil’s 
midfield look vulnerable and far from the fearsome unit who bullied rivals last 
year, most notably Spain. Lacking intensity and stamina, Paulinho was a pale 
resemblance of the box-to-box midfielder that led Tottenham into making one of 
their club-record signings last season. That has seen Brazil struggle going 
forward and also defensively, which helps to explain why the hosts have rarely 
looked convincing over their four matches in this tournament.

Few challenges could look more interesting than a Colombia team reborn after 
the heartbreaking loss of Radamel Falcao. They have cruised to the 
quarter-finals, despite the caveats that Greece, Ivory Coast and Japan was 
hardly a “group of death” and that Uruguay were rocked by the Luis Suárez 
affair when the two South American sides met in the last 16 in Rio.The 
playmaker James Rodríguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jul/02/neymar-james-rodriguez-brazil-colombia-world-cup-2014>
 will need attention while Brazil will have to handle Colombia’s taste for 
exploring the flanks, something even more tempting when up against the host 
nation’s full-backs. Hence the fact that Scolari, over the last few days, 
entertained the idea of bringing in Maicon for Dani Alves to make Brazil’s 
right side more robust.

He has even toyed with a back three during practice sessions in Brazil’s 
mountainous base near Rio. What he really needs, though, is someone to do the 
dirty but brilliant work Gustavo has been providing so far.
 