
Ten years ago, Karen Marie Ørsted was one half of a Danish feminist 
anarcho-punk duo whose repertoire included a song called Pussy in Your Face. 
Starting in 2007, she and her friend Josefine spent five years crusading across 
Europe drunk, rousing riots in squats, making naff nu-rave-styled videos and 
shouting: “Fuck the government!” to anyone who would listen. In 2016, however, 
Mø is, by some measurements, the biggest pop star in the world.Lean On 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YqeW9_5kURI>, her collaboration with Major 
Lazer and DJ Snake, was named last year asSpotify’s most-streamed track of all 
time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/spotify-most-streamed-track-all-time-major-lazer-lean-on>
, and has picked up 1.6bn YouTube plays. Her collaboration withJustin Bieber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/justin-bieber>, Cold Water 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a59gmGkq_pw>, ended Drake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake>’s 16-week stay at No 1 earlier this 
year.

In her own right, however, she is a long way from becoming the biggest pop 
star in the world. On a Saturday night in early October, she is playing at Klub 
Stodoła in Warsaw, the first date of her European tour. Her voice is a little 
hoarse – a cold has arrived with impeccable timing. And for all her increasing 
profile as a mainstream pop star, she still seems torn between that and her 
past as a punk.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWUcXQ--yGWQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWUcXQ--yGWQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWUcXQ--yGWQ&media=>
 Final Song 
At home in Copenhagen recently, she went to see one of her favourite punk 
bands. “When I watched [the gig] I was like, ‘Woah! I love this so much. This 
is so me.’ But it’s been so long … It’s hard because I definitely have the pop 
in me. I love what I’m doing. I love mainstream music. But I also really 
fucking love super DIY hardcore punk. So I just love both things. It is hard to 
combine both things. It’s just something I’ve got to work on. I’ve got to work 
on putting it in there.”

That “it” she refers to is punk and politics. It’s something Mø is a little 
overwhelmed by at the moment, what with Brexit, Trump and the toxic 
re-emergence of the far right in her home country. But tackling those issues is 
tricky for her. Her music, muscular and melodic, is a hybrid of bouncy EDM 
drops and Scandipop on steroids. Her videos are often set in barren wastelands 
or deserts, as if to suggest an ambiguous global identity. Her lyrics are 
generally about coming together: unity, love and freedom. Then she adds a bit 
of angst. It’s all very vague, at least when you compare it with the specific 
notion of putting one’s pussy in another’s face.

Five of the best... rock & pop gigs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/07/justin-bieber-jamie-t-mabel-kano-mo>
This year has seen clear political statements on albums by Anohni, MIA, 
Beyoncé and Solange, but Mø recognises that it is easier for established 
artists to release something with a hard-hitting, potentially divisive message. 
“I have found it super hard: ‘Oh, I don’t want to upset anyone.’ But now, when 
all these things are happening, you have to start doing something,” she says.

On the other hand, she has the expectations of her anarchic old friends to 
consider. Josefine, for example.

“You know what? She was also in that activist environment, and I have a couple 
of friends I’m very close to from that time. I think they know that sometimes I 
have to compromise with some stuff that I wouldn’t have done back then, because 
of this weird collide with the total leftwing and mainstream pop music.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmo-pop-music-punk-lean-on-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F740bbefe168e83c878b4fd4cebff0f7e57081841%2F310_661_4978_2987%2F4978.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M%C3%B8%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20pop%20music.%20But%20I%20also%20love%20super%20DIY%20hardcore%20punk%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmo-pop-music-punk-lean-on-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M%C3%B8%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20pop%20music.%20But%20I%20also%20love%20super%20DIY%20hardcore%20punk%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmo-pop-music-punk-lean-on-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F740bbefe168e83c878b4fd4cebff0f7e57081841%2F310_661_4978_2987%2F4978.jpg>
 ‘Once I go on stage I can just fuck up. I love that.’ Photograph: Hex/Corbis 
via Getty Images 
Backstage at the venue, members of her band mill about in black bomber jackets 
emblazoned with the word Mø. Her stage name means “virgin” in Danish, and 
refers to her wide-eyed enthusiasm for the world, but is an example of how she 
subtly provokes from within the mainstream, too. Her second album is currently 
being written, and its leading track – the elephant-sized Final Song – became 
her biggest solo hit to date across Europe, Australia and New Zealand. Its 
video shows a polished version of the singer, unlike the one we were introduced 
to on her 2014 debut album, No Mythologies to Follow. Gone is the topknot and 
practical athleisure; in its place angelic blonde hair and a floral femininity.

Mø says she is terrible at saying no; how much of her true self must she 
compromise for the sake of success? “In my heart, I want to believe I shouldn’t 
give up anything to become a huge pop star. You have to dare to totally be 
yourself and go 100% with your heart and guts. And that’s what I think 
sometimes can trick you, because people say: ‘Oh, you should do this, you do 
that you should blah blah blah blah.’ And, really, I don’t think that’s 
necessarily a better way. Trust your guts. Seriously – I know a lot of big pop 
stars have been made, I am aware of that, but I’m not that kind of type. I mean 
I wouldn’t have been the one they chose in an audition because I don’t sing 
perfectly and I don’t look particularly great.”

On stage, Mø is a tornado. Her dancing is uninhibited and wild, as if she were 
in the audience rather than centre-stage. She is fiercely present, never vacant 
or going through the motions. She almost always ends up crowdsurfing or in the 
pit.

“It’s that urge to let something out. It is your place to express yourself and 
share it in the moment – and in a way it’s the most nerve-racking thing in the 
world. But it can also be the most relieving thing because you’re always [led 
by] control and schedule – which is great because I mean it’s the dream life 
I’m living, I’m so happy – but there are a lot of things where you’ve got to be 
controlled all the time.

“Once I go on stage I can just fuck up. And I love that. I love to be free and 
don’t think about if I look good or sing perfectly. It’s just ‘blaaaaagh!’ It’s 
so nice. Just watching that punk show – that was where I have it from. Just 
screaming and shouting and rolling on the floor. It’s the most fucking great 
thing to do. To just let go.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D37qvCrbilUk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D37qvCrbilUk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D37qvCrbilUk&media=>
 Drum 
That freedom translates less well when you’ve got three minutes to promote a 
single on prime time American TV, however. Before her big Major Lazer hit, Mø 
was a guest vocal on rapperIggy Azalea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/iggy-azalea>’s track Beg for It. In 
October 2014,they appeared on Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hh9cbInp_Og> to perform the track, but things 
didn’t go to plan. Mø was awkward and, because of technical difficulties, out 
of time. She was a strange gothic ghost weaving in between a pristine pop 
machine. In its aftermath, the tabloids declared it “a performance flub”. She 
cried for three days and felt down for a week.

“My attitude towards playing those big shows at the time? I was thinking: 
‘Yeah, I don’t need to warm up for an hour.’ I’d always been like: ‘I don’t 
want to do a choreography. I’m going to go in and be myself and it really 
doesn’t matter.’ But it didn’t fit with their format and I was tapping into 
their thing,” she says.

“It was such a different world for me to suddenly stand there. I was sad that 
I didn’t know how to be myself in that and make it work. But you make it work 
for yourself. There have been a couple of things during my career where I’ve 
been looking back where I’ve thought: I shouldn’t have done that. But again, 
you learn from it and that’s a blessing in a way. A big blessing. Because I’m 
someone who needs to burn my hands to know.”

Her recent appearance on Jimmy Kimmel’s show 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZyc6wIUOb4> suggests she has learned. The 
next challenge is finishing her upcoming album; an album that is surely 
weighted with the pressure to surpass the success of a Bieber-boosted hit and 
Lean On.

“I always dreamed about having a hit but I never thought it would happen so 
when it happened I was like: ‘Huh? Can I really be a part of this? How the fuck 
is this even possible?’ For the album, I want to have success but let’s say my 
next album’s going to fail. That will bring me something great again. It won’t 
be putting water on the fire, it will just put gasoline on it. Because I’ll be, 
like, fuck! I want to show them! Arrrrrgh! Which is a good thing. Of course I’m 
scared – don’t get me wrong – but it’s fine. It’s good fear,” she says, 
reconsidering, renegotiating. “I think it’s good actually. Yeah.”

Mø plays Glasgow ABC on 14 October, then tours the UK until 22 October. 
Details:momomoyouth.com <http://momomoyouth.com>
 