
Eric Mamboué tells a story that goes to the heart of what it means to be a 
child soldier, perfectly capturing the anomaly of a term that applies totens of 
thousands of children and teenagers 
<https://childrenandarmedconflict.un.org/press-release/children-at-risk-of-recruitment/>
 across the world.

The Burkinabé head of War Child UK <http:// www.warchild.org.uk>’s operations 
in Central African Republic describes a 14-year-old boy who had joined one of 
the so-called anti-balaka (anti-machete) militias and become close to its 
leader, a man said to have mystical powers that meant bullets could not harm 
him.

“The boy felt very powerful being with this chief, until one day they were 
fighting against some of theMinusca 
<http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/missions/minusca/> [UN peacekeepers] and his 
chief was killed,” Mamboué said on the phone from the capital, Bangui.

“Now, he felt serious fear and trauma because he thought, ‘Wow, I can also die 
tomorrow’. So he managed to run away from the anti-balaka,” said Mamboué, whose 
team works with local NGOs to help formerchild soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/child-soldiers> return to their 
communities in a country still tilting between war and peace.

People of Central African Republic pray election will bring peace at last
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/12/central-african-republic-car-pray-presidential-elections-bring-peace-at-last>
After his abrupt reawakening, the teenager was aghast to realise he had wasted 
four years with the anti-balaka.


“I don’t want to be a carpenter or anything. I want to go back to school,” he 
told the coordinator of the War Child programme, which offers training in 
farming or vocational skills and helps children resume their studies if that is 
what they want.

Dismay, fear, anger and often a deep desire for revenge torment these 
children, Mamboué said. In the Ouham region, War Child is working with 178 
children, including six girls, who were released from armed groups following 
intervention by Unicef and the social affairs ministry. War Child has since 
expanded the initiative to reach another 1,300 children in nearby districts.

The vulnerability of CAR’s children predates this latest surge of violence in 
a country that for decades has beenpreyed on by a self-declared emperor and 
myriad warlords, among others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/france-poisoned-legacy-central-african-republic>
, all eager to strip it of rich assets including diamonds and gold.

War Child has been working here since 2010, initially with children who were 
kidnapped by the rebels of theLord’s Resistance Army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/dominic-ongwen-the-hague-lords-resistance-army-war-crimes-uganda>
, who have terrorised communities from their origins in northern Uganda through 
to Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.


The charity has now expanded its operations, responding to the fact that an 
estimated6,000-10,000 children  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/18/-sp-child-soldiers-central-african-republic-doubled>
have been recruited or forcibly enlisted in myriad armed groups on all sides 
since political conflict erupted in 2013.

In March of that year, mainly Muslim Seleka rebels overthrew the  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/24/central-african-republic-president-flees>
president and installed Michel Djotodia,who was subsequently accused of sending 
child soldiers to their deaths during the coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/01/central-african-republic-leader-government>
. The Seleka terrorised the majority Christian population and predominantly 
Christian forces, or anti-balaka, retaliated by slaughtering thousands of 
Muslims and forcing many more from their homes.

Djotodia, the country’s first Muslim leader, resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/10/central-african-republic-president-resignation-djotodia>
 after nine months and Catherine Samba-Panzawas installed as interim president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/23/catherine-samba-panza-sworn-in-central-african-republic>
 to lead the country towards elections, the first roundof which took place in 
December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/polls-open-in-central-african-republic-elections>
.

A runoff presidential vote and legislative elections, meant to signal the 
start of a new era,are due to be held on Sunday 
<http://www.africanews.com/2016/02/10/car-prepares-for-sunday-presidential-run-off-elections/>
. Before the poll, the UN missionsaid a forthcoming report 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53202#.VruSvrmLTu0> would shed 
light on “grave violations and abuses of human rights” in Bangui in September 
and October 2015, when afresh burst of violence gripped the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/27/central-african-republic-violent-sectarian-clashes-erupt-in-bangui>
.

UN deal secures release of child soldiers held by Central African Republic 
militias
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/15/central-african-republic-child-soldiers-released-un-deal-armed-groups>
The report used witness testimonies to document the killing of at least 41 
civilians, rape and other sexual violence, kidnapping, and the looting of 
property (including the theft of medical equipment and other supplies from 
NGOs). The authors said most of the abuses were carried out by the anti-balaka 
and the former Seleka groups, but that the state’s armed forces also committed 
violations.

Mamboué said it can be difficult to persuade children and teenagers, whether 
forcibly recruited or not, to relinquish the power that comes with being part 
of a gang in a country with one of thehighest poverty rates in the world at 62% 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/centralafricanrepublic/overview>, and 
gross nationalincome per capita of just $320 
<http://data.worldbank.org/country/central-african-republic> (£222).

Some children were forced into armed groups; others joined because their 
friends were already involved and seemed to enjoy it, or because their parents 
had been killed. Sometimes, after an attack on their village, children joined 
community defence groups that evolved into militias.

“Initially, the idea is to defend your community, then you move to doing small 
things like manning roadblocks, delivering messages, then gradually you become 
involved in learning how to use weapons, not necessarily guns but knives and 
machetes,” Mamboué said.

Some of the older children might also have used drugs, and this can make their 
reintegration even harder, he said. Most of the children are aged between 10 
and 18.

“Some have been very active in these groups, some have witnessed the killing 
of their parents or relatives, and they keep this anger inside, with the idea 
of getting revenge. They end up being violent, particularly when it comes to 
dealing with the opposite side,” Mamboué said.

Last May, Unicef helped to broker a deal between the leaders of 10 armed 
groups tosecure the release of the 6,000 to 10,000 children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/08/central-african-republic-militias-disarmament-agreement-undp>
 thought to be connected with the different factions. Shortly afterwards, a 
first group ofmore than 350 children were released by armed groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/15/central-african-republic-child-soldiers-released-un-deal-armed-groups>
.

Ishmael Beah hails South Sudan's former child soldiers as future leaders | 
Nadene Ghouri
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/06/ishmael-beah-author-south-sudan-child-soldiers-released-future-leaders-peace-unicef>
To keep the children and teenagers focused on peace, War Child works with 
community leaders, women’s associations, government departments and other 
groups to mentor, train and talk to the former combatants and provide new role 
models. But they cannot do it alone – a peaceful environment is also needed, 
and this is a challenge in a country whereeven the most basic infrastructure is 
lacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/03/central-african-republic-chronic-healthcare-crisis-malaria-msf>
, and nearlyhalf a million people 
<http://ec.europa.eu/echo/files/aid/countries/factsheets/car_en.pdf> are still 
displaced from their homes.


Mamboué said he hoped the re-establishment of local authorities and police 
would help clear the roadblocks, removing some of the temptation to return to 
the militias.

“The idea is, and this is going to take time, these roadblocks will no longer 
be a source of income for anybody, unless you become a real bandit, working in 
the bush. It won’t be like the past, where you can just set up a roadblock on 
the outskirts of the city and whatever car comes there, you demand payment.”

There are some tentative indications of success. Mamboué said that despite 
recent violence, 171 of the original 178 children are still in the programme in 
Batangafo, and the other seven have gone to Bangui to resume their studies.

“The children know that living as an anti-balaka is not the conventional life 
of a child … They know there are others who have gone to school and are now 
teachers. Their older brothers are not anti-balaka,” he says.

“He or she has to be able to grasp the value of the alternative you are 
proposing.”
 