
Readers may recall that, earlier this year, Lost in Showbiz reported it had 
come to a new accommodation with the celebrity press. No more would it sneer at 
it, nor dismiss the act of reading it asakin to immersing your brain in a 
massive vat of warm diarrhoea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/jul/29/keeping-up-with-kardashians-blots-out-the-horror>
. No, world events in 2016 had caused Lost in Showbiz to start looking at the 
celebrity press with a kind and welcoming eye, as balm for the brain: every 
self-evidently fabricated story about the romantic vacillations of Jennifer 
Aniston, every titbit about people it has never heard of from the cast of 
Geordie Shore, would be a beautiful respite from the horror of daily life.

Six months on, things are even worse and, LiS regrets to inform you, the 
celebrity press is no longer doing the trick. It has tried to luxuriate 
cravenly in Closer magazine’s exclusive about Kerry Katona’s interest in 
availing herself of something called “minky tightening” – “a nonsurgical 
procedure using plastic balls, rejuvenating cream and a vacuum to strengthen 
the pelvic floor and tighten the vagina”. It has turned the pages of the same 
magazine to discover that Closer has also canvassed the opinions of Vanessa 
Feltz and someone who presents the weekend breakfast show on Magic Radio on the 
debate around thecryonic freezing of a 14-year-old girl with cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/teenage-girls-wish-for-preservation-after-death-agreed-to-by-court>
 and cried. Bring it on, for who wasn’t struck during the whole cryogenics case 
by the overpowering desire to know what Vanessa Feltz and the presenter of 
Magic Radio’s Weekend Breakfast think about it?

But it’s no good. Not even news of Katie Price’s sixth volume of autobiography 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/reborn-360433.html> can fully still the 
disquiet in LiS’s mind. It lies awake at night, worrying itself sick about the 
future. Its mind races with one imponderable question after another. It feels 
sure you are the same and that, for you too, one difficult question towers 
above all others: what’s going on with the line up at Donald Trump’s 
inauguration celebration?

It has thus far proved quite the saga. First, Vince Neil announced he was 
playing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/18/motley-crue-vince-neil-presidential-inauguration-donald-trump>
, which LiS thought was a truly inspired booking. You may recall that Barack 
Obama’s inaugural celebration featuredStevie Wonder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0PEPrPRAp4M&list=TLDxJN0dAzQvf7C2t1K6ZAwfL5q4Dr8JCJ>
,U2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQVZAh8WCw8>, Mary J Blige, Bruce 
Springsteen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wnvCPQqQWds> and the veteran soul 
singerBettye LaVette performing Sam Cooke’s 1964 civil rights anthem A Change 
is Gonna Come <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uvApnxZ4hRg>. What better way to 
announce that there is a new, brighter mood abroad in the US than by getting 
the delectable former Mötley Crüe frontman – a man onceaccused of assaulting a 
sex worker at a legal brothel in Nevada by grabbing her by the throat and 
throwing her against a wall 
<http://lasvegassun.com/news/2004/apr/16/prostitute-sues-musician-neil-brothel-over-alleged/>
 – centre stage at the Lincoln Memorial, belting out some of those Mötley 
classics? PerhapsSlice of Your Pie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vxykiv07i0k>
 – “schoolgirl studied up well on hoochie-coochie, lick lips, kitten with a 
whip so undress me” – or indeed the fabulousAll in the Name Of 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zclelXTZVc4>: “She’s only fifteen, she’s the 
reason I can’t sleep, you say illegal – I say legal’s never been my scene.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-inaugural-celebration-atomic-kitten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc39932da4ccc4fee166ab0db278d1aab90539f75%2F100_285_2150_2688%2F2150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20plans%20for%20Nigel%3A%20how%20Trump%20can%20keep%20Shambassador%20Farage%20busy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-inaugural-celebration-atomic-kitten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20plans%20for%20Nigel%3A%20how%20Trump%20can%20keep%20Shambassador%20Farage%20busy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-inaugural-celebration-atomic-kitten%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc39932da4ccc4fee166ab0db278d1aab90539f75%2F100_285_2150_2688%2F2150.jpg>
 Vince Neil: oddly, found himself ‘uninvited’ from the inaugural event. 
Photograph: NBC via Getty Images 
But alas, it was not to be: Neil subsequently claimed that he had been 
“uninvited” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/11/18/politics/vince-neil-donald-trump-inauguration/>
. Next, Trump transition team executive Anthony Scaramucci – a man whose name 
surely begs the question, “will he do the fandango?” –announced that Sir Elton 
John would be performing <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38079472>
, in tribute to the new administration’s fantastic record on LGBT rights. For 
the record, that includesTrump’s longstanding personal opposition to same-sex 
marriage 
<http://www.hrc.org/2016RepublicanFacts/donald-trump-opposes-nationwide-marriage-equality>
; vice-president Mike Pence’s attempts todivert federal HIV/Aids funds to “gay 
conversion therapy” 
<http://www.politifact.com/california/statements/2016/jul/28/gavin-newsom/true-mike-pence-advocated-conversion-therapy/>
; and the president-elect’s choice for attorney general, Jeff Sessions, whom 
the Huffington Post recently profiled with the headline:Pick Any LGTBQ Rights 
Issue – Jeff Sessions Has Voted Against It 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/jeff-sessions-lgbt-rights_us_58346cd9e4b030997bc1524f>
.

For reasons that are completely beyond LiS, Elton John’s spokeswoman quickly 
announced that he would not be performing, but who can blame Scaramucci for 
thinking he might? After all, throughout the presidential race, pop’s Rocket 
Man kept dropping coy hints, precisely the kind of things that might lead 
anyone to believe he was 100% behind the Trump campaign:“I fear for the world … 
[if] Donald Trump gets to be president” 
<https://mic.com/articles/149485/elton-john-fears-for-the-world-if-donald-trump-is-elected-president-here-s-why>
;“we need a humanitarian in the White House, not a barbarian” 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/rambling-reporter/inside-hillary-clintons-final-star-938301>
;“I’m not a Republican in a million years – why doesn’t he ask Ted fucking 
Nugent? Or one of those fucking country singers?” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/07/elton-john-i-really-hate-the-cult-of-celebrity>
 In consolation to Scaramucci, LiS can only say: well, that’s rock stars for 
you – unpredictable creatures of whim and caprice.

But LiS has a message for Trump, and that message is: don’t despair! Don’t 
waste your time trying to book Hollywood stars and music-biz liberals: they are 
probably all a bit “sadface emoticon” about the wave of virulent neo-Nazism 
that appears to have swept America in the wake of your victory with all the 
sieg heiling and everything. You don’t need those guys! Remember: Brexit 
Britain is your friend! And we have got talent to spare! Yes, the government 
may have blocked your idea to haveNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> appointed as UK ambassador 
to the US, but LiS has another, equally important role for him in mind: 
inaugural celebration talent scout, bringing you the very best of British 
entertainment to make that big day go with a swing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigel-farage-at-ritz-party-another-big-seismic-shock-is-coming-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Farage%20hands%20out%20Ferrero%20Rocher%20at%20Ritz%20party%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigel-farage-at-ritz-party-another-big-seismic-shock-is-coming-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel%20Farage%20hands%20out%20Ferrero%20Rocher%20at%20Ritz%20party%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigel-farage-at-ritz-party-another-big-seismic-shock-is-coming-video&media=>
Nigel Farage hands out Ferrero Rocher at Ritz party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/24/nigel-farage-at-ritz-party-another-big-seismic-shock-is-coming-video>
Remember that fantastic line-up assembled for the sadly cancelled pro-Brexit 
gigBPop live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/apr/08/brexit-crisis-the-leave-lobby-wants-a-music-festival-but-its-hottest-acts-want-out>
? Who could forget it? Three quarters of Bucks Fizz, sometime Living in a Box 
frontman Kenny Thomas and “world leading Elvis Presley tribute and 
impersonator” Gordon Hendricks! That’s the kind of 3,000 megawatt starpower old 
Nigel can pull in! Problem solved!

And LiS can happily throw a few suggestions into the pot. First off: who needs 
Elton John when Atomic Kitten are back and touring with Kerry Katona in the 
line up? LiS reckons you can get them if the price is right: after all, minky 
tightening doesn’t pay for itself. Next: former Another Level star Dane Bowers. 
Of course, he’s pretty busy at the moment, DJing at Dubai’s 
sophisticated-sounding British pub-themed venue The Black Lion (“the food is 
amazing – even down to a homemade sausage in batter and chips” 
<https://www.facebook.com/DANEBOWERSUK/posts/10202369367273062>), but he is 
surely persuadable. If you are after something more contemporary than the 
world’s leading Elvis Presley tribute and impersonator, what about Robbie Glenn,
the UK’s No 1 Olly Murs tribute 
<http://www.shoutpromotions.co.uk/portfolio/olly-murs-tribute-act-robbie-glenn/>
, perhaps performing his amazing-sounding Murs to Mars show, in which he 
transforms himself into not just the X Factor “cheeky chappie”, but the Uptown 
Funk hitmaker too! That’s TWO tributes for the price of ONE!

Come on, Donald: nil desperandum! Atomic Kitten, Dane Bowers, three quarters 
of Bucks Fizz, sometime Living in a Box frontman Kenny Thomas and Robbie Glenn 
the UK’s No 1 Olly Murs tribute: that’s what Lost in Showbiz calls a 
star-studded presidential inauguration celebration, a bill fit to prepare 
America to be made great again.
 