
The underlying fact seems incontrovertible: mosquito resistance to the 
insecticides used to treat bednets is growing. The question is what can be done 
to combat this resistance and ringfence the dramatic drop in global malaria 
deaths over the past 15 years?

Since 2000, the numbers of people dying of malaria have dropped by 60% and 
cases of the disease have fallen by 37%, according to theWorld Health 
Organisation (WHO) 
<http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/world-malaria-report-2015/en/>.

 Insecticide-treated bednets, indoor and outdoor spraying, and other measures 
have averted millions of deaths, the WHO’s 2015 malaria report found. Research 
published inNature and included in the report 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature15535> showed that bednets had been “by far 
the most important intervention” across Africa, accounting for an estimated 68% 
of cases prevented since 2000.

Should we wipe mosquitoes off the face of the Earth?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/feb/10/should-we-wipe-mosquitoes-off-the-face-of-the-earth>
But the report highlighted concern about mosquito resistance to insecticides 
used in bednets or indoor spraying. The evidence of resistance topyrethroids 
<http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/92/3/14-020314/en/> – the only insecticide 
class approved by the WHO for use in long-lasting bednets – has been building.

“Insecticide resistance is an important emerging threat that could potentially 
weaken malaria responses in many countries. Since 2010,60 of the 78 countries 
that monitor resistance 
<http://www.who.int/malaria/media/insecticide_resistance_management_qa/en/> 
have reported [resilience] to at least one insecticide used in nets and indoor 
residual spraying,” a WHO spokesperson says.


“We do not, at this point in time, have sufficient evidence linking an 
increase in insecticide resistance to [cases] or death rates.”

Vestergaard <http://www.vestergaard.com/>, a Swiss firm that makes bednets, 
argues that it is time to change strategy. It is among a handful of firms to 
have developed acombination net <http://www.vestergaard.com/permanet-3-0> to 
replace nets treated with pyrethroids.

Vestergaard’s new net contains piperonyl butoxide 
<http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/malaria_worldwide/reduction/itn.html> (PBO), with a 
pyrethroid insecticide in the roof section. PBO is a synergist that enhances 
the effect of the insecticide.

CEO Mikkel Vestergaard Frandsen says the new net was evaluated in 2007 by the 
WHO 
<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/69986/1/WHO_HTM_NTD_WHOPES_2009_1_eng.pdf>
 and by theVector Control Advisory Group 
<http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/vector_ecology/VCAG/en/> (VCAG), which 
serves as an independent advisory board to the WHO.

African countries ​congratulated for ​driving down malaria deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/01/african-countries-congratulated-for-driving-down-malaria-deaths>
“In February 2014, they concluded 
<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/137318/1/9789241508025_eng.pdf?ua=1>: 
this product is recommended, it’s the first in class of a new tool in a new 
category of bednets,” Vestergaard says, accusing the WHO of dragging its feet 
in drawing up deployment guidelines for the new nets.

The WHO spokesperson says there is “nothing holding up the process for the 
rollout of PBO nets”, which, it says, are recommended for use where metabolic 
resistance – when mosquitoes use enzymes to break down the insecticides – is 
present.


Mosquitoes can develop metabolic or knockdown resistance (KDR), or both. 
Insects <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/insects> with KDR have 
mutations that prevent the insecticide from binding effectively with the target 
site in the nervous system.


The WHO says the VCAG only makes recommendations on efficacy of new tools, not 
on deployment. The WHO is advised by the independentMalaria Policy Advisory 
Committee <http://www.who.int/malaria/mpac/en/> on deploying new ways to battle 
malaria.

Vestergaard Frandsen says the WHO is missing a chance to get ahead of the next 
big health problem.

“I am convinced that insecticide resistance is the next global embarrassment 
for the WHO,” he says, “and I’m saying that because there are all sorts of 
possibilities to do something about it.”

The WHO’s spokesperson says: “There is only one insecticide currently 
recommended by WHO for the treatment of mosquito nets – pyrethroids … As such, 
the use of multiple insecticides for bednets is not possible at this time. 
Next-generation insecticide-treated nets with different classes of insecticides 
are being evaluated.”



'Anti-malarial mosquitoes' created using controversial genetic technology
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/23/anti-malarial-mosquitoes-created-using-controversial-genetic-technology>
Proving a causal relationship between mosquito resistance and deaths is very 
difficult, says Helen Pates Jamet, Vestergaard’s head of entomology.

“Looking for this definitive evidence from a randomised control trial – the 
gold standard of academia – is not an easy thing to do and it may never be 
possible because you can’t randomise resistance. Resistance changes over time … 
The concern is that, while waiting for the definitive data, the only way that 
we are going to get that is by seeing an increase in deaths and cases, before 
we have the definitive study that says this is the link.”

Another concern is that if people see that nets are not being effective, for 
example if mosquitoes are landing on them and not dying, they might stop using 
them, reversing years of work.

“If your bednet is no longer killing mosquitoes, then obviously the community 
effect – in terms of how widespread use of bednets can reduce the malaria in 
the mosquito population – will no longer be sustainable,” says Pates Jamet.

“There are increasing numbers of places where you see mosquitoes resting on 
long-lasting nets, fresh out of the bag, or on freshly sprayed walls, and more 
and more studies showing that pyrethroid nets are no longer killing mosquitoes 
in experimental studies, for example, as they were 10 years ago.”

Many countries in sub-Saharan Africa, from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in 
the east, are at risk from growing resistance. Vestergaard has beenmapping 
resistance in 64 countries <http://irmapperjavascriptwcfservice.cloudapp.net/> 
since 1956.

Mosquito resistance to pyrethroids does not necessarily mean nets are 
ineffective. The WHO spokesperson says that even where there is resistance to 
pyrethroids, “mosquito nets have been shown to provide protection due to the 
physical barrier provided by nets, as well as other factors”.

Eradicating malaria: how parasites' genetic 'barcodes' can stop the spread
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/nov/17/eradicating-malaria-how-parasites-genetic-barcodes-can-stop-the-spread>
In a study published in the journal Parasites and Vectors 
<http://parasitesandvectors.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13071-016-1384-x>
 in March, researchers from theLondon School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
<http://www.lshtm.ac.uk/> and the Malaria Consortium found that bednets might 
still help prevent malaria, despite resistance to pyrethroids.

The research, carried out in Uganda and funded by UK aid, found that although 
resistant mosquitoes were surviving contact with the insecticide, parasites 
inside those mosquitoes were affected by the chemicals.

Lead author Mojca Kristan says: “Sub-lethal doses of pyrethroids, even when 
they do not kill mosquitoes, can affect the development of malaria parasites in 
them, which can potentially help reduce the transmission.”

“We recognise that insecticide resistance remains a major threat to malaria 
control. What our study indicated was that the pyrethroid-treated nets seem to 
remain partly effective despite increasing resistance through their effect on 
the malaria parasite.”

Vestergaard Frandsen, however, says the system is broken, and describes 
growing resistance as a “wakeup call” that evaluating a new product should not 
take longer than developing it.

“For us to stay ahead of the game in reducing global malaria deaths … we, in 
industry, need to start thinking along the lines of a Silicon Valley tech 
company but we can only do that if there is a credible pathway to the market, 
and the evaluation is at least as fast as the development,” he says.
 