
Eric Abetz calls for Abbott to be returned to cabinet after ministers' 
departure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/30/eric-abetz-calls-for-abbott-to-be-returned-to-cabinet-after-ministers-departure>
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has all but ruled out returning deposed former prime minister Tony Abbott to 
the cabinet as part of a reshuffle, citing “the need for renewal”.

The prime minister said “unless people move on, you can’t bring new people in. 
Unless some of the men retire, or leave the ministry, you can’t bring the women 
in”.

“And any dynamic leadership group – whether in government or in the corporate 
sector – has to have renewal.”

In response to questions about a possible Abbott return, Turnbull asked 
journalists to “contemplate” recently retired Westpac CEO Gail Kelly’s example, 
saying she could have headed Westpac “for another decade at least” but instead 
retired.

“She chose to retire and of course that meant that Westpac could renew its 
leadership team,” she said.

Jamie Briggs resigns as minister over incident in Hong Kong bar with female 
public servant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/jamie-briggs-resigns-federal-minister-cities>
Turnbull’s ministry lost two people on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/timing-of-turnbull-ministers-departure-shocking-cynicism-says-labor>
 when cities minister Jamie Briggs resigned over an incident in a Hong Kong bar 
and special minister of state Mal Brough stood aside pending an Australian 
federal police investigation, leaving the possibility open of a reshuffle.

Liberal senator Eric Abetz  called for Abbott to be returned to the cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/30/eric-abetz-calls-for-abbott-to-be-returned-to-cabinet-after-ministers-departure>
 in a potential reshuffle, saying it would be a “a welcome move”.

“I think the Australian people would welcome that, just as much as when other 
leaders have been deposed they have been, if you like, rehabilitated into 
cabinets or shadow cabinets,” he told the ABC on Wednesday morning.

But on Wednesday afternoon Turnbull listed his most important criteria as 
“ability and talent”, also citing the well-worn “broad church” description of 
theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> and the 
“talent in the ranks of junior ministers, parliamentary secretaries and on the 
backbench”.

“We’ve got more talent than we can get into the ministry,” Turnbull said. “My 
faith in the future is bringing that new talent forward.”

Turnbull said of Briggs that “his conduct did not live up to the standard 
required of ministers” and was “a serious matter. It was considered very 
carefully, with due process, consultation with senior colleagues.”

He dismissed Labor’s criticism that the Briggs resignation was deliberately 
timed for a quiet period. “The announcement about Mr Briggs was made on the 
first business day after Christmas,” he said.
 