
Malcolm Turnbull has attempted to paper over the government’s mixed messages 
on tax reform, insistingthe opposition’s negative gearing policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/labor-promises-to-cut-negative-gearing-and-capital-gains-tax-concessions>
 would deliver “two contradictory, massive shocks” to the residential housing 
market.

Facing a third day of parliamentary questions about his claims of property 
prices being “smashed”, the prime minister went on the attack, denouncing “the 
most ill-conceived, potentially destructive policy ever proposed by any 
opposition”.

Turnbull's claim that Labor will 'smash' house prices shows evidence-free 
politics is back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/23/malcolm-turnbull-throws-down-but-labors-housing-smash-is-overrated>
But the prime minister had to correct the parliamentary record after he made 
outdated claims about the property holdings of a Labor rival.

Negative gearing is the practice of investors deducting net losses on their 
rental properties from other income on their tax returns.

Labor, which is promising to rein in negative gearing by restricting it to 
newly constructed homes, accused the government of running an incoherent, 
Tony-Abbott style scare campaign.

In question time on Wednesday, Labor seized on a comment by the assistant 
treasurer, Kelly O’Dwyer, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/24/labors-negative-gearing-policy-would-push-house-prices-up-says-minister>
 that the opposition’s policy would “increase the cost of housing for all 
Australians”. Turnbull previously said the opposition was “smashing home 
values” and would “cut the value of your home”.

Dismissing “childish word games”, O’Dwyer told parliament the impact on 
established and new homes would differ.


Labor's negative gearing policy would push house prices up, says minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/24/labors-negative-gearing-policy-would-push-house-prices-up-says-minister>
Turnbull also rejected claims of a discrepancy. “What the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> proposes to do is to 
administer two contradictory shocks, massive shocks, to the residential housing 
market,” he said.

“They are proposing to remove from the market for established dwellings 
one-third of demand. All investors would be gone – and when I say all 
investors, I mean all investors ... The reality is the Labor party policy does 
not simply apply to net interest losses, it applies to all net rental losses 
... This will eliminate all investors from the established property market, and 
that naturally will cause prices to fall. How can it not? The market is subdued.

“And at the same time they then want to pour all of that investment into new 
properties, which can only be designed, presumably, entirely contradictorily to 
drive those prices up.”

But, later in question time, Turnbull made a blanket statement that the Labor 
policy was “designed to reduce the value of every single home in Australia”.

He also said the manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, “owns two 
investment properties, both of which are geared”.

“I don’t know whether they’re negatively geared or not but he is very well 
aware of the economics of this matter,” Turnbull said.

Burke, who is also Labor’s finance spokesman, immediately challenged the 
claim, saying it was “completely wrong and made up”.

Burke’s register of interests 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/~/media/03%20Senators%20and%20Members/32%20Members/Register/44p/AB/BurkeTony_44P.pdf>
, filed on 10 December 2013, indicated he owned three properties, two of which 
provided him with rental income, but subsequent updates in 2015 indicated these 
had been sold.

Turnbull owned up to the error a few minutes later. “I should just add in 
fairness to the honourable member for Watson: he is quite correct to pick me 
up,” the prime minister said.

“When the parliament began he did record three properties, one of which was a 
residence and two of which were investment properties, and he has subsequently 
sold them all, so I missed the honourable member’s amendments.”

Labor promises to cut negative gearing and capital gains tax concessions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/labor-promises-to-cut-negative-gearing-and-capital-gains-tax-concessions>
The Labor leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, said the prime 
minister’s failure to mount an effective scare campaign showed the government 
was “in complete and utter chaos” on tax reform.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said Turnbull had abandoned his pledge to 
pursue evidence-based policy to adopt a campaign befitting Abbott.

Turnbull replied that the principles of supply and demand were “economics 
101”. It was, he said, “fundamental common sense” that a decrease in buyers 
would trigger a drop in prices.

Labor announced its policy to rein in negative gearing and capital gains tax 
concessions nearly two weeks ago, saying the measures would raise $32.bn for 
the budget over 10 years.

Negative gearing would be limited to newly constructed housing from 1 July 
2017, but all investments made before this date would retain access to the 
deductions.

Labor would cut the capital gains tax discount from 50% to 25% for assets 
purchased after 1 July 2017.

The opposition’s policy measures have dominated parliamentary question time 
this week, with the government yet to announce its own detailed policies apart 
fromruling out an increase in the goods and services tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/turnbull-says-labors-negative-gearing-plan-harms-average-earners-as-gst-ruled-out>
.

On Monday, Turnbull told parliament that “increasing capital gains tax is no 
part of our thinking whatsoever”, but he later clarified his pledge applied 
only to capital gains tax for individuals anddid not extend to superannuation 
funds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/23/superannuation-funds-say-changing-capital-gains-tax-rules-will-cost-retirees>
.
 