
Peel it back and Malcolm Turnbull’s pitch for re-election is not really a 
policy, or a manifesto, but something far more subjective.Stability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/24/election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-eu-refendum-liberal-party-marriage-equality>
. And if voters think it through, that’s one thing he cannot promise for sure.

He does have policies and he has argued them forcefully. But when he promises 
economic and political stability, he’s really holding out the prospect of 
respite, of an end to political upheaval and leadership challenges. He’s 
offering the mundane possibility of a government that just gets on with doing a 
competent job.

He hasn’t asked us to suspend disbelief entirely; he hasn’t been storming the 
nation with a manifesto that fired the national imagination. No Sandersesque 
call for a revolution, no Trump-like promise of greatness, just a gee-up about 
how these are terrifically exciting times and a modest request for a bit more 
of a go because he has a plan that might take away that nagging fear about 
where the economy is heading and what new plot is going to explode in Canberra 
and wouldn’t that be nice.The #realtradie summed up the limited ambition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/21/fake-tradie-in-liberal-election-ad-the-real-deal-says-friend>
 of the Coalition’s message when he suggested “we should just see it through 
and stick with the current mob for a while”.

Election editorials overwhelmingly endorse Malcolm Turnbull and Coalition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/01/election-editorials-overwhelmingly-endorse-malcolm-turnbull-and-coalition>
When you think about it, Turnbull didn’t have a lot of choice. He had not 
unpicked the Abbott agenda, he’d prevaricated too long over taxation policy, 
and he hadn’t fully exerted his authority over the party’s smarting and 
suspicious conservative wing.

So he strode into the campaign armed mostly with his own capabilities – his 
barrister’s art of oratory and persuasion, the self-confidence that has marked 
every stage of his career, and the assertion that he was the only man with a 
plan for economic and political stability.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fa-look-back-at-australias-2016-general-election-campaign-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20look%20back%20at%20Australia's%202016%20general%20election%20campaign%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fa-look-back-at-australias-2016-general-election-campaign-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20look%20back%20at%20Australia%27s%202016%20general%20election%20campaign%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fa-look-back-at-australias-2016-general-election-campaign-video&media=>
A look back at Australia’s 2016 general election campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/01/a-look-back-at-australias-2016-general-election-campaign-video>
His “plan” was mostly $48bn worth of corporate tax cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/24/paul-keating-criticises-coalitions-unfunded-50bn-company-tax-cut>
 over the next decade and small tax cuts for middle- and high-income earners. 
And for a time it looked like that might set the scene for a real ideological 
battle: Turnbull’s tax cuts versus Shorten’s message of inclusive growth – that 
spending on health and education to prevent rising inequality was a 
prerequisite for growth, not something that could be afforded after the 
benefits of tax cuts “trickled down” through the economy.

But despite eight long weeks on the hustings we never really got full answers 
to big questions about the asserted economic and political “certainties” of the 
company tax cuts plan.

Treasury modelling showed they would boost economic growth. But there was no 
way to compare that increase (0.6% of gross national income in a decade) with 
other things that might have been done with the money. Economists questioned 
how much of the benefitwould flow offshore in the form of higher profits for 
foreign firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/coalitions-company-tax-cuts-more-than-40-of-benefit-flows-overseas-report-finds>
. And when asked how he would make up for the revenue forgone, Turnbull would 
point to a graph showing the budget returning to a slim surplus (0.2% of GDP) 
in 2020-21 and say this proved that the growth dividend and other Coalition 
savings would fill the revenue hole just fine. But again there was no detail, 
and no explanation of what he’d do if the “uncertain times” he so often warned 
us about changed those forecasts, which they almost certainly will. Would he 
delay the return to surplus or make more cuts to spending. And if so, where?

One glance at the international economic situation shows no government can 
promise economic stability. The tax cuts were a vehicle for Turnbull’s 
assertion that he’d be a better bet than Labor but without the detail that 
could prove the case.

The tax cuts could also fall victim to his inability to deliver on his 
“political certainty” promise. Despite the Senate voting changes, the 
double-dissolution election is likely to deliver a Senate just as unwieldy as 
the last one – with Turnbull reliant on votes from Nick Xenophon’s Team and an 
assortment of others that might include Jacqui Lambie, Derryn Hinch and Pauline 
Hanson. A Guardian Australia survey last week showed that would put a big 
question mark on the big business tax cuts and a lot more of Turnbull’s agenda 
besides.

And that’s before we consider how the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> conservatives are 
spoiling for a fight with the socially Liberal Turnbull, in the first instance 
over whether Australia legally recognises same-sex marriage. Turnbull has ended 
the campaign trying to “flick the switch” back to the consensus-driven centrist 
prime minister intent upon “bringing the country together” and “ending 
ideological divisions”, but Abbott couldn’t even wait until the votes were 
counted to implicitly berate his successor for not beating the drum on national 
security like he would have. Turnbull’s right-hand man, Arthur Sinodinos, sent 
the not-so-subtle return volley, a win, no matter how slim the margin would 
mean Turnbull’s authority was “greatly enhanced”.

'Sophomore surge' by first-term MPs could push Coalition over the line
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/01/sophomore-surge-by-first-term-mps-could-push-coalition-over-the-line>
Turnbull ran a disciplined campaign given he had so little to announce or say. 
He’s known for his impatient intellect, so watching with interest during 
everything that crossed his path on the hustings was not his natural game, but 
he even made it through a several-minutes-long rendition ofWe Are Australian 
played on a gumleaf <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ye40vBHqlQ>. 

But Shorten ran a far stronger race than the Liberals expected, based on bold 
policies for higher spending on education and health and cuts to highly 
generous tax concessions to which better-off Australians have become 
accustomed, for housing investments and retirement savings. He did pique 
voters’ interest. They responded to his pitch on Medicare, even if the claim 
the Liberals were about to privatise it was overblown. But he never quite 
“owned” the economic narrative. At senior levels the Labor party was uncertain 
how far to push the economic policy differentiation, which left it with 
spending policies thatincreased its forecast near-term deficits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/26/labor-costings-chris-bowen-promises-higher-surpluses-after-early-increase-in-deficit>
 to levels higher than the Coalition’s, but without the clearly explained 
rationale to deflect the inevitable accusation that this made Labor a risk to 
the economy.

Turnbull set out to win over the disaffected with reassurance but seemed to 
leave the electorate nonplussed and uncertain. His net satisfaction rating 
plummeted from +38 when he was elected to around -14. Shorten set out to 
inspire but didn’t quite inspire enough. His net satisfaction rose steadily, to 
leave the two leaders now almost level pegging.

By campaign’s end somewhere between 23% and 27% of voters were intending to 
vote for the Greens or independents (higher than the last peak in 2013). A 
large proportion were still undecided. Turnbull was taking out full-page 
newspaper ads trying to hammer home his implausible claim that unless they 
switched to the Coalition the country would descend into “chaos”.

Polls suggest Turnbull’s small-target campaign will get him there, but 
narrowly. But polls have been wrong before. Voters wanted something more 
inspiring. They weren’t just disillusioned with the political process, they 
were disillusioned with the policies on offer and were casting around for 
something new and exciting.

Turnbull didn’t offer it. He had no policies at all on higher education or 
industrial relations or vocational education or the arts.

There’s both opportunity and risk in winning an election with so many big 
blank spaces in your mandate.


But that’s not the biggest risk for Turnbull if he achieves the ultimate 
culmination of his life’s ambition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/17/election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-liberal-party-coalition-profile>
 on Saturday.

He’s pushing the majority government pitch so hard in the election’s dying 
days because he desperately needs sufficient command of the parliament and 
enough authority over his own restless colleagues to have even a chance of 
delivering the biggest thing he’s promised. Stability.
 