
As Wayne Rooney’s wait for the goal that will equal Sir Bobby Charlton’s 
record goes on, Zlatan Ibrahimovic continues to carry the torch for aManchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> side who are 
running into form at just the right time. With another two goals, the Swede 
took his tally for the season to 16 – and 10 in his last nine games – to 
complete a highly satisfactory week for José Mourinho and his players.

United have won three times in the space of seven days – their first such run 
in thePremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> since 
August – and there are clear signs that the juggernaut is starting to pick up a 
little speed. Ibrahimovic is certainly in the groove, playing like a man at the 
peak of his powers rather than a 35-year-old in the twilight of his career.

His early header set United on their way before anyone had a chance to break 
sweat and the match was in effect over as a contest when Ibrahimovic added a 
second early in the second half. West Bromwich Albion’s self-belief was broken 
and United were able to cruise towards a routine victory that lifts them to 
within three points of fourth-placed Manchester City, albeit having played a 
game more.

West Brom v Manchester United: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/17/west-brom-v-manchester-united-premier-league-live>
With home fixtures to come against Sunderland and Middlesbrough, the league 
table could make for even better reading for United by the time the year comes 
to a close. They are not playing vintage attacking football by any stretch, yet 
United are finding a way to win matches and producing flashes of brilliance, 
with the lovely opening goal against Albion a case in point.

By the end it felt like Christmas had come early for the travelling supporters 
as Rooney, Paul Pogba and Ander Herrera led a group of United players over 
towards them to throw their shirts into the crowd. “I told them to do that,” 
Mourinho said. “It’s Christmas time. A shirt for a fan, coming direct from the 
game with sweat, means a lot. For the players, it’s just one more shirt. But I 
think for the fans it means a lot.”

With Albion flying high in seventh place and awkward opponents for any team on 
paper, Mourinho was entitled to be delighted with the outcome and the 
Portuguese quickly made it clear that he had no intention of overshadowing the 
result by saying anything controversial in relation to either of the two 
major flashpoints.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwest-bromwich-albion-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf03b7b602230028cb94c65525d461d35d15d66%2F774_694_4160_2496%2F4160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20United%20ease%20past%20West%20Brom%20thanks%20to%20Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20double&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwest-bromwich-albion-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20United%20ease%20past%20West%20Brom%20thanks%20to%20Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20double&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwest-bromwich-albion-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf03b7b602230028cb94c65525d461d35d15d66%2F774_694_4160_2496%2F4160.jpg>
 Zlatan Ibrahimovic scores his second goal of the match. Photograph: Tom 
Jenkins for the Guardian 
The first incident featured Ibrahimovic, who poleaxed Craig Dawson with a 
challenge that was late and potentially dangerous as the United striker knocked 
the Albion full-back to the floor. Ibrahimovic never had any chance of getting 
the ball and it felt like one of those fouls that merits more than a booking 
but perhaps not quite a red card. Anthony Taylor, the referee, arrived at that 
conclusion and decided to show only a yellow card.

Asked about that moment, Mourinho turned the conversation to the other 
controversial incident, when Salomón Rondón slapped Marcos Rojo in the face 
after the two squared up to each other in the second half. Rondón seemed to be 
reacting to something that Rojo said, yet the Venezuelan was playing with fire 
by raising his hand, even if the contact was barely hard enough to burst a 
paper bag. Mourinho, in fairness, felt the referee did the right thing by 
allowing Rondón to stay on the pitch.

Tony Pulis did not seem quite so impressed with the way that Taylor handled 
the game. Asked about Ibrahimovic’s actions, Pulis said: “Ask the 28,000 
supporters what they thought.“ The Albion manager also described Ibrahimovic’s 
challenge as “worse than the [Rondón] one”.

Either way, there can be no doubting Ibrahimovic’s ability and his influence 
over this United team. “I’m so pleased for him,” Mourinho said. “He is the kind 
of player who doesn’t need to prove anything to anyone. But when he decided to 
come to England for the last period of his career – to the most difficult 
championship in the world – I think he proved he is a superman in his 
mentality. What he is doing at 35 is a dream for every striker of 25 in the 
Premier League.”

Patrick van Aanholt lifts Sunderland with vital win over Watford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/sunderland-watford-premier-league-match-report>
It was certainly a wonderful goal that Ibrahimovic finished off to put United 
ahead in the fifth minute. Pogba and Antonio Valencia were involved in the 
buildup, yet ultimately it was all about the timing of Jesse Lingard’s run and 
the outstanding technique that the England international showed to deliver an 
inch-perfect cross, on the half-volley, for Ibrahimovic to nod beyond Ben 
Foster.

Chances then came and went at both ends. Rooney, set up by Lingard, saw his 
18-yard shot superbly tipped on to the crossbar by Foster. At the other end of 
the pitch, Rondón should have done better when he got in between Phil Jones and 
Rojo only to head Matty Phillips’s cross well wide.

Mourinho was frustrated that Lingard wasted an opportunity to double United’s 
lead on the stroke of half-time, when the winger snatched at a ball that 
dropped invitingly for him following Matteo Darmian’s miskick, yet the visitors 
took little time to score a second after the restart.

Picking up possession from Rooney, Ibrahimovic stepped inside Gareth McAuley 
far too easily and struck a low right-foot shot that took a deflection off 
Craig Dawson before nestling in the far corner. Albion, in truth, never looked 
like getting back in the game. “That second goal took the wind out of us,” 
Pulis admitted.
 