
This was a third win in succession for Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and, while not a vintage 
one, Pep Guardiola will take much solace from his side’s renewed resolve in 
recent weeks. Yaya Touré and Kelechi Iheanacho were the City names on the 
scoresheet but the visitors seem mentally reinvigorated and far more assured in 
the face of direct and physical opponents.

Hull certainly provided such a challenge and credit must also go to them after 
matching their far wealthier adversaries for much of the game. In the end 
City’s greater quality saw them over the line, a Touré penalty, a fine team 
move finished by Iheanacho and a late Curtis Davies own-goal ensuring they 
finished Boxing Day second in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> table.

Given that Sergio Agüero has been missing since early December and the nature 
of City’s defeat at Leicester two weeks ago, Guardiola can point to a tangible 
improvement in his side’s recent performances, even if this was not a classic. 
Hull battled well but they have now not won in seven league matches.

Hull City 0-3 Manchester City: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/26/hull-city-v-manchester-city-premier-league-live>
“The first half was quite good in terms of control, except in the last five 
minutes when we conceded a few stupid fouls and they created some problems with 
the quality of [Robert] Snodgrass’ set pieces. But we forgot in the first half 
where the goal was,” Guardiola said.

“Every time Ras [Sterling] had the ball it was pass, pass, pass and we don’t 
need Ras for the pass we need him for the one-on-one. In the second half he 
created the penalty, he created the third goal.

“We cannot forget that we’ve played seven games [this season] without Kun 
[Agüero]. Gabriel Jesus is also coming so we will have two to three strikers 
with a sense of the goal. It’s so important, especially in games like this.”

John Stones returned to the City starting line-up but the defender lasted only 
18 minutes before a kick to the knee forced him off, although Guardiola 
suggested the injury could be serious. Aleksandar Kolarov slotted in at 
centre-back but neither side produced many moments of fluency during a drab 
first half.

City had more of the ball but Hull were relatively solid in defence and 
limited their opponents to speculative efforts early on. Guardiola had selected 
a team without a striker once again – with Agüero serving the final match of 
his four-game suspension – so Kevin De Bruyne, David Silva, Nolito and Raheem 
Sterling regularly switched positions in a fluid attacking set-up.

Both teams, though, began the second half with more intent. Sterling had an 
enticing cross-shot palmed away by David Marshall before Hull started to press. 
Harry Maguire found himself in an attacking position and crossed from the right 
to the far post, where Sam Clucas met the ball with a half-volley that was 
blocked well.

Chelsea’s Pedro torments Bournemouth to stretch league winning run to 12
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/chelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
A swift break from City so nearly resulted in the opening goal in the 53rd 
minute, De Bruyne eventually receiving the ball down the left before cutting 
inside and firing a low effort on to Marshall’s right-hand post.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fhull-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae7aa3f0bb41af7f50304fceb535a44d6b0aee3d%2F162_0_4107_2465%2F4107.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%20leave%20it%20late%20before%20Tour%C3%A9%20and%20Iheanacho%20see%20off%20Hull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fhull-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20City%20leave%20it%20late%20before%20Tour%C3%A9%20and%20Iheanacho%20see%20off%20Hull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fhull-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae7aa3f0bb41af7f50304fceb535a44d6b0aee3d%2F162_0_4107_2465%2F4107.jpg>
 Andrew Robertson brings down Raheem Sterling to give Manchester City the 
chance to take the lead from the penalty spot. Photograph: Ed Sykes/Reuters 
Hull then came extremely close themselves. A series of crosses into the box 
had pinned City in and when Michael Dawson met a high ball with a looping 
header he seemed to have directed it superbly over City’s goalkeeper, Claudio 
Bravo, and into the net, only for Bacary Sagna, in a fine position on the line, 
to clear the danger.

Guardiola sent on Iheanacho in place of Nolito with just over half an hour 
remaining but it was Sterling who had the decisive impact. After 72 minutes the 
England forward darted inside from the right and was brought down in the 
penalty area following a clumsy sliding challenge from Andrew Robertson. There 
were no complaints from Hull and Touré stepped up to finish emphatically from 
the spot.

The second, which killed the game six minutes later, was a fine team move. De 
Bruyne glided forward, waited calmly before playing a precise pass right to 
Silva, who then cut an excellent ball across goal for Iheanacho to finish into 
an empty net.

Davies’ late own-goal – the result of a rapid Sterling break down the left – 
rubbed salt into Hull’s wounds. Mike Phelan, the Hull manager, said: “It is 
harsh because a lot of work went into that game from our players today. We 
suffered through elementary errors which we have to stop doing if we are to 
progress in this league.

“I thought the way we went about our work today was commendable,” Phelan 
added. “The critical part is when you make those individual errors and they 
cost you. But I’m not going to look for a scapegoat. Andy Robertson has been 
terrific. It’s that youthfulness, maybe immaturity at times at this level. But 
I think he will come out of it for the better.”
 