
The man who hovered over my intoxicated body one humid May night in my senior 
year of college, liquor and lust staining his breath as he laughed that my “no” 
really meant “yes”, is still on campus. He is the kind of man women whisper to 
each other about when they think he is not looking, whose transgressions 
against our bodies are cataloged in hushed tones and quick, ominous shakes of 
the head.

When I left that man’s room, sweaty and shaken to my core, I didn’t dare call 
the police or campus security. In the impossible hierarchy of acceptable 
victimhood, black women who walk willingly into the rooms of men they call 
“brother” are considered undeserving of protection from any violence that 
happens therein.

If we report our assaults to police, we risk being retraumatized 
<http://www.blackwomensblueprint.org/2014/11/09/invisible-betrayal-police-violence-and-the-rapes-of-black-women-in-the-united-states/#_edn13>
 not only by theinhumane process 
<http://the-toast.net/2014/12/09/truth-fire-couldnt-hold/> of reliving a 
violent experience through sharing its gory details - but also by theviolence 
of the criminal justice system itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/24/chicago-police-detain-americans-black-site>
, whichtreats rape victims like suspects 
<http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/headlines/2012/04/alleged-rape-victim-jailed-to-ensure-testimony/>
. Worse yet, the police themselvescommit assault with impunity 
<http://www.truth-out.org/opinion/item/24677>; often, they target black women 
in particular 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/jtes/daniel-holtzclaw-alleged-sexual-assault-oklahoma-city>
, knowing our existence at the intersections of racism and misogyny make crimes 
against usfar less likely to be investigated 
<http://jezebel.com/when-youre-a-black-woman-youre-never-good-enough-to-be-1633065554>
.

To be a “good rape victim 
<http://jezebel.com/5251148/who-you-calling-a-bad-feminist>” is to immediately 
report your assault to the police (even knowing you will likelynever see 
“justice” 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/180441/how-did-fbi-miss-over-1-million-rapes>
), but to be a goodblack person is to avoid the police entirely because your 
life quite literally depends on it 
<http://gawker.com/unarmed-people-of-color-killed-by-police-1999-2014-1666672349>
. The tightrope walk is impossible.

That’s why black anti-sexual assault activists, like survivor and feminist 
writerWagatwe Wanjuki 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/how-wagatwe-wanjuki-making-college-safer>, have long
argued 
<http://feministing.com/2014/04/11/stop-telling-survivors-they-must-report-to-the-police/>
that survivors should not be forced to report their assaults to police in order 
for their stories to be believed.

An ongoing study by Black Women’s Blueprint, a New York-based human rights 
organization, finds that60% of black girls and women 
<http://www.blackwomensblueprint.org/sexual-violence/> report having 
experienced “coercive contact of a sexual nature” by the age of 18. Still, we 
are deemedcategorically hypersexual <http://www.ferris.edu/jimcrow/jezebel.htm>
, incapable of being assaulted because our bodies themselves serve as static, 
menacing consent.

The overlapping vectors of racist and sexist violence in black women’s lives 
have long been points of bothdeep pain and fierce activism 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/11/19/AR2010111906689.html>
. This intersection drove Rosa Parks, the noted civil rights activist, to spend 
much of her life combating not just segregation, but also thepervasive sexual 
violence against black women 
<http://rhrealitycheck.org/article/2013/08/23/the-real-work-of-rosa-parks-not-just-refusing-to-move-to-the-back-of-the-bus-but-combatting-sexual-violence/>
. As is so often the case, resistance and solutions to this grave, systemic 
injustice come from the affected community itself.

Today, this commitment to envisioning a world free from sexual violence is 
reflected in organizations likeA Long Walk Home <http://www.alongwalkhome.org/>
, a Chicago-based non-profit that “uses art to educate, inspire, and mobilize 
young people to end violence against girls and women”. The organization finds 
its roots in the creative labor of sistersSalamishah 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/192673/why-its-so-hard-write-about-rape> and 
Scheherazade Tillet <http://www.alongwalkhome.org/bioscher.htm>. After learning 
of her sibling’s sexual assault, Scheherazade used photography to help her 
heal. The two co-wrote and directed a multimedia performance calledStory of a 
Rape Survivor (SOARS) 
<http://www.alongwalkhome.org/shared/documents/SOARS_catalog.pdf>, which 
brought Salamishah’s story and Scheherazade’s art to life; years later, A Long 
Walk Home was born.

Salamishah came to Dartmouth to give a speech on campus sexual assault in my 
last spring term in college 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/04/27/dartmouth-sexual-assault-protest-cancels-classes/2117159/>
, mere hours before I found myself in that man’s room. In the days afterward, I 
returned to her speech, a lullaby of resistance. She is one of the countless 
black women whose profoundly human, unshakably feminist resolve has shaped 
approaches to the daunting task of anti-sexual assault work.

Others carry out this vision by working to create a world that challenges the 
unmitigated terror <http://www.usprisonculture.com/blog/what-is-the-pic/> of 
the criminal justice system itself. Prisons are themselveswarehouses of sexual 
violence 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/opinions/2014/4/united-states-prisonrapesexualassaultovercrowdedprisons.html>
, and women suffering abuse aremore likely to be incarcerated 
<http://www.correctionalassociation.org/issue/domestic-violence> than to see 
even the most paltry threads of “justice”-especially women of color 
<http://bitchmagazine.org/post/marissa-alexander-and-the-color-of-violence>. 
Intimate violence, at the hands of family, friends, or partners, is an assumed 
reality for people already made vulnerable by other systems of power.

The activist women of Ferguson 
<http://thefeministwire.com/2014/10/fergusonfridays-black-freedom-fighters-men-interview-black-women-front-line-ferguson/>
, New York, and beyond, whoprotest against the violence of the US criminal 
justice system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/15/ferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter>
 and thewhite supremacist ideals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/20/white-supremacy-ferguson-black-excuses>
 it enforces, also form part of the patchwork of radical brilliance that 
survivors - including me - can draw on when our strength threatens to falter.

As attempts to address the funneling of people of color into prison gain 
traction, we can renew our efforts to develop our anti-sexual assault work 
outside of a racist institution that stacks our bodies as collateral damage. 
These movements are distinct, but not separate - and black survivors’ bodies 
often lie at the crossroads.
 