
As Marcus Willis, £30-an-hour part-time tennis coach from Wokingham, walked on 
to Centre Court shortly before 5pm on Wednesday to play arguably the greatest 
tennis player of all time, he raised one arm aloft, beamed from ear to ear, and 
gave a little shake of the head. Yes, this was really happening.


Roger Federer is quite a popular chap at the All England club, but for once 
the deafening cheers that roared around the court for an hour and 25 minutes 
during the pair’s second-round encounter were not, for the most part, for him. 
No one expected the man known as the Maestro to break much of a sweat against 
the world number 772, who a few years ago was so overweight he earned the 
nickname Cartman, after the “big-boned” character from South Park. But even by 
the standards of Wimbledon’s plucky Brit battlers, Willis’s was quite a story.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwimbledon-day-3-highlights-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wimbledon%202016%3A%20Novak%20Djokovic%20and%20Roger%20Federer%20in%20action%20on%20day%20three%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwimbledon-day-3-highlights-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wimbledon%202016%3A%20Novak%20Djokovic%20and%20Roger%20Federer%20in%20action%20on%20day%20three%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwimbledon-day-3-highlights-video&media=>
Wimbledon 2016: Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer in action on day three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/jun/29/wimbledon-day-3-highlights-video>
Just four months ago, the party-loving 25-year-old was on the verge of giving 
up playing altogether and moving to America to become a coach, until he met a 
woman on a night out, fell in love and was persuaded to stay. His place on 
Centre Court was earned the hard way, after winning seven successive matches in 
the tournament’s pre-qualifying and qualifying rounds, and beating Ricardas 
Berankis, ranked 54, in the first round proper. As his hero Goran Ivanisevic 
put it, Marcus Willis has already wonWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon>.

And so, after the Swiss 17-time Grand Slam winner took the first set 6-0, 
Willis was cheered to the court’s retractable roof when he won his first game 
in the second. The crowd was conducted by the “Berkshire Bulldogs”, a small but 
rowdy group of the player’s mates, who roared adapted football chants and took 
off their shoes in homage to a prank Willis liked to play during training, 
where he would hide one of his opponent’s sneakers. At one point, he blew them 
a kiss.

In the player’s box above the scoreboard, his girlfriend Jennifer Bate – given 
an unexpected day off from her job as a Warwick dentist – and wider family were 
scarcely less excitable, leaping to their feet to roar with almost every point 
taken off the seven-time Wimbledon winner.

Roger Federer sees Marcus Willis story at Wimbledon as Hollywood gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/marcus-willis-wimbledon-roger-federer-hollywood-gold>
He lost, of course. But Willis certainly didn’t embarrass himself, being 
broken only once by the Swiss in the second and third sets to lose 6-0, 6-3, 
6-4. As he walked to the centre of the court to acknowledge the crowd after 
losing, the joking was gone, and he appeared to be on the verge of tears. In 
the seats above the scoreboard, his parents Cathy and James, with whom he still 
lives, shared a hug.

“I was enjoying it out there,” a clearly exhausted Willis said after the 
match. “If I’m playing quite well and competing with Roger Federer for a couple 
of sets, I’m doing the right thing.”

Federer, for his part, said he had approached the match as if his opponent was 
a top 50 player, “because that’s the level he was playing at”.

But to those speculating over whether Willis might bow out of the game after 
an experience that will surely never be bettered, he was quite clear. “It 
sounds funny, but I’m disappointed to lose. I went out there trying to win.

“I’ve had a fantastic few weeks, and this has been great, but there’s life 
after Wimbledon, and I want more. More experiences like this. I have to knuckle 
down and work harder.”

Wimbledon 2016: Roger Federer beats Marcus Willis – day three as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/29/wimbledon-2016-novak-djokovic-roger-federer-marcus-willis-and-more-day-three-live>
And would he be celebrating this evening? “ I’m absolutely exhausted. I might 
wait and calm down. But I’ve earned myself a beer, I think.”

Inevitably, he was asked if he now planned to marry the woman who was 
responsible for his being here in the first place: “I haven’t thought, to be 
honest. This whole few weeks have been a bit of a blur. But I do like her quite 
a bit.”

And how would he sum up his day? “Amazing. It’s not my standard Wednesday.”
 