
Australia is a slow, backward land of dingos and kangaroos at the “bottom of 
the world” where actors view America “the way the Martians view Earth at the 
beginning of The War of the Worlds”, according to Vanity Fair in a new profile 
ofMargot Robbie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/margot-robbie> that has been 
mocked and parodied across the country.

In the US magazine’s August cover profile 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/07/margot-robbie-cover-story> of the 
Wolf of Wall Street and Legend of Tarzan star, The Summer of Margot Robbie by 
Rich Cohen, Australia is described as being like “America 50 years ago”: “sunny 
and slow, a throwback, which is why you go there for throwback people. They 
still live and die with the plot turns of soap operas in Melbourne and Perth, 
still dwell in a single mass market in Adelaide and Sydney.

“In the morning, they watch Australia’s Today show. In other words, it’s just 
like America, only different. When everyone here is awake, everyone there is 
asleep, which makes it a perfect perch from which to study our customs, habits, 
accents.”


Robbie, he writes, “grew up in Gold Coast, a city on Australia’s Pacific 
shore, 500 miles north of Sydney ... Now and then, she stayed with cousins who 
lived in the hinterland of the hinterland, where there really were kangaroos 
and a dingo really will eat your baby.”

Margot Robbie profile in Vanity Fair calls Australians 'throwback people'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/margot-robbie-profile-in-vanity-fair-calls-australians-throwback-people>
Aussies did not waste much time taking the mickey, with News.com.au declaring 
it had “fixed” the article by rewriting it as a piece entitled The Winter of 
Donald Trump: “When everyone here is awake, everyone there is asleep, which 
makes it a perfect perch for Americans to envy our multiculturalism, pine for 
our perfect climate – and ogle our actresses,” itwrote 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/books-magazines/magazines/vanity-fair-we-fixed-that-dumb-article-for-you/news-story/8a839b92257599bfe848876fa45a3ded>
.

As that dig suggests, the profile was also criticised for the lascivious way 
in which Cohen described Robbie. “She is 26 and beautiful, not in that 
otherworldly, catwalk way but in a minor knock-around key, a blue mood, a slow 
dance ... She can be sexy and composed even while naked but only in character,” 
the writer notes.

With that in mind, in the Age 
<http://www.dailylife.com.au/news-and-views/dl-culture/the-profile-vanity-fair-refused-to-publish-20160707-gq14dy.html>
, satirist Ben Pobjie reimagined the piece as a profile of Cohen, calling the 
writer “handsome in an earthy, soily, mushroomy kind of way, the sort of 
home-style, soul-food, eyes-too-wide-apart handsome that Hollywood forgot the 
day that Gary Cooper pulled up his bootlaces” and adding: “Cohen is from Lake 
Forest, Illinois, a somnambulistic little town that is both full of trees and 
entirely underwater, where men live their lives according to the rhythms of the 
local peanut factory and women sit on their porches sobbing over the last 
unexpected leukaemia diagnosis on The Vampire Diaries.”

In Cohen’s Vanity Fair piece, Robbie says she does not talk much about her 
upbringing in the Gold Coast as she does not like perpetuating Australian 
stereotypes.


“When she talks about it, you see the arid country, the horizon on every side, 
blue sky, yellow fields,” Cohen writes. The Gold Coast has a subtropical 
climate with beaches on one side of the city and rainforest on the other.

“People always want to know, ‘Did you have kangaroos outside your bedroom 
window?’ I’m like, ‘Yes, but none of my other friends did.’ Or ‘Did you have 
snakes running around?’ And again, ‘Yes, in our house, but this isn’t an 
Australian thing,’” Robbie is quoted as saying in the piece.


Cohen talks at great length about the actor’s looks, repeatedly discussing 
whether she is like Audrey Hepburn, to whom the The Legend of Tarzan producer 
Jerry Weintraub compared her.


“She is blonde but dark at the roots. She is tall but only with the help of 
certain shoes,” he writes.


“As I said, she is from Australia. To understand her, you should think about 
what that means.”


Robbie has previously spoken about how uncomfortable she is at being written 
about as a sex symbol. “I’ve been very fortunate,” shesaid at a press 
conference this year 
<http://www.metro.us/entertainment/tina-fey-and-margot-robbie-talk-whiskey-tango-foxtrot-and-sexism/zsJpca---PBYAzjzx63JI/>
. “I’ve got a really good team around me. I haven’t been exploited, I don’t 
feel.


“I’m more concerned with being labelled as a sex symbol. That makes me feel 
more uncomfortable than any day-to-day interactions I have.”


“Another day, another profile written by a crusty old man describing the 
physical attributes of a young actress as if she was an intricately decorated 
end table that they found at Sotheby’s, or a piece of steak they were looking 
forward to devouring after a five o’clock scotch,” wrote journalistSinead 
Stubbins <http://junkee.com/author/sinead-stubbins> in an op-ed published on 
Junkee 
<http://junkee.com/vanity-fairs-sexist-profile-margot-robbie-offensive-pretty-much-every-way-possible/81522#Y2Q7Ev2qGxUi5WKl.99>
.

The US feminist and writer Roxane Gay said Cohen had a “hard-on” for Robbie.


“We don’t need to cry for them but can you IMAGINE how many gross men hot 
movie stars have to endure? Goddamn,” she tweeted.
 