
I’ve been thinking a lot about Mariah Carey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mariahcarey> recently. Carey is never far 
from my mind, because ever since I read that she gave birth to her twins, 
Monroe and Moroccan (I love you, Mariah), while listening to a recording of one 
of her own concerts so the babies would enter the world to“the sound of 
applause”, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/celebritology/post/mariah-careys-twins-born-to-her-fans-applause/2011/05/17/AF7fMu5G_blog.html>
 every decision I make is accompanied by the inner question: “What would Mariah 
do?”

Carey has been in the news recently because of her relationship with James 
Packer <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Packer>, a deeply tedious-looking 
Australian billionaire and Scientologist. If you’re thinking, “Boy, he sounds 
unworthy of Carey”, you would be right: the two have split up. But, incredibly, 
rather than mocking the Australian billionaire Scientologist (I mean, I ask 
you), the media coverage has been making fun of Carey.

Now, when I break up with someone, or someone breaks up with me (Carey and 
Packer offer differing accounts of who was the dumper and dumpee), my approach 
is to follow the advice of women’s magazines and take some “me time”, and by 
“me time” I mean “spend at least a month locked in my flat watching Murder She 
Wrote and eating cake frosting straight out of the tub”. Carey, however, takes 
a different tack: instead of relying on Jessica Fletcher to help her through 
this difficult period, she is allegedly demanding that Packer stump up $50m as 
an “inconvenience fee”.

“He moved her across the country and relocated her and her kids,” someone 
described as a member of Carey’s entourage told the US press. “She wants an 
inconvenience fee.”

As anyone who has ever moved in their life knows, with or without twins named 
Monroe and Moroccan, $50m is small potatoes for the inconvenience involved. 
Personally, I reckon Carey should ask for $100m plus an entirely new wardrobe, 
because something always goes missing when you move, such as that old blue 
jumper that was disgusting but perfect for staying in and eating cake frosting.

Some have suggested that it is unseemly for Carey to demand money from Packer, 
who is worth $3.5bn, when she herself has $500m. But given that she made her 
money by singing like an angel for 25 years, whereas he made his by being the 
son ofKerry Packer <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerry_Packer>, he really 
should give her every damned cent he has to thank her for having been allowed 
to park his talentless, overprivileged ass anywhere within her supernaturally 
gifted orbit.

When the Tories talk about curbs on foreign workers, they don’t mean me. Or do 
they?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/15/brexit-britain-where-not-wanted>
And yet this story is being reported as further evidence that Carey is the 
demanding one (quick reminder that Carey worked for every penny, whereas Packer 
was given his by Daddy). In every report that I’ve read of this story, which 
currently numbers about 562,732, she is referred to as “a diva”. This is a word 
that is only ever used about women and gay men and, as far as I can glean, it 
means someone who demands to be treated as a heterosexual man in their position 
would. It is applied with notably especial enthusiasm to black women. Know your 
place, black ladies! Plenty of heterosexual men have a thrillingly inflated 
sense of their self-worth and never apologise for it. After all, Elvis Presley
once flew his private jet 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2014/08/04/elvis-presleys-fools-gold-sandwich-was-born-in-denver/>
 from Denver to Graceland just because he fancied a peanut butter sandwich. 
John Lennon had a refrigerated room in his apartment for his fur coats. Yet not 
once have I heard either of them sneered at as “divas”.

Like “ambition”, to be demanding is seen as unseemly in a woman but rather 
sexy in a man. Yes, people might chuckle at male performers’ riders (my 
personal favourite was Iggy Pop’s, in which he allegedly demanded a “Bob Hope 
impersonator at every show”). But there is no negative term for them, or even 
any kickback. Carey, meanwhile, merely (and allegedly) demands 20 white kittens 
at each of her gigs and her talent is deemed secondary to, even compromised b,y 
her demands.

Pretty much all my favourite celebrity women have been described as divas – 
Diana Ross, Cher, Mary J Blige, Carey – because they’re awesome and they demand 
their due respect (and kittens). Divas act as necessary counterbalances in a 
world that sees anything other than self-deprecation or self-effacement in a 
woman as unnatural, ugly and laughable, and if I was the education secretary I 
would honestly put diva lessons on the school syllabus for girls. So you go get 
your inconvenience fee, Mariah. You’re worth it and God bless you for knowing 
it.
 