
As Germany went wild and celebrated winning the World Cup in Brazil two years 
ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
, one prominent supporter of the national team experienced a wider, darker ray 
of emotions in their moment of triumph. “When you see the team play so 
successfully, when you’re aware of the fantastic atmosphere, you feel the pain, 
too,” Mario Gomez admitted about watching the tournament on television. He then 
added: “But many games have been thrilling, and I was happy for the boys. It 
wasn’t too hard [for me] during the tournament because I’d had time to digest 
not being part of the team.”

Nobody had missed the tall centre-forward in Brazil. He had been injured for 
most of the 2013-14 season and performed poorly for Fiorentina in Serie A. 
Joachim Löw’sNationalmannschaft had moved on from playing with a recognised 
striker to a more fluid system with “false 9s” in the qualification campaign. 
Worse still, they had moved on from him, the truest No9 of his generation, 
after three tournaments of near misses, two of which were later blamed on Gomez 
not taking his chances in crucial games. “I was the scapegoat, I felt hard done 
by,” the 30-year-old told Tagesspiegel.

Italy’s tournament hold over Germany set for latest test at Euro 2016 | Rob 
Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/italy-germany-euro-2016> 
The former Bayern Munich president Uli Hoeness, too, had singled out the 
attacker in the wake of the club’s traumaticdefeat by Chelsea in the Champions 
League final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/19/bayern-munich-chelsea-champions-league-final>
 at the Allianz Arena in 2012. “Mario Gomez is a good striker,” Hoeness said. 
“If he was a very good striker, we would have won the game.” His place up front 
was taken by Croatia’s Mario Mandzukic as Bayern powered to a treble in the 
2012-13 season and the club unceremoniously offloaded him to Italy amid rumours 
of dressing-room tensions before the arrival of Pep Guardiola.

An urge to prove everyone wrong took the sensitive striker down a cul de sac 
of too much pressure, of trying too hard. His time as an elite striker seemed 
over altogether last summer, when he agreed, after much deliberation about the 
unstable political situation in Turkey, to move to Besiktas in the Turkish 
Super Lig, where plenty of former greats get paid huge salaries in exchange for 
toiling at the periphery of European football, off the radar. Last exit 
Istanbul: refuge of stars with broken dreams and derailed careers.

Gomez, however, made a promise to himself: it would be a new beginning, not 
the end. He was going to recalibrate, ignore the negativity, fall back in love 
with the game, score goals again, play forGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> again. “In July, I decided that 
my aim was to make it to the Euros and to win it with this team. Even if I only 
played three minutes or not at all.”

As early as September, he felt that the joy returned along with the fitness, 
and with it the born poacher’s sixth sense of where the ball was going to fall 
at his feet in the opposition box. Gomez netted 26 times to fire Besiktas to 
the championship and finish the campaign as Turkey’s leading goalscorer. After 
a 14-month absence, Löw recalled him for the ill-fated friendly against France 
in November, the night of the terror attacks in Paris.

Gomez did well in the 3-2 defeat by England in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
 but his chances to make the squad were then still rated low enough for Panini 
not to include him in their Euro 2016 sticker book. Even as theBundestrainer 
confirmed his place in the squad in May, the expectation in Germany was that 
Gomez was only being taken to France as a two-legged emergency measure, to be 
called upon in the unlikely event that Germany fell behind and had to divert 
from Löw’s aesthetically pleasing short-pass game to a more agricultural 
approach with a big man up top.

To the surprise of everyone, however, Gomez’s new-found, zen-like demeanour 
and “Tibetan calmness” (Frankfurter Rundschau) off the pitch has translated 
into strong showings, two goals, and seen him emerge as the unlikeliest of key 
players for Germany at these Euros. He’s a player “resurrected,” wrote 
Stuttgarter Zeitung about the former local hero, born to a Swabian mother and a 
Spanish immigrant father from the Andalusian mining village of Albuñán.

Gomez no longer looks as if he’s a hindrance to Germany’s fluidity, he has in 
fact enabled it in France, with intelligent movement. “You can play football 
with him,” Lothar Matthäus said, while his physical presence has been such that 
plenty of German reporters have penned odes to his “well-toned model athlete 
upper body” (Süddeutsche Zeitung).

“I’m happy with my game like never before,” he told the media, in four 
different languages, in the Lille mixed zone afterthe 3-0 win over Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/germany-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
 with a huge smile on his face. “I don’t measure my performances in goals any 
more, it’s more important that my team-mates see how hard I work for them.”

A win against Italy – Germany’s bogey team and the side who beat Gomez and his 
men2-1 in the Euro 2012 semi-final in Warsaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/28/euro-2012-italy-germany-semi-final>
, his last competitive international before this summer’s comeback – would 
bring him closer to fulfilling his own promise, and open the door to the 
happiest return of all. It will be his 31st birthday on 10 July, the day of the 
final.
 