
Having been away from these pages for a few weeks, I thought that when I came 
back I really ought to address a properly big question. So here we go: what are 
things?

You know, things? Pens and tomatoes and motorcycles and daffodils. And I don’t 
just mean objects: also chess and Valentine’s Day and ants and poetry and 
Somalia. They’re all things. TheObserver is a thing, but so is this particular 
issue of theObserver. But also, the individual copy of this particular issue of 
theObserver that you might be currently holding is a thing – and a different 
thing from the institution of the newspaper itself, or the concept of a day’s 
individual edition, but somehow linked. But then you might be reading this on a 
phone (a thing) or computer (a thing), either way via the medium (a thing? A 
person? A lady with a turban?) of theGuardian website (which is also a thing).

A spoon is just a very ineffective fork with a single blunted tine. A fork is 
only a spoon with annoying holes

I have a feeling I’m stumbling along a path already trodden by those more 
learned and with more time on their hands than I. I vaguely remember listening 
to an episode ofIn Our Time in which some hapless boffins had to explain all 
the knots Bertrand Russell had got himself into trying to prove that numbers 
were a thing, while Melvyn Bragg got so cross and bored you could actually hear 
his irritated glare.

So, things: it’s a broad church. Or they’re a broad church. And a broad church 
is, as well as a metaphor (itself a thing) for things, also a thing. Such as 
might have a magnificent tower or spire, perfect for bell-ringing. And the 
practice of bell-ringing is also, of course, a thing.

But what sort of thing? Now we’re getting down to it. Well it is not, 
currently, a sport. (A sport is a type of thing.) But Robert Lewis, editor of
The Ringing World <http://www.ringingworld.co.uk/>, says it should be. Because 
he thinks it is. I mean, he thinks it should be classified as a sport, which 
must surely mean he believes it already is one. He can’t think that the 
classification alone would be enough to make it one, like a fairy godmother’s 
wand. He’s not hitching mice to a pumpkin and calling himself princess.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fmartians-bells-cutlery-david-mitchell-bell-ringing-martian-comedy-golden-globes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7a202103c72684ad3bc5af96b708b3db4e4516e%2F0_0_2418_5804%2F2418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martians%2C%20bells%2C%20cutlery%E2%80%A6%20things%20are%20all%20relative%20when%20you%20think%20about%20it%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fmartians-bells-cutlery-david-mitchell-bell-ringing-martian-comedy-golden-globes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martians%2C%20bells%2C%20cutlery%E2%80%A6%20things%20are%20all%20relative%20when%20you%20think%20about%20it%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fmartians-bells-cutlery-david-mitchell-bell-ringing-martian-comedy-golden-globes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7a202103c72684ad3bc5af96b708b3db4e4516e%2F0_0_2418_5804%2F2418.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
“Ringing is… a healthy mental and physical workout,” Lewis says. “We would 
like many more people to have the opportunity to try it and identification as a 
sport could help achieve that.” I wonder why it would help. It would put me 
off. Because books about it would be in a different section of the library? 
Next to oldWisdens and the novelisation of Rocky? Funding probably, isn’t it. 
It’s always bloody funding. That’sdefinitely a thing.

Anyway, in this case the fairy godmother, or rather the organisation in charge 
of saying “It’s no good putting that in a pie, it’s got an axle”, isSport 
England <https://www.sportengland.org/>. It decides what’s a sport and recently 
told the game of bridge it wasn’t one because it didn’t entail a “physical 
activity”. It’s a lot stricter than Card Game England, which let in Twister on 
the basis that it’s “all played on a single large card”.

I reckon bell-ringing’s case is fairly persuasive. It’s clearly a physically 
strenuous activity that requires skill, and there are hotly, indeed sweatily, 
contested competitions between different bell-ringers. Shooting, darts, quoits, 
angling, yoga and ballooning are official sports, so why not?

The main reason is that its governing body, the Central Council of Church Bell 
Ringers <http://www.cccbr.org.uk/>, doesn’t want to apply: “The primary object 
of the council is to promote and foster the ringing of bells for Christian 
prayer, worship and celebration,” it said. “We enjoy and rely on an excellent 
relationship with various church bodies and we would not wish to risk 
prejudicing this.” What a weird difference of opinion among the campanologists. 
They don’t disagree over what bell-ringing involves, what they should all 
actually do – just over how the activity is classified.

This reminded me of the fuss surrounding the nomination of The Martian for 
best comedy at this year’s Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/18/judd-apatow-attack-hollywood-the-martian-golden-globes-critics-choice-awards>
, an award it then won. Many felt that, not only was the film not funny, 
something which wouldn’t necessarily make it stand out among comedies, but it 
wasn’t even meant to be. A post-structuralist might argue that the film-makers’ 
intentions were irrelevant. Others considered them cynical and accusedThe 
Martian’s producers of muscling in on the comparatively cushy comedy category 
in order to grab an easy award and add to the pre-Oscars buzz surrounding their 
film, without having to take on heavy hitters likeThe Revenant in the more 
competitive best self-important-three-hour-slog category.

But how could an unfunny film be judged the winner of the comedy category? I 
suppose the judges must have liked it better than the films with jokes. They 
can’t have thought it a better comedy, just a better film, a better thing. It’s 
like a bacon sandwich winning the “tastiest apple” award at a farm show. 
Comedies aren’t as easily defined as sandwiches and apples. I’m sure there’s 
some deliberate humour inThe Martian, so maybe that means it is a comedy. And 
the award, after all, is for best comedy, not funniest comedy. Maybe all that 
funny stuff in the other films made theHollywood Foreign Press Association 
<http://www.goldenglobes.com/about-hfpa-0> feel cheap.

Sign up to our Film Today email
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2016/feb/12/film-today-email-sign-up> 
But all of these problems stem from trying to divide things into meaningful 
groups: sports, calls to prayer, comedies, tragedies, films, YouTube clips. 
What is a call to prayer but a noisy sport without a scoring system? What is a 
drama but an unbelievably long comedy without any jokes? What is an awards 
ceremony but a strange and inefficient distribution system for vulgar 
knick-knacks? Well, some would say it’s a comedy, some a drama, some, what with 
all the getting up and down, a sport. And it’s certainly a call to prayer for 
many nominees.

A spoon is just a very ineffective fork with a single blunted tine. A fork is 
only a spoon with annoying holes that inhibit soup consumption. What is soup 
but a liquid mousse? And isn’t steak and chips just a very hearty, lumpy 
consommé? Or a hot and greasy weapon? Or a work of modern art? Or a weirdly 
meaty non-dairy cheese?

So does the big question I posed have an answer? No. But actually “No” is an 
answer. And a word. And a thing.
 