
I sometimes wonder what would happen in the absurdly unthinkable scenario that 
we’re left without a cooking show on our TV screens. Probably the end of known 
existence. There’s always been one. Even in the background of Da Vinci’s Last 
Supper, you can just about make out a team of aspiring chefs talking about how 
hard it was to put a unique twist on “bread for 13”.

There are so many culinary shows, jumping between channels makes me feel like 
a rather mundane superpower whose only skill is switching the identity of the 
chef that’s currently waxing lyrical about local produce. I now refer to my 
remote as The Chef Changer.

Sating our need for pornographic close-ups of soufflé – and unnervingly clear 
audio of critics wetly chewing their food – isMasterChef 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/masterchef/episodes 
http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/masterchef/season-7/episode-6> (Channel Ten), 
returning for its seventh season in Australia. Of all the shows that take 
“stuff on plates” as their premise, it’s probably my favourite. There’s less 
focus on building up unnecessary, and false, character rivalries to generate 
drama, leaving more time to focus on the cooking.

Thankfully, we don’t have to sit through footage of the contestants going 
shopping either (something which often made My Kitchen Rules seem like little 
more than choppy CCTV footage of Coles).MasterChef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masterchef> has its own supermarket 
in the studio, which the cooks hurtle towards in a high quality 
grabbing-frenzy. A note here: chefs make particularly fussy looters, so don’t 
pal up with them in a zombie apocalypse; there’s no time to look for shards of 
saffron, just grab the nearest tin of mushy peas!

Sunday’s episode featured the Mystery Box round, a feature made mysterious by 
the box rather than its contents, unless you consider a crab and a coconut 
mysterious (I suppose they would be if you found them on adjacent seats on a 
bus). As far as cooking shows go, it’s a good segment, allowing us to see the 
generation of 20 different dishes, most of them pretty impressive and none 
particularly predictable. I could only think of putting the crab in the 
coconut, thereby creating the world’s most horrifying Kinder Surprise.

After the Mystery Box was the Invention Test, which is sort of the same thing, 
to be honest, except that the key ingredient is revealed from under a cloche 
instead of a wooden box. Again, the end results were fascinating, but by this 
time I think I’d had enough of the TV competition tropes of ticking clock, 
mid-cook interviews with the chefs sure they weren’t going to make it, and the 
three judges pottering around muttering: “You’re not making that are you? Ooh, 
I wouldn’t do that.”

Okay, so the moments of judgement can be slightly grating. First, there’s that 
moist, masticating soundscape as the three critics gurn, grunt and slaver their 
way through the dish, accompanied by the metallic chimes of cutlery repeatedly 
clinking against plates. It sounds like a wildlife documentary of some starved 
lions gorging on the cast of Stomp.

There’s also George Calombaris’ slightly intense handshakes, reminiscent of 
the sort of fatalistic bonding sessions that occur between two soldiers before 
they go over the top. I’m convinced there’s something else going on as he grips 
the contestant’s hand: a mind meld perhaps, or the communication of his entire 
life story through his fiercely staring eyes. Bits of fat to be trimmed, then, 
but MasterChef is still far more rewarding than most of the alternatives.

And the award for worst promo goes to ...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsbs-mount-druitt-struggle-street-promo-video-doco&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430800668300%2FA-scene-from-Struggle-St-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Struggle%20Street%20reality%20TV%20series%20promo%20lands%20SBS%20in%20hot%20water%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsbs-mount-druitt-struggle-street-promo-video-doco>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Struggle%20Street%20reality%20TV%20series%20promo%20lands%20SBS%20in%20hot%20water%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsbs-mount-druitt-struggle-street-promo-video-doco&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430800668300%2FA-scene-from-Struggle-St-001.jpg>
What were the marketing team behind Struggle Street 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/433209411782/struggle-street-s1-ep1> 
(SBS) thinking? Having seenthe first episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/06/struggle-street-review-must-see-tv-undersold-by-sensationalism>
, I’m reassured this show might actually be a sympathetic and eye-opening 
glimpse into the lives of the disadvantaged (yes, even worse off than those on
the rather low income of $185,000 a year, Mr Abbott 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/really-mr-abbott-185k-not-especially-high-20150510-ggyeuh.html>
). Why then set the show up as if it were meant to appeal to viewers who want 
to do nothing more than have a good scoff at those less fortunate?

Ashley, for example, comes across as a loving father in the first episode, 
albeit one who struggles due to his various health concerns. But sure, plop him 
in the promo having a good fart. Guess what: everyone farts. On this basis, you 
could promote every single show that’s ever existed by showing someone having a 
good guff out the bum. “Tonight on Bondi Vet, Dr Chris Brown deals with an 
injured puppy ... [Prrrrrp] ... ooh, whoopsie!”
 