
Kerrie Young’s great yearning in life was to be a rock star. Instead, at 59 
years of age, she finds herself as a housewife in Brisbane with two adult 
children she adores but is confounded by. Her daughter, a Christian convert who 
is on a scholarship at university, does not “drink, smoke or have sex”, a 
puzzled Kerrie says. Her husband thinks Kerrie’s a redneck.

Young has been a lifelong Labor voter, but at the last election she cast her 
No 1 Senate vote for Pauline Hanson’s One Nation party. The future terrifies 
her.

She is dreadfully nervous about being interviewed as one of the people who 
voted for Hanson. She speaks quickly at the beginning, looking away and 
laughing defensively when making certain statements. But she thinks the issue 
is too important not to speak out about, to try to warn people, to hopefully be 
at the start of what will become a national conversation.


Pauline Hanson is back, and it's still just as hard to counter her rhetoric 
with facts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/10/pauline-hanson-is-back-and-its-still-just-as-hard-to-counter-her-rhetoric-with-facts>
“I don’t think there’s enough awareness of my generation having been told all 
our lives, paying taxes, paying into superannuation, you can retire, you can 
get in your bus and travel around, you can go on cruises or whatever, now all 
of a sudden – boom – you can’t. I want to know why,” she says.

 “My friend said retirement is not a right, retirement is a privilege and I 
can’t see that. If we have all paid our taxes, if our parents have paid their 
taxes, why are we sending the money overseas, why are we bringing in refugees 
who I read somewhere it cost $60,000 to each set up.

 “This is my money. This is our money.”

 With her hair in a neat braid, wearing glasses and a simple floral shirt, 
Young holds forth on all of her fears while sipping a chai latte in a suburban 
Brisbane shopping centre. Her retirement. Foreign investment. Immigration. 
Mining destroying arable farming lands. She is one of roughly 134,000 who gave 
Hanson a first preference vote in Queensland. The hundreds of thousands who 
cast votes for her One Nation party Australia-widedelivered four One Nation 
representatives into the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/australias-double-dissolution-election-backfires-badly-with-likely-senate-makeup>
with the chance to have a powerful influence in a chamber where the government 
has not got a majority. 


In the spirit of most dogmatic people Hanson has not let facts get in the way 
of her cause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/10/pauline-hanson-is-back-and-its-still-just-as-hard-to-counter-her-rhetoric-with-facts>
. She haswarned of Australia being swamped by Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-australia-in-danger-of-being-swamped-by-muslims-video>
 when they make up 2.2% of the population. In the 1990s Hanson’s focus was on 
Asians – so far she has not explained what happened to the supposed invasion of 
the 1990s. She has linked organised crime, welfare fraud, unemployment and the 
prison population to Muslims without producing data or evidence to back her 
claims.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83a92c07bd5865ad91dc28681cee0bf64c4a9c1f%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meeting%20Pauline%20Hanson's%20voters%3A%20silent%20screamers%20find%20their%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meeting%20Pauline%20Hanson%27s%20voters%3A%20silent%20screamers%20find%20their%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83a92c07bd5865ad91dc28681cee0bf64c4a9c1f%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Pauline Hanson delivers her maiden speech in the Senate on Wednesday. 
Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
Rising inequality, coupled with the ability to create communities of people 
who live tens of thousands kilometres apart through social media, has made a 
fertile patch for Hanson to flourish in.

Divided by geography, united by fear

Young is a housewife whose husband has dealt with health issues for many 
years, meaning periods where he has not been able to work.

Robyn McLaughlin is an amputee recovering from cancer.

Graham (not his real name) lost his livelihood when he was punched on a night 
out and acquired a brain injury that meant he was not allowed to work in his 
manual labour industry anymore.

Shirley’s daughter looked for work for years after finishing university while 
Shirley looked on helplessly until one day her daughter suggested they both 
kill themselves.

It’s very, very difficult these days to express anything without sounding 
racist or non-PC
Kerrie Young 
They live scattered across the country, from Western Australia to Newcastle to 
Townsville, but they all say almost the exact same thing when asked why they 
voted for Hanson. The economy. They are worried about their futures and 
terrified for their children’s. Where are they going to live? What jobs are 
they going to have? How are they going to survive?

Fuelled by posts on social media, particularly Facebook, they have discovered 
what they think the root of their problems is – foreign investment and asset 
sales. This segues into concern about immigration.

While Malcolm Turnbull has been talking innovation and Bill Shorten has been 
pitching to the middle class, those becoming poorer and feeling the class lines 
shifting under their feet, have had just one person listening to them. They 
don’t just read Hanson’s Facebook page, they are talking to her. She is talking 
to them. Hanson responds to multiple comments every day, reassuring people who 
are upset about particular policies and situations, arguing with people who 
disagree with her and seemingly taking them into her confidence (“I don’t 
handle compliments very well”) while her fans tell her they are concerned about 
immigration, politician wages (“cut them across the board to the average 
Australian’s wages”) or offering Hanson advice (“I notice you get quite 
flustered when you are upset or angry, try mindfulness breathing”).

Or they just talk to her as they would any of their other mates on Facebook. 
“Good job getting the tea in without looking, really good technique.”

 Young has befriended people as part of the community and has had Hanson 
respond personally to her messages and comments. Young’s political beliefs are 
a patchwork that don’t follow the conventional patterns – she does not really 
care about marriage equality either way, is passionate about the environment, 
suspicious of immigration and upset by foreign investment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb232714f6a3896857e79cdb6ef87789b27d044e8%2F0_0_4096_2747%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meeting%20Pauline%20Hanson's%20voters%3A%20silent%20screamers%20find%20their%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meeting%20Pauline%20Hanson%27s%20voters%3A%20silent%20screamers%20find%20their%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb232714f6a3896857e79cdb6ef87789b27d044e8%2F0_0_4096_2747%2F4096.jpg>
 Pauline Hanson jokingly hides behind one of her campaign signs, surrounded by 
supporters, during her election-night function in Ipswich, west of Brisbane. 
Photograph: Dan Peled/EPA 
She seems slightly surprised at how her life has turned out and will often 
start ruminating on that while answering questions about policy. At one stage 
while talking about Indigenous Australians she diverts and reveals she has seen 
my Facebook profile. “I looked at your wedding photos, you looked so beautiful 
and happy, I hope you never lose that fresh loveliness, but you will. Nobody 
gets out of here without a bit of pain.”

Hanson’s One Nation has been Young’s personal middle ground between parties 
that have let her down. She will not vote Greens as she does not think they 
talk about the environment enough and she will not vote Nationals because she 
thinks they don’t believe in climate change. She has never voted Liberal and 
she is appalled by Labor’s behaviour over the past six years and does not think 
there is any talent there anyway.

“The rot set in when they all ganged up on Kevin Rudd, everybody I know says 
Kevin Rudd is a real prick, blah blah blah, if you can’t work with him maybe 
it’s your problem? Truly brilliant people are really hard to for normal people 
to deal with, look at Paul Keating. Everyone thought he was an asshole too, but 
he is brilliant.”

 Young thinks Australia does not have the resources to support many more 
people and there should be a temporary stop to immigration, as well as an 
examination of the welfare system. When it comes to these issues, her angst 
could almost belifted directly from Hanson’s maiden speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-first-speech-senate-calls-for-immigration-ban>
.

All the businesses are gone, car manufacturing is gone, sugar is gone, 
everything’s gone for that little bit of money
Shirley 
 “The ones who are working are getting taxed more and more to pay for the 
people who aren’t working, it’s just untenable, it’s not possible to keep going 
that way. It’s like if you get a fish tank and they’ve got too many fish in it, 
they start eating each other. That’s what happens,” she says.

 “It’s very, very difficult these days to express anything without sounding 
racist or non-PC. I wouldn’t hurt anybody, I don’t care what you do in your own 
time, I honestly believe there is a section out there who stop any intelligent 
debate by throwing these ‘vile racist bigot’ comments around. Is there a way to 
express disapproval of certain value systems and certain belief systems without 
sounding racist? Is there a way of doing it? Or do you just have to wear it? 
I’ve been called that, my friend that I walk with every day calls me her 
redneck friend. And I say to her ‘are you aware that this happens in Islam? Do 
you understand what Eid is?’”

‘We’re selling Australia’

Young is also called a redneck by her husband and the mocking by people close 
to her is common to other Hanson voters. Further north on the Sunshine Coast 
Shirley talks in a granny flat she is housesitting.


 Shirley’s daughter does not know that she votes Hanson (“I would never tell 
her, she supports Muslims”) and Shirley is careful before she tells friends, 
sounding them out first to see if they already agree with her on other issues.

 As she welcomes me at the door she tells me she has been researching my name 
and knows it is Lebanese. “Is your father a Muslim?” she asks narrowing her 
eyes. To her small comfort the family were Maronite Christian when they arrived 
in Australia.

 “[Hanson is] interested in what I’m interested in which is the selling of 
Australia, I don’t mind foreign investment but our land is going, if you go to 
another country you can’t buy the land … Australia is just too open,” she says.

Pauline Hanson emerges as the queen of a potentially unruly Senate | Katharine 
Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/04/pauline-hanson-emerges-as-the-queen-of-a-potentially-unruly-senate>
A short and talkative woman who cheerfully describes herself as fat, Shirley 
is 66 and retired. She has lived in Cairns and Sydney before settling on the 
Sunshine Coast and voted Labor until she switched to One Nation at the last 
election. She is also a Sri Lankan immigrant.

 “I got out of Sydney because people thought I was Muslim, and I get Muslim 
men looking at me, I started to feel treated differently, in shops people 
weren’t serving me,” she says.

 “I got this in Cairns in the 70s … I remember getting an ice cream for my 
little girl, who’s really white, can’t go in the sun … they could see me, it 
was packed this ice cream shop, all these people were behind me, these girls 
were serving everyone in the shop except for me.

“I got really sick of it, I said really loud ‘Am I too short? Am I too black 
for you to serve me?’ It happened so many times in Cairns, it really did. We 
were classed as Aboriginal, we were treated as Aboriginal, which was not very 
nice.

 “There’s still racism here, I feel it I know it and I don’t care.”

 So does she have any empathy for how Muslim people, and Aboriginal people, 
may feel about Hanson and her comments? She concedes Hanson “came across as 
racist” in the 1990s in the way she spoke about Aboriginal people but what 
Hanson really wanted was equality for all, not for one group (Indigenous 
people) to be treated differently from other Australians by getting certain 
welfare payments.

It’s about time Australians stood ground for their own country
Graham 
“She said you’re gonna lose Australia, Australia is going to be lost, and all 
these yeas later she’s absolutely right, we’re selling Australia. It’s OK to 
have foreign investments, but all the businesses are gone, car manufacturing is 
gone, sugar is gone, everything’s gone for that little bit of money, they’ve 
sold it,” she says.

 “They’re sending everything offshore where it’s cheaper, so it’s not 
Australians getting employed, the mining, they’re employing people on 457 
visas, I think it’s the worst thing ever, that loophole.”

 Shirley’s primary concern is foreign investment but while others want to ban 
all immigration as an extension of that, or loathe Muslims, she is more tepid. 
She tells a story of being glared at by a woman in a headscarf to illustrate 
her point about some of them not being trustworthy.

“Stop the people from coming at the moment, but they’re not all bad, I know 
some good ones, and they agree, because they say ‘we don’t know who’s coming 
in’, they consider themselves Australian. They don’t want sharia law, these are 
Muslims talking to me, the average Australian does not want it, they’re too 
scared to say anything,” she says.

“I’m not a politician, I’m not an accountant, I’m not anybody who knows 
anything but I see stuff and think ‘that doesn’t look right to me’, the average 
Joe Blow feels things more than they actually understand or know, they feel 
things, they know stuff.”

Hardship, hard yards and grievance unheeded

Most of Hanson’s supporters do just “know stuff”. A lot of their news, like 
most people’s, comes from Facebook. But theirs is dissected by rightwing blogs 
and sites. Their world view is reinforced on pages such as Hanson’s and their 
own invitation-only private groups with more than 10,000 people congregating on 
one.

Comprehending Pauline is not the challenge. Engaging constructively with 
Hansonism is | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/comprehending-pauline-is-not-the-challenge-engaging-constructively-with-hansonism-is>
 They are mostly older than 50, mostly live in regional areas, and have not 
had easy lives. Their grievances, real and imagined, make up the bedrock of 
their politics. For a long time they have not felt voiceless, but that they 
have been screaming and nobody is listening to them.

They are driven by their own circumstance, the greater good and other people 
do not really factor into it. It’s about what they have lost, what’s slipped 
through their fingers, what their children are going to miss out on. They don’t 
have the luxury of worrying about other people.

 In Newcastle, Robyn McLaughlin is recovering from chemotherapy after being 
diagnosed with cancer while getting treatment related to her amputated right 
leg. She has long been faithful to the minor parties and voted for Hanson in 
the 1990s, for much the same reasons that she votes for her now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc2909c189a38e78ac09506306d4e250c0b865ff%2F0_0_5376_3024%2F5376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meeting%20Pauline%20Hanson's%20voters%3A%20silent%20screamers%20find%20their%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meeting%20Pauline%20Hanson%27s%20voters%3A%20silent%20screamers%20find%20their%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmeeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc2909c189a38e78ac09506306d4e250c0b865ff%2F0_0_5376_3024%2F5376.jpg>
 Hanson speaks at a rally against Islam in Brisbane in April 2015. Photograph: 
Jamie McKinnell/AAP 
 “Bringing all these so-called refugees into the country there’s no 
infrastructure to support what we’ve got here, it’s already been drained. I’m a 
baby boomer, I’ve worked all my life, I’ve done the hard yards, I’ve paid taxes 
and yet because I’ve saved money and been taught to be sensible for a rainy day 
I can’t even get a disability pension, it’s quite unfair. Myself aside, there’s 
pensioners, veterans, kids on street and all this is being ignored and we’re 
bringing in all these people, they don’t want to integrate,” she says.

 The 67-year-old is a dyed-in-the-wool Hanson supporter who she says she pays 
extra to go to a butcher that uses a halal free abattoir and that the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement “fits nicely into the global governance 
that the UN is pushing”.

 Graham is another who, having taken body blow after body blow throughout his 
life, is easily convinced of the existence of villains and Hanson is happy to 
supply them. Graham suffered an acquired brain injury after being punched in 
2001 and though he has recovered his speech and motor skills he is not allowed 
to work in the maritime industry. After, as he puts it, being followed by the 
black dog for a number of years, he is rebuilding his life in Western 
Australia. But he is worried. He is worried about how he is going to keep 
finding work, he is worried about his daughters on the other side of the 
country in Victoria, he is worried he could get hit again, he is worried about 
what could happen next, and he is worried about Muslims.

 “Primary schools are going visiting mosques, that’s trying to encourage kids 
and speaking about their religion, and then when you see their side of Islam 
and what they do actually believe in is pretty disgusting. Such as against the 
females, they are not being able to wear a bikini, they see someone wearing a 
pair of shorts and they think they have the right to rape them,” he says.

It’s just so much easier to call her a racist bigot rather than actually think 
about something and do something
Kerrie Young 
 “It’s totally wrong. They turned their religion into a violent religion. It’s 
about time Australians stood ground for their own country, my grandfather and 
great uncles didn’t go to war to let other societies into our country to change 
our religion and the way we live our free life.

 “I worry about my kids and their kids, putting all these mosques around 
Australia. All of a sudden they will be putting their votes in and they won’t 
allow our Anzacs to sell or pledge their poppies or raise concerns.”

 Graham is strident in his political beliefs but does not want his full name 
printed like many other Hanson supporters. They say they don’t feel ashamed 
voting for Hanson but most have people very close to them who do not know how 
they vote.

 They see the election of Hanson as a final stand, one of their very last 
chances to be heard, a slight possibility that maybe the future will be OK. 
They feel Hanson understands them, and to many Hanson voters, what they feel is 
crucial.

Back in the suburban shopping centre Young sighs and looks past the shoulder 
of the person sitting next to her when she talks about the reaction to her 
choice to vote for Hanson.

“People immediately, many people, the minute you mention Pauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> roll their eyes and 
call her a racist or a yobbo, or that stupid woman … she’s xenophobic.

Pauline Hanson's maiden speech to the Australian Senate – full text
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/pauline-hansons-maiden-speech-to-the-australian-senate-full-text>
“No, she’s someone who feels something [but] who wasn’t educated enough to 
know the big words, that’s all. I really believe her heart is in the right 
place and what she’s trying to say, is very, very pertinent to how we should be 
thinking bout the future but it’s just so much easier to call her a racist 
bigot rather than actually think about something and do something about 
something that is going to affect you and your children.”

Hanson’s views are inflammatory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/politicians-and-muslim-leaders-condemn-hanson-she-doesnt-know-what-shes-talking-about>
, divisive and simplistic. But while her supporters’ views can be out of step 
with mainstream Australia, they constitute a growing minority that needs to be 
acknowledged. Labor and Liberal parties have had falling primary votes since 
the early 1990s and at the most recent election One Nation recorded a higher 
primary vote in Queensland than the Greens. Justcondemning Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/politicians-and-muslim-leaders-condemn-hanson-she-doesnt-know-what-shes-talking-about>
 is not enough; there is an argument to be properly explained and won. The 
people who vote for Hanson, mostly from increasingly marginalised communities, 
are ignored at the country’s peril.
 