
Late-night radio has a kind of romance about it. We think of the DJ. A single 
light in a darkened studio. A lone voice into a microphone, musing, wondering, 
complaining, banging on. Riffing on obscurities, posing questions and unpicking 
answers. Perhaps playing a few choice tunes. But mostly talking, because 
talking is what’s needed in the middle of the night. Talking, and someone 
listening to what’s being said. Although what’s often special about late-night 
programmes is that it’s the presenter who is doing the listening, the listener, 
calling in, who speaks.

There are a number of stations with a strong tradition of good late-night 
shows: LBC, BBC Radio London, TalkSport, XFM (nowRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> X). Most big cities will have at 
least one, local, post-10pm programme that attempts to connect with an 
insomniac audience. But if you listen really late at night – after midnight – 
you’ll find far fewer specialist late-night broadcasts than there were even 15 
years ago. Budget cuts mean that local BBC stations can’t afford to employ 
presenters, producers or engineers between the hours of 1am and 5am. Instead, 
they broadcast 5 Live or the World Service, or run repeats of programmes that 
have already been broadcast during the day. Commercial radio often runs shows 
across the entire network, rather than ones made especially by regional teams. 
You have to pay people to make them want to give up their sleep.

Late-night programmes can seem almost private. Show hosts will reveal more of 
themselves

The internet, too, has changed things. Scheduling is less important than it 
used to be: a show can be put out in the UK at night, but listened to 
simultaneously by people in North America or Japan during their daytime.

You can catch up with a programme at a time that suits you. Often people 
choose to listen to podcasts at night. Certain podcasts seem to be made for the 
small hours, such asLove + Radio <http://loveandradio.org/> and the longer-form 
interview shows.Resonance FM <https://www.resonancefm.com/>’s esoteric 
broadcasts seem peculiarly designed for after sunset, though almost all of them 
also go out during daylight hours. (Sleeping Dogs Lie is an exception: 
“presented” by Miguel Santos, who doesn’t speak, just plays purely ambient 
music, designed to get you to sleep.)

Audiophile Ed Baxter runs Resonance FM. He says that daytime listening is 
“half-listening”; we’re multitasking, checking into a radio programme while 
doing something more important. But as night closes in, we stop doing so much. 
“You’re lying in bed, concentrating on the sound, the intimate nature of the 
source material,” he says. “Whether or not you feel you’re being directly 
addressed, it’s always a bit like eavesdropping.”

Daytime presenting is a tame beast compared to its night-time counterpart. 
During the day, shows are geared around the hour, the half-hour; guests are 
vetted professionals; producers check details. Everything and everyone is on a 
tight rein. Breakfast shows, especially. Think of theToday programme, of any 
news-based breakfast show, the feeling that we listeners are being broadcast 
at, rather than to. There’s a kind of pomp about such shows: if you visit them 
in real life, they are heavily populated by producers, experts, speakers. Busy, 
busy, busy. But with a night-time show, there is often only the presenter in 
the studio, and one other person manning the phones. Sometimes the presenter is 
completely alone.

No wonder there’s more intimacy at night-time. Late-night programmes can seem 
almost private. Show hosts will reveal more of themselves. Callers will tell 
all. We’re into the lonely hours. “There’s a vertigo of urban loneliness that 
late-night radio addresses,” says Baxter. And the-late night phone-in, 
especially, seems to help. Regular callers become semi-celebrities, and speech 
becomes more free, less monitored. You don’t have to have broad knowledge about 
a topic; you can just phone in because you’re happy or sad or angry and want to 
tell someone (everyone) about it. We’re listening.

Many late-night shows have a pool of devoted followers: taxi drivers, factory 
workers, bakers, breastfeeding mums. They develop a relationship with their 
chosen show, whether or not they ever call in or make themselves known. As with 
podcasts, late-night radio is often listened to on headphones, as people work, 
or lie awake in bed, staring at the ceiling. The sound of a voice in your ear, 
telling a sad or dramatic story. Perhaps just being silly, teasing someone else 
for being daft. Or sympathetic, helping another human through a crisis.

And the weirdest thing about listening to radio at this time of night? The 
constant pull of your mind towards sleep. Gradually, music and speech morph 
into ambient noise. There’s a point when you’ve stopped paying attention to 
what’s actually being broadcast and instead you float in the sounds. Late-night 
radio might start off shouty or clever or crass, but it often lives most 
vividly on the threshold of our consciousness, looping in and out of our minds, 
a living dream.

Iain Lee: ‘It’s for the lost, lonely, battered’

Late Nights With Iain Lee, TalkRadio, 10pm-1am, Mon-Fri
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F164f4b7670a62cda01c5590fa81ea35993027fa1%2F0_0_6609_4768%2F6609.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20late-night%20radio%20DJs%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20like%20a%20confession%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20priest%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20late-night%20radio%20DJs%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20like%20a%20confession%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20priest%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F164f4b7670a62cda01c5590fa81ea35993027fa1%2F0_0_6609_4768%2F6609.jpg>
 Iain Lee at his desk in the TalkRadio studio: ‘I could be mean-spirited. I’m 
more kind now.’ Photograph: Sonja Horsman for the Observer 
There aren’t the shows there used to be: there’s nowhere for the weirdos and 
freaks to call in, the fruitcakes phoning up with their dead nan sitting at the 
end of their bed. When Ian Collins was on LBC [he still is], me and Mackenzie 
Crook would get pissed and we would phone him up. One time, there was this guy 
who had auditioned to be Ronan Keating onStars in Your Eyes, and he phoned up 
all upset because they hadn’t picked him, they’d picked a different Ronan 
Keating. So I called in and said, I’m the Ronan Keating that was picked, I’m 
the winning Ronan Keating. And there was me and this guy arguing about who was 
the best Ronan Keating for about half an hour. Ian Collins let us get on with 
it. It ended up with us having a sing-off. He sang a Ronan Keating song and 
then I said, listen to this, and sang a Ronan Keating song. And Ian Collins 
just said, well that’s obviously much better, even though I was terrible. 
It was a joy.

Everyone’s welcome on my show. I want to hear real people. I don’t want the 
competent, the media-savvy
Iain Lee 
My long-term plan used to be to get a late-night show on 5 Live but I did two 
overnight shifts and they were soul-destroying. I’d turned the act down to zero 
and they told me there was still too much personality in it. It broke my heart, 
to be honest. They had a guest on, a fitness expert, at 3 o’clock in the 
morning, and I said: “That guy’s awful, why do you use him?” And they said: 
“Oh, it fills an hour…”

My show is from 10pm until 1am and about halfway through we lose the daytime 
listeners and callers, and get the people on the fringes. I would say losers, 
because I’m a loser, but it sounds bad. Everyone’s welcome on my show. I want 
to hear real people having proper phone chats. I don’t want the competent, the 
media-savvy. There’s a real trend for radio presenters to say: “Can I just 
bring you back to the question please?” Whatever question they have, for the 
hour. I don’t want that. I hate it.

I asked for the slot I have on TalkRadio. I could have done breakfast or 
drive, but I didn’t want that structure, the news, travel, the focus. When I do 
the show, I turn all the lights off. It’s for the insomniacs, the people 
driving, working all night in factories. It feels different, it’s a different 
vibe. I do try and create that. It’s about allowing people to stay on for as 
long as they want, as long as they’re interesting. If someone comes on with 
horrible views, I’ll engage with them, explain why saying that is wrong and 
it’s bad, be slightly combative.

I used to love Tommy Boyd, Clive Bull, Mike Dickin. I’ve taken stuff from them 
and from other people. Who do I like now? I sometimes listen to thetwo Mikes 
<http://talksport.com/the-two-mikes> [Graham and Parry] on TalkSport even 
though I hate football; they do make me laugh. I quite like Cristo [Foufas] on 
LBC through the night, he’s not afraid to have an argument.

I give callers a lot of breathing room. We have regulars, perhaps more than 
most, because we’re not a big show. I like the sense of community. Alan Caddick 
phones every day. The other night, we had a human moment. I said: “You don’t 
sound yourself, Alan, are you OK?” And he said: “My mum’s ill, she’s gone into 
hospital.” And my mum has just been in hospital, so we had a moment. When I was 
on LBC, I used to take the piss out of callers; I could be a bit mean-spirited. 
I’m more kind now. We have Nigel from Maidstone, he’s legendary, this old guy 
who is obsessed with Miley Cyrus and Lindsay Lohan and he comes on and sing 
songs, and if he sings too loud, his mum will come and tell him to shut up.

With regulars, it’s a story developing over a period of years. We’re a drop-in 
centre for the lost, lonely and emotionally battered. Not experts, with 
well-thought-out reasons. It’s more like chatting at the bus stop or at a 
coffee shop, which is what I like to do anyway.

Hattie Pearson: ‘I might be the only voice my listeners hear at work’

Radio X, 1-4am, Mon-Fri
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98af4830c79674563efad1bd85441f8330bc74cd%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20late-night%20radio%20DJs%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20like%20a%20confession%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20priest%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20late-night%20radio%20DJs%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20like%20a%20confession%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20priest%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98af4830c79674563efad1bd85441f8330bc74cd%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 ‘There’s nobody in the studio with me’: Hattie Pearson at Radio X. Photograph: 
Gary Calton for the Observer 
It’s like any radio job – you have to think about the audience you’re talking 
to.Radio X <http://www.radiox.co.uk>’s audience at that time are coming back 
from a night out. Or they’re ambulance drivers, cabbies, hospital cleaners, 
working on the tubes, bakers, milkmen, farmers... An interesting crowd.

At breakfast or other daytime shows, people listen for 20 minutes. But with my 
show <http://www.radiox.co.uk/radio/hattie-pearson/>, people are listening for 
a long time; they’re probably with you for your whole shift, so you’re able to 
take the listener on more of a journey. You can take your time over being 
creative. Someone might tweet me at 1am, saying hi, and then again when I clock 
off at 4am, saying, thanks, chat to you tomorrow. You don’t get that with many 
other shows. We’re a secret gang. There’s Phil the baker, Sammy the ambulance 
driver...

With talk radio, phone-in radio, you might want to engage people by having a 
debate, getting them agitated enough to call in, but with me it’s more about 
what do I want to share? I might talk about going to gigs at the weekend, 
sharing my experiences of that, talking around music in a way that’s relevant 
to people listening. My show isn’t a specialist show, it’s play-listed – I get 
what I’m given when it comes to music – but I think about the music we play, 
how I can engage with that. There’s a different vibe. You can get away with a 
more eclectic mix. There’s a flexibility at night – you can push boundaries a 
bit more. You’re naturally more relaxed and in your own groove as a presenter 
at night. You’re in control.

Social media is instantaneous, so you’re able to engage more because there’s 
no boss there… I mention people on air, I reply to tweets. There’s less volume, 
everyone feels more involved and valued, and I do too. Everyone knows it’s 
weird to be up at that time. I might be the only voice they hear at work.

I don’t have a producer in the studio with me. I work in Manchester, and 
there’s nobody there with me. I unlock the door, deactivate the alarm and let 
myself in, and then, when I’ve finished, I set the alarm and go out. I don’t 
see anyone. Sometimes, when I come over to do the odd show during the day, or 
some work, I’m like, oh my God, there are people in the office!

I get to bed at 5am and I’m up at lunchtime. I used to do 3-7am at the 
weekends and I found it a lot tougher. You lose your weekend completely. I like 
working at this time. I get there an hour and a half before the show, and in 
the afternoons I walk the dog, go to the gym, I have meetings. The only thing 
is I get that Sunday feeling really early, at Sunday lunchtime. But I get 
Friday afternoons. Friday’s like a day off for me. I actually think my slot is 
one of the best.

Pete Price: ‘I often go mad with people, I’ll cut them off’

Late Night City, Radio City Talk Liverpool, 10pm-1am, Sun-Thurs
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F884853361e8c7d6380b2d9f6ffab3647a595ee0f%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20late-night%20radio%20DJs%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20like%20a%20confession%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20priest%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20late-night%20radio%20DJs%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20like%20a%20confession%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20priest%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F884853361e8c7d6380b2d9f6ffab3647a595ee0f%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 Pete Price: ‘I was a standup for years, so I can go with the flow, I can argue 
back. I often go mad with people.’ Photograph: Gary Calton for the Observer 
It makes me laugh when people say we don’t have free speech in this country. 
I’ve travelled a lot for work, and when you’ve been to other places in the 
world, you really know how much freedom we have here. I always say: “You have 
free speech, use it! Call up, say what’s on your mind!”

I’ve had a lot of radio shows in my time. I had a feature in a show that was a 
dating feature, called Evening Encounters – one of the first ones ever on 
radio. People would call up looking for love. There was one guy who called in 
from the Wirral, he loved his gnomes. “I’ve got 45 of them,” he said. “I love 
every single one of them. Love me, love my gnomes.” Anyway, I asked him to tell 
the listeners what he looked like. “I’m five foot,” he said. And I said: “Don’t 
tell me you’ve got a little red hat and a fishing rod!” and he put the phone 
down on me. We carried on, and I talked to the next caller. She said: “That 
last guy. Do you think he was gnome-osexual?” That’s what I love about radio.

I was a standup for years, so I can go with the flow, I can argue back. I 
often go mad with people, I’ll cut them off. Late-night talk radio is like a 
confessional and I’m the priest.

I’m gay, I’m adopted, my mum died, I’ve had struggles in life, I’ve been 
through every pain you have except for childbirth. And I’ll talk about it all. 
I’ll talk about anything on air. Except football. I hate the way football’s 
changed, how it’s about money now and not passion. And the way it divides 
people, how abusive they get.

I think about the show all day. It’s all planned, but when the mic goes live, 
anything can happen. We’ll have questions and interviewees. I know a lot of 
celebs: my autobiography is calledPete Price: Namedropper. I’ll just call them 
up and have a chat. Sharon Osborne is a mate, Paul O’Grady will often call if 
he’s in Liverpool. He’ll be feeding the lambs and think, I must ring Pricey. We 
have the “peaceful hour” at midnight, but if something breaks on the news, then 
we have to react. We have to go with it.

I know what the show can mean to people because they tell me. Sometimes it’s 
overwhelming, like with the James Bulger case. People phoning in, saying: “I 
think I saw them when I was on the bus, I saw them walking along the street, I 
could have stopped them, I can’t live with myself.”

I once walked out in the middle of a show in 2004 because a young lad called 
Michael phoned in saying he was going to kill himself. He was 12. Off air, I 
said to him: “If I come and see you, would you stop what you’re gonna do?” And 
he said: “You’d never come.” And I said: “I would.” And I left the studio and I 
drove to his road. I said to my producer, I’ve got to go, you can’t stop me. I 
called the police on the way, because I didn’t know if it was a set-up – I’m a 
known gay man, he was 12. I saw him and got him in the car. I was driving him 
to the hospital and one of the police rang to see if he was all right. So I 
picked up his call and Michael said: “You know it’s illegal to talk on the 
phone while you’re driving!” I went, “I’ve just saved your life, you little 
shit!”

You can get your problems off your chest, you don’t have to go to bed with 
them, you can speak to me instead
Pete Price 
Social media has made phone-ins more difficult. Some people don’t call because 
they can tweet or text instead. I don’t like texting on my phone. It drives me 
mad, but we tweet during the show. There’s only me and my producer, we don’t 
have a big team. People are lazy and it takes two seconds to tweet. When we 
ring them back to have a chat, they get impatient even though we’re paying for 
the call. No one wants to wait.

There was one lady who called, a bit ago. Her husband died and she was 
distraught. I talked to her and made her get one of his suits from the wardrobe 
and sleep next to it. And the next day I got the most beautiful bouquet of 
flowers from her daughters, and a note saying that I’d saved her life the night 
before.

To anyone reading this, I would say, please don’t waste your opportunity to 
call in. We are the luckiest people alive, in this country. You can get your 
problems off your chest, you can talk about them, you don’t have to go to bed 
with them, you can speak to me instead, share it, whether it’s political, 
medical, anything. Talk to me. I can’t emphasise it enough, we are so lucky to 
have freedom of speech. Look at Turkey! We’re so lucky and we shouldn’t take it 
for granted. It’s the most incredible tool.

Dotun Adebayo: ‘I’m happy to give out my personal phone number’

Up All Night, BBC Radio 5 Live, 1-5am, Thurs-Sun
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd333447e6ead463e0c8f9851b634b892ac19bcdc%2F0_368_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20late-night%20radio%20DJs%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20like%20a%20confession%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20priest%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20late-night%20radio%20DJs%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20like%20a%20confession%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20priest%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Flate-night-radio-djs-confession-priest-iain-lee-hattie-pearson-pete-price-dotun-adebayo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd333447e6ead463e0c8f9851b634b892ac19bcdc%2F0_368_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Dotun Adebayo: ‘Our priority is news.’ Photograph: BBC/Jon Super 
I’m the default late-night listen, which means we can’t realistically just 
feature ranting and raving callers. If you’re not watching telly, then we’re 
what you’re listening to for breaking stories, and we never forget that. The 
World Service is more on an international scale, we’re the national news. We’re 
the first point of call, the messenger, we have to get the message across.

So our priority is news. We do a world football phone-in on a Friday night and 
we had to abandon it for two weeks running because of atrocities: first Nice, 
then Turkey. We have fans all over the world and some of them got it, and some 
didn’t. We got lots of: “We’ve got to suffer because of something we can’t 
control.”

We embrace some of that call conversation. I’m happy to give out my personal 
phone number to certain callers. The other week, I was talking about my 
daughter’s English A-level. She studiedMacbeth and I said to her: “Any question 
aboutMacbeth can be answered with this: it’s an argument between existentialism 
and determinism. Is Macbeth ruled by fate or is he the maker of his own 
destiny? Does he have to follow what’s determined in advance?” Anyway, we got a 
lot of texts about it, and they carried on after the programme ended. I replied 
to them from my phone by text, because I think if you’ve taken the trouble to 
think about the topic and send in a question, then you’re part of my extended 
family.

I’m a Londoner through and through, but I have to live in Manchester for the 
show, so I live in the rear end of Salford in a £90-a-week flat. A one-bedroom 
place. I’m half-Mancunian now. There’s a gym at the bottom of my tower block 
and I go after the show for two hours.

When I started the late-night show, when it was still in London, I thought it 
was the perfect opportunity. I had two young children and I’d come in to 5 Live 
every night after they went to bed. I come in at 9pm to go on for 1am and then 
I got home by 5.30am to see them get up. They never missed me. But now they’re 
older, and so am I, and emotionally it’s much more difficult.

When I started there was a production team of five; now it’s a team of two, a 
senior producer and a broadcast journalist as well as me. You can only do that 
job if you’re a really excellent journalist. You’re forced to react, to respond 
in the middle of the night to a press conference from Barack Obama that you 
thought was a five-minute thing on the economy and turns out to be him 
announcing: “We have shot dead Osama bin Laden.” You have to find commentators 
from all over the world in the middle of the night.

Social media has totally changed the job. The traditional advantage that radio 
has over TV, that we can be more immediate, that we can be on air in 30 
seconds… well, social media is even more immediate. We can be more in-depth 
than 140 characters, though. Also, for my other show, a black-interest 
programme on BBC London. The other day we had five guests booked on the subject 
of Black Lives Matter and not one could make it. All five dropped out with 
hours to spare. So we went on Twitter and tweeted people who had been tweeting 
about Black Lives Matter and five people got back and we used three of them. We 
got new voices.

A late-night programme is a unique form of radio. There’s no one anywhere in 
the country that does what we do. One in five people listening at that time of 
night are listening to me. We might not get the same figures as breakfast 
shows, but in terms of market share, we’re the boss.
 