
It’s lunchtime and the Lemon Twigs – brothers Michael and Brian D’Addario, 17 
and 19 respectively – have just got up: someone from their record company had 
to go and wake them in order to bring them to the interview. They are 
bleary-eyed, and barely dressed, at least compared to the way they appear in 
photographs – they’re not wearing anything made of satin and there’s no hint of 
makeup – but, it has to be said, they still look pretty remarkable. Michael has 
turned up resplendent in a pair of half-mast flared jeans and a tight, 
midriff-baring T-shirt, his hair in the kind oflavishly be-mulletted feather 
cut that Rod Stewart used to sport when he was still in the Faces 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1821523/rod-stewart-announces-faces-reunion-show/news/>
. That’s quite a look you’ve got there, I say.

He frowns: “It’s just jeans and a T-shirt.”

Oh, come off it, you look like one of the Bay City Rollers. No one turns up to 
an interview in 2016 dressed like one of the Bay City Rollers by accident.

“We could wear sweatpants and stuff, but it wouldn’t be as exciting, I don’t 
think,” Michael shrugs. “I used to dress up more onstage, but then I just kind 
of took out all of the parts of my wardrobe that I really didn’t care about too 
much. It was like: ‘OK, this is how I’m dressing now.’ Now it’s hard for me to 
justify wearing something boring, because once you start, it’s, like, weird.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLncJE2otRVA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLncJE2otRVA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLncJE2otRVA&media=>
 Click here to watch the Lemon Twigs’ video for These Words. 
If you get famous when you’re 12, you’d hate everything you did by the time 
you were 16. It would be traumatic
Brian D'Addario 
Nevertheless, as the duo concede, the way they look – not to mention Michael’s 
onstage penchant for high-kicks, of which more later – has clearly attracted 
attention. In the space of a year, they’ve gone from playing New York’s bars to 
signing a record deal with 4AD and have received praise from everyone from 60s 
psych heroesthe Zombies 
<https://twitter.com/thelemontwigs/status/780861089445736448> to Questlove of 
the Roots. However, the fevered nature of that attention has led to their music 
– a heady, lavishly rococo brand of powerpop, bearing the influence ofHarry 
Nilsson <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/sep/13/artsfeatures1>, Todd 
Rundgren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/may/01/todd-rundgren-interview>, the 
Beatles and Broadway showtunes – being dismissed in some quarters as the work 
of hipster dilettantes. Some people who normally take artists inspired by 
revered figures such as Nilsson, Rundgren and Big Star very seriously indeed 
can’t seem to get past how the Lemon Twigs look, assuming they’re some kind of 
knowing joke.

“Fuck ’em,” Michael says.

“If I have to look like a lumberjack for people to care, then I don’t care,” 
nods Brian.

For a duo so young, they have a remarkably long and intriguing backstory. 
Seemingly unbothered by rock’s long history of brothers who attempt to make 
music together, only to fall out spectacularly in the end – “We can say the 
worst shit to each other and when it’s over it’s just done; there’s no 
underlying awkwardness because we’re brothers,” suggests Brian – they started 
writing music “when we were pre-teens”, working through a variety of musical 
phases, many of themlovingly documented by their dad 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/MisterRD/videos>, also a musician, and still 
available for all the world to see on YouTube.

There was a brief, pre-pubescent flirtation with rapping (“I love guitar, Jimi 
Hendrix and the Who / Rocking out is what I like to do 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i-nCX3wNT4Y>”); a period when Michael dabbled 
in “Nirvana rip-off songs” while his brother knocked out Beatles-inspired 
material; a time when they made electronica. And there wasMOTP 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0p1m7x9G-c4>, or Members of the Press, a 
psychedelically inclined hard-rock outfit, inspired in equal parts by Syd 
Barrett-era Pink Floyd and a kids’ TV show on Nickelodeon calledThe Naked 
Brothers Band <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j2RhJE4gtoI>, about – guess 
what? – an internationally famous rock band formed by tweenage brothers. “We 
wanted to be like a cool kid band,” says Brian. “Like, people would go not: 
‘Those kids play well for kids,’ but, ‘That’s a really good band, but they’re 
also really young.’ But I don’t think that’s possible. If you get famous when 
you’re 12, you’d hate everything you did by the time you were 16. It would be 
traumatic, you’d have an awful life, probably.”

They also enjoyed a period as child actors in films and on TV and stage. 
Michael starred alongside Michelle Pfeiffer and Olivia Wilde in the 2012 movie
People Like Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/people-like-us-review>: again, if 
you look on YouTube, you can find a clip of him being quizzed on the red carpet 
at the premiere <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q7FbSbvu3Ms>, looking 
distinctly nonplussed and telling the interviewer he actually wants to be a 
musician. “We’d get stuff because other people really wanted stuff and we 
didn’t,” says Brian, who winningly describes his time performing in Les 
Misérables on Broadway as “just singing really loud”. “When we were little 
kids, we got jobs because we didn’t really want to do it in general, we wanted 
to do music. And most little kid actors would be very, very ‘on’ all the time – 
like, overly friendly and stuff – so when someone walks in and acts like they 
don’t care, they stand out. And we didn’t care.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQ4nqnVOfMo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQ4nqnVOfMo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQ4nqnVOfMo&media=>
 Click here to see the Lemon Twigs’ new video for As Long as We’re Together. 
High kicks are just about the only thing you can do if you’re playing a guitar 
while you’re singing
Michael D'Addario 
Eventually, the duo’s voices broke, the acting jobs stopped coming and they 
formed the Lemon Twigs, initially playing “modern psychedelia, like MGMT and 
the Flaming Lips”. They put out a tape and were taken under the wing of 
Jonathan Rado, one half of Californian psych-pop duo Foxygen; their first gig 
was at a street fair near their home in Long Island and their second was 
supporting Foxygen at New York’s 1,500-capacity Webster Hall. They found their 
sound gradually inclining toward the lushly melodic music in their dad’s record 
collection, and their shows neatly dividing in two: Brian sings the first half, 
consisting of his songs, Michael emerging from behind the drum kit to sing his 
songs for the second half. Michael’s stage presence in that second half has 
become increasingly augmented by his way with a high kick, which seem to appear 
during his performances with a startling frequency, not just one or two per 
song, but sometimes reaching a couple of dozen: “I’m not as good of a guitar 
player as he is and I get too insecure if I’m not moving enough, and, I mean, 
kicks are just about the only thing you can do if you’re playing a guitar while 
you’re singing,” he says.

Perhaps their lengthy musical history, with its attendant trying on of 
different musical incarnations for size, explains why their debut album, Do 
Hollywood, sounds remarkably assured. It arrives positively teeming with 
melodies and ideas: the songs constantly shifting and changing as they go, as 
if the duo are trying to cram everything in. They’ve talked about trying to 
pare things back a bit, they say, but with the best will in the world that idea 
doesn’t sound like it’s going too well: the follow-up is already written and is 
apparently rock opera-ish.

“When it gets heavier, it gets heavier, when it gets sweet and musical-ish, 
it’s more sweet and musical-ish, and there’s more of an influence from 
classical music,” says Brian.

“It’s just that we have a lot of ideas and get too attached to them and we 
wouldn’t want to cut them,” he continues. “But I like that we did that on this 
record, because … ”

“Nobody’s going to get bored,” offers his brother, from beneath that lavishly 
be-mulletted feather cut.
 