
It has been no surprise that women are among those keening over Donald Trump’s 
election victory. But they are also using the result as a platform for protest.
Alison Segel <http://www.alisonsegel.com/> is an activist and writer who 
started compiling a post-election zine – Forever Nasty – for aggrieved women in 
an attempt to galvanise them. The submissions were myriad, including fan art of
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, prose, 
poetry and, finally, a screenshot of a definition of how “femininity” is used 
in the Merriam-Webster dictionary. It read: “She managed to become a female CEO 
without sacrificing her femininity.”

Horrified, Segel tweeted the screenshot with the thinking-face emoji. The 
tweet found its way back to Merriam-Webster’s lexicographer, Peter Sokolowski, 
and shortly afterwards, the company changed it. Segel was thrilled – and 
surprised. “I wanted to create a dialogue and was not looking or expecting to 
get the definition altered.” The new definition? “The quality or nature of the 
female sex.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmeet-woman-changed-dictionary-definition-femininity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21acb5b87e6bc0af82ae2d4070f00645e6b26367%2F0_0_634_729%2F634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20woman%20who%20changed%20the%20dictionary%20definition%20of%20%E2%80%98femininity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmeet-woman-changed-dictionary-definition-femininity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20woman%20who%20changed%20the%20dictionary%20definition%20of%20%E2%80%98femininity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmeet-woman-changed-dictionary-definition-femininity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21acb5b87e6bc0af82ae2d4070f00645e6b26367%2F0_0_634_729%2F634.jpg>
 Writer and activist Alison Segel. Photograph: Twitter 
Even so, a cursory Google suggests this problematic definition isn’t unique to 
Merriam-Webster.The Oxford Living Dictionaries 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/femininity> says: “She celebrates 
her femininity by wearing makeup and high heels.”The Cambridge Online dictionary
 <http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/feminine>? “Long hair was 
traditionally regarded as a sign of femininity.” And hats off to the online
Macmillan dictionary 
<http://www.macmillandictionary.com/dictionary/british/femininity> for 
suggesting: “Qualities that are considered to be typical of women, for example, 
the quality of being gentle and delicate.”

You might argue that to quibble with this definition is to quibble with the 
definition of “femininity” as a social and cultural construct. Marx once said: 
“The ideas of the ruling class are, in every epoch, the ruling ideas.” But the 
change suggests these dialogues – and the people who start them – have some 
gravitas. And that identity politics is very much back in the public sphere. “I 
think that traditional gender constructs are changing,” explains Segel. “What 
makes someone stereotypically male or female doesn’t really exist any more.” 
Segel’s zine, which is still in compilation stage, remains focused on 
“solution” and changing people’s minds, rather than aggression – and redefining 
“femininity” certainly points towards progress. Whatever authority a dictionary 
definition might have, Segel proved women have the power to change it.
 