


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443199503653%2F406d21b6-dcba-4fea-8bbe-ee0d8f317860-2060x1640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Turner%20prize%20shortlist%2C%20from%20the%20musician%20to%20the%20mind-reader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Turner%20prize%20shortlist%2C%20from%20the%20musician%20to%20the%20mind-reader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443199503653%2F406d21b6-dcba-4fea-8bbe-ee0d8f317860-2060x1640.jpeg>
 Granby Four Streets 2014 - Greenhouse view by Assemble, part of their work on 
a Liverpool housing terrace Photograph: Assemble/Tate Britain/PA 
Assemble

When Tate Britain director Penelope Curtis called Assemble 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/> to inform them they had been shortlisted for the 
Turner prize, whoever answered the phone didn’t know who she was – and anyway, 
they were too busy getting on with their work to talk to her. When the message 
finally got through, far from jumping with joy at having achieved the pinnacle 
of their artistic careers while still in their mid-20s, the 18-strong 
architecture collective sat down and had a serious discussion about whether 
they should accept the accolade at all.

“We were concerned that the community housing project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/may/12/assemble-turner-prize-2015-wildcard-how-the-young-architecture-crew-assemble-rocked-the-art-world>
 we are working on in Liverpool would suddenly be seen as ‘art’,” says Lewis 
Jones, momentarily downing tools on the building site in Toxteth where the 
group is busy transforming a street of long-vacant terraced houses into 
affordable homes for a community land trust. “We decided we would only accept 
the nomination if we could use it as a platform to actually help move the 
project forward – and it’s really given it a boost.”
Beyond being flooded with phone calls offering commissions for everything from 
a house extension to a luxury hotel (none of which they have had the capacity 
to take on), the Turner prize limelight has boosted fundraising to help 
renovate further houses in the street,five of which have been completed so far, 
now let out at social rent <http://www.granby4streetsclt.co.uk/>.

Assemble recently established the Granby Workshop 
<http://granbyworkshop.co.uk/> in the area, a social enterprise to train local 
young people to make furnishings for the new homes – from sculptural fireplaces 
to ornamental ceiling roses and doorknobs – products that are likely to loom 
large in their installation at the forthcoming Turner show atTramway in Glasgow 
<http://www.tramway.org/turner-prize/Pages/default.aspx>.

“We didn’t want to just use the exhibition to tell the story,” says Fran 
Edgerley, who has been co-leading the project in Liverpool with Jones. “We’re 
trying to use it as an opportunity for visitors to be able to play a part in 
supporting the ongoing rebuilding of the neighbourhood.” By the sound of it, 
gallery-goers might well be able to walk away with their very own little piece 
of Toxteth.

The group’s work in Liverpool is the most substantial project they have 
embarked on since they came together five years ago, as a bunch of recent 
graduates, to build a temporary cinema in an abandoned petrol station in east 
London. One pop-up led to another, and they attracted the attentions of the 
Olympic legacy team, who soon arranged for Assemble to occupy an abandoned 
warehouse in Stratford, east London – now reborn as their HQ,Sugarhouse Studios 
<http://sugarhousestudios.co.uk/>.

It is a thrilling workshop, bursting with tools, models and full-size 
prototypes, with chunks of “paper-crete” lying next to fragments of 
“rubble-dash”, just two of the intriguing hybrid materials the group have 
invented for their recent projects, including temporary theatres, touring 
exhibitions and anew town square in Croydon 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=7>. None of them has yet had time to even 
fully qualify as an architect, but that hasn’t proved much of an obstacle. They 
are currently working a £2m permanentgallery for Goldsmiths 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=944>, a group of artist’s studios in west 
London <http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=885>and a community garden 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/?page_id=1195> for an estate in Poplar.

So has the Turner prize <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/turnerprize> 
nomination changed them?

“There hasn’t really been time for a huge amount of soul-searching,” says 
Jones. “We’ve been mostly just getting on with it.” And, with that, he and 
Edgerley both get back to building – there are five more houses to finish, 
never mind the opening of the Turner show.


Oliver Wainwright, architecture critic
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443199257298%2F3fa8df6e-32d0-4819-9afc-c2d82f9ffe9e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Turner%20prize%20shortlist%2C%20from%20the%20musician%20to%20the%20mind-reader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Turner%20prize%20shortlist%2C%20from%20the%20musician%20to%20the%20mind-reader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443199257298%2F3fa8df6e-32d0-4819-9afc-c2d82f9ffe9e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Untitled Chairs, from Infrastruktur by Nicole Wermers. Photograph: Herald 
Street, London/Tate Britain/PA 
Nicole Wermers

When I first see the fur-coated chairs of Nicole Wermers’s Infrastruktur, it’s 
hard not to imagine that a model hasn’t just left the set of a high-fashion 
shoot to have her lipstick touched up off camera. Such is my fashion-addled 
brain that I start to narrativise the scene – who is the model? She must be 
fierce; I wouldn’t dare move that fur coat; is itAnna Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/06/anna-wintour-who-is-the-real>
’s?

But for the German-born, London-based artist this is all wrong, and she tells 
me as much quite firmly. The installation is not about fashion. Rather it’s 
about appropriating space in an urban environment. “I wanted to take a fleeting 
observation that anyone can make every day in a restaurant – people put their 
jacket on the back of a chair in order to claim them, to turn public property 
into their own private space.”


In fact the coat could never be moved even had I dared. It’s sewn on to the 
chair so that it becomes a part of it. “I wanted to make this temporary 
occurrence a permanent feature of the chair,” Wermers explains. So the point 
isn’t just to mimic the gesture but to turn it into something else. This idea 
is echoed elsewhere in Infrastruktur. She has madeceramics based on the 
temporary signs <http://www.heraldst.com/infrastruktur/> put up on lampposts 
for missing cats with detachable phone numbers.


In Untitled Chairs the lining of each fur coat (sourced from eBay) is removed 
and replaced with a silk that tones beautifully with the newly upholstered seat 
on versions of Marcel Breuer’s Cesca chair. The artist shows me two that are 
mid-construction. The hemline is hanging a little too near to the floor on one 
(a proportion issue I can relate to) but it will be fixed when the backrest is 
raised.


In fashion, fur symbolises status. But the 44-year-old artist is clear that 
her work isn’t about power and class. “Fur isn’t always associated with luxury. 
You haven’t looked properly: a couple of them cost the staggering amount of 
£40!” What fur signifies for Wermers is a strong physical presence (“It’s a 
dead animal at the end of the day”) which in turn gives off an invisible 
forcefield – an idea the artist has long been interested in.

The play between the fur and the tubular steel feels very glossy interiors 
magazine to me. Wermers describes the fabric combination as a “well-rehearsed 
conversation” in modernist design, citingEileen Gray’s E-1027 house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jun/30/eileen-gray-e1027-corbusier-review>
. So I’m not totally wrong there. But I am well off the mark to picture models 
slinging furs around. Wermers’s work isn’t concerned with relationships between 
people who have left the scene. Hence the chairs are placed at an unnatural 
90-degree angle to each other, more furniture shop than cafe. “For a second the 
chairs were almost named after Fassbinder actresses, but that would have 
emphasised narrative. And I really wanted to emphasise infrastructure.”

Imogen Fox, fashion editor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443199160274%2Ff938e4f6-ae38-456c-8850-46146c594128-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Turner%20prize%20shortlist%2C%20from%20the%20musician%20to%20the%20mind-reader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Turner%20prize%20shortlist%2C%20from%20the%20musician%20to%20the%20mind-reader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443199160274%2Ff938e4f6-ae38-456c-8850-46146c594128-1020x612.jpeg>
 A Zener card from Bonnie Camplin’s The Military-Industrial Complex. 
Photograph: Tate 
Bonnie Camplin

Bonnie Camplin is sitting on a stool in the kitchen of her flat holding up a 
Zener card with the symbol facing towards her. The cards – which bear pictures 
of waves, squares, circles or plus signs – are used to conduct experiments in 
extrasensory perception. Camplin furrows her brow and closes her eyes. I’ve to 
guess what card she’s holding. “When you get it right,” she asks, “what is your 
mind doing? What is my mind doing?”


Camplin believes in ESP <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sHN2kngOtk4> even 
though she knows most people do not. Why shouldn’t someone be able to tune into 
the thoughts of another? Scientists have plenty of reasons why not. And when an 
experiment suggests someone aced an ESP test, there is always another 
explanation: the test was run badly, the result was a fluke, someone cheated. 
No one read anybody else’s mind. On that, most people tend to agree.

Camplin was shortlisted for the Turner prize for the Military-Industrial 
Complex, a study-type room arranged to explore the idea of “consensus reality”. 
How does a society arrive at common beliefs? And what is lost when ideas become 
marginalised?

On the wall is a sheet displaying five Zener cards. Elsewhere are images taken 
from the psychology department at Goldsmith’s University in London, where 
Camplin lectures in fine art. In those, a baby wears a hairnet of electrodes: 
an attempt by scientists to read infant brainwaves. The experiment looks 
eminently sensible: in our society, after all, science is regarded as an 
authority.

And there are good reasons why. Scientists build models of reality by 
proposing theories and testing them to destruction. It is about finding 
patterns in data that are corroborated by others until the chances of them 
being false are minuscule.

Camplin wants to embrace a more uncertain reality. Science – and other 
institutions, education included – have a constricting and standardising 
effect, she says. They make reality too rigid. “Making laws is a demand for 
certainty. In nature there are no laws, only habits. The demand for certainty 
gives us a calcified reality.”

Patterns flow through Camplin’s work. The artwork features the 1968 book 
Towards a Poor Theatre, byJerzy Grotowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/jan/20/guardianobituaries>. The 
innovative Polish director based his theatre lab on the Danish institute 
founded byNiels Bohr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2015/jun/03/niels-bohr-life-behind-the-physics>
, a leading figure in quantum theory, which so embraces uncertainty that it 
says two objects can exist in two places at once. Bohr was smuggled out of 
Denmark to avoid Nazi arrest in 1943, and became involved in the Allied atom 
bomb project, an example of the iron triangle of legislature, armed forces and 
military firms that became the Military-Industrial Complex.

A dozen or so books and articles lie on a table. Among them are five 
testimonials from people with fantastic stories. One tells of meeting with 
extradimensional beings, of travelling to Mars, of watching galactic wars rage. 
So does another. And so does the next. There is a pattern here: the individuals 
share a subjective reality. They corroborate each other. They have reached 
their own consensus reality.

“The proposition,” says Camplin, “is that I am open to the truth of these 
testimonies. Does that mean I’m mad? I’m not trying to get a message across. 
It’s about a dialogue. I don’t see art as a mouthpiece for my opinions.”

Ian Sample, science editor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443199084966%2Fd53ea926-8ff4-4c73-9a05-6220ae17b27b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Turner%20prize%20shortlist%2C%20from%20the%20musician%20to%20the%20mind-reader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Turner%20prize%20shortlist%2C%20from%20the%20musician%20to%20the%20mind-reader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fturner-prize-2015-artist-interviews-assemble-nicole-wermers-bonnie-camplin-janice-kerbel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443199084966%2Fd53ea926-8ff4-4c73-9a05-6220ae17b27b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Janice Kerbel’s Doug is performed in the Mitchell Library, Glasgow. 
Photograph: Tate 
Janice Kerbel

Doug is a 25-minute, nine-movement work for six singers that has been 
performed in its complete form precisely once, at Glasgow’s Mitchell Library. 
There was no public recording, nor does Janice Kerbel intend one. When I meet 
the Canadian-born artist, she’s not yet sure how to present the piece for the
Turner prize exhibition 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tramway/exhibition/turner-prize-2015>: what 
will the visual representation of Doug become in the Tate’s galleries, apart 
from a handful of performances from the same team who gave its premiere?

In contrast to the classical music world’s obsession with trying to find 
visual expression, Doug is stark in its simplicity. The six singers wear the 
austere black mufti of the contemporary music ensemble, they stand behind their 
music stands, the conductor raises his hands, and they sing the notes printed 
on the scores in front of them. Kerbel, it seems, is consciously making a 
musical composition in Doug, not trying to make a hybrid of sound-art 
experimentalism, nor to splice new music and new visuals in some hipsterish 
fusion.

“The work is entirely about how it sounds,” she says. That rigour is precisely 
the point. “Music was a completely unfamiliar language to me when I started 
work on Doug. And it’s important for me to be obedient to an existing language, 
to inhabit the form very strictly and very rigorously.” So much so that she 
tells me she’s the proud conqueror of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools 
of Music’s grade 3 theory exam. “I was the only person older than about 14 
sitting in my row in some huge hall near Westminster.”

She’s delighted with the “distinction” she was awarded, but says ta little 
knowledge is a dangerous thing: “When you start out knowing nothing at all, 
you’re not limited by not knowing what you don’t know. Now I know a little 
more, I probably couldn’t write another piece of music.”

In composing Doug, Kerbel was approaching the arcane languages of music, its 
notation, its performance culture and its rituals, with the perspective and 
insight of the outsider. That’s an approach she’s used before: writing the 
commentary for a fictional baseball game inBallgame (Innings 1-3) 
<http://www.greengrassi.com/Artists?aid=13&eid=19>, creating a new language 
solely through lighting effects in Kill the Workers 
<http://www.chisenhale.org.uk/archive/exhibitions/index.php?id=117>, and 
inventing aholiday resort, real in every palm tree and coral reef in its online 
representation <http://www.bird-island.com/> and its offers to prospective 
honeymooners and luxury travellers – apart from the tiny detail that the island 
doesn’t actually exist.

Which all poses the question: why did Doug have to be a piece of music at all? 
“I knew I wanted to write a work for voice,” says Kerbel. “There are these nine 
accidents that happen to Doug, and I needed an ensemble of voices to embody 
them, because no single human voice could encompass the range.”

Ah yes, the accidents. Kerbel’s text in Doug tells of a series of remarkably 
unfortunate events to which the protagonist falls victim (an early version of 
the Doug project summed him up: “I knew this guy once named Doug. Man, did he 
have some luck”). These include a bear attack, a massive object falling out of 
the sky on to his head, a lightning strike, a long drawn-out asphyxiation, a 
slip, a drowning; all written in poems of wildly differing size, shape, tone 
and verse. Why is it called Doug? Because of that joke, she says. “What do you 
call a man with a spade on his head? Doug.”

The idea of the accident runs through her work. “For Doug, I looked at 
physical comedy, cartoons. I have a kid and I’m always trying to stop him from 
having an accident. So the idea was on my mind.”


Kerbel was assisted by composers Philip Venables <http://philipvenables.com/> 
andLaurie Bamon 
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/index.php/young_musicians/ym_programme/biographies/bamon>
, and the conductorGeorge Chambers <https://twitter.com/geocham>, who taught 
her to use the Sibelius music-sequencing program, and suggested how best to 
realise her ideas about the shapes, sounds, and dramas of her accident-prone 
antihero. She shows me the stages of her composition: graphs of note names and 
vocal register, scrolls of paper that mark her multidimensional attempts to fix 
and choreograph Doug’s accidents through the languages and mechanics of musical 
time from boxes of her own musical handwriting notation, too big for 
conventional music paper, to the finished score, as polished and 
finessed-looking as any product of contemporary notated music.

The resulting work was hailed by the few who heard it as a piece that could 
stand alongside other new vocal compositions, but Kerbel is less sure of Doug’s 
next stage of life. “Doug was clearly produced for a specific context, and it 
is in this context that I can best try to understand it.”

I’m one of the lucky ones who has been granted access to a private recording 
of Doug. What it reveals to me is that Kerbel’s work creates an imaginative 
space that does something more than simply depict the accidents that befall the 
hapless Doug. Instead each piece (even the climatic Slip, which sets the 
haiku-like “Heel on peel / To seal the deal. Feet to sky / Life slips by” in a 
single moment of vocal slippage) dramatises its accident and turns it into a 
musical object. In other words, Kerbel is doing what any real composer does, 
manipulating the stuff of musical time through her handling of the space of 
musical notation. In that sense, composers have always been artists. Perhaps 
the Turner should be open to all of them next year?

Tom Service, classical music writer
 