
Dating shows have been the form of TV in which it has been hardest to make a 
lasting match. The long marriage between ITV and Cilla Black in Blind Date was 
pretty much a singleton, until it was recently joined in union with Take Me Out 
and First Dates.

But there’s a new suitor from tomorrow night in Meet the Parents, hosted by 
Holly Willoughby, who is being asked to go up against Strictly Come Dancing. As 
an idea, Meet the Parents marries Blind Date (studio contestant picks potential 
mate from three possibilities) with First Dates (the matched pair go on a meal 
in a restaurant customised by the TV company). But the twist is that there is 
an intermediary: it is three sets of parents, or sometimes other relatives, who 
answer questions from the hopeful romantic on behalf of the prospective dates. 
The folks also secretly watch the winners’ dinner from behind a screen.

It’s a shock this idea has not been tried before, though you strongly suspect 
it was dreamed up at a wedding. The grownups flirt inappropriately with the 
young chooser, and there is a wedding-speech feel to the sequences in which the 
adults bring up embarrassing childhood anecdotes or photos. During these 
moments, the trio of would-be dates, confined to a “den” in the corner, squeal 
or hide behind the sofa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5229257b458c56a268f52a144e5e12b50881805d%2F0_381_6697_4017%2F6697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Parents%3A%20the%20dating%20show%20that's%20a%20masterclass%20in%20inappropriate%20flirting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Parents%3A%20the%20dating%20show%20that%27s%20a%20masterclass%20in%20inappropriate%20flirting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5229257b458c56a268f52a144e5e12b50881805d%2F0_381_6697_4017%2F6697.jpg>
 This idea must have been dreamed up at a wedding … Meet the Parents. 
Photograph: ITV 
The movie Meet the Parents involves a family called the Fockers and, in the TV 
equivalent, the tension comes from how likely contestants are to end up 
focking. After their first dinner, the couple is sent to a photobooth, where 
physical interaction is encouraged. (A similar device is used in Channel 4’s 
most recent contribution The Lie Detective – in which contestants answer 
questions about love and sex while wired to a polygraph – by trapping couples 
in a lift with hidden cameras.)

In that respect, Meet the Parents and The Lie Detective could be sealed in a 
time capsule to show defining aspects of 21st-century life. Asked to read a 
question from a card – “What is your son’s best feature?”, or “If your penis 
were a movie title, what would it be?” – everyone always starts with the word 
“So”, although it surely isn’t written down. And tattoos are almost as 
ubiquitous as public displays of affection: presenters hug contestants, couples 
hold hands at all times, and other body parts at others.

Naked attraction: the apocalyptic rise of nude dating shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/25/naked-attraction-the-apocalyptic-rise-of-nude-dating-shows>
This ease of talking about and displaying physicality marks the biggest shift 
in the 30 years from Blind Date to Meet the Parents. Dating shows have been 
relatively rare for two reasons. For years, broadcasters were nervous of any 
suggestion that they were encouraging the public to have sex. Cilla Black 
always claimed to have been told that her selection to presentBlind Date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/04/how-we-made-blind-date-cilla-black-alan-boyd-laurie-holloway>
 was due to being so “sexless” as to be a fire-blanket on the show’s 
implications.

At the BBC, such inhibitions remain to the extent that, even many decades 
after the death of its severe Presbyterian founder Lord Reith, the BBC has 
scarcely ever flirted with hook-up shows, except for last year’s Sexy Beasts, a 
completely barking concept in which participants sniffed each other while 
disguised as creatures from nature or myth.

Commercial TV’s increasing liberation from regulation means that ITV and 
Channel 4 have enthusiastically embraced date-and-mate shows. Indeed, C4 
currently has a body of work in this genre that stretches to a foursome, with 
First Dates and The Lie Detective joined by The Undateables (since 2012) and 
this summer’s Naked Attraction.

Naked Attraction, in which compatibility was judged from exposed flesh 
including genitals, showed how unzipped the genre has become since Cilla was 
employed to stop moral knickers twisting. But new ethical and moral concerns 
have arisen. The Undateables – a soul-mate show for those who have faced 
rejection for physical or psychological reasons – faced accusations of 
insensitivity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd404ddd18c8c9320ffad700d46fe1d801b24b6%2F0_52_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Parents%3A%20the%20dating%20show%20that's%20a%20masterclass%20in%20inappropriate%20flirting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Parents%3A%20the%20dating%20show%20that%27s%20a%20masterclass%20in%20inappropriate%20flirting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd404ddd18c8c9320ffad700d46fe1d801b24b6%2F0_52_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
 Compatibility judged by genitals … Naked Attraction. Photograph: Ken 
McKay/Channel 4 
However, any programme that sends strangers off together raises issues of duty 
of care: a number of matchups on Take Me Out have been abandoned after 
contestants misrepresented their identities or backgrounds. And in a culture 
marked by greater fluidity of sexual identity, the makeup of the dating pool 
becomes a serious question for producers.

Take Me Out, built on the idea of one man picking from several women, 
continues to promote a circa-1950s view of romance, although presenter Paddy 
McGuinness has expressed the desire to present a gay version. Meanwhile, First 
Dates and The Lie Detective have featured all of the relationships that could 
lead to marriage in modern Britain, although The Undateables remains 
contentiously separatist. In a move perhaps aiming to compensate for the 
singularity of Take Me Out, ITV tells me that an episode of Meet the Parents 
features a man choosing from three men.

With dating TV now so popular, the question, as in all relationships, is how 
far it might go. Commissioners will be desperate for new suggestions and, 
although most permutations have now been tried, there must be others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F404b96700fb669c2b5dba8c2f7c3073eb3df8095%2F0_52_2864_1718%2F2864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Parents%3A%20the%20dating%20show%20that's%20a%20masterclass%20in%20inappropriate%20flirting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Parents%3A%20the%20dating%20show%20that%27s%20a%20masterclass%20in%20inappropriate%20flirting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmeet-the-parents-the-dating-show-thats-a-masterclass-in-inappropriate-flirting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F404b96700fb669c2b5dba8c2f7c3073eb3df8095%2F0_52_2864_1718%2F2864.jpg>
 The ‘sexless’ matchmaker … we’ve come a long way since Cilla Black. 
Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
The metaphor in Blind Date has already been made more literal in Dating in the 
Dark, where the people eating in a restaurant don’t know who they’re meeting 
until the lights go on. But perhaps Dating in the Dark could be given a 
Shakespearean twist in Masked Balls, with face-obscured contestants at a 
Venetian dance (bringing a useful slice of the Strictly Come Dancing vibe) not 
knowing until the end whether they are dancing with a man, woman or, if they go 
really Bardic, the twin from whom they were separated in a shipwreck.

With one segment of society still barred from marriage, how about Meet the 
Bishop, a matchmaking show for gay Church of England worshippers and clerics, 
in which the winning couple can live together but agree not to have sex?

And a burst of nostalgia for the 1960s might yet result in Car Keys, in which 
contestants throw their fobs in a bowl and have to get off with whoever’s they 
pick out, although the obvious sources of sponsorship and advertising – car 
manufacturers – might take some persuasion to see it as a vehicle for them.

Meet the Parents starts tomorrow at 7pm on ITV. 
 