
By the end of this decade it may be too late to limit global warming to 
scientifically guided limits, if the infrastructure built in the next four 
years is constructed along the same lines as currently planned.


Building high-carbon infrastructure – from transport systems predicated on 
motor car use, to new coal-fired power plants, and buildings that leak energy – 
effectively “locks in” a future ofgreenhouse gas emissions that are likely to 
far exceed the planet’s capacity to absorb carbon. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/the-world-passes-400ppm-carbon-dioxide-threshold-permanently>

Though such factors have been the subject of numerous scientific studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/nov/09/fossil-fuel-infrastructure-climate-change>
 in the past decade, countries have been slow to take the implications on board.

The latest warning comes from the C40 group <http://www.c40.org/> of mayors 
and city authorities that have signed up to their own limits on carbon and 
actions to combat climate change and reduce its impacts, often independently of 
their national or federal governments.

In a new report, entitled Deadline 2020, published on Tuesday and co-authored 
by the engineering firm Arup, they suggest that the next four years to the end 
of 2020 will be crucial in determining whether the world is able to limit 
warming to no more than 2C above pre-industrial levels –as called for in the 
Paris agreement signed by world governments last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
 – or busts that goal, with unpredictable and potentially irreversible effects 
on climate change.
Paris explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=e0baea36-2bf8-4f56-8f46-ef7c35de261b>
Actions and regulations introduced by cities are increasingly seen as an 
important alternative to the national targets and measures that have been the 
main feature of international climate change negotiations, culminating in the 
Paris agreement. While national governments may be reluctant to make sweeping 
changes or new regulations, many mayors and local authorities in large cities, 
in both the developed and developing world, have sufficient autonomy to set 
their own path.

Such initiatives are seen as having particular potential in the US, where the 
president-electDonald Trump has vowed to “cancel” the Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
, but where the political leaders of many large cities are using their powers 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, for instance through improvements to public 
transport and new regulations on energy.

The authors of the report calculate that city leaders acting alone could 
deliver roughly half of the carbon savings required to meet the Paris agreement 
goals. But there is much to do. Megacities, for instance, defined as those with 
more than 10 million inhabitants, must reduce their carbon emissions from about 
5 tonnes per capita per year at present to less than 3 tonnes within the next 
decade or so.

About $375bn (£301bn) will be required globally by the end of the current 
decade to meet the goals, the report found, though some of this expenditure may 
already be included in planned city budgets.

 