
Melania Trump appears to have spent the entire US election as a sort of 
anti-Michelle Obama – whatever she does, however hard she tries. Not that she’s 
been that visible – her husband has mainlyput his daughter, Ivanka, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/21/ivanka-trump-speech-republican-convention-women-gender-pay-mothers>
 in the first lady spot on his campaigning chain-gang. When Melania has been 
thrust into the spotlight, it’s been to do a manifestly sub-par nerve-racked 
turn, before scurrying back into the shadows, amidaccusations (at the mildest) 
of speech-plagiarism. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/melania-trump-republican-convention-plagiarism-michelle-obama>

Now Melania has made another so-so speech (keeping to the relatively safe 
topic ofchildhood bullying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/melania-trump-cyberbullying-campaign-speech>
). There have also been further allegations about Melaniaworking as a model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/melania-trump-was-paid-modeling-before-work-visa-records-show#img-1>
 before officially obtaining her US work visa. Does it matter? Of course it 
does (it makes a mockery of her husband’s relentless anti-immigrant rhetoric). 
Another question could be: does Melania matter? After all this time, does she 
even exist as a legitimate separate entity outside of her husband’s swirling 
toxic orbit?

Throughout the Trump campaign, Melania has been simultaneously defined and 
eclipsed by her husband, which, considering his well-documented views on women, 
probably suits him just fine. With a man like Trump (an ego driven by a sonic 
blast of narcissistic personality disorder), it makes a weird kind of sense 
that his daughter (his issue, his blood) is given pole female position, 
validating his genetic grandiloquence (subtext: everything that is of Trump is 
magnificent!), while his third wife (with her “chequered” past) is given tasks 
and duties almost as an afterthought.

Melania has been bounced down the Republican campaigning ranks from player to 
mere decorative human accessory, given as much significance and influence as 
Trump’s choice of tie at a rally. At the same time, in every negative, 
dehumanising way possible, Melania has been completely defined by her husband. 
Of course, something similar also happened to Hillary Clinton – an actual 
candidate – who’s spent her entire campaign being pelted by rocks for the“sins 
of Bill”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/wikileaks-bill-clinton-foundation-emails>

The difference is that Hillary has at least (small mercies) also been attacked 
forwho she is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/18/hillary-clinton-why-hate-unlikeable-us-election>
 andwhat she’s done. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-latest-emails-explained>
 Then there’sMichelle Obama, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/sep/29/michelle-obama-we-need-an-adult-in-the-white-house-video>
 whose charisma seems at once amplified by her husband, while also robustly 
being independent of him. By contrast, from start to finish, the pressure has 
been on Melania to atone publicly for all her husband is and everything he 
represents, her every word and deed viewed and judged entirely via the 
omnipresent prism of the Donald.

So what? you might ask. As the saying goes, if you lie down with dogs, you get 
up with fleas. But although associations are important, ultimately, only Donald 
Trump should be attacked for being Donald Trump.

Certainly, it seems too easy and dangerous to assess women solely via the 
medium of their men. You can already see it happening withPrince Harry and his 
new partner, Meghan Markel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/shortcuts/2016/nov/02/when-harry-met-meghan-markle-and-dragged-the-royals-into-the-21st-century>
, a successful, attractive biracial actress being systematically reduced to how 
she, her heritage and achievements fit in with The Almighty Him. As a feminist, 
it makes me feel uneasy watching Markel being defined via her “suitability” for 
Harry, as if this were her only pertinent characteristic, all other nuance and 
agency of a living, breathing, thirtysomething individual cheapened or 
obliterated.

If this makes a soul uneasy, then perhaps the same courtesy should be extended 
toMelania Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump>. Melania 
probably wouldn’t make a great first lady. (Not so much the anti-Michelle, as 
simply inadequate). However, the fact remains that during a wild, dirty 
election, Hillary Clinton emerged hurt by Bill, but not felled by him, Michelle 
gloriously stepped out of Barack’s shadow and even Ivanka is relatively 
unscathed. Only Melania wafts around like an election phantom whose only 
function is to be viewed and judged entirely via the medium of her husband. 
While it’s not surprising that this happened, it’s telling that nobody seems to 
mind a bit.

Salute Sting for relaunching the Bataclan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmelania-trump-stands-by-her-man-a-thankless-task%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F057f0fd5dccf794c5647963dcc624af1ac7fb29c%2F0_134_4770_2862%2F4770.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melania%20Trump%20stands%20by%20her%20man%2C%20a%20thankless%20task%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmelania-trump-stands-by-her-man-a-thankless-task%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melania%20Trump%20stands%20by%20her%20man%2C%20a%20thankless%20task%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmelania-trump-stands-by-her-man-a-thankless-task%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F057f0fd5dccf794c5647963dcc624af1ac7fb29c%2F0_134_4770_2862%2F4770.jpg>
 Sting’s appearance will be a boost for the Bataclan.
 Photograph: Tatan Syuflana/AP 
Sting will be the first musician to perform at the Bataclan theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/bataclan-witnesses-recount-horror-paris-attacks>
 in Paris since the terrorist attacks last November that killed 130 people, 89 
of them at the venue.

A separate event has been planned, according to ed reports, to mark the 
anniversary of the attacks, attended by survivors and the band that performed 
on the night of the attack, the American group Eagles of Death Metal, whose 
roadie Nick Alexander died.Sting <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sting> will 
perform the day before the anniversary, to remember those who died and to 
celebrate the cultural history of the Bataclan.

Bravo, Mr Sumner. This is a boost for the Bataclan, which is said to be 
struggling to get acts to perform there, though artists such as Youssou N’Dour, 
Marianne Faithfull and Pete Doherty have also confirmed dates.

It was always going to be a big deal to be the first act to play at the venue, 
with all that the gig represents, and a globally renowned name such as Sting 
was crucial.

It says loud and clear that violence and hate, although devastating, don’t 
have the power to end or stunt a culture. Good for Sting, for taking this 
stance.

Turin turns screw on meat-eaters
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmelania-trump-stands-by-her-man-a-thankless-task%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6161b790f937bd541142984823e153a0313c46%2F81_278_5488_3293%2F5488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melania%20Trump%20stands%20by%20her%20man%2C%20a%20thankless%20task%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmelania-trump-stands-by-her-man-a-thankless-task%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melania%20Trump%20stands%20by%20her%20man%2C%20a%20thankless%20task%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmelania-trump-stands-by-her-man-a-thankless-task%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6161b790f937bd541142984823e153a0313c46%2F81_278_5488_3293%2F5488.jpg>
 The shape of things to come? It is planned to make Turin Italy’s first 
vegetarian city. Photograph: robertharding/REX/Shutterstock 
Chiara Appendino, the new mayor of Turin, is proposing to make it Italy’s 
first “vegetarian city” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/04/italy-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free>
. Which is not to ban meat (although veganism in Italy is on the rise), but to 
promote awareness about healthier, more ecologically sustainable lifestyles, 
with such initiatives as educational projects, a vegetarian map of the city and 
a meat-free day of the week.

As a vegetarian, I love this, not only for admirable animal welfare and 
ecological reasons, but also for vindictive and immature ones. As in, it’s a 
wonderful notion that, injust one city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/turin-mayor-italys-first-vegetarian-city-five-star>
 in the world, the standard vegetarian/meat-eater’s experiences could be 
reversed.

As it happens, Italian cuisine is vegetarian-friendly anyway, but vegetarians 
will know what I’m talking about when I recall how many times I’ve sat in 
foreign restaurants practically begging to be fed… well, anything really. In 
some countries, a plate of lukewarm steamed vegetables and a disgruntled munch 
through the bread basket is all you can expect. Quite howvegans cope with 
eating out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/24/expert-guide-eating-out-vegan>
, here and abroad, I’ve no idea, but perhaps restaurant staff should check for 
crazed gnaw-marks on the tables, chairs and laminated menus after they leave.

Certainly, it would make a nice change for the meat-eaters to be the ones 
sitting in restaurants, squinting at menus, nervously inquiring about whether 
there’s a “carnivore choice”. Their turn, too, to irritate waiting staff by 
asking if they could adapt this or that dish to include meat or fish. Or to 
risk the terrible wrath of chefs by audaciously suggesting that they might 
rustle up a palatable ham omelette.

While, in real terms, the vegetarian city will undoubtedly turn out to be more 
symbolic than literal, Turin could still end up being the unofficial centre of 
vegetarian revenge.

• Comments will be opened later
 