
Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> Theatre 
Company’s production of Double Indemnity is both gorgeous to look at and a 
great romp. Tom Holloway’s adaptation of James M Cain’s noir novel is slick, 
director Sam Strong’s direction is fluid, and the design team has excelled 
themselves in the realisation of its smoky, 1940s California.

But MTC’s show is not so much a loving homage to a bygone era as it is a 
postcard from a rapidly fading view of the world. The bold costume design 
flatters the stereotypes it presents, but the image of “woman” that floats 
across the lightscapes of the stage are more a reminder of what male writers 
such as Cain used to think about women, rather than what women theatre-makers 
do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd89799bc5443bb56162ce8fb1e03b3cbaf0a3eed%2F0_43_882_543%2F882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20theatre%20productions%20show%20the%20difference%2040%20years%20of%20feminism%20make&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20theatre%20productions%20show%20the%20difference%2040%20years%20of%20feminism%20make&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd89799bc5443bb56162ce8fb1e03b3cbaf0a3eed%2F0_43_882_543%2F882.jpg>
 Jess Tovey as Lola, Claire van der Boom as Phyllis and Richard Piper as Mr 
Nirdlinger in MTC’s production of Double Indemnity. Photograph: Jeff Busby 
Phyllis, for instance, is clung in silk: the femme fatale, she lures her male 
prey into a web of deceit and murder. The girlishness of her virginal 
stepdaughter Lola provides a direct contrast – but Phyllis is eventually unspun 
by the plain, hardworking Nettie: the maternal and unrewarded office assistant, 
dressed in dour beige, who twigs to the mechanics of Phyllis’s plan.

Trilogy | Theatre review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jan/13/trilogy-review> 
These ancient archetypes of the virgin, mother and whore continue to saturate 
the canon of western theatre, but there were two other shows in Melbourne this 
month which offered proof of the difference four decades of feminism has made.

Nic Green’s two-and-a-half hour feminist masterwork, Trilogy, made its 
Australian debut at Arts House in June. Although it was originally conceived 
and presented 10 years ago, the experience of growing up and older within a 
female body – coupled with the evolving insight of professional practice, and 
Green’s overt engagement with the developing currents of feminism – has 
metastasised the work of agitprop into a profound meditation on the 
relationship of feminism to time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31fcc4f2fa436ef0d0cbbe1eb700764258d68f45%2F0_0_2953_1969%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20theatre%20productions%20show%20the%20difference%2040%20years%20of%20feminism%20make&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20theatre%20productions%20show%20the%20difference%2040%20years%20of%20feminism%20make&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31fcc4f2fa436ef0d0cbbe1eb700764258d68f45%2F0_0_2953_1969%2F2953.jpg>
 ‘A profound meditation on the relationship of feminism to time’: Nic Green’s 
Trilogy at Arts House Melbourne. Photograph: Bryony Jackson 
It’s hard to conceive that Double Indemnity’s femme fatale could ever be 
considered more threatening to the masculine ego than Green herself, who 
thunders on to the stage naked with no less than 50 other naked women who are 
volunteers from the community.

Australia Council cuts: theatre companies lament ‘dark days’ for arts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/16/australia-council-cuts-theatre-companies-lament-dark-days-for-arts>
Of all ages and sizes, they stomp and whirl to techno music like maenads in 
their rapture, a force of female power that the paranoid minds of the ancient 
Greeks used to condemn in terrifying bas-reliefs as “amazonomachy 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazonomachy>”. There was never a murder so 
clean than that of Norman Mailer’s ego, accomplished by the feminists Jill 
Johnston and Germaine Greer in the footage of theiranarchic 1970s public debate 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tXM6KuD8ZNI>, shown and re-enacted within 
Trilogy’s text.

Theorist Mary Ann Doane explained the femme fatale is not a representation of 
female agency but a confection of male desire. This is true of silken Phyllis 
in Double Indemnity as much as the converse is the case for Trilogy’s 
clothesless female choir, who steal back William Blake for feminism – Jerusalem 
was adopted as a suffragette anthem, after all – in a chorus of polyphonic 
bellowing.

Meanwhile, around a third Melbourne corner at the Richmond Theatrette, the 
ensemble members of the Quippings troupe not only seize the body’s power as the 
subject of their performance work but they explode it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77df77b3150e019ab43a6678c3b0268351271856%2F0_0_800_1200%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20theatre%20productions%20show%20the%20difference%2040%20years%20of%20feminism%20make&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20theatre%20productions%20show%20the%20difference%2040%20years%20of%20feminism%20make&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77df77b3150e019ab43a6678c3b0268351271856%2F0_0_800_1200%2F800.jpg>
 ‘The work we make is unashamedly political’: Australian disability advocate 
and writer Jax Jacki Brown, who is co-producer of Quippings. Photograph: Amy 
Cater 
Quippings is described by its co-producer and ensemble member Jax Jacki Brown 
as something akin to a “crip burlesque”, although she finds the label limiting. 
The history and concept of the show is certainly more complex; when gay 
wheelchair-user Greg Acton found himself turned away from a Melbourne 
sex-on-premises venue in 2010, he protested, and around him formed a movement 
called Quip, to challenge ableism in Melbourne’s queer community.

The activist Kath Duncan suggested live performance as a medium for the group 
to further expand and explore discussions about sex, sexuality and disability 
within the queer community. Five years later Quippings schedules performances 
to coincide with the events and festivals of both the queer and disabilities 
calendars, offering wild, original cabaret variety line-ups in which all the 
participants identify as having disabilities, and the subject is always the 
erotic.

The ensemble is mixed gender as well as a mix of practice, but there are more 
women than men. Brown’s own contribution is as a spoken word artist; her work 
engages the intersections of her feminist and queer identity to engage the 
social model of disability, which is the focus of her work.

“The last performance was on the theme of secrets,” she explains to me, “and 
my piece was about the process of learning to keep secrets about myself, 
because for people with disabilities, keeping secrets about your own body 
becomes a political thing.”

For performers who “subvert the expectation of the erotic” just by placing 
their bodies in an erotic context, the work presented is a deliberate 
provocation – and Brown herself is often confronted by the work of her 
collaborators. Such as? “Kath Duncan is a congenital amputee and does work 
about stump fucking,” Brown explains. She’s also a fan of Duncan’s creation 
Shirley McBogan: a character who appears onstage to patronise everybody in the 
audience. Other performers are dancers, standup comics, sometimes singers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffe0a25a28b4e4183164799826c5510f48fa7922%2F212_152_1664_999%2F1664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20theatre%20productions%20show%20the%20difference%2040%20years%20of%20feminism%20make&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20theatre%20productions%20show%20the%20difference%2040%20years%20of%20feminism%20make&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmelbourne-theatre-productions-show-the-difference-40-years-of-feminism-make%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffe0a25a28b4e4183164799826c5510f48fa7922%2F212_152_1664_999%2F1664.jpg>
 Kath Duncan performs at Quippings, an Australian night of disability and queer 
theatre. Photograph: Supplied By Capital Pictures 
There are marketing challenges to the show that productions such as Double 
Indemnity will never face, but perhaps Brown prefers it that way.

“If we try and reach the mainstream, we have to depoliticise our marketing,” 
she says, “but the work we make is unashamedly political because it’s 
disability human rights, and sexuality human rights. The stage is a space that 
people with these identities don’t get to determine that often. That’s valid, 
and it’s interesting, and I don’t want to lose that as a performer.”
 