
A controversial thriller about a hitman forced to undergo gender reassignment 
surgery has been added to the lineup of next month’s Toronto international film 
festival.

Toronto film festival 2016: full line-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/26/toronto-film-festival-2016-full-line-up>
(Re) Assignment, formerly known as Tomboy, a Revenger’s Tale, stars Michelle 
Rodriguez as a male assassin who undergoes a transition against his will at the 
hands of a rogue surgeon, played by Sigourney Weaver. The film, which is 
directed by The Warriors’ Walter Hill, wascriticised last year by the LGBT 
group Glaad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/29/michelle-rodriguez-tomboy-lgbt-gender-reassignment-movie>
, which called the premise “sensationalistic” and said the film undermined the 
progress of transgender rights. The film festival’s press release makes no 
mention of the transgender theme, describing the story as “a trail of 
self-discovery and redemption against a criminal mastermind opponent”.

(Re) Assignment joins a slew of other world premieres announced by festival 
organisers. Other high-profile titles include Burn Your Maps, a drama about an 
eight-year-old boy (played by Room star Jacob Tremblay) who persuades his 
family to take him on an epic journey after becoming convinced he is a 
Mongolian goat herder.

Toronto film festival adds Anne Hathaway monster movie to lineup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/09/toronto-film-festival-anne-hathaway-lineup>
Also appearing at the festival is Brain on Fire, director Gerard Barrett’s 
film about a New York Post journalist (Chloë Grace Moretz) who experienced 
seizures, hallucinations and violent outbursts. Meanwhile, in The Exception 
offers mind games with higher stakes as rival agents wrestle over the fate of 
the abdicated German Kaiser (Christopher Plummer) in the middle of the second 
world war. It also stars Lily James, Jai Courtney and Janet McTeer, and is the 
feature-film debut of the theatre director David Leveaux.

The Duelist, by Russian director Alexey Mizgirev, is about a St Petersburg 
gun-for-hire who takes on other people’s fights, while Rage, directed by 
Sang-il Lee, is a grisly three-part thriller that hops between Japanese cities 
and stars Ken Watanabe. The Long Excuse, also set in Japan, is a comedy-drama 
about a man (Masahiro Motoki) who offers to care for the children of another 
man who is widowed by the same crash that killed his own wife.

The Toronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival> runs from 8-18 September.
 