
At the end of the day, the walls begin closing in. The hotel suite shrinks, 
the armchair pinches and the harried performer has been at rest for too long. 
Round and round the room he prowls, like an animal exploring the limits of its 
cage, looping at intervals behind the couch where I’m sat. He’s raking his 
hair. He’s scratching his beard. It turns out that there’s one prospect more 
unnerving than havingMichael Shannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-shannon> in your field of vision. 
It’s having him behind you, conceivably preparing to pounce.

Michael Shannon: five best moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/25/michael-shannon-five-best-moments>
If you need an embodiment of all-American madness, Shannon is your man. He 
plays cracked saints and tragic monsters: the broken maths prodigy in
Revolutionary Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/revolutionary-road>, the 
remorseless mafia killer inThe Iceman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-iceman>. The camera feasts on his 
lumberjack frame, his intense, bug-eyed stare, the sense that he’s unstable 
ordnance, about to explode. And yet Shannon’s great skill is in holding the 
tensions. Cast him as the villain and he exhibits pathos and humanity. Install 
him as the hero and he carries a distinct whiff of danger.

His latest film, Midnight Special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/midnight-special>, is a case in point. He 
plays a ruthless kidnapper, dragging an eight-year-boy between cheap motels 
with the authorities in hot pursuit. But first appearances are misleading: it 
transpires the child is his son, possessed of unearthly powers. A religious 
cult regards the boy as the messiah; the Pentagon, by contrast, plans to 
weaponise him. Shannon’s dad is desperate, exhausted and thrumming with 
violence. For all that, he may just be on the side of the angels.

His prowling complete, the actor returns to the chair and cracks open a bottle 
of water. He explains that he is in town for only a few hours. He flew in this 
morning; he flies out tonight. “But that’s OK. I saw the lions. I saw the 
palace. One day in London, that isn’t so bad.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc7f78f5385d46d5138c3b26f2e223a5d5c08983%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Shannon%3A%20%E2%80%98Actors%20are%20just%20models%20nowadays.%20Going%20to%20the%20Oscars%20is%20like%20going%20to%20the%20prom%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Shannon%3A%20%E2%80%98Actors%20are%20just%20models%20nowadays.%20Going%20to%20the%20Oscars%20is%20like%20going%20to%20the%20prom%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc7f78f5385d46d5138c3b26f2e223a5d5c08983%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 In Midnight Special. Photograph: Ben Rothstein/Warner Bros 
Midnight Special marks Shannon’s fourth collaboration with writer-director 
Jeff Nichols (a fifth, Loving, is tipped to premiere at Cannes this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/30/20-films-prediction-list-cannes-film-festival>
). He says he loves working with Nichols because it hardly feels like acting at 
all, and that he relishes the themes the director explores. The pull of blood 
ties. The parent-child relationship. “The kid gives a father a sense of purpose 
and identity,” he explains. “But what the kid ultimately does is become 
something other than you. He’s going to transform. The caterpillar is going to 
become the butterfly. And I loved the notion that the kid is literally full of 
light. Because that’s what children are, full of light, and they don’t know how 
to control it. Or sometimes they don’t get to keep it. It gets taken away.” He 
snorts at his presumption. “I mean, I don’t want to get too heavy about it. The 
more I’m talking, the less I’m making this sound like a science-fiction movie.”

Man Of Steel: eye to eye with Michael Shannon, the new General Zod
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/08/michael-shannon-man-of-steel-iceman>
Sci-fi or not, the film resonated with him; he has children of his own. Sylvie 
is seven and Marion is two. “And actually my second daughter was born right 
before I started shooting. We live in New York and I had to go down to New 
Orleans the week after, which was hard, but I think it probably informed the 
performance. I mean, I never thought I was capable of being a father. But I 
also never wanted to be one of those parents who leaves the kids with the 
nanny. But it can be tricky sometimes. The work takes you all over.”

His own childhood sounds positively discombobulating. Shannon’s parents 
divorced when he was small and each went on to remarry five times while their 
son bounced between his mother’s home in Kentucky and his father’s up in 
Evanston, Illinois. As an adolescent, he was booked in for sessions with a 
child psychologist and reputedly responded by trashing the man’s office. 
Acting, he allows, was an outlet for his angst, even a form of self-therapy, if 
only up to a point.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fmidnight-special-star-michael-shannon-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Midnight%20Special%20star%20Michael%20Shannon%3A%20'The%20US%20is%20a%20desperate%20environment%20right%20now'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fmidnight-special-star-michael-shannon-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Midnight%20Special%20star%20Michael%20Shannon%3A%20%27The%20US%20is%20a%20desperate%20environment%20right%20now%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fmidnight-special-star-michael-shannon-video-interview&media=>
He glares at the ground, rakes again at his beard. “I don’t think that acting 
necessarily fixes your problems. To me it’s a job. Whatever my personal 
situation is, if I can extricate myself from it and say, ‘OK, I’m Bob or Tom or 
whatever’ then that’s great and you can get lots of attention. But then you 
come home at the end of the day and find that you’re still a trainwreck as a 
human being. That’s the big problem with seeing acting as therapy.”

Besides, he adds, he was always more into music than acting. He recalls seeing 
the video for Talking Heads’ And She Was 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZV9DNpkfak0> on MTV in his teens and feeling 
that his mind had been blown. He reveres Thelonious Monk more than he does any 
film-maker. He even writes andsings in his own band, Corporal 
<http://corporalband.com/>, playing restrained, accomplished folk rock that 
rather belies his volcanic screen work. “And I always say I’d like more time to 
write songs, I’m too busy to write songs. But maybe I’m lying, maybe I’m lazy. 
Because I do have the time. I mean I had time on the flight over here. I could 
have written some songs. Instead I sat watching bad movies.”

Landing in Chicago at the end of his teens, he founded his own theatre and 
performed with theSteppenwolf company 
<https://www.steppenwolf.org/?gclid=Cj0KEQjwxI24BRDqqN3f-97N6egBEiQAGv37hFY2pWpRJ6zpDdzDk6QYAbf7RqXRQ2qzZkAWAW3dqtcaAopO8P8HAQ&gclsrc=aw.ds>
. On screen he cropped up in the likes of8 Mile 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ShWGyC408I>, Pearl Harbor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/87539/pearl.harbor> and Bad Boys II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96432/bad-boys-ii> before that 
Oscar-nominated turn in 2008’sRevolutionary Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/revolutionary-road> pushed him centre-stage. 
After that he hit his stride, playing a turncoat G-man in Boardwalk Empire, the
satanic property mogul in the excellent 99 Homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/29/99-homes-review-andrew-garfield-and-michael-shannon-flog-the-foundations-of-america>
 and the late-period Elvis Presley, who wings into the White House in the 
upcoming Elvis and Nixon, desperate to beanointed as a federal drugs agent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/dec/03/elvis-presley-nixon-drugs-1986>
 (“Who knows why he did it?” Shannon says. “There are a whole lot theories. 
None of them totally add up”). All the same, I think I love him best as
hair-trigger Curtis in Jeff Nichols’ Take Shelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142870/take-shelter>. Curtis spies 
portents of apocalypse in the movement of sparrows. Hegoes off like a bomb at 
the Lions Club dinner <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ey1Z0VhAQdA>. It’s a 
performance for the ages; a thing of fierce glory. Peer too closely at Curtis 
and he risks peering back into you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff830e5260b079870c1506481f6a1de8e5c77b8b4%2F0_0_5629_3166%2F5629.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Shannon%3A%20%E2%80%98Actors%20are%20just%20models%20nowadays.%20Going%20to%20the%20Oscars%20is%20like%20going%20to%20the%20prom%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Shannon%3A%20%E2%80%98Actors%20are%20just%20models%20nowadays.%20Going%20to%20the%20Oscars%20is%20like%20going%20to%20the%20prom%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff830e5260b079870c1506481f6a1de8e5c77b8b4%2F0_0_5629_3166%2F5629.jpg>
 As Elvis with Kevin Spacey as Nixon in the forthcoming Elvis and Nixon. 
Shannon has his doubts. “Oh no, I’m not one of those people who get tangled up 
his parts. If anything I don’t take it seriously enough. I envy someone like 
Daniel Day-Lewis. Makes one movie every three years, gets totally lost in the 
part and then everybody says it’s the greatest thing ever. I’ve never had that 
experience and I don’t really know why.”

Michael Shannon: 'I'm not trying to exorcise any demons'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/30/michael-shannon-hard-sleeping-night>
He mulls it over. “I guess there’s something uneasy about me. I guess I’m 
definitely in touch with uneasiness. So maybe that’s the thing. Maybe I’m 
always in such a state of complete and utter turmoil that I only notice it when 
I’m working.” He gropes for his water. “Now you’ve got me all self-conscious.”

But perhaps there’s a more mundane explanation. Put bluntly, might it be that 
his career owes as much to his appearance as it does to his talent? On film (in 
person?), he’s a corn-fed galoot with a riptide of chaos. If he looked like Tom 
Cruise, he would have been offered different roles.

Shannon shoots me such a scowl that I fear I’ve offended him. He thinks I’m 
here to debunk the mystique of great acting. Then he guffaws and the tension 
breaks. “Oh please do,” he says. “You could do us all a big favour. And yeah, 
it’s a visual medium. It’s motion pictures. So basically you’re just a model 
that talks. Look at any actor nowadays – they’re just models. Going to the 
Oscars is like going to the prom. Everybody dressed up. It used to be that when 
you went to theOscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>, you’d pick up 
something nice from the mall. Now it’s this big hoo-ha. It’s off the fucking 
rails. Even with me, when I do some press conference, some designer will say 
they want to put their suit on me. Put their suit on me! I never in my wildest 
dreams thought I would be hearing that phrase.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e042dc4c56c2d126e7631c564455a8457707b81%2F18_0_2367_1420%2F2367.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Shannon%3A%20%E2%80%98Actors%20are%20just%20models%20nowadays.%20Going%20to%20the%20Oscars%20is%20like%20going%20to%20the%20prom%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Shannon%3A%20%E2%80%98Actors%20are%20just%20models%20nowadays.%20Going%20to%20the%20Oscars%20is%20like%20going%20to%20the%20prom%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fmichael-shannon-actors-are-just-models-nowadays-going-to-the-oscars-is-like-going-to-the-prom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e042dc4c56c2d126e7631c564455a8457707b81%2F18_0_2367_1420%2F2367.jpg>
 As Rick Carver in 99 Homes. Photograph: Allstar/Broad Green Pictures 
Life, he admits, is chaotic, confounding; in good ways and bad. Every fork in 
the road has taken him by surprise. Every restless movement has carried him 
somewhere new. His career, it’s fair to say, has surpassed his expectations. 
“Oh yeah, definitely. I can’t begin to explain it. Free drinks on the plane. 
Life of Riley.” He says “I’m from Kentucky”, as though this explains 
everything. “I’m from Kentucky and when I was a kid I’d go out in the backyard 
and there was a creek at the end. I’d stand waist-deep in the creek and catch
crawdads <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crayfish> with my hands. And now look 
at me. Look at how crazy life is. Drinking bottles of perfectly still water 
inside a five-star London hotel.”

So fair enough and well done him. And yet, if Shannon’s roles tell us 
anything, it’s that the world is unstable and contains as much darkness as 
light. I ask if that means life is better these days and he grins like the wolf 
in a kids’ fairytale. “Aha,” he says. “No comment, no comment.”

Midnight Special is released in the UK on 8 April
 