
America is now a country without hope, Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> has said.

Asked by Oprah Winfrey 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/first-lady-michelle-obama-on-husbands-legacy-of-hope/>
 if her husband’s administration had lived up to its promise of hope, the first 
lady said yes, adding: “Because we feel the difference now. Now we’re feeling 
what not having hope feels like. Hope is necessary.”

Why Michelle Obama is unlikely to run for president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/michelle-obama-run-for-president-politics>
She added: “And Barack didn’t talk about hope because he thought it was a nice 
slogan to get votes. He and I and so many believe ‘what else do you have if you 
don’t have hope? What do you give your kids if you can’t give them hope?’”


In what is likely to be Obama’s last interview of the year, she suggested that 
Americans would miss “having a grown-up in the White House”, drawing a clear 
contrast between her husband and the man who will replace him on 20 January,
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

And she compared the nation to a toddler who falls over and looks to their 
parent to know if they should cry or not.

“I feel that Barack has been that for the nation in ways that people will come 
to appreciate,” she said. “Having a grown-up in the White House who can say to 
you in times of crisis and turmoil ‘hey it’s going to be OK, let’s remember the 
good things that we have, let’s look at the future, let’s look at all the 
things that we’re building’.”

On Thursday, the first lady played that role herself to a group of students, 
many of them young black women,who had gathered at the White House for a 
screening of the film Hidden Figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/michelle-obama-diversity-us-politics-hidden-figures>
, which documents the role of black female mathematicians in the space race.

“Look at this eight years,” she said. “We were supposed to be hidden. People 
didn’t even want to believe we were real. But here we are, eight years later.

“But it’s up to all of you, our young people, to continue that legacy. It’s 
your turn now. All right?” she said.

In that interview she also gave a message about diversity and inclusiveness 
that could be read as a criticism of Trump.

At a time when the Republican president-elect is drawing up a cabinet 
dominated by older white men, 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/13/politics/donald-trump-cabinet-diversity/index.html>
 the first lady said: “As we move forward in life and we get access to these 
seats of power, these tables of power, I want you to look around and make sure 
there’s diversity at the table.


“Because you don’t come up with the right answer if everyone at the table 
looks the same and thinks the same and has the same experience – you never come 
up with the best answer. So when you get these seats at these tables of power, 
your obligation is to make sure the conversation is diverse.”

She added: “Because what we saw in this film is that when we pull together men 
and women, people of every background and colour and faith, immigrants who’ve 
come here from across the globe to make America their home – when we bring all 
of that brainpower to the table, anything is possible, even going to the moon, 
right?”

Have you met the Obamas? Tell us about your experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/have-you-met-obama-share-your-story>
President-elect Trump was endorsed by the Ku Klux Klan and accused of tapping 
into crude white nationalism while insulting Mexicans and Muslims. Michelle 
Obama was arguably one Trump’s most eloquent and powerful adversaries during 
the campaign,denouncing his treatment of women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/michelle-obama-donald-trump-misconduct-frightening>
 after allegations of sexual harassment came to light.

She told the students that if they take anything from the past eight years, “I 
want you to see that it does not matter what you look like, it doesn’t matter 
how much money your parents have – none of that matters. Skin colour, gender is 
the most ridiculous defining trait that we cling to. It doesn’t matter.”

The Oprah Winfrey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oprah-winfrey> 
interview with the first lady airs Monday night on CBS at 8pm ET.
 