
She did not mention the election or Donald Trump once. But Michelle Obama’s 
message about diversity and inclusiveness was clear.


The first African American first lady addressed a gathering of students – many 
of them young black women – at the White House on Thursday after a screening of
Hidden Figures, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/hidden-figures-review-john-glenn-taraji-henson-black-nasa-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>
 a new biopic of three black female mathematicians who helped launch Americans 
into space.

The 16-minute speech 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/12/15/remarks-first-lady-screening-film-hidden-figures>
 was a far cry from the recent election campaign, where she made rousing 
interventions on behalf of Hillary Clinton, but Obama’s remarks about race and 
gender were shot through with the new political reality.

Hidden Figures review – black women Nasa boffin pic defies its formula
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/hidden-figures-review-john-glenn-taraji-henson-black-nasa-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>
“Look at this eight years,” she said. “We were supposed to be hidden. People 
didn’t even want to believe we were real. But here we are, eight years later.”

The audience applauded and whooped. Obama, wearing black, added somewhat 
somberly: “But it’s up to all of you, our young people, to continue that 
legacy. It’s your turn now. All right?”

It has been a year of bittersweet farewells for Obama. But since the brutal 
surprise of Trump’s election win, there was now a subdued, steely tone as she 
described some lessons from the film, directed byTheodore Melfi 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0577647/?ref_=tt_ov_dr> and starring Taraji P 
Henson, Janelle Monáe, Octavia Spencer and Kevin Costner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmichelle-obama-diversity-us-politics-hidden-figures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94136461da024d0427a35a869741e3ad8ccdd032%2F0_103_2975_1785%2F2975.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Obama%20urges%20students%20to%20keep%20up%20diversity%20legacy%3A%20'It's%20your%20turn%20now'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmichelle-obama-diversity-us-politics-hidden-figures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Obama%20urges%20students%20to%20keep%20up%20diversity%20legacy%3A%20%27It%27s%20your%20turn%20now%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmichelle-obama-diversity-us-politics-hidden-figures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94136461da024d0427a35a869741e3ad8ccdd032%2F0_103_2975_1785%2F2975.jpg>
 Michelle Obama greets Margot Lee Shetterly, author of the book that the movie 
Hidden Figures is based on. Photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images 
Outlining the racial and gender discrimination that faced “human computers” 
Katherine Johnson, Dorothy Vaughan and Mary Jackson, Obama said: “But they 
didn’t listen to those doubters. You understand? They did not listen to the 
haters – because they’re always out there – they’re out there even today.”

And at a time when Trump is drawing up a cabinet dominated by older white men, 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/13/politics/donald-trump-cabinet-diversity/index.html>
 the first lady continued: “As we move forward in life and we get access to 
these seats of power, these tables of power, I want you to look around and make 
sure there’s diversity at the table.


“Because you don’t come up with the right answer if everyone at the table 
looks the same and thinks the same and has the same experience – you never come 
up with the best answer. So when you get these seats at these tables of power, 
your obligation is to make sure the conversation is diverse.”

She added: “Because what we saw in this film is that when we pull together men 
and women, people of every background and colour and faith, immigrants who’ve 
come here from across the globe to make America their home – when we bring all 
of that brainpower to the table, anything is possible, even going to the moon, 
right?”

President-elect Trump was endorsed by the Ku Klux Klan and accused of tapping 
into crude white nationalism while insulting Mexicans and Muslims. Michelle 
Obama was arguably one Trump’s most eloquent and powerful adversaries during 
the campaign,denouncing his treatment of women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/michelle-obama-donald-trump-misconduct-frightening>
 after allegations of sexual harassment came to light.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmichelle-obama-speech-donald-trump-sexual-assault-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Obama's%20powerful%20rebuke%20to%20Trump's%20'predatory%20behavior'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmichelle-obama-speech-donald-trump-sexual-assault-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Obama%27s%20powerful%20rebuke%20to%20Trump%27s%20%27predatory%20behavior%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmichelle-obama-speech-donald-trump-sexual-assault-video&media=>
Michelle Obama’s powerful rebuke to Trump’s ‘predatory behavior’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/13/michelle-obama-speech-donald-trump-sexual-assault-video>
She told the students that if they take anything from the past eight years, “I 
want you to see that it does not matter what you look like, it doesn’t matter 
how much money your parents have – none of that matters. Skin colour, gender is 
the most ridiculous defining trait that we cling to. It doesn’t matter.”
 