
In the same way the statue of Christ the Redeemer dominates the Rio skyline so 
Michael Phelps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michaelphelps> now transcends 
his sport. It did not require one final gold medal in the 4x100 medley relay – 
his 23rd gold and 28th Olympic medal – to reinforce his status as the most 
decorated Olympian of all time but he delivered it anyway. The outstretched 
arms of Phelps will encourage swimmers to aim higher for as long as there is 
water on the surface of the earth.

The chances of any other male athlete from any sport eclipsing Phelps’s tally 
are not so much remote as inconceivable. Maybe the remarkable Katie Ledecky, 
still only 19, will edge into similarly rarified territory but she will have to 
dig extraordinarily deep over the next dozen years to do so. The phenomenal 
Phelps has taken the art of winning to a level beyond the average human 
imagination.

Australian swim team finish on relay high after early disappointments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/mack-horton-and-campbell-sisters-miss-out-on-olympic-medals-in-swimming>
His 23rd gold medal also took him to a personally significant mark; his great 
hero Michael Jordan always wore that number for the Chicago Bulls. 
“Twenty-three is a special number,” he admitted. “It always has been and now 
it’ll be even more special. I guess everything happens for a reason. Watching 
what he did in basketball is something I’ve always dreamed of doing in the 
sport of swimming.” It made his last competitive Olympic swim all the more 
satisfying. “It’s just the perfect way to finish. This is the cherry on the top 
of the cake that I wanted. I couldn’t be happier with the way things ended.”

His long time coach Bob Bowman is already convinced there will never be 
another swimmer quite like him. “Absolutely not. I’m not even looking. He’s too 
special. It’s not even once in a generation. It might be once in 10 generations 
that someone like Michael comes along. I don’t think you’re going to be seeing 
another Michael.”

It certainly feels surreal to anyone brought up on American swimming greats 
such as Mark Spitz and Matt Biondi that the retiring champion will depart with 
more golds than his two closest pursuers combined. Yes, swimming affords plenty 
of podium opportunities but that should theoretically give his rivals more 
chances to unseat him in some of his less specialist disciplines. Their 
inability to do so tells its own recurring story.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmo-farah-takes-10000m-gold-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farah%20retains%2010%2C000m%20title%2C%20Phelps%20wins%2023rd%20Olympic%20gold%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmo-farah-takes-10000m-gold-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farah%20retains%2010%2C000m%20title%2C%20Phelps%20wins%2023rd%20Olympic%20gold%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmo-farah-takes-10000m-gold-video-highlights&media=>
Farah retains 10,000m title, Phelps wins 23rd Olympic gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/14/mo-farah-takes-10000m-gold-video-highlights>
The last hurrah was typical Phelps: the menacing hoodied, headphoned entry 
followed by the almost inevitable golden outcome, a shared Olympic record and a 
familiar podium salute. He was more emotional than usual before the race, 
however, as his team-mate Ryan Murphy later confirmed; “You could see the tears 
in his eyes as we were walking over to the medal ceremony. He was super 
emotional. If this is the end for him that was a great way to cap off an 
incredible career. He’s opened a lot of doors for all of us. Whoever you swim 
for, you’re indebted to Michael Phelps.”

The 31-year-old, who has also won the 200m butterfly and 200m individual 
medley, along with the 4x100m and 4x200m freestyle relays – he won silver in 
the 100m butterfly – has also looked a far more contented athlete in Rio; 
fatherhood clearly suits him yet his competitive urge remains undimmed. While 
Great Britain’s James Guy did well to hold him in check during the butterfly 
leg, there was never much doubt the US would take gold.

 With the women’s 4x100 medley relay team also winning gold, it was another 
satisfying night for the American team at the end of another productive week. 
Amid all the American back-slapping, though, GB’s silver medal effort did 
contain one remarkable statistic. Adam Peaty’s split time for his 100m 
breaststroke leg was a staggering 56.59, well under the mythical 57-second 
barrier and almost half a second quicker than his world record time set earlier 
this week en route to individual gold.

Even Phelps was impressed. “He was swearing and said ‘56.5 is mad’,” revealed 
Peaty. “He was pretty impressed. Looking at the TV as a kid you never think 
you’d impress Michael Phelps with all those golds round his neck.”

It will give the GB team further reason to fly home suitably encouraged about 
the future. “I was a man on a mission,” said Peaty. “A lot of people have been 
saying I couldn’t do it but I took over half a second off it. Hopefully that’s 
a message for the rest of the world in four years time. We’re looking at a very 
good relay coming together.”

It was also an emotional outcome for Chris Walker-Hebborn who has been 
competing while coping with the recent news that his father, Andy, has been 
diagnosed with cancer. There was a less soothing outcome for Fran Halsall who 
finished an agonising fourth in her 50m freestyle final, leaving her just 
outside the medals for the third Games in succession. Even a season’s best time 
of 24.13 secs was not quite enough in a desperately tight race, with the Danish 
winner Pernille Blume clocking 24.07 and Belarus’s Aliaksandra Herasimenia 
winning bronze in 24.11.

Halsall, who was leading halfway down the pool, could not hide her 
disappointment afterwards. “It’s disappointing not to come away with the result 
I wanted but it just didn’t work out on the day. It was a season’s best...my 
best performance of the whole year, in an Olympic final. You can’t do much more 
than that really. It’s just that other people on the day were a bit better than 
me.”
 