




I have used Windows Live mail since its introduction: it’s simple, clear and 
uncluttered. NowMicrosoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> is 
going to end it. Help! With its automatic sign-in, I haven’t used my passwords 
in years. How can I transfer my accounts?Tony

Windows Live Mail is a desktop email program Microsoft introduced to replace 
Outlook Express. It is part of theWindows Essentials 
<http://windows.microsoft.com/en-gb/windows/essentials> suite, which includes 
several fine programs: Live Mail, Live Writer, Photo Gallery, MovieMaker and 
OneDrive. (It used to include Messenger, which was replaced by Skype.) 
Unfortunately, the suite has not been updated since 2012, because Microsoft 
switched to developing securely sandboxed, touch-oriented apps instead.

Windows Live Mail 2012 will not stop working, and you can still use it to 
download emails from any standard email service. However, Microsoft is moving 
all its own email services – Office 365, Hotmail, Live Mail, MSN Mail, 
Outlook.com etc – to a single codebase at Outlook.com. Windows Live Mail 2012 
does not support the new APIs (applications programming interfaces) required to 
provide full synchronisation with Outlook.com. Microsoft could updateWindows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> Live Mail 2012, but instead, 
it has asked users to switch to a different email program.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Faskjack%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicrosoft-killing-windows-live-mail-what-should-i-do-hotmail-msn-outlook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9a3bb64dc4fe68d5222523d77e8ea7c87c1301%2F0_88_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microsoft%20is%20killing%20off%20Windows%20Live%20Mail%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0what%20should%20I%20do%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Faskjack%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicrosoft-killing-windows-live-mail-what-should-i-do-hotmail-msn-outlook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microsoft%20is%20killing%20off%20Windows%20Live%20Mail%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0what%20should%20I%20do%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Faskjack%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicrosoft-killing-windows-live-mail-what-should-i-do-hotmail-msn-outlook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9a3bb64dc4fe68d5222523d77e8ea7c87c1301%2F0_88_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Microsoft is moving all its own email services to a single codebase at 
Outlook.com Photograph: Mike Segar / Reuters/Reuters 
Microsoft suggests ...

Microsoft suggests using either its free Mail app or Outlook, the email and 
personal information manager that is part of Microsoft Office. Outlook costs 
money, but Microsoft is offering Live Mail users a free subscription to Office 
365 for one year. (You should have received this offer by email, but if not,the 
details are online 
<https://support.office.com/en-us/article/Windows-Live-Mail-2012-will-not-connect-to-Outlook-com-45453b92-373b-4bbb-88ca-f8ec74f8e8fd?ui=en-US&rs=en-US&ad=US#BKMK_TermsConditions>
.)

The obvious catch is that, after the first year, you’d be paying £59.99 per 
year forOffice 365 Personal 
<https://products.office.com/en-gb/office-365-personal>, though this does 
include full copies of Microsoft Office programs plus a 1TB free online 
storage. Alternatively, you could buy a standalone copy ofMicrosoft Office Home 
and Business 2016 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Microsoft-Office-Home-Business-2016/dp/B011N73X8O/> 
(£164) orMicrosoft Office Outlook 2016 
<http://www.mrhightech.net/office-suites/3580-microsoft-outlook-2016-0885370991147.html>
 instead. These don’t expire.

Either way, it is a slightly awkward choice: you can upgrade to Outlook or 
downgrade to Mail, but you can’t stay at the same level.

The Mail app is simpler but less powerful than Windows Live Mail: it has 
limited options for sorting emails, and it cannot send emails to groups. 
Outlook is far more powerful than Windows Live Mail and has more advanced 
features for emails, contacts, calendars and to-do lists. However, you may not 
need them, or you may already be using a range of apps instead.

The Mail app has another drawback: it runs on Windows 8/8.1/10, but not on 
Windows XP/Vista/7. Some people who want to use the Mail app will have to 
upgrade to Windows 10 to get it.

Forbidden Technologies jumps 25% after Microsoft deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/mar/16/forbidden-technologies-jumps-25-after-microsoft-deal>
Microsoft’s final suggestion is to do your email in a web browser. Your email 
address and your Hotmail/Live/Outlook.com email service will continue to work, 
even if Windows Live Mail 2012 doesn’t. Of course, web-based email has similar 
drawbacks as the Mail app – fewer features and limited sorting options – and is 
slower to use, but today it’s probably how most people do email.

Sticking with Windows Live Mail

Windows Live Mail 2012 is clearly on the way out, but you can still use it if 
you really want to. To do this, you must create a new account for your existing 
email address, but check the box that says “Manually configure server 
settings”. For the incoming server, select IMAP with the address 
imap-mail.outlook.com and Port 993. For the outgoing server, use 
smtp-mail.outlook.com and Port 587.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Faskjack%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicrosoft-killing-windows-live-mail-what-should-i-do-hotmail-msn-outlook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff30290e1706b369a9f6b4fbae641ff6e127a4b4b%2F0_0_636_559%2F636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microsoft%20is%20killing%20off%20Windows%20Live%20Mail%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0what%20should%20I%20do%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Faskjack%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicrosoft-killing-windows-live-mail-what-should-i-do-hotmail-msn-outlook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microsoft%20is%20killing%20off%20Windows%20Live%20Mail%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0what%20should%20I%20do%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Faskjack%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicrosoft-killing-windows-live-mail-what-should-i-do-hotmail-msn-outlook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff30290e1706b369a9f6b4fbae641ff6e127a4b4b%2F0_0_636_559%2F636.jpg>
 WLM server settings Photograph: Jack Schofield/Screengrab 
The settings shown in the screenshot worked perfectly for one of my old 
Hotmail accounts even though Windows Live Mail didn’t work with the automatic 
settings.

Once you have downloaded your emails using the new settings, you can use the 
mouse to drag-and-drop emails across from the “old” Microsoft account, but 
don’t delete it. Your “new” account only does email, so you will lose the 
address book/contacts and calendar features.

Switching clients

If you decide to switch to the Mail app or Microsoft Office Outlook, then you 
will need to import your emails from Windows Live Mail. There are lots of ways 
to do this, and Microsoft provided reasonably clear instructions along with the 
announcement:Windows Live Mail 2012 will not connect to Outlook.com 
<https://support.office.com/en-us/article/Windows-Live-Mail-2012-will-not-connect-to-Outlook-com-45453b92-373b-4bbb-88ca-f8ec74f8e8fd>

Windows Live Mail actually stores individual emails in industry standard .eml 
files, so they’re easy to back up and move between programs or between PCs. 
(Microsoft Office Outlook, by contrast, stores everything in one giant blob of 
a .pst file.)

One problem: some users may have emails stored on their PCs that are no longer 
on the server. In that case, see “Special instructions for users of locally 
stored data in Windows Live Mail 2012 application” on the same page.

Of course, rather than switching to the Mail app or Microsoft Office Outlook 
you could switch to an alternative from a third-party supplier. Examples include
Mailbird <https://www.getmailbird.com/>, eM Client <http://www.emclient.com/>, 
andThunderbird <https://www.mozilla.org/en-GB/thunderbird/>. I’d try them in 
that order and see which one you like. Both Mailbird and eM Client are 
“freemium” programs, while Thunderbird is open source and free.

Password recovery

It is not clear if you still know your password, but you will need it to set 
up a new mail program. Fortunately, some free utilities can extract passwords 
from Windows Live Mail. Two examples are NirSoft’sMail PassView 
<http://www.nirsoft.net/utils/mailpv.html> and the Live Mail Password Decryptor 
<http://securityxploded.com/windows-live-mail-password-decryptor.php> from 
SecurityXploded.

Microsoft has ruined my day, and possibly my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/23/microsoft-windows-ten-10-software-update-problems-iplayer>
The alternative is to ask for a password reset so that you can enter a new 
password. You can do this via a Microsoft page:Forgotten password and other 
sign-in problems 
<http://windows.microsoft.com/en-gb/windows-live/account-reset-password-forgot-faq>
, or use the password reset wizard ataccount.live.com 
<https://account.live.com/ResetPassword.aspx>.

Password resets require authentication, so Microsoft will send a security code 
to the alternative email address listed in your email account, or send an SMS 
to the mobile phone number listed.

Once upon a time, you could open an email account without providing an 
alternative email address or phone number, but most email providers now require 
one or another. If you have not provided an alternative, you can use the 
Recover your Microsoft account <https://account.live.com/acsr> page, which 
allows you to supply a new contact email address.

Timing

Microsoft started rolling out the new system last year, in preview mode. Once 
your account is converted, you will no longer be able to use it with Windows 
Live Mail. In Windows 7, you will either get server error 3219 or Windows Live 
Mail error 0x8DE00005, or both.

It would therefore be a good idea to switch in the next week or two. For 
accounts where Microsoft has detected Windows Live Mail use, the deadline is 
June 30, 2016.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 