
At one stage of this curtainraiser Middlesbrough looked as if they had never 
left thePremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, 
despite a seven-year hiatus. Yet whereas Álvaro Negredo had raised the 
Riverside roof early on with a debut goal Boro were hanging on somewhat at the 
end of the game and a point ended up being a satisfactory start to their season.

Leroy Fer strikes late as Swansea spoil Burnley’s top-flight return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/burnley-swansea-premier-league-match-report>
Stoke City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> were well off the 
pace in the opening half but Xherdan Shaqiri’s free-kick in the 67th minute 
ensured Mark Hughes’s side left Teesside with a point which, on reflection, 
will probably have satisfied both teams.

Aitor Karanka watched Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> play some sparkling 
football early on, with Gastón Ramírez particularly impressive, and there were 
plenty of encouraging signs for the Spaniard, with the exception of an injury 
to the new signing Marten de Roon. Negredo showed a predatory instinct to 
bundle in while Middlesbrough’s defence stood up to late pressure, something 
they may have to get used to on their return to the top flight.

The Riverside was reverberating with optimism before kick-off and that 
fractured period last spring was all but forgotten as a pristine pitch 
beckoned, while banners were unfurled and a plane flew overhead. This moment 
had been a long time in the waiting and Middlesbrough’s supporters were going 
to enjoy it.

Yet while spirits were high, there was an air of uncertainty about how 
Karanka’s team would stand up to the challenge of an established Premier League 
side full of international quality. Middlesbrough had four new players in the 
starting lineup but, if there was any apprehension beforehand about a 
transitional, gelling period, it was soon allayed.

Boro came out of the blocks flying and were the superior side throughout a 
first half in which they scored one and hit the post twice. Ramírez was the 
standout performer but how Negredo will be thankful for a goal 11 minutes into 
his career on Teesside.

Albert Adomah was at the heart of an excellent team move, retrieving the ball 
in midfield and building momentum down the left, drifting a high cross to the 
back post where Ramírez rose to nod across goal. Negredo, who scored nine goals 
in 30 league appearances for Manchester City during the 2013-14 season, was in 
the right place at the right time and bundled the ball in with his shoulder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fmiddlesbrough-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcedee08f96c6fc5772ec49e4ca134c5f8be9b12%2F2_35_2836_1701%2F2836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Middlesbrough%20held%20after%20Xherdan%20Shaqiri%20clinches%20point%20for%20Stoke%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fmiddlesbrough-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Middlesbrough%20held%20after%20Xherdan%20Shaqiri%20clinches%20point%20for%20Stoke%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fmiddlesbrough-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcedee08f96c6fc5772ec49e4ca134c5f8be9b12%2F2_35_2836_1701%2F2836.jpg>
 Álvaro Negredo makes an early impact on his Premier League return, even if the 
goal was not the most graceful. Photograph: Steve Welsh/Getty Images 
“It’s important to score when you are a striker, especially for Álvaro,” said 
Karanka. “When we signed him I said he needed to recover his confidence. Maybe 
we should have won the game but we can’t forget that three months ago we were 
playing in the Championship. I’m more than pleased.”

The only serious blow for Middlesbrough came in the 18th minute, when their 
£12m summer signing from Atalanta, De Roon, was forced off with a hamstring 
injury, yet Adam Forshaw slotted into central midfield with ease.

Victor Valdés, another debutant, was rarely called into action in the 
Middlesbrough goal and Karanka’s men could have been two up before half-time, 
Ramírez dropping his shoulder to beat Ryan Shawcross before hitting a 
left-footed shot on to the post; and he hit the woodwork again with a corner.

However, the pattern of the game changed. Stoke began to control the ball and, 
although Middlesbrough were content to play on the break, their lead was soon 
eradicated.

Stoke had not crafted too many chances, other than a determined run from Marko 
Arnautovic that the Austrian sliced wide, but it was a piece of quality that 
brought them level.

Karanka was furious that Stoke were awarded a free-kick on the edge of the 
Middlesbrough penalty area as the referee, Kevin Friend, had already played 
advantage, despite a trip by Adam Clayton. Shaqiri curled a precise effort in 
off Valdés's left-hand post, with the former Barcelona goalkeeper getting a 
faint touch.

Mark Hughes, the Stoke manager, said: “It was a great strike but it was the 
least we deserved. We looked strong and dynamic and it shows our pre-season 
preparation has gone well. It’s a big year for Shaq, I think he senses that.”

Southampton rally against Watford but cannot capitalise on Ben Watson red
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/southampton-watford-premier-league-match-report> 