
New South Wales Premier Mike Baird recently visited Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/29/mike-baird-set-to-become-first-serving-new-south-wales-premier-to-visit-israel>
 and Palestine, the first for a sitting leader of the Australian state. After 
travelling to the occupied West Bank and seeing the Aida refugee camp, Baird
wrote on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/mikebairdMP/posts/1078496115611962> 
that the situation was “heartbreaking.” He continued:

I don’t know where the cycle of thousands of years of violence ends. 

But I do know that all kids should be able to dream. That they should have 
hope of a better future.

Baird’s motherhood statements, pushing the human angle of the conflict, 
diluted the politics. He didn’t mention the Israeli occupation, its nearly 
50-year existence andeffects 
<http://972mag.com/special/children-under-occupation/> on Palestinian children. 
Human Rights Watchrecently stated 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/04/11/palestine-israeli-police-abusing-detained-children>
 that, “Israeli security forces are abusing Palestinian children detained in 
the West Bank. The number of Palestinian children arrested by Israeli forces 
has more than doubled since October 2015.” Amnesty issued a report this month 
telling Israel toprotect human rights defenders 
<http://www.amnestyusa.org/news/press-releases/israeli-government-must-cease-intimidation-of-human-rights-defenders-protect-them-from-attacks>
 and activists from Israeli military and settler violence.

The Palestinian farmers battling border restrictions and lack of water
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/12/fruit-veg-exports-palestine-farmer-conflict-broken-supply-chain-west-bank>
Baird also briefly went to Bethlehem and met its first female mayor. He wrote 
<https://www.facebook.com/mikebairdMP/photos/a.114981801963403.11220.114287798699470/1079597822168458/?type=3&theater>
 that Vera Baboun was a teacher and “fierce advocate for her community as she 
seeks to solve some very complex problems.”

Channel 9 News 
<http://www.9news.com.au/world/2016/04/05/19/57/nsw-premier-mike-baird-visits-the-west-bank>
 andSky News 
<http://www.skynews.com.au/news/politics/international/2016/04/05/mike-baird-visits-the-west-bank-pkg.html>
 covered Baird’s time in the West Bank, at least the word “occupation” was 
briefly uttered by one report, yet they both grossly exaggerated the journey 
into a supposedly brutal war zone. It’s nothing of the sort. I’m based in East 
Jerusalem and safely travel to the West Bank without fear of attack.



Apart from scant time in the West Bank, Baird’s trip was principally about 
deepening NSW’s economic, medical cannabis and policing ties to Israel. 
Co-ordinated by the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce and the NSW Jewish 
Board of Deputies, Baird was effusive in his praise for Israel. He told the
Australian Jewish News 
<http://www.jewishnews.net.au/baird-nothing-can-prepare-yad-vashem/53178> that 
Israel is an “incredible nation” that is “leading the world in so many ways”. 
He wanted his trip to represent a “critical turning point” in relations between 
NSW and Israel, “going from being … allies and friends to significant 
collaborators and economic partners.”

Baird inked a deal with Israeli arms manufacturer, Elbit Services, to provide 
a flight simulator to help the Australian Royal Flying Doctor Service. Elbit is 
subject to a worldwidecampaign 
<https://bdsmovement.net/2014/elbit-systems-loses-key-brazil-deal-12878> 
against its involvement in Israel’s military and building of the separation 
wall through Palestinian territory.

The politics around Israel/Palestine are changing in Australia, however, and 
Baird’s visit 
<https://newmatilda.com/2016/04/08/mike-baird-becomes-nsws-most-pro-israel-premier-ever-the-left-celebrates-his-sympathy-for-palestinians/>
 won’t change this reality. Outgoing Labor MP Melissa Parke – who worked as a 
UN lawyer in Gaza – tabled a petition in parliament urging Australia to back 
the boycott, divestment and sanctions (BDS) campaign against Israel.The Greens’ 
Lee Rhiannon 
<http://lee-rhiannon.greensmps.org.au/campaigns/ending-military-occupation-palestine>
 is an outspoken opponent of Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories.

Although many politicians and journalists from most media outlets routinely 
take free pro-Israel lobby trips 
<https://newmatilda.com/2016/04/07/jews-journalist-junkets-why-australian-media-covers-palestine-so-badly/>
 to Israel with a few minutes in the West Bank, and despitegrowing opposition 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/push-to-ban-israel-lobby-trips-for-nsw-labor-officials-20160119-gm8zsx.html>
 in the NSW Labor party, the Australian public are becoming less tolerant of 
the Israeli occupation and regular attacks against Gaza.

Roy Morgan polling from 2011 showed 
<https://apan.org.au/apan-activities/opinion_poll/> that a majority of 
Australians opposed expanding Israeli colonies in the West Bank, and in 2014 a 
majority also thought that Australia should vote yes for Palestinian 
recognition as an independent member state at the UN. These trends have had no 
effect on Australiapartnering 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/australia-guilty-of-double-standard-in-supporting-israeli-settlements-20160331-gnvi95.html#ixzz45Tnx1dz7>
 withIsraelis weapon’s manufacturers 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/foreign-affairs/israels-alp-fan-lobbies-for-arms-maker/news-story/9934d7bf7a34f6cfe654f903c7622a5d>
 over the last decade; Canberra is keen to purchasebattle-tested 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.609919> armaments.

Sydney's stadium debate over as Mike Baird commits $1.6bn to refurbishments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/14/sydneys-stadium-debate-over-as-mike-baird-commits-16bn-to-refurbishments>
The boundaries of acceptable political debate in Australia are narrow. Think 
of so-called Labor dissidents pushing for the party torecognise Palestine 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/australias-labor-party-signals-support-for-palestinian-state/>
 at some point in the indeterminate future when such a policy is irrelevant to 
facts on the ground after nearly 50 years of Israeli occupation of Palestinian 
land.

The Palestinian Authority, the likely head of this “state”, is an 
authoritarian and corrupt body backed by the west, including Australia. What’s 
brave calling for them to rule over Palestinians? On the ground in Palestine, 
the idea of “recognising” Palestine elicits confusion. Many Palestinians tell 
me they crave global support and recognition but after years of empty gestures 
and UN resolutions their scepticism is warranted. Palestinian politicians 
haven’t faced anelection <http://www.maannews.com/Content.aspx?id=771072> in 
over 10 years.



I know that some activists in Australia celebrated Mike Baird’s brief trip to 
Palestine as a sign that political leaders have to at least show interest in 
the Palestinians in 2016. Perhaps. But until journalists and politicians talk 
more honesty about Israel’s stranglehold on thePalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories>, public opinion 
will continue to turn away from the Jewish state.
 