
The Republican Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell opened the door to 
congressional investigation of Russia’s alleged interference in the 2016 
election on Monday but left the scope of such an inquiry vague and unlikely to 
satisfy those who want a thorough exploration of an intelligence finding that 
has shaken Washington.

In an indication of the political difficulties confronting congressional 
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> traditionally 
opposed to Russia but disinclined to criticizing a GOP president, McConnell 
told reporters he “strongly condemns” foreign hacking and dismissed criticism 
that the party was now soft on Russia.

“The Russians are not our friends,” McConnell said, although he did not say 
whether he agreed thatRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> had 
sought to help Trump win the White House.

Donald Trump says CIA charge Russia influenced election is 'ridiculous'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
The scope of congressional inquiry on offer appeared to fall short of the 
aggressive investigation Democrats favor. McConnell said the Senate 
intelligence committee was “more than capable of conducting a complete review” 
of the issue, but the chairperson of that committee, Richard Burr, a Republican 
from North Carolina and vocal supporter of Trump, did not commit to an actual 
investigation.

“The Senate select committee on intelligence has been, and remains, concerned 
about Russia’s actions,” he said, vowing instead to “continue to conduct 
vigorous oversight over activities and agencies within our jurisdiction in an 
appropriate and responsible way”.

The CIA recently concluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 with “high confidence” that Moscow sought to interfere in the election to 
Trump’s benefit. Hackers leaked thousands of emails from the Democratic 
National Committee and Hillary Clinton campaign via WikiLeaks during the 
election campaign.

The president-elect has repeatedly rubbished the notion that Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was helping him. On Monday he 
tweeted: “Can you imagine if the election results were the opposite and WE 
tried to play the Russia/CIA card. It would be called conspiracy theory!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwhite-house-obama-ordered-full-review-election-hacking-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=White%20House%20says%20Obama%20has%20ordered%20'full%20review'%20of%20election%20hacking%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwhite-house-obama-ordered-full-review-election-hacking-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=White%20House%20says%20Obama%20has%20ordered%20%27full%20review%27%20of%20election%20hacking%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwhite-house-obama-ordered-full-review-election-hacking-video&media=>
White House says Obama has ordered ‘full review’ of election hacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/09/white-house-obama-ordered-full-review-election-hacking-video>
Trump has previously expressed admiration for Russian leader Vladimir Putin. 
His leading candidate for secretary of state,ExxonMobil chief executive Rex 
Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
, has close ties with the country.

McConnell put some daylight between himself and Trump on Monday. “Any foreign 
breach of our cybersecurity measures is disturbing and I strongly condemn any 
such efforts,” he said. “This simply cannot be a partisan issue.”

But he studiously refused to address Trump’s attack on the CIA and failed to 
offer explicit details of what a bipartisan inquiry would entail, raising fears 
that it could yet be sidetracked.

Experienced intelligence analysts and former Senate intelligence committee 
staffers said Burr’s lack of commitment to a full inquiry was significant.

“I’m surprised there has not been a definitive statement that an investigation 
has been launched. This is the exact type of matter that the Senate 
intelligence committee is uniquely positioned to assess,” said Daniel Jones, 
the chief investigator for the Senate intelligence panel’s inquiry into 
post-9/11 CIA torture.

“The US public relies on the members of the committee to do this type of 
examination in a thorough and nonpartisan manner. Not launching an 
investigation, in my view, would be an abdication of its responsibilities.”

Rex Tillerson: an appointment that would confirm Putin's US election win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
Steven Aftergood, an intelligence policy expert at the Federation of American 
Scientists, added: “Senator Burr is explicitly disavowing any new initiative in 
this area. Instead, he says that SSCI [the Senate intelligence committee] will 
simply ‘continue’ to do what it has been doing all along. In particular, there 
is no indication that SSCI will undertake any new investigation of its own. 
Instead, Burr is only committing to ‘oversight’ of the work of others.”

Trump’s vehemence poses an early dilemma for Republicans who are deeply 
suspicious of Putin but are anxious to avoid picking a fight with Trump even 
before his inauguration. Whereas Democrats were quick to accept the CIA’s 
conclusions, some Republicans have been more cautious.

Senator David Perdue of Georgia told the Washington Post last Friday: “I’d be 
very concerned if a foreign government were doing that – we don’t have any 
evidence of that yet, and I haven’t seen the CIA report, so I’ll reserve 
judgment.”

Senate majority whip John Cornyn of Texas tweeted on Saturday: “All this 
‘news’ of Russian hacking: it has been going on for years. Serious, but hardly 
news.”

But two senior Senate Republicans, John McCain of Arizona and Lindsey Graham 
of South Carolina, have joined with two Democrats in seeking a bipartisan 
investigation into the Kremlin’s activities during the election.

The Senate armed services committee, which McCain chairs, intends to set up a 
subcommittee to hold hearings on alleged election hacking and how the US would 
respond to cyber-attack. “It’s all part of the larger issue of the cyber threat 
we face from Russia, China and other countries,” he said on CBS’s This Morning. 
“It’s another form of warfare. And the entire issue is going to be examined by 
the armed services committee because it’s a threat to our national security.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fus-election-russia-mitch-mcconnell-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47a0fd91fcc159296a93077d1708b4215b4138dc%2F0_0_5067_3040%2F5067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mitch%20McConnell%20backs%20Russia%20election%20hack%20inquiry%2C%20but%20scope%20remains%20vague&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fus-election-russia-mitch-mcconnell-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mitch%20McConnell%20backs%20Russia%20election%20hack%20inquiry%2C%20but%20scope%20remains%20vague&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fus-election-russia-mitch-mcconnell-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47a0fd91fcc159296a93077d1708b4215b4138dc%2F0_0_5067_3040%2F5067.jpg>
 Trump’s team has said concerns over Russian hacking are ‘an attempt to 
delegitimize President-elect Trump’s win’. Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP 
Barack Obama has ordered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/us-election-hacking-russia-barack-obama-review>
 US intelligence to review evidence of Russian interference in the 2016 
presidential election, as well as the 2008 and 2012 votes.

Democrat Adam Schiff, the ranking member of the House permanent select 
committee on intelligence, called for a bipartisan congressional investigation. 
“The House and Senate intelligence committees should conduct a joint inquiry, 
along with public hearings similar to what was done after 9/11, to determine 
the length and breadth of Russian interference in our elections,” he said.

“This investigation would serve the purpose of informing the public, 
developing a concerted response, deterring the Russians from further 
malign[ant] cyber action and inoculating the public against such manipulation 
in the future.”

Schiff’s GOP colleague, chairman Devin Nunes of California, has yet to commit 
to such an inquiry. A spokesperson for Nunes did not reply to the Guardian’s 
request for clarification by press time.

In a conference call with reporters on Monday morning, Trump spokesman Jason 
Miller expressed his scorn at those expressing concerns about Russian hacking. 
“I really think this is an attempt to delegitimize President-elect Trump’s win. 
That really seems to be what’s going on here.”

The White House dropped its generally cordial approach to Trump and urged 
Congress, especially Republicans who backed him, to examine the evidence. “You 
didn’t need a security clearance to figure out who benefited from malicious 
Russian cyber activity,” press secretary Josh Earnest told reporters. “The 
president-elect didn’t call it into a question. He called on Russians to hack 
his opponent, to hack Secretary Clinton, so he certainly had a good sense of 
whose side this particular activity was coming down on.”

Intelligence figures fear Trump reprisals over assessment of Russia election 
role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
Russian hackers targeted the Democratic National Committee and Clinton’s 
campaign chairperson John Podesta, Earnest said, not the Republican National 
Committee and Trump strategist Steve Bannon.

The spokesperson argued it was Trump who said he thinks Putin is a “strong 
leader”, indicated he would withdraw the US from Nato, refused to disclose his 
business ties to Russia, hired a campaign chairperson with lucrative financial 
links to Russia and had a staff member who has been a paid contributor to the 
pro-Putin Russia Today.

“This is information that all of you have reported on, throughly investigated 
and discussed on television ... So all of that is information that was not 
obtained through intelligence channels. It was not information disclosed for 
the first time at the White House ... And it’s all information that, as far as 
I can tell, is undisputed.

“One conclusion that it leads me to is the special responsibility that members 
of Congress have to take a look at this, particularly those members of Congress 
who endorsed Mr Trump in the election. They were aware of all this information 
too ... In some cases we’ve seen some pretty heated rhetoric from Republicans 
wringing their hands ... They should spare us the handwringing and fulfill 
their basic responsibility.”

Earnest added: “This was all known to Republican members of Congress who 
endorsed the president-elect. How they reconcile their political strategy and 
their patriotism is something they’re going to have to explain.”

Earnest said the intelligence community did not detect any increase in 
malicious Russian cyber-activity on election day that interfered with the 
ability of people to cast ballots and have them counted accurately.

But he added: “The results of the hack-and-leak operation carried out on the 
orders of Russia were extensively discussed before election day ... There was a 
daily leaking of John Podesta’s emails ... But you weren’t waiting for leaks 
from the RNC and Steven Bannon. That’s illustrative. People can draw their own 
judgments.”
 