
Human trafficking is an evil we like to think happens somewhere else; in 
impoverished countries, or if nearer to home only as part of activity that is 
generally illegal – the sex trade perhaps, but not the mainstream economy. It 
is a jolt to be confronted with evidence suggesting that human trafficking for 
labour exploitation – a form of modern slavery – may be happening under our 
noses and in relation to goods that we ourselves consume.

The Guardian has uncovered suspected cases of undocumented African and Asian 
migrant workers being trafficked into the Irish prawn and white fish fleet as 
part of awider investigation into the exploitation of undocumented migrants in 
fishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/revealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry>
. We know that similar allegations are being investigated by police as part of 
a formal inquiry into trafficking in the Scottish fishing fleet.

The reaction in Ireland has been one of shock. But it has fallen into 
two camps:those who say the problem has been an open secret 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/editorial/exploitation-within-irish-fishing-indistry-is-no-surprise-1.2415838>
 for years, including amongleading Irish media groups who have bravely covered 
the issue in the past 
<http://www.irishexaminer.com/viewpoints/ourview/exploitation-we-pretend-not-to-see--people-trafficking-in-ireland-362913.html>
, and those, some of them connected to the industry, who saythe reports are 
exaggerated 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/fishermen-may-sue-over-newspapers-migrants-claims-34172138.html>
.

Revealed: trafficked migrant workers abused in Irish fishing industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/revealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry>
What many of those we spoke to in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> during the year-long investigation 
found hard to accept was that some of the exploitation reported to us might be 
a problem of slavery, although human rights groups and the seafarers’ union are 
convinced that is what it is. African and Asian workers wanted to come, they 
said. Employers were doing them a favour. They were happy to live on trawlers – 
even though the pay was often a fraction of what locals might earn for the same 
work – because it was nevertheless more than they could ever earn at home. They 
might be working illegally and be undocumented, but they were friends, like 
family. That can’t be slavery, surely?

Most of the migrant workers we interviewed, by contrast, conveyed a sense of 
constant fear, feeling trapped by their lack of immigration status. They also 
conveyed a sense of deep degradation. We did not attempt to put figures on the 
scale of trafficking – measuring something that is hidden and illegal is, by 
definition, impossible. Any figures that do emerge should, like all statistics 
on irregular immigration, be treated with caution. Undocumented migrant workers 
who are being exploited tend not to appear on the mandatory crew logs. Some 
talked clearly, however, of being treated as though they were less than human, 
or as second-class citizens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmodern-slavery-cheap-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64251a410da4f62483a0a27b892e05931efb2ca9%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modern%20slavery%20is%20harder%20to%20recognise%20when%20it%E2%80%99s%20right%20under%20our%20noses%20%7C%20Felicity%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmodern-slavery-cheap-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modern%20slavery%20is%20harder%20to%20recognise%20when%20it%E2%80%99s%20right%20under%20our%20noses%20%7C%20Felicity%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmodern-slavery-cheap-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64251a410da4f62483a0a27b892e05931efb2ca9%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 A worker mends nets on an Irish fishing trawler. Photograph: Mat Heywood for 
the Guardian 
Legal definitions of slavery have changed. New legislation in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/27/human-traffickers-face-life-sentence-britain-slavery-bill>
 and amended legislation in Ireland aims to recognise that slavery today is not 
limited to chattel slavery and violent control. The new laws recognise that 
victims may have consented to their initial journeys, and that control may be 
exercised in other ways than the physical. A good analogy is the change in 
legal definitions of rape in recent decades. We no longer think of rape as 
confined to cases involving violent attack by a stranger. We accept that there 
can also be rape where a victim has agreed to meet and have some sort of 
relationship with the other person but not consented to sex.

Modern slavery can encompass more subtle forms of coercion and control: where 
a victim’s vulnerability or lack of choice has been abused; where there is a 
hold over family back home through debt; or where the threat of deportation 
deprives them of any real freedom and choice once they have been brought in. 
They may be paid for some of their work but be forced to do extra unpaid 
labour. Determining when an individual is a victim of slavery as it is newly 
defined depends on the detail of their experience. To distinguish it from the 
historic wrongs of the slave trade, we add the tag “modern” to slavery, 
although of course we do not feel the need to call rape, as newly defined, 
“modern rape”, nor do we attempt to create a hierarchy of psychological pain 
within the experience.

A huge cultural shift is still needed to recognise the phenomenon of modern 
slavery for what it is. The words we use matter because those who do not 
recognise it are, in effect, saying: we pay them enough for who they are. They 
may have to live on boats and hide, their status may be “illegal”, but their 
conditions are good enough for who they are. And who are they? They are poor, 
sometimes black or brown, and from elsewhere. Unchecked, such discrimination 
can lead to deep divisions based on race, as the Irish Equality and Human 
Rights Commission has pointed out.

There are other reasons this story has made people feel queasy. It speaks of 
our hypocrisy about immigration. Generally we are against it, except where it 
provides a convenient pool of cheap labour, and then we allow ourselves to 
depend on it. We could grant migrant workers equal rights whatever their 
immigration status, as argued for by the organisations that have supported them 
bravely in Ireland for more than 15 years.

But then they wouldn’t be cheap any more, and their purpose would be removed.
 