
Hardly a week has gone by recently without dramatic headlines about Saudi 
Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> planning far-reaching 
changes. And every report features the intriguing character of Mohammed bin 
Salman, the deputy crown prince and rising star of an increasingly 
unpredictable kingdom.

Bin Salman, an imposing man of 30, oversees a team of advisers and ministers 
who are working on the grandiosely named Vision 2030  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/saudi-arabia-approves-ambitious-plan-to-move-economy-beyond-oil>
– designed to prepare pampered Saudis for a life after oil by diversifying, 
privatising and modernising the largest economy in the Arab world.

Older Saudis say the prince reminds them of King Abdulaziz ibn Saud – his 
paternal grandfather and the revered founder of the state that bears the family 
name. Bin Salman lives in Diriyah, scene of the historic and still functioning 
pact between the ruling Al Saud family and the conservative religious 
establishment.

Saudi Aramco – the $10tn mystery at the heart of the Gulf state
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/16/saudi-aramco-10-trillion-dollar-mystery-heart-of-gulf-state>
It was from there that he oversaw last weekend’s reshuffle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/08/saudi-arabia-appoints-new-oil-minister-khalid-al-falih>
 – the latest piece in the jigsaw of a dizzying 15-year transformation project. 
Veteran oil minister Ali al-Naimi was replaced by Khalid al-Falih,head of the 
national oil company Aramco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/16/saudi-aramco-10-trillion-dollar-mystery-heart-of-gulf-state>
 and source of 90% of Saudi revenues for decades. Aramco isnow up for the 
biggest stockmarket offering in history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/01/saudi-arabia-plans-to-sell-state-oil-assets-to-create-2tn-wealth-fund>
.

Falih is to run a ministry for energy, industry and natural resources – mining 
is being highlighted for future development. Eight economic-related portfolios 
were shifted while other changes streamlined financial management and 
investment decision-making. “These people are technocrats on steroids,” quipped 
one expert.

Bin Salman’s rise has seen power shift from the royal court to the council of 
ministers – though still under the watchful eye of the 80-year-old King Salman 
bin Abdulaziz, who made his favourite son defence minister and head of the 
council of economic and developmental affairs when he came to the throne last 
year.


Bin Salman – or Mr Everything, as he has been dubbed by foreigners – is a 
millennial and a digital native, like the majority of the Saudi population who 
are under 25. His youth is a big part of his appeal and one reasonForeign 
Policy magazine 
<https://2015globalthinkers.foreignpolicy.com/#!decision-makers/detail/salman> 
listed him as one of the world’s most influential leaders after his surprise 
appointment.

Another novelty is greater transparency in a famously opaque system. There has 
been a careful drip feed of media signals  
<http://www.economist.com/saudi_interview>that culminated in the formal launch 
of a still sketchy but hugelyambitious set of economic reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/20/saudi-royals-best-of-the-worst-yemen-king-salman-saudi-arabia>
 last month.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63a6df0c0284053915aa8276f9a979eaf12d4d46%2F1100_0_3144_1886%2F3144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mohammed%20bin%20Salman%3A%20the%20prince%20trying%20to%20wean%20Saudi%20Arabia%20off%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mohammed%20bin%20Salman%3A%20the%20prince%20trying%20to%20wean%20Saudi%20Arabia%20off%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63a6df0c0284053915aa8276f9a979eaf12d4d46%2F1100_0_3144_1886%2F3144.jpg>
 A poster in Riyadh bears a portrait of King Salman, crown prince Mohammed Bin 
Nayef (left) and deputy crown prince Mohammed Bin Salman. Photograph: Fayez 
Nureldine/AFP/Getty Images 
Marking the occasion in his first ever TV interview 
<http://english.alarabiya.net/en/media/inside-the-newsroom/2016/04/25/Full-Transcript-of-Prince-Mohammed-bin-Salman-s-Al-Arabiya-interview.html>
, albeit with the deferential, family-owned al-Arabiya, Bin Salman said Saudis 
could live without oil by 2020. “I’ve been monitoring reactions and he really 
blew people away,” said the analyst Mohammed al-Yahya. “He spoke clearly and 
concisely.”

Bin Salman’s makeover has been fast and effective. Until 2015, Saudis gossiped 
about him being thuggish and corrupt. Now he is praised as ambitious, 
hardworking and open to argument. Foreigners are impressed by his ability to 
reel off statistics – preferring to speak Arabic but with good enough English 
to correct errors of interpretation.

“Some people are cautiously optimistic because he is changing things,” says a 
middle-aged businessman from Dhahran, describing a new informality that has 
dispensed with traditional flowingbisht cloaks, ghutra headdresses and 
excessive courtesy in the corridors of power.

 “The new style is almost Silicon Valley. But there is a lot of cynicism, too, 
because older people remember other big plans in the past to wean the country 
off oil and in the end the government always backed down. So there’s a sense 
that he is inexperienced and may not be dealing with reality.”

 That criticism applies, too, to the war in neighbouring Yemen, where the 
Saudisstand accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/saudi-arabia-scale-back-yemen-attacks-sanaa-airstrikes-toll-houthi-market-rises>
 of killing civilians in attacks on Houthi rebels. Assertiveness is the 
kingdom’s new watchword at home and across a troubled region where strategic
rivalry with Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/29/iran-saudi-arabia-yemen-conflict>
, upsetting an already volatile oil market, is the overarching theme.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4e9443b206ada036145c7fd229777c97d5686c%2F0_167_4535_2721%2F4535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mohammed%20bin%20Salman%3A%20the%20prince%20trying%20to%20wean%20Saudi%20Arabia%20off%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mohammed%20bin%20Salman%3A%20the%20prince%20trying%20to%20wean%20Saudi%20Arabia%20off%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4e9443b206ada036145c7fd229777c97d5686c%2F0_167_4535_2721%2F4535.jpg>
 A man walks at Riyadh National Museum. Tourism is one avenue Salman is hoping 
to explore. Photograph: Hasan Jamali/AP 
Few Saudis talk openly about the succession. On paper, King Salman’s heir is 
the crown prince, Mohammed Bin Nayef (MBN), the security supremo and minister 
of interior who is liked by western governments focused on terrorism. But many 
believe the king will eventually bypass him and hand power to his own son, also 
known as MBS.

 Another worry is overdependence on foreign consultants, McKinsey is one of 
the most important, who are insensitive to cultural issues and royal politics. 
“MBS is the prince of war and oil,” says Madawi Al-Rasheed, a London-based 
Saudi historian and fierce critic of the Al Saud. “His increasing stardom comes 
with a risk. If he succeeds, he will be tolerated. If he fails, he will be 
replaced when MBN becomes king.”

 Educated Saudis wonder out loud whether economic changes will have other 
implications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/22/austerity-saudi-style-cheap-oil-nudges-riyadh-toward-economic-reform>
. “It is all very well talking about business and investment and living without 
oil,” protests an exasperated thirtysomething Riyadh professional. “But what 
about political change, the legal system and social issues?”

Subsidies are already being cut. And if taxation is introduced to generate 
revenues, will royal wealth and privileges be excluded? “If people see that 
everyone is biting the bullet then they’ll accept taxes without asking for a 
parliament as long as they don’t feel someone else is getting their bread,” 
suggests another Saudi.

Bin Salman’s biggest difficulty is likely to be jobs, with a desperate need to 
reduce dependence on foreigners to get young Saudis into private sector jobs 
rather than the undemanding and unproductive state positions so many see as 
their birthright.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76d551059032d929058ec3e67f2f51f0e9cdb186%2F0_81_4112_2468%2F4112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mohammed%20bin%20Salman%3A%20the%20prince%20trying%20to%20wean%20Saudi%20Arabia%20off%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mohammed%20bin%20Salman%3A%20the%20prince%20trying%20to%20wean%20Saudi%20Arabia%20off%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmohammed-bin-salman-the-prince-trying-to-ween-saudi-arabia-off-oil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76d551059032d929058ec3e67f2f51f0e9cdb186%2F0_81_4112_2468%2F4112.jpg>
 The French president Francois Hollande (right) welcomes Bin Salman in Paris in 
2015. Photograph: Alain Jocard/AFP/Getty Images 
The prince talked about opportunities for women but stopped short of saying 
whether the longstanding ban on driving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/25/saudi-arabia-women-action-driving-laws>
 could end. Tourism is being billed as another new cash source, and there is 
talk of expanding entertainment and leisure opportunities, in a country with no 
cinemas and austere standards of public morality. Hardline clerics – and 
perhaps rival royals – are watching carefully.


“MBS is reasonably sharp and does want to change the kingdom. But it also 
clear that he is not economically literate and lacks public policy experience 
and is surrounded by people who pander to him,” a western academic who insists 
on remaining anonymous said.

“Yes, he does work long hours, he is ambitious and he’s not just a thief and 
thug. He clearly has the capacity to make things happen and he is willing to 
take risks. That is good to get things done but also dangerous in the long 
term.”


The jury will clearly be out for some time yet. “This is the first mile of a 
marathon,” mused a European diplomat in Riyadh. “People underestimated MBS, 
saying he is young and owes everything to his father. But he seems more 
determined than they thought and more eager to grasp details and numbers. And 
more than other royals he does realises the challenge in transforming a country 
that has depended on oil for almost its entire history.”
 