
More than 14% of England’s honeybee colonies died over the winter, the latest 
research from the British Beekeepers Association (BBKA) has found 
<http://www.bbka.org.uk/news_and_events/press_office/press_releases.php>. 

The BBKA’s annual survey of beekeepers across England’s found that winter 
losses were highest in the west country (18%) and lowest in the north of 
England (11.8).


The average reported losses for 2014/15 of 14.5% were higher than 2013/14 when 
only 9.6% of colonies perished, but much lower than the winter of 2012/13 when 
a third of hives died, and below the average losses since the survey began 
eight years ago of 19.3%.

The BBKA says winter losses remain at an “unacceptably high levels and are 
still in excess of what might be considered normal losses of 5-10%”. It blames 
poor and variable weather, bee diseases and parasites such as the varroa mite 
and starvation.

But Francis Ratnieks <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/profiles/128567/publications>, 
professor of apiculture at Sussex University, describes this year’s losses as 
very low and easily managed by beekeepers. “Honeybee colonies have the capacity 
to double in number every summer when they swarm, or the beekeepers splits the 
colony in two, so 14.5% winter losses are totally sustainable,” he says. “A 
good summer allowed the bees to forage and go into the winter well fed and 
strong.”

His own 100-strong apiary lost just two hives. “If you make sure your bees 
have food, a healthy queen and are treated for the varroa mite, you should be 
able to get winter losses down to single digits,” Ratnieks insists.

Bees are estimated to contribute £651m to the UK economy a year 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/earth/wildlife/11679210/Bees-contribute-more-to-British-economy-than-Royal-Family.html>
 through their pollination services. Some 85% of the UK’s apple crop and 45% of 
the strawberry crop relies on wild bees and managed honeybees to grow.

More than half of British adults say they would do more to help bees to 
thrive, but almost two thirds don’t know what they can do, according to 
additional research by the BBKA. It has launched a bee-friendly guide featuring 
classic Winnie-the-Pooh characters to illustrate simple steps people can take 
such as planting a flowering tree in your garden or building bee habitats.

None of the 900 hobby beekeepers who took part in the annual losses survey 
cited neonicotinoid pesticides as a reason for colony deaths despite their use 
beingtemporarily banned on certain crops across Europe over fears they are 
linked to bees decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bee-harming-pesticides-banned-europe>
. The two year ban from the end of 2013 followed a recommendation from the 
European Food Safety Authority, whichtoday launched 
<http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/press/news/150625b.htm> a major new project to 
establish a framework that aims to assess the risk to honeybee colonies of 
various threats including agricultural chemicals, parasites and environmental 
changes.
 