
Supermarkets <https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets> group Wm 
Morrison today reported cracking Christmas sales, outstripping its larger 
rivals with a jump of 6.5%.

The group, Britain's fourth-largest supermarkets chain, said total sales for 
the six weeks to 3 January were up by 11.2%, excluding fuel. The 6.5% increase 
in underlying sales, which strip out contributions from new stores, was ahead 
of analysts' expectations.

Chairman Sir Ian Gibson said the group served a record number of customers 
over the festive season and had continued to outperform the market.

The group remains cautious on the outlook for consumer spending and says the 
market will remain challenging. "In this environment we believeMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> value credentials will serve 
us and our customers well."

Morrisons is still searching for a chief executive to replace Marc Bolland, 
who waspoached by Marks & Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/nov/18/marc-bolland-marks-spencer> 
to run its food business. Bolland ison gardening leave  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/dec/04/morrisons-announce-departure-marc-bolland>
at Morrisons and the group said today it is still in talks with him on a 
departure date.

Morrisons' performance is the strongest of the big four grocery retailers, 
althoughall did well in December as shoppers splashed out on festive fare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/interactive/2010/jan/05/christmas-2009-retail-winners-losers>
.

Tesco, Britain's biggest retailer, enjoyed its best Christmas in three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/12/tesco-christmas-sales-figures>
, luring shoppers into its stores with the offer of extra Clubcard points and 
money off vouchers. Underlying sales in its UK chain grew by 4.9%.

Sainsbury's, Britain's third-largest food stores chain, also beat City 
forecasts, reporting a4.2% rise in like-for-like sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/07/sainsbury-record-christmas-performance>
.

One of the biggest winners over Christmas was the John Lewis-owned Waitrose 
chain,Britain's fastest-growing food retailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/11/waitrose-fastest-growing-supermarket-december>
, which notched up its biggest sales and market share gains since 2005.
 