
When I was 16, I was torn between trying to learn to play guitar like the 
Shadows’Hank Marvin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/13/hank-marvin-my-family-values>
 or the Indianapolis bebop marvelWes Montgomery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/wes-montgomery>. Me and my mate Dave used to 
stumble through Montgomery tunes on a couple of battered semi-acoustics, and 
after half an hour or so of it, in which we even bored ourselves, we’d play 
jazz LPs instead – Montgomery’s hip-looking albums for the Riverside label, 
Miles Davis’sKind of Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/aug/20/miles-davis-kind-blue> 
or Porgy and Bess or Sketches of Spain, with a good many of Gil Evans’ 
beautiful orchestral nuances excised by the shortcomings of the Dansette record 
player. Everybody we listened to was purely an instrumentalist – except for 
Mose Allison.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpCpekvOkwNM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpCpekvOkwNM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpCpekvOkwNM&media=>
Mose Allison obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/16/mose-allison-obituary> 
I thought Dave had let the side down at first by buying a record with singing 
on it, but Mose did things I didn’t know singers did. His lyrics were poetic, 
intelligent, satirical, and mostly they didn’t seem to be about love. His 
quirky piano-playing was jazzy but it was oddly inflected, as if he’d learned 
it like a second language. He seemed to understand bebop (I heard, with 
fascination, that he’d been a sideman forcool-jazz 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cool_jazz> saxophone star Stan Getz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/stan-getz>), but he was deeply rooted in the 
earthiness of the blues. He was a white kid at home and accepted in an 
African-American musical world, just like we wanted to be. He could write 
wonderful ironic poetry, as well as the kind of blistering putdown you vainly 
dreamed of being able come out with in the presence of a smartass.

He would arrive on stage, throw his jacket on the piano lid and barrel through 
classic songs at headlong speed

More than three decades later in the 1990s, when I started 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/jan/17/jazz.artsfeatures3> regularly 
hearing <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/oct/14/jazz.johnfordham> him 
play <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/sep/28/jazz.johnfordham> live on 
what became his twice-yearly trips to thePizza Express Jazz Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/aug/05/mose-allison-review> in Soho, 
London, it was wonderful to hear how much of the old bite and unsentimental 
realism remained, that he was still producing new material, and that his 
resourcefulness as a piano improviser had, if anything, expanded. In his lean, 
wise, grey-bearded 70s, he would arrive on stage as if passing through to a 
more urgent appointment somewhere else, throw his jacket on the piano lid and 
barrel through classic songs at headlong speed, draining them and moving on as 
if he were leaving empties on a bar. He didn’t talk much or tell anecdotes 
about what must have been a fascinating life, preferring to thumbnail-sketch 
the biographies and credit the importance of the southern country and blues 
artists, famous or unknown, whose work he would often cover. And he would play 
a great deal of piano, mixing insistent, boogying grooves with unexpectedly 
ornate flourishes and fills, without ever letting an underlying and hard-hit 
chordal punctuation stay quiet for long.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFM_5yfuQbF4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFM_5yfuQbF4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFM_5yfuQbF4&media=>
Timeless Allison lyrics – “Ever since the world ended, I don’t get out so 
much”, “Your mind’s on vacation but your mouth’s working overtime” and “Y’know 
if silence was golden, you couldn’t raise a dime” – never lost their caustic 
charm, and as the ages of many of his fans advanced along with him, it was also 
gratifying to witness him turning his scalpel on what life as a senior citizen 
could feel like. “The young man is the man of the hour, 35 years of purchasing 
power,” the octogenarian Allison would snap, over a rocking piano vamp and 
glittering boppish rejoinders that sounded as if he was still 35 himself – 
winding up Old Man Blues with the indictment: “An old man ain’t nothin’ in the 
USA.” In this new political era, we’ll miss him even more.
 