
The musician Mose Allison, who has died aged 89, could count the Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/who>, the Clash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/clash>, Bonnie Raitt, Van Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/van-morrison> and Georgie Fame among the 
fans of his acerbic songs. His scalpel-sharp lyrics were underpinned by 
assiduous researches of a line that went all the way back to the earliest roots 
of the blues.

Allison always managed to sound cool and in a hurry at the same time. Needing 
nothing more than a piano, a microphone and a rhythm section to fire off his 
own biting updates on country-blues, he would hustle through his repertoire of 
laconic social commentary, and the classic songs of Tampa Red, Willie Dixon and 
many others, as if trying to squeeze a Delta discography into a single set.

Rarely pausing for banter or biographical musings about himself or his heroes, 
the spare, faintly donnish Allison would clatter into the opening of a song 
when the last syllable of its namecheck was barely out of his mouth. The 
restless urban urgency of his methods brought a modernity (via bebop) to the 
earthy materials of the Delta, and a sophisticated irony to the direct and 
often accusatory themes of the blues.

The pianist, singer and occasional trumpeter never adapted his light, 
southern-inflected conversational voice to the spine-tingling hollers or the 
muscular laments of traditional blues. He used it instead as an almost 
rap-like, rhythmic monotone – the dynamics sometimes varied by an explosive, 
sustained sound, but more usually echoing a drummer’s busy, preoccupied mutter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmose-allison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6a3ba0ccdf7b2d828503e65b613cc3789892753%2F19_51_2811_1687%2F2811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mose%20Allison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmose-allison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mose%20Allison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmose-allison-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6a3ba0ccdf7b2d828503e65b613cc3789892753%2F19_51_2811_1687%2F2811.jpg>
 Mose Allison performing on the BBC’s Later … With Jools Holland in 2005. 
Photograph: Andre Csillag/Rex/Shutterstock 
In his early years, he was a piano accompanist and not a singer, working for 
various top saxophonists, and his keyboard playing retained a delightful 
eccentricity throughout his career, an uncategorisable style of whirling runs 
and marching left-hand countermelodies that was his alone.

And though the lyrics of Allison’s best songs became well known, his 
performances could always produce freshly disconcerting versions of the 
devastating one-liners that included “your mind’s on vacation but your mouth’s 
working overtime”, “I’m nobody today but I was somebody last night” and “ever 
since the world ended, I don’t go out so much”. “Mose, you got a good thing 
goin’,” Sonny Boy Williamson said to him. Dixon called him “a beautiful 
musician”.

Allison was born on his grandfather’s farm, near the village of Tippo, just 
inside the eastern rim of theMississippi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi> Delta. His father took over 
the business, and his mother taught at the local school – a connection that 
gave the boy a lifelong love of literature that significantly influenced his 
resources as a songwriter. Allison’s father was a good stride-style pianist 
and, at the age of five, the boy was sent for formal piano lessons. But it was 
the blues, boogie-woogie music and jazz he heard on the jukeboxes that really 
turned his head.

In a predominantly black corner of the US’s cotton-farming country in the 
1930s, Allison recollected that 60% of the jukebox fare would be country blues, 
and the remainder the big-band bravura of Count Basie and Tommy Dorsey – and he 
loved both. A gifted natural improviser, he was also attracted to the trumpet 
by the music ofLouis Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/louis-armstrong>, studying the instrument in 
high school and performing with it in local marching bands and dance bands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmose-allison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd128d6ba359f119cd2aeb792eb2fdc9bcb24c34d%2F409_505_4784_2870%2F4784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mose%20Allison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmose-allison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mose%20Allison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmose-allison-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd128d6ba359f119cd2aeb792eb2fdc9bcb24c34d%2F409_505_4784_2870%2F4784.jpg>
 Mose Allison in London in 1986. Photograph: AvalonRex/Shutterstock 
But family caution rather than the lure of jazz and blues determined Allison’s 
next step and he went to the University of Mississippi to study chemical 
engineering. Army bands allowed him to return to the trumpet and piano during a 
year of military service, however, and in 1947 he returned to college (this 
time as an economics major) but also became the leader of a jazz trio and a 
composer/arranger for the college band. He pulled out of full-time education a 
second time, to take a six-nights-a-week job playing piano and singing in a 
cocktail lounge near Lake Charles, Indiana, then moved to Louisiana State 
University to study English and philosophy, graduating in 1952.

But Allison’s career was beginning to roll by now. He began working all over 
the south-east and as far north as Denver, then went to New York to sample the 
frenetic modern jazz and bebop scene in 1956. He played piano with the saxists 
Stan Getz, Zoot Sims andGerry Mulligan 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-gerry-mulligan-1325265.html>
, but the invigorating New York scene encouraged him to draw together all the 
disparate influences in his musical sensibilities: the relaxed swing piano of 
Nat King Cole andErroll Garner <http://errollgarner.com>, the various angles on 
bebop adopted by Thelonious Monk,John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/apr/02/guardianobituaries.johnfordham> 
and Al Haig, and, of course, the distant childhood sounds of the blues singers.

Like Miles Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/music/miles-davis> in the same 
period, Allison was finding that bop could become a mechanical, formulaic 
exercise, and he was looking for something else. In 1957, Allison made Back 
Country Suite for the Prestige label, and, the following year, an Allison trio 
made its debut at the Café Bohemia in New York – with a young drummer,Paul 
Motian <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/24/paul-motian-obituary>, 
who was later to become a star.

Allison’s interweaving of swing’s elegance and his own eccentrically bumpy, 
bop-influenced rhythmic sense marked the arrival of a significant new force. He 
brought together a mix of jazz and country sounds new to 50s east coast 
hipsters, and on a single sung track (simply called Blues) he seemed to be 
opening up possibilities for a white voice exploring black material creatively 
rather than as pastiche that anticipated the white R&B boom of the decade still 
to come.

Albums such as Local Color (1957) and Autumn Song (1959) followed, with the 
first briefly featuring Allison’s muted trumpet and a haunting examination of
Duke Ellington <https://www.theguardian.com/film/duke-ellington>’s Don’t Ever 
Say Goodbye <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c-BJxEwCQCk>, and the second 
including more vocals, and some straight bop piano on one of the idiom’s 
classics,Groovin’ High <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JnXcKX4aBMc>. But he 
still saw himself as a pianist at least as much as a singer in this period, 
continuing to work with Getz intermittently – including a month-long engagement 
at the Montmartre club, Copenhagen, where the two performed as a duo.

Allison’s best songs surfaced ever more prolifically in the period between 
1960 and 1964, withI Don’t Worry About a Thing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tk345PK5gBA>, Your Mind Is on Vacation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pCpekvOkwNM> and Don’t Forget to Smile 
appearing on an impeccable series of albums for Atlantic. He began to tour 
internationally through the 60s and 70s, and his bluesy vocals and the 
enthusiasm of such influential fans as Morrison helped him avoid the effects of 
the rock-driven downturn in jazz’s fortunes in that period.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpCpekvOkwNM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpCpekvOkwNM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpCpekvOkwNM&media=>
 Mose Allison sings Your Mind Is on Vacation 
Allison appeared in Jeff Stein’s 1979 rock documentary The Kids Are Alright, 
about the Who, who covered his Young Man Blues. Regularly working with the 
bassist Mel Graves and drummer George Marsh, Allison toured steadily, and moved 
to the Elektra and then Blue Note labels in the 80s. The latter company sought 
to rebrand him through collaborations with various guests – from the New 
Orleans band on My Backyard (1989) to contemporary jazz stars including the 
trumpeterRandy Brecker <http://randybrecker.com>, saxophonist Joe Lovano 
<http://www.joelovano.com> and guitarist John Scofield 
<http://www.johnscofield.com> on The Earth Wants You in 1994.

But Allison never sounded better than when left to himself and he confirmed 
that the acuity of his observational powers was undimmed in beginning to turn 
his muse toward the insights and ironies of senior citizenship. The influence 
of long-gone southlands guitarists on his piano technique would always be 
audible under classic songs such as What’s Your Movie?, he would typically 
impart a defiant rather than romantic air to a standard ballad such as You Are 
My Sunshine, and the originalHow Much Truth (Can a Man Stand?) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IwHSXJ2IlGg>, delivered without an iota of 
reproof, could always tingle the spine.

At the PizzaExpress jazz club in London, which he took to visiting twice a 
year in the 90s and early 2000s, Allison would sometimes seem to be in a 
fascinating private reverie, in which stomping bluesy figures would wrestle 
with swirling, wind-in-trees melodies, or turn into a jerky clatter like a 
silent-movie soundtrack. Ain’t Got Nothing But theBlues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blues>, Trouble in Mind and Knock on Wood 
might hurtle by in a blur.

The pungency and vigour of Allison’s work with local sidemen at the 
PizzaExpress was admirably caught on a fine collection by Blue Note Records in 
2000 –The Mose Chronicles: Live in London Volumes 1 & 2 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Mose-Chronicles-Live-London/dp/B000056BAE>. But after 
1998, suspicious of studios and record companies, he avoided them until the 
producerJoe Henry <http://joehenrylovesyoumadly.com> tempted him back for the 
LA label Anti in 2008.

The result, a mix of covers and originals entitled The Way of the World and 
featuring a duet with his daughter, Amy, revealed the octogenarian to be to be 
just as sardonic, incisive, and vocally and instrumentally quirky as ever. In 
2013, Allison was named aNational Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master 
<https://www.arts.gov/honors/jazz>, and performed his song Was at the ceremony, 
with Amy accompanying him.

Back in the memorable days of Allison’s London visits, he would sometimes 
intone his 1982 album title “Just another middle-class white boy trying to have 
some fun,” as the piano notes flew by. That childhood pastime went on to work 
its inimitable magic for almost six decades.

Allison is survived by his wife, Audre Mae, and four children, Alissa, Amy, 
John and Janine.

• Mose Allison (John Allison Jr), musician, born 11 November 1927; died 15 
November 2016
 