
MPs are visiting Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sunderland> on 
Thursday to take evidence from local politicians and business representatives 
on the consequences of Britain leaving the EU.

The new Exiting the European Union select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/exiting-the-european-union-committee/>
 will ask key figures from the city and wider north-east what they want from 
the Brexit negotiations.

The committee, led by the Labour MP Hilary Benn, will also seek to understand 
why Sunderland voted so resoundingly to leave the EU.

To some outsiders, Sunderland’s 61.3% vote in favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/30/sunderland-looks-to-city-of-culture-bid-to-reunite-post-brexit>
 of leaving the European Union didn’t seem to make sense. “What about Nissan?” 
they asked. The Japanese car company provides 7,000 jobs at its plant in 
Washington, a few miles out of the city, and supports a further 40,000 in the 
UK supply chain. About 80% of the 500,000 cars the plant produces each year are 
exported, many to the EU.

Post-Brexit Sunderland: 'If this money doesn't go to the NHS, I will go mad'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/post-brexit-sunderland-if-this-money-doesnt-go-to-the-nhs-i-will-go-mad>
Others questioned how a region so reliant on EU funds could opt to leave the 
union that dished out the money. Sunderland has received more than £23m of 
direct investment from Europe since 2007, complemented by more than £130m of 
region-wide business support services accessible to a wide range of Sunderland 
firms,according to a report 
<http://www.pacec.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Sunderland-Bresit-Final-Report.pdf>
 commissioned by the city’s economic leadership board before the referendum.

The result was not much of a surprise to many people living in Sunderland, 
however. John Kelly, a Labour councillor for Washington North, which includes 
theNissan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> plant, defied his party 
line by voting to leave.

He told the Guardian that his constituents had been failed by globalisation. 
“My ward is one of the most deprived in the city of Sunderland and we weren’t 
seeing anything coming to us [from the EU]. Nissan has a fantastic workforce, 
is a fantastic employer, fantastic output, but that wasn’t being seen on the 
ground in Washington,” he said.

“Europe had become a symbol of globalisation. I’m a local ward representative 
and to me I’ve got to represent the best interests of my ward and I genuinely 
didn’t think that Europe was doing that for us any more. Globalisation and the 
fact that people have been forgotten about in the race to make money, that’s 
what has an impact on my residents.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmps-visit-sunderland-ask-what-city-wants-brexit-negotiations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2787488838dbbaac57e48432ab60d06d1246f285%2F0_209_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs%20visit%20Sunderland%20to%20ask%20what%20city%20wants%20from%20Brexit%20negotiations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmps-visit-sunderland-ask-what-city-wants-brexit-negotiations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%20visit%20Sunderland%20to%20ask%20what%20city%20wants%20from%20Brexit%20negotiations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmps-visit-sunderland-ask-what-city-wants-brexit-negotiations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2787488838dbbaac57e48432ab60d06d1246f285%2F0_209_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 A cheer reportedly rang through the Nissan factory when news of the leave vote 
came through. Photograph: Michael Adamucci/Reuters 
Many Nissan workers voted to leave – a cheer reportedly rang through the 
factory on the night shift when Sunderland’s vote came through, with one 
employeetelling the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/its-blackmail-really-nissan-employees-on-the-brexit-compensation-demand>
 later that 19 out of 20 workers on his Infiniti luxury car production line had 
voted out.

They, like Kelly, believed firmly that Nissan would not leave Washington – and 
they were proved right when, in late October, Nissan announced it was not only 
staying but wouldbuild two new models there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-decision-to-stay-in-sunderland-averts-catastrophic-consequences>
.

“There was no way on earth that Nissan, or Renault, the partners in [the] 
plant, were ever going to sacrifice a plant that has the highest output, the 
best workforce, the least amount of strikes,” said Kelly. He does not believe 
the EU will impose tariffs on Nissan. “It won’t happen because the Germans sell 
to us as many cars as we sell to them. Charge us 10% [extra], we’ll charge them 
10%,” he said.

Though Nissan’s future in Sunderland is secure for now, many businesses in the 
supply chain are faring less well. AV Dawson, a logistics company that 
transports and delivers the steel used to make Nissans, saw 15-year, 
multimillion-pound contracts fall through within days of the Brexit vote.

“It has been a real rollercoaster,” said Charlie Nettle, the company’s 
marketing and business development manager. “We saw it mostly in the 
construction sector, where we had three businesses that were looking to work 
with us who pulled out overnight because of loss of confidence due to Brexit. 
It was scary really to see that happen quite so quickly.”

AV Dawson’s directors made it clear to their workforce that they would be 
voting to stay in the EU, yet the majority of their employees voted the other 
way, said Nettle.

[Nissan leaving] was scaremongering. The quality of work we can produce in 
England is much greater than anywhere else
Jordan Griffiths 
Crane operator Ronnie Johnson, 64, said he never doubted that Nissan would 
stay in Sunderland, even when its chairman, Carlos Ghosn,issued a fairly bald 
threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/nissan-hard-brexit-compensation-new-uk-investment-tariffs>
 in late September that it may pull out of the north-east if it was unable to 
extract “compensation” from the government.

“Don’t you think they were holding the government to ransom? Saying ‘if you 
don’t give me this, we’ll go?’” he said. His colleague Jordan Griffiths, 24, 
also voted out. “In my personal opinion it was scaremongering. I always thought 
that the quality of work that we can produce in England is much greater than 
anywhere else. So if they really want top quality they are not going to go over 
just a couple of quid.”

He said he expected the uncompromising response from European leaders, who are 
determined that the UK should not get a better deal outside the EU. “Leaving, 
they were always going to make it hard for us because they don’t want other 
countries to follow us and leave Europe. But I think in the long run everything 
will be better for it,” he said, adding that for the first time “it did make 
you feel like you counted this time around”.

Giving evidence to the select committee in Sunderland on Thursday will be 
Richard Baker, the head of policy and strategy at theNorth East Local 
Enterprise Partnership <http://www.nelep.co.uk/>; John Elliott, the executive 
chairman of Ebac – which manufactures dehumidifiers and watercoolers in the 
north-east – and representative of campaign groupBusiness for Britain 
<https://businessforbritain.org/> in the north-east; Ross Smith, the director 
of policy at the north-east England chamber of commerce; and councillor Paul 
Watson, the leader of Sunderland city council and chair of theNorth East 
Combined Authority <http://www.northeastca.gov.uk/>.
 