
Max Richter’s Sleep 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2015/all-night-world-premiere-sleep>
, music specifically written to put you to sleep, will become the single 
longest continuous piece to be broadcast on Radio 3 this Saturday night/Sunday 
morning, and at eight hours is one of the longest live performances 
<http://www.deutschegrammophon.com/gb/cat/4795267> ever. Richter’s piece, 
however, is only the latest in a long line of musical soundscapes designed to 
accompany your journey through the wee hours. There are plenty of eight- or 
10-hour concoctions ofdelta-wave enhancing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=txQ6t4yPIM0> and theta-wave inducing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FKbo5lr9vGo> meditative musical medleys out 
there on YouTube, tapping into an apparently insatiable demand for somnolent 
soundscapes.

Sleep – as a metaphor for a heightened or transformed state of consciousness, 
or a route to the subconscious world of dreams, fantasy and imagination – is 
also something that has inspired composers to some of their most powerfully 
intoxicating works. So, as my homage to Richter’s eight-hour lullaby, here 
instead are 10 pieces of musicnot to put you to sleep – 10 pieces that turn 
falling asleep into a variously magical, creepy or supernatural drama.

1. Wagner: Die Walküre <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4tDP-K1dQ-M>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4tDP-K1dQ-M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4tDP-K1dQ-M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4tDP-K1dQ-M&media=>
The siren-song of Brünnhilde’s magical sleep into which her father, Wotan, 
casts her at the end of the opera, to be awoken by a vanquishing hero in the 
next.

2. Britten: The Turn of the Screw <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCQdI3ESo_g>

Flora’s chilling little ditty in the seventh scene of Benjamin Britten’s opera 
puts her dolly to sleep with a strange and haunting lullaby: “Today by the dead 
salt sea / Tomorrow her waxen lids may close / On the plains of Muscovy.”

3. Strauss: Die Frau ohne Schatten 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=74MHzaNDnvE>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D74MHzaNDnvE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D74MHzaNDnvE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D74MHzaNDnvE&media=>
Richard Strauss’s opera is suffused with sleep, dreams and fantastical 
nocturnal imaginings, as the Dyer is drugged to sleep and the Empress is 
haunted by her dreams.

4. Carter: Night Fantasies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oW2DmmDvyHk>

It’s not just in opera that things go bump in the night: in Elliott Carter’s 
1980 piano piece, the music has the surreal unpredictability of a dream (albeit 
one that charts “a period of wakefulness at night”). It’s a musical geometry of 
the weirdness and wonder of our visions and images, as Carter says, of “our 
inner life at a time when it is not dominated by strong, directive intentions 
or desires”.

5. Thomas Adès: The Tempest  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fdGD1XQVrag>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfdGD1XQVrag&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfdGD1XQVrag>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfdGD1XQVrag&media=>
Another magical operatic world in which Miranda is enchanted to sleep by her 
father, then awoken by Ferdinand, and in which Ariel puts a spell on the courts 
of Naples and Milan, sending them to a slumber from which they are awakened by 
Antonio and Sebastian’s attempt to commit murder most foul.

6. Debussy: Prélude à l’après-midi d’un faune 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rpw4-J49auQ> 

Debussy’s Prelude finds a faun in a half-awake reverie that was the 
inspiration for some of his most hallucinogenic music. As the composer said, 
the music depicts the faun of Mallarmé’s poem: “Tired of pursuing the timorous 
flight ofnymphs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nymphs> and naiads 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naiads>, he succumbs to intoxicating sleep, in 
which he can finally realise his dreams of possession in universal nature.”

7. Handel: Semele <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqHe4FAKYhI> 

In which Somnus, the god of sleep himself, is the magical agent of the tragic 
drama of Semele’s love for Jupiter.

8. Lully: Atys  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3FUARvnau0>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di3FUARvnau0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di3FUARvnau0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di3FUARvnau0&media=>
Another baroque opera with sleep at its centre, as Atys is consoled by 
pleasant dreams and warned by bad dreams – a vision of the consequences of what 
happens when you mess with the gods …

9. Elgar: Sea Slumber Song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sEDHaJ1mn5M> 

A setting of Roden Noel’s words, the first of Elgar’s Sea Pictures turns the 
sea into a lulling, swelling, sighing, sensual sensorium: “Sea-sound, like 
violins / To slumber woos and wins.”

10. Brahms: Lullaby <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IXcGORjWte8> 

OK, it had to make the list: the sound of the song that has sent countless 
children to the land of nod with its cradling melody and swaddling harmony. 
Here it is on an epic 12-hour loop …
 