
Greenpeace <https://www.savethearctic.org/> this week began what they’re 
calling “a month-long run of Titanic-themed orchestral protests against Arctic 
drilling” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/greenpeace-adds-a-new-string-to-its-bow-with-musical-protest-at-shell>
. “Orchestral” might be overstating and also underselling it, since this isn’t 
really about full orchestras playing for Greenpeace, and although classical 
musicians are involved, there are also bagpipers and brass bands and many other 
musicians.

Greenpeace performs Arctic requiem in effort to touch hearts over Shell 
drilling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/greenpeace-adds-a-new-string-to-its-bow-with-musical-protest-at-shell>
But on Monday, outside Shell’s offices, the musical protest began with the 
Crystal Palace Quartet playing the four movements ofGreenpeace’s Requiem for 
Arctic Ice <https://soundcloud.com/greenpeaceuk-1/sets/requiem-for-arctic-ice>, 
a multi-authored miscellany featuring new pieces by Nehemiah Luckett and Chris 
Garrard, and donated tracks by John Metcalfe and Rachel Portman.

Inspired by the string quartet that famously played as the Titanic went down, 
it’s the ice that felled the passenger liner that is precisely what is at risk 
– Shell’s drilling would only accelerate climate change in the Arctic, say 
Greenpeace. The NGO stateson their website <https://music.savethearctic.org/#/>:

Shell are about to drill for oil in the Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic>. The last time they tried, they made 
dangerous mistakes and faced criminal charges. But drilling is just as risky 
now – the US government says there’s a 75% chance of an oil spill if Shell 
manages to extract oil. This oil must be left in the ground to avoid 
catastrophic climate change.

The tone of the music is soft-focused and lamenting; more interesting is the 
way Greenpeace have made the music reflect the changing – and increasing – wave 
of support for their anti-drilling campaign online,as this site for the musical 
protest <https://music.savethearctic.org/#/>will keep tolling its requiem until 
Shell is out of the Arctic.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fmusical-activism-greenpeace-is-not-the-first%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438690155818%2F84a71418-3b80-438d-96f4-493cec2602c1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Musical%20activism%3A%20Greenpeace%20is%20not%20the%20first&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fmusical-activism-greenpeace-is-not-the-first%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Musical%20activism%3A%20Greenpeace%20is%20not%20the%20first&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fmusical-activism-greenpeace-is-not-the-first%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438690155818%2F84a71418-3b80-438d-96f4-493cec2602c1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Warmer global temperatures are leading to melting glaciers, with catastrophic 
short- and long-term ramifications. Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
Greenpeace’s campaign mobilises the power of music to accommodate meanings 
that we associate with the sounds we hear. Their “Requiem” is only about 
climate change and Arctic protest because of the context in which it is 
performed, and because of the titles the individual movements have been given 
(The Northernmost Part, Our Movement Rises, The Rig Approaches, And We Will 
Defend). Musically speaking, there are many more effective and more powerful 
pieces that make a meaningful connection between soundscape and landscape, and 
voice the anger and desperation that many composers feel about this looming 
ecological disaster we all face, as well as the wonder they experience when 
confronted by the power of natural forces at their rawest and most awesome. 
Here are six examples:


Brett Dean: Pastoral Symphony <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e648gw#b062mlyr>

The Aurora Orchestra’s performance at the Proms on 2 August revealed this 
piece as a furious cry against the deforestation of Dean’s native Australia, 
and the bird life that has been lost as a result. But whatever the inspiration, 
in performance the piece works as a single arc of desperate birdsong in 
conflict with man-made machines.

Tansy Davies: Re-greening <http://www.nyo.org.uk/summer-2015>

Currently in rehearsal with the National Youth Orchestra, Davies’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/03/facing-the-music-composer-tansy-davies>
 work will be an awakening of “an ebullient spring from her long winter 
slumber”. Performed from memory, the piece is a ritual of movement, song and 
instrumental music that will be unveiled at the Snape Maltings concert hall on 
Thursday, touring to Birmingham, the Proms and Berlin.

Peter Maxwell Davies: Symphony No 8, Antarctic 
<http://www.maxopus.com/resources_detail.aspx?key=46>

Davies’s symphony commemorates his journey into the Antarctic, and is an 
orchestral hymn to the wonders he encountered on his journey. He heard, on the 
boat south, “the ice crack and split before the bow, then roar along, keel to 
stern, in a tumultuous clatter of slabs and shards”. He also described the 
sound of an avalanche he saw as the ship passed between mountains of ice: “the 
mightiest, gentlest, longest whisper ever. It was a sound that seemed almost 
quieter than the silence that surrounded it”.

Vaughan Williams: Symphony No 7, Antarctica 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XaKLLnrhzw>

Based on his score for the film Scott of the Antarctic, VW’s symphony is 
focused more on humanity’s vainglorious dominion over the elements in the 
dramatisation of Scott’s tragedy, but it’s also an evocation of the vastness of 
the Antarctic; a paean to an ice-scape that is now imperilled by humanity, 
rather than the other way round.

John Luther Adams: In the White Silence 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gXHzxMJrf9g&list=PL4sapy99eYWo6UDWqwWD3_56r8UZWFHgn>

A 75-minute work by Adams – often slow-moving, when not actually static – 
which creates a soundscape that takes on the character of a meditation in a 
physical landscape when you’re listening to it. It’s a piece that makes you 
part of the ecology of a musical landscape, a sounding metaphor for a deep 
engagement with the natural environment.

Chris Watson: Vatnajökull <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CH2o-FGrWdE>

The metaphor becomes real: the sounds of an Icelandic glacier that Chris 
Watson recorded and turned into a 18-minute sonic tone-poem for which the 
adjective “elemental” is absolutely accurate: Watson’s recording seems to puts 
you inside the ice, to make you part of the glacier’s heaving, cracking journey 
into the sea.
 