
We usually talk about the way music moves us – to joy, passion, excitement, 
melancholy, fury even – but music can also be put to much darker uses, 
something that is rarely discussed. Over the course of Radio 3’sWhy Music? 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02zjcpx> weekend, Morag Grant 
<http://www.mjgrant.eu/mjg/mjgrant.eu.html> and Suzanne Cusick 
<http://music.as.nyu.edu/object/suzannecusick.html> threw light on the 
disturbing history of music’s use in, and as, torture.

The impetus for much of their research 
<http://www.radical-musicology.org.uk/2008/Cusick.htm> over the past few years 
was the revelation of the ways music was one of the tools used to degrade and 
destabilise prisoners in thewar on terror 
<http://www.feinstein.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?p=senate-intelligence-committee-study-on-cia-detention-and-interrogation-program>
 in locations includingIraq and Guantanamo Bay 
<http://www.sibetrans.com/trans/articulo/152/music-as-torture-music-as-weapon>. 
For example, playing music – often chosen to be as culturally offensive as 
possible to the cadre of detained prisoners –at devastatingly loud volume for 
long but unpredictable periods 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayFulltext?type=6&fid=1674932&jid=SAM&volumeId=2&issueId=01&aid=1674928&bodyId=&membershipNumber=&societyETOCSession=&fulltextType=RA&fileId=S1752196308080012>
, meant that prisoners were deprived of control of sleep, but also of their 
ability to find an aural space that was not invaded by their captors.

Music at loud volumes goes into your bones and violates a prisoner’s inner 
being as well as their external environment. But this isn’t just a feature of 
the recent past: as Grant and Cusick’s research –and that of others 
<http://www.social-musicology.net/socmus/music_and_torture.html> – and the 
testimony of captors and prisoners 
<http://www.sibetrans.com/trans/articulo/152/music-as-torture-music-as-weapon> 
makes clear, the use of music in conflict in general, and in torture in 
particular, has along and grim history 
<http://www.mjgrant.eu/mjg/mcs_files/Music%20Conflict%20and%20the%20State_Final%20Report.pdf>
 especially in totalitarian regimes throughout the 20th century, but also in 
many other contexts from the Middle Ages on.


As Grant <http://www.mjgrant.eu/mjg/mcs.html> and Cusick’s work 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=1674928&fileId=S1752196308080012>
 confirms, music is value-neutral. It is what we make of it, and how we use it. 
Of course it can be used to heal, to comfort, to console, to offer existential 
transcendence and emotional escape, yet it can also be weaponised. One 
consequence of their work ought to be that the use of music in conflict 
situations should be recognised - and banned - when it is used in contexts of 
cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment. It’s disturbing reading, but this 
research –in all of these links 
<http://www.social-musicology.net/socmus/music_and_torture.html> – reveals a 
bleak phenomenon of musical history that needs to be faced up to, accounted 
for, and stopped.
 