
It may take time for the full story of the death in Syria of the Hezbollah 
military commander Mustafa Badreddine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/hezbollah-commander-killed-israel-mustafa-badreddine>
 to emerge – was he killed in Damascus or elsewhere, by a car bomb, artillery 
shell or an airstrike? In the chaos of war, establishing even basic facts is 
not easy.

But what is certain is that he had acquired many enemies over a long and 
violent career. Israel tops the list, but Hezbollah’s backing for the Syrian 
president,Bashar al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, 
widens the circle of suspects.

Sunni Saudi Arabia and its Gulf allies loathe the Lebanese group as a proxy of 
Shia Iran, their bitter rival. Sunni rebel groups in Syria, such as the 
al-Qaida affiliateal-Nusra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/syria-al-qaida-group-jabhat-al-nusra-terror-attacks-russia>
 Front or less extreme Islamist outfits, would certainly have the motive and 
possibly the capability to strike a blow.

Mustafa Badreddine: the Hezbollah leader who left no footprints
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/mustafa-badreddine-the-hezbollah-leader-who-left-no-footprints>
In a macabre way, Badreddine’s demise provides a useful prism through which to 
view the current crises of the Middle East.Syria’s five-year war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/syria-civil-war-five-years-guardian-reporting>
 is the centrepiece of this bloody turmoil – with regional powers ranged on 
opposing sides – though their competition extends as far afield as Iraq, Yemen 
and Bahrain.


His career spanned the dark underside of more than three decades: from his 
involvement in the bombing of the US and French embassies in Kuwait in 1983, 
through to Hezbollah’s role in the assassination of the Lebanese prime minister 
Rafiq al-Hariri in 2005 – for which he was formally indicted by a UN-backed 
tribunal.

But Hezbollah’s intervention in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/07/hezbollah-syria-assad-win-conflict>
, at first clandestine and then open, has seen it play a crucial military role 
in support of the Assad regime, a diversion from its founding motivation as the 
“resistance” – as all Lebanese call it – whose originalraison d’être was 
fighting Israel after the 1982 invasion. It is estimated to have lost up to 
1,000 men since 2011.

There are striking parallels with the fate of Badreddine’s predecessor, Imad 
Mughniyeh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/07/wikileaks-syria-hezbollah-assassination>
. Haj Radwan, as he was known, was assassinated in a Damascus suburb in 2008 in 
a sophisticated car bombing that turned out – long after the event – to have 
been a joint operation by the CIA and Israel’sMossad secret service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/29/israel-mossad-spy-agency-recruitment>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmustafa-badreddine-violent-hezbollah-career-enemies-lebanon-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc92cda019aa10f523869c26413b3eb905a0d2379%2F0_140_3444_2067%2F3444.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mustafa%20Badreddine%3A%20a%20long%2C%20violent%20career%20won%20him%20many%20enemies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmustafa-badreddine-violent-hezbollah-career-enemies-lebanon-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mustafa%20Badreddine%3A%20a%20long%2C%20violent%20career%20won%20him%20many%20enemies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmustafa-badreddine-violent-hezbollah-career-enemies-lebanon-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc92cda019aa10f523869c26413b3eb905a0d2379%2F0_140_3444_2067%2F3444.jpg>
 Mourners carry the coffin of Hezbollah commander Imad Mughniyeh in 2008 after 
he was killed in a car bombing. Photograph: Hussein Malla/AP 
Israel’s refusal to comment on the latest killing was entirely predictable, 
though one senior former security official hailed it as “good news”, while 
adding: “Remember that those operating inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> today have a lot of haters without 
Israel.”

Still, Israel has repeatedly targeted Hezbollah since the 2006 war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/jul/12/lessons-second-lebanon-war>
, and has mounted repeated airstrikes against it in both Syria and Lebanon over 
the last five years, often targeting weapons convoys while insisting it was not 
involved in the conflict. It fears the opening of a new front on the occupied
Golan Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2015/jun/19/israelis-watch-intently-as-syrian-rebel-forces-approach-golan-heights-border>
.

Leading Hezbollah commander and key Israel target killed in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/hezbollah-commander-killed-israel-mustafa-badreddine>
According to one report, rebels of the Jaish al-Sunna group claimed Badreddine 
was killed in an attack on a Hezbollah operations room in Khan Touman, near the 
northern city of Aleppo,the scene of recent heavy fighting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/05/the-guardian-view-on-syria-the-agonies-of-aleppo>
. Whether true or not, that hints at the scale of Hezbollah’s presence in Syria.

The group’s latest martyr will be mourned and praised in Beirut, Damascus and 
Tehran, where the “axis of resistance” is celebrated. But there will be few 
tears in other Middle Eastern capitals, whereHassan Nasrallah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/17/hezbollah-leader-anti-islam-film>
, Hezbollah’s secretary general, is loathed for his loyalty to Assad and his 
invective against Arab autocrats.

Saudi Arabia, for example, recently cut off financial aid to the eternally 
weak Lebanese government because of its tolerance of Hezbollah as an armed 
state within a state – andthe foothold it gives Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/18/advantage-iran-in-lebanese-political-proxy-battle-with-saudi-arabia>
 in the heart of the Levant.

“The killing of Badreddine is an indication of the sort of people they are,” 
said a senior Gulf official. “He was a hijacker and an assassin, and a 
commander ofHezbollah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hezbollah>.”

 