
The creaking Russian helicopter lands in an open field in remote Wai, a town 
in South Sudan’s Jonglei state. The sky is perfectly clear; the temperature 
reaches 45 degrees. Women wave the South Sudanese flag to welcome the UN’s top 
humanitarian official, Valerie Amos, whoarrives with Unesco peace envoy 
<http://www.unocha.org/eastern-africa/top-stories/south-sudan-high-profile-mission-reclaim-global-attention-photo-gallery>
 and American actor Forest Whitaker. His peace and development initiative,
founded in 2012 
<http://wpdi.org/our-work/programs/youth-peacemaker-network-south-sudan>, works 
across the region.

They’ve come with a small group from the capital Juba to see how the UN is 
managing around 25,000 women, men and children who arrived in late December, 
fleeing acivil war <http://www.hrw.org/reports/2014/12/10/ending-era-injustice> 
that has entered its second year and claimed tens of thousands of lives.

It’s a remarkable operation, establishing basic but workable services. Local 
leaders press Amos for more help – especially for digging bore-holes for water 
– and complain that the central government isn’t listening to their demands. I’m
observing as a journalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/10/valerie-amos-south-sudan-arms-embargo-un>
, as Amos is leaving her position in March and touring nations with the most 
desperate needs.

Her visit was my introduction to South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> since moving here recently with 
my partner, who works for an international aid organisation in advocacy and 
campaigns.

Neither of us had been to East Africa before we arrived, but we knew something 
of the country through friends who worked with the South Sudanese community in 
Sydney. The country’s political strife felt like a distant issue. I saw the 
occasional news aboutcommunal violence 
<http://www.smh.com.au/world/hopes-draw-australias-south-sudanese-home-20130712-2puhr.html>
, pleas for Canberra toplay 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2014/03/07/peace-appeal-south-sudanese-australians>
 a larger role in resolving the crisis and events such as the oneorganised 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/crowd-funding-for-young-asylum-seekers-to-tell-their-stories-20141204-120b27.html>
 by my friend, photographer Conor Ashleigh, which helped teach young South 
Sudanese and Afghan youth how to use a camera (aside from taking selfies).

At first, the idea of relocating to a war zone elicited curious and confused 
stares from friends and family, but both of us have spent time in challenging 
nations. We’d both discussed for a long time our desire for a change of scene, 
away from Australia.

It wasn’t such a leap, then, to leave the comforts of home. We wanted to be 
more than just temporary bystanders, and had the chance to experience the inner 
workings of the world’s newest nation. It didn’t take long for my girlfriend to 
convince me that her job in South Sudan would give me the opportunity to deepen 
my experience as a journalist, while avoiding the usual fly-in fly-out habits.

Juba, where we live, has poor infrastructure, few paved roads and an excess of 
dust, but there are also bars on the Nile and a growing use of social media. We 
live in a simple apartment in a compound in the middle of the city. There’s a 
strict nightly curfew. Security isn’t excessive – this isn’t Iraq or 
Afghanistan – but streetlights are almost non-existent and it’s unwise to walk 
alone when the sun goes down.


It’s safe to walk the streets during the day, though, and I’ve already lost 
count of the times I’ve been asked whether I know relatives living in Melbourne 
or Sydney’s big South Sudanese populations. Over 19,000 South Sudanese live in 
Australia – many refugees, who arrived over the last decade. People I meet are 
happy that their family members are safe and thriving away from South Sudan.

A government worker last week quizzed me on the Socceroos’ career prospects. 
He knew far more about them than me. Like many places I visit, apart from areas 
in the Middle East, Australia is seen as a benign force in the world.

Many of us know Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> as the place 
Bob Geldof used to visit, a continent defined by aid. That image was false, but 
it remains the case that without humanitarian aid, South Sudan – created with 
huge fanfare in 2011 – would likely collapse in many areas.

There are other descriptions: journalist Ken Silverstein wrote 
<http://gawker.com/why-is-south-sudan-a-hellhole-blame-george-clooney-1683838565>
 in February this year that after its creation, the country became the “world’s 
emotional petting zoo”. Alex De Waal, writing in African Affairs,argued 
<http://afraf.oxfordjournals.org/content/113/452/347.abstract> that “South 
Sudan obtained independence in July 2011 as a kleptocracy”. The Guardian’s 
Daniel Howden wrote that the country was born from a “seductive story that 
could be well told by handsome movie stars” like George Clooney.

I’ll be exploring other questions during my time here, too. What role did 
Washington’sdesperation 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175878/tomgram%3A_nick_turse,_christmas_in_july_and_the_collapse_of_america%27s_great_african_experiment/>
 for an African success story play in creating the current mess? Why is the 
African Uniondragging its feet 
<http://africanarguments.org/2015/02/02/no-peace-no-justice-how-the-african-union-is-failing-south-sudan-by-david-k-deng/>
 on human rights? Wikileaks cablesconfirm 
<http://www.counterpunch.org/2014/01/23/the-usa-v-china-in-south-sudan/> that 
US administrations were deeply involved in funding all sides of the brutal war 
that led to the 2011 independence; US Christian Evangelicals were key to 
building support for the soon-to-be independent Christian nation back at home.

Being in South Sudan will also force me to face the complex relationships that 
exist in a developing nation: betweenjournalists and NGOs 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/listeningpost/2015/02/closer-ties-journalists-ngos-150207143507517.html>
, and Western aid donors and their recipients. How much money stays in the 
pockets of foreign contractors and how much reaches the locals?

During my visit to Wai, the military governor of the rebel-held area said: “We 
are at war but at the end of the day we are one nation.” It was a hopeful plea, 
despite all sides committing horrendous abuses, at a time when South Sudan 
needs unity, reconciliation and accountability. It also leads to the most 
crucial question of all: what hope is there for a durable peace agreement 
between the warring parties, to avoid the ongoing displacement of millions of 
people andsave 
<http://www.frontier-economics.com/news/new-frontier-report-highlights-economic-cost-war-south-sudan/>
 billions of dollars?
 