
A powerful parliamentary group has called for the National Grid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalgrid> to be stripped of its 
powers for balancing the energy system in Britain due to a potential conflict 
of interest.

The House of Commons energy and climate change committee is urging the 
government to transfer control for ensuring all methods are used to keep the 
lights on to a newly created independent system operator (ISO).

The committee report, Low Carbon Network Infrastructure, says the system needs 
a shake up just days after the Energy Institute complained that continual 
changes in energy policywere frightening away investment. 
<https://www.energyinst.org/media-relations/media-centre/1658>

“The government should set out its intentions regarding an ISO as soon as 
possible, and consult on a detailed, staged plan for their implementation, so 
as to avoid injecting uncertainty into the energy sector,” recommends the 
report.

Angus MacNeil MP, thecommittee chair, said: “National Grid’s technical 
expertise in operating the national energy system must be weighed against its 
potential conflicts of interest. The independent system operator model has 
worked in the USA. It is time for it to be brought to these shores.”

The National Grid, a privately owned company listed on the stock market, owns 
the main national pipes and pylons in England and Wales but also has stakes in 
two interconnector power links with the continent with plans to build many more.

EDF Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> has been among 
those companies that have questioned whether the National Grid is conflicted. A 
spokesperson for the Department of Energysaid: “There is a strong case for 
greater independence for the system operator to promote more competition in our 
electricity system.

“We are working alongside National Grid and Ofgem to see how we can ensure our 
electricity system is as secure, flexible and independent as possible, whilst 
operating in the best interest of consumers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fnational-grid-needs-overhaul-say-energy-committee-mps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf90c0a2c87c9951f1c05ad1c48d0c555c45e9c4%2F0_273_1902_2377%2F1902.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=National%20Grid%20needs%20overhaul%2C%20say%20energy%20committee%20MPs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fnational-grid-needs-overhaul-say-energy-committee-mps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=National%20Grid%20needs%20overhaul%2C%20say%20energy%20committee%20MPs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fnational-grid-needs-overhaul-say-energy-committee-mps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf90c0a2c87c9951f1c05ad1c48d0c555c45e9c4%2F0_273_1902_2377%2F1902.jpg>
 Angus MacNeil, chair of the energy and climate change committee. Photograph: 
Michael Stephens/PA 
Labour said it supported the report’s findings. “With the tech-driven 
transformation of the energy market that is well under way, together with 
legitimate concerns about conflicts of interest for National Grid, these 
proposals should be given serious consideration,” said shadow energy minister 
Alan Whitehead.

There is no recommendation in the select committee report about whether any 
new ISO should be privately owned, non-profit or state sector.

Critics have argued that the National Grid is unlikely to fully support demand 
reduction or other ways of reducing power usage in Britain because it has a 
commercial interest in seeing more use of its infrastructure.

The committee specifically recommends much more electricity storage and demand 
reduction is deployed at scale as soon as possible and warns these moves are 
being hampered by out of date regulations.

“Innovative solutions like storage and DSR [demand side response] to 
21st-century energy problems have been held back by legislative and regulatory 
inertia,” said MacNeil, who represents the Scottish National party. He accepted 
the government was already committed to addressing some of these issues but 
said the committee would hold it to account.

 “[The energy department] must also learn lessons from these policy lags so as 
to be better prepared for ongoing changes,” he said.

 The committee found that small-scale generators faced long and uncertain 
queues to connect to the National Grid and recommended a review of connection 
costs.

MacNeil said: “The UK needs clean, renewable power, but it won’t be built if 
it is too costly or difficult for generators to connect to the electricity 
grid. Distribution networks have been overwhelmed at times by the challenge of 
integrating small-scale renewables.”

The National Grid fought back against the report’s findings, saying the recent 
report by Andrew Adonis, from the National Infrastructure Commission, found no 
sign that the grid had up till now had negatively affected consumers.

“Our priority as a system operator will always be balancing the system 
minute-by-minute and getting the best value for billpayers, which is what the 
current system provides,” said a National Grid spokesperson.

“The costs and risks of introducing further change to market structures must 
be proportional to any benefit. There is little evidence that an independent 
system operator model would provide any benefits that would justify the cost to 
households, potential disruption to much of the energy sector, and the risks to 
security of supply such uncertainty could create.”

Jonathan Marshall, an energy analyst at the non-profit Energy and Climate 
Intelligence Unit <http://eciu.net>, believes the committee report has raised 
important questions. He said: “The committee is right to suggest that we have a 
20th-century grid that isn’t fit for the 21st century. With the national 
infrastructure commission, EnergyUK and others also calling for a move to a 
flexible grid, it’s clear that the system desperately needs upgrading.

“The UK electricity grid is currently stuck in a mould that favours old 
fashioned, centralised power stations that do not allow new technologies to 
compete fairly. Without swift and efficient upgrades, the system will continue 
to favour ageing and increasingly unreliable power stations.”
 