
The award-winning team behind Netflix’s new royal drama The Crown has already 
“mapped out” the next two seasons of the biopic, with the action running up to 
the end of the 1980s and the marriage of Diana to Prince Charles.

The first season deals with the relationship between Princess Margaret and 
Group Captain Peter Townsend in the 1950s as well as the Queen’s accession to 
the throne. In an interview with the Guardian, Andy Harries, the co-founder of 
Left Bank Pictures, said: “There are so many things in [the next series] – 
Thatcher, Blair, Diana. But I’m sureNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> will want to wait and see how this 
one goes first.”

Three lawyers worked on the current series, which launches on 4 November, 
because its writer, Peter Morgan, and the Left Bank production team were keen 
to avoid legal threats from those depicted who are still alive.

Netflix's glittering Crown could leave BBC looking a little dull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/31/netflix-glittering-crown-bbc-dull-launch-tv>
The fact that the series is launching on the US-based streaming service has 
highlighted the expansion of global entertainment groups into the UK. “This is 
a very, very British project with very experienced British talent and then we 
working for a global media company,” said Harries, who received an Academy 
Award nomination as producer ofThe Queen 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Queen_%28film%29>, also with Morgan.

Harries, Morgan and director Stephen Daldry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-daldry> went to the US believing 
they would probably end up with a global partner for the BBC in the UK. 
Netflix, however, had already “mapped out their global rollout” internally and 
offered £100m for the two series within 40 minutes.

“I came out of the room, I felt like I’d been in Tutankhamun’s tomb or 
something,” said Harries. “They said: ‘Yes, we will pay for it, we will support 
you, you can do what you want and by the way it will be launching in 190 
countries at the same time.’ It’s staggering! It’s just a different world and 
this is where the world is going.”

Netflix was looking for content that would help it grow not just in the UK but 
globally and which might attract older subscribers. The UK marketing plan 
involves special screenings for the Women’s Institute.

Harries admits that his mother might have to become a Netflix subscriber to 
watch the show.
 