
Chennupati Jagadish, a physics professor and neurotechnologist, was not aware 
he had been nominated for a companion of the order of Australia (AC) when he 
received a letter telling him he would receive it onAustralia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day>.

“When I received the letter I felt very humbled, grateful and honoured,” he 
says.

Having never been recognised in such a public way for his distinguished career 
of research and service to science, receiving the highest award in the order 
also came as a shock.

“That again is such a big surprise,” Jagadish says.

His research in nanotechnology is in technologies that are on the verge of 
ubiquity: he is helping to develop a new class of lasers with applications in 
telecommunications and new lightweight solar cells with increased efficiency, 
among other projects.

Lessons nanotechnology can learn from past mistakes | Michele Catanzaro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/small-world/2013/sep/16/nanotechnology-lessons-safety>
Perhaps most interesting is new research on neuromorphic cells – artificial, 
trainable neurons – or what Jagadish calls a “brain on a chip”.

“We try to use nanotechnology to train the neurons to grow,” he says. 

The new technology could dramatically change our assumptions about computing 
power.

“Last year we only started that work and this is something we’ll be focusing 
on,” he says. “I’m learning a lot. It’s a very exciting area.”

Jagadish is a professor of physics at the Australian National University, 
where he has supervised more than 40 doctoral students from Australia and 
overseas. He is also the vice-president of the Australian Academy of Science 
<http://www.science.org.au/> and founded the Australian Nanotechnology Network 
<http://ausnano.net/>, which has more than 1,400 members.

He says: “Stem education [science, technology, education and mathematics] is 
absolutely critical, not only for science but for the country.

Small is beautiful – nanotechnology in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/small-world/gallery/2013/nov/22/small-is-beautiful-nanotechnology-in-pictures>
“I’m very passionate about that. A Stem-trained workforce is critical if you 
want to develop innovative industries, technologies and a knowledge-based 
economy.”

He hopes his award will increase awareness of the value of science, even if it 
means more work.

“They say that rest is for the weak,” he says. “I say, ‘Look, I’m having fun.’ 
Science is fun for me and when you’re having fun you don’t really look at how 
long you’re working.”
 