
The new Spider-Man, the star of an interracial relationship drama called 
Loving and a Spanish horror actor are among the contenders for this year’s 
Bafta rising star award.

Tom Holland, a 22-year-old from Kingston upon Thames, is perceived as the 
frontrunner by dint of having the highest-profile gig: he’s the new webslinger 
in Marvel’s movie franchise. Holland, a former stage Billy Elliot who, aged 15, 
starred in tsunami drama The Impossible, featured in last year’s Avengers movie 
Captain America: Civil War. A new Spider-Man film with him in the title role is 
scheduled forrelease this summer 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/news/1597810/the-spider-man-homecoming-trailer-is-here-and-its>
.

Nearly 13 years his senior, Ruth Negga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/17/ruth-negga-hollywood-12-years-a-slave-misfits-preacher-iona-loving>
 – who turns 35 on 7 January – is another Marvel graduate, having found 
mainstream fame on TV show Agents of SHIELD. The actor, who was born in 
Ethiopia and brought up in Ireland, is also seen as a contender for a best 
actress Oscar nomination for her role as Mildred Loving in Jeff Nichols’s
acclaimed tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/loving-review-civil-rights-tale-marries-heartfelt-drama-with-too-much-restraint>
 of a couple battling miscegenation laws in 1960s America.

Ruth Negga: ‘I never fitted anywhere – in life or in Hollywood’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/17/ruth-negga-hollywood-12-years-a-slave-misfits-preacher-iona-loving>
The three other contenders in an eclectic field are Lucas Hedges, a 
2o-year-old who starred in Wes Anderson’s Moonrise Kingdom and has won acclaim 
for his role as a difficult teen who loses his father in forthcomingManchester 
by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
; Spanish actorLaia Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/laia-costa-victoria-one-take-thriller-interview>
, 31, who starred in one-shot German thrillerVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/03/victoria-sebastian-schipper-observer-review>
, and 20-year-old actor and model Anya Taylor-Joy, an American-born Argentinian 
Brit who took the lead in arthouse horror filmThe Witch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/the-witch-review-a-eerie-campfire-tale-that-gets-under-your-skin>
.

The nominations, which were decided by a panel, were announced in London by 
2009 winnerNoel Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/22/noel-clarke-brotherhood-kidulthood-make-films-cant-ignore>
. Last year’s award went to Star Wars: The Force Awakens leadJohn Boyega 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/21/john-boyega-kathryn-bigelow-1960s-detroit-riots>
. Other notable recipients includeJames McAvoy <http://james%20mcavoy/>, 
Kristen Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/04/kristen-stewart-directorial-debut-short>
 andTom Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/22/tom-hardy-to-play-war-photographer-don-mccullin>
. A public vote to decide the winner is open until 10 February. The remainder 
of the Bafta nominations will be announced on 10 January.

Created in 2004, the award seeks to recognise the achievement of a new acting 
talent <http://ee.co.uk/why-ee/tickets-events/ee-baftas/ee-rising-star-award> 
of any age, gender or nationality, who has broken through either in film or 
television. It was created in memory of casting directorMary Selway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/apr/26/guardianobituaries.film>. 

The Baftas winners will be announced on 12 February at a ceremony in London 
hosted by Stephen Fry.
 