
Brexit Britain is a “new political landscape”, in which Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party could find itself squeezed 
on all sides, according to a new report marking six months since the referendum 
result.

The UK in a Changing Europe <http://ukandeu.ac.uk/> thinktank argues that the 
past six months have been the most tumultuous period in British politics since 
the second world war, with a new prime minister;leadership challenges in Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/jeremy-corbyn-unassailable-not-leading-labour>
 andUkip; 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/paul-nuttall-elected-as-ukip-leader>
 the creation of two major new Whitehall departments; andScottish independence 
back on the agenda, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/second-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-published>
 as well as the prospect of leaving the European Union.

Brexit Britain has the deepest faultlines of any country I have known
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/16/brexit-britain-has-the-deepest-faultlines-of-any-country-i-have-known>
“While none of these alone is unprecedented, there has been no moment in the 
post-war period when so much has happened almost at once,” says Simon Usherwood.


“Brexit is partly a function of, but is also partly bringing about, a new UK 
political landscape,” says Anand Menon, UK in a Changing Europe’s director.

Menon, professor of politics at Kings College, London, highlights the rapidly 
shifting political mood, with MPs on both sides of the House of Commons quickly 
moving to support restrictions on immigration, as they interpret the referendum 
result, and subsequent polling, as aclear rejection of the EU’s policy of free 
movement. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/poorer-voters-worries-immigration-fuelled-brexit-vote-study-finds>

“It has been striking to see how former remainers among Conservative MPs have 
swung behind the prospect of even a hard Brexit,” he says in his contribution 
to the report.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd4b53cc64da155fdaf5a3041ebd70fae4e12dd%2F0_0_4480_2688%2F4480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20post-Brexit%20landscape%20could%20squeeze%20Labour%20out%2C%20warns%20new%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20post-Brexit%20landscape%20could%20squeeze%20Labour%20out%2C%20warns%20new%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd4b53cc64da155fdaf5a3041ebd70fae4e12dd%2F0_0_4480_2688%2F4480.jpg>
 Reports have suggested that the vote to leave the EU was motivated by 
anti-immigration sentiments. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Menon argues this political climate will make it unlikely that parliament will 
exercise much leverage beforethe government triggers article 50 next March, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/brexit-plan-will-not-be-published-until-february-says-davis>
 because so few MPs will want to be seen to block Brexit or argue against the 
continuation of free movement implied by soft Brexit.

It is unclear which parties will benefit from this period of political 
volatility, the report argues – but it looks unlikely to be Labour. Political 
scientist Matthew Goodwin uses his essay,Brexit, Six Months On 
<http://ukandeu.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Brexit-Six-months-on.pdf>, to 
argue that the referendum campaign, “exposed a deep and widening divide in the 
political geography of Labour support”.

He points to the fact that nearly 70% of Labour-held constituencies voted for 
Brexit. It is estimated that some, including Ruth Smeeth’s Stoke-on-Trent North 
and Ed Miliband’s Doncaster North, backed leaving the EU with 70% of the vote 
or more.

By contrast, in some metropolitan Labour constituencies, including Corbyn’s 
Islington North and Chuka Ummuna’s Streatham, more than 70% of voters voted to 
remain.

”This tension between working-class, struggling, Eurosceptic and 
anti-immigration, and more financially secure, middle class, pro-EU and 
cosmopolitan wings poses strategic dilemmas for Labour and provides 
opportunities for its main rivals,” he argues.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25589af26edada2a69a08a3bf78496e07ecc633%2F0_41_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20post-Brexit%20landscape%20could%20squeeze%20Labour%20out%2C%20warns%20new%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20post-Brexit%20landscape%20could%20squeeze%20Labour%20out%2C%20warns%20new%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25589af26edada2a69a08a3bf78496e07ecc633%2F0_41_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Diane Abbott has warned that Labour will not succeed by becoming ‘Ukip-lite’. 
Photograph: Jeff Overs/BBC/PA 
Labour MPs appear deeply divided about immigration, with shadow home secretary 
Diane Abbottwarning against the party becoming “Ukip-lite”, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/labour-will-not-win-a-general-election-as-ukip-lite-says-diane-abbott>
 while Andy Burnham suggested ignoring voters’ concernscould even provoke 
violence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/take-back-control-immigration-debate-labour>
 Goodwin says Ukip, under new leader Paul Nuttall, is likely to target seats 
which saw a strong Brexit vote, and where Ukip came second in the 2015 general 
election.

At the same time, Tim Farron’s Liberal Democrats are making a noisy pitch to 
remain voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/17/farron-invites-labour-and-tory-members-to-join-lib-dems>
 who feel Labour has not opposed Brexit vociferously enough.

“Should the Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats>, rather than Labour, 
manage to project themselves as a ‘new’ political home for remainers who loathe 
Brexit and the Conservative party, but also despair of Corbyn’s leadership, 
then in some seats this holds the potential to divide the more socially liberal 
and remain-focused group of voters, at the same time as Ukip is trying to win 
over working-class voters who used to support Labour,” according to Goodwin.

”In pro-remain Labour seats where the Liberal Democrats are already second, 
Labour could find itself further squeezed by the beginnings of a realignment, 
in seats like Hornsey and Wood Green, Bristol West, Cambridge, Bermondsey and 
Old Southwark, and Cardiff Central.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb642822e262c0d4a273bf1213915ab8677ad11%2F0_0_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20post-Brexit%20landscape%20could%20squeeze%20Labour%20out%2C%20warns%20new%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20post-Brexit%20landscape%20could%20squeeze%20Labour%20out%2C%20warns%20new%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpost-brexit-landscape-squeeze-labour-out-warns-new-report-corbyn-ukip-conservatives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb642822e262c0d4a273bf1213915ab8677ad11%2F0_0_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
 In remain-supporting Richmond Park, Lib Dems, including candidate Sarah Olney, 
have found new success against the Conservatives. Photograph: Chris J 
Ratcliffe/Getty Images 
In Labour’s northern heartland seats, much may depend on the ability of Ukip 
to get its act together, according to Menon, who says theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> could also gain if May 
manages to achieve what he calls a “hard Brexit, wrapped in immigration 
language”.

”The Conservative government is signalling its desire to try to attract former 
Labour voters, with its appeals to those who arejust about managing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-jams-rhetoric-just-managing-families-autumn-statement>
. Achieving an exit from the EU that ends freedom of movement could form a 
logical part of this strategy.”

The by-election in Copeland, where Labour MP Jamie Reed is stepping down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
, is likely to provide an early test in the new year of whether the party will 
find itself squeezed.

Other essays in the report spell out what we have learned so far about how the 
government is approaching Brexit – and how the other 27 EU states may respond.

Jonathan Portes, of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, 
argues that as far as immigration is concerned, it remains unclear what exactly 
the government is hoping to achieve. “Progress can be only limited until 
ministers agree their negotiating objective and key priorities,” he says.

Both currently appear a long way off, with some – such as the chancellor and 
business secretary – regarding as important the single market and business’s 
ability to recruit the workers it needs, while the prime minister appears to 
see restoring full control over immigration policy and reducing migrant numbers 
as taking precedence.

Economist Angus Armstrong uses his chapter to argue that the formal procedure 
of invoking article 50 will be less important than how the other EU countries 
respond. But with a series of elections in key states, and many other pressing 
issues on the EU agenda, he says, “the likely scenario is one of familiar EU 
negotiating territory: long interludes of tedium and small print, interspersed 
with episodes of late-night brinkmanship, leading eventually to a compromise 
that satisfies no-one but with which everyone can live”.

 