
Miffed that Stewart Lee’s Comedy Vehicle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/04/stewart-lees-comedy-vehicle-bbc-bafta-james-corden>
 isno more 
<http://www.stewartlee.co.uk/slcv4/stewart-lees-comedy-vehicle-cancelled-by-the-bbc/>
? Vexed that Live at the Apollo and its ilk offer barely a glimpse of the 
creative diversity of live comedy? Salvation may be at hand in the form ofNextUp
 <http://www.nextupcomedy.com/>, a new live comedy streaming service (a 
“Netflix for new British comedy,” says the press officer), which launches this 
week.

NextUp’s stated aim is to find a wider audience for the many fine shows that 
populate theEdinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/edinburgh-festival-2016> fringe each year, 
tour if they’re lucky, then – for want of production resources or a DVD deal – 
sink without trace. Now, with NextUp’s help, they’ll be available to all of us; 
the channel’s roster at its launch includes shows from big-hitting acts such as
Miles Jupp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/live/2016/sep/19/miles-jupp-webchat-songs-of-freedom>
 andLuisa Omielan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/29/luisa-omielan-destinys-comic>, 
and up-and-comers includingFern Brady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/15/fern-brady-review-standup-edinburgh-festival-2016>
, Alfie Brown and Ben Target.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75af3e5fbdf5178f8175b02e13316641352c1b92%2F0_2337_5332_4328%2F5332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NextUp%3A%20can%20it%20become%20the%20Netflix%20for%20British%20standup%20comedy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NextUp%3A%20can%20it%20become%20the%20Netflix%20for%20British%20standup%20comedy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75af3e5fbdf5178f8175b02e13316641352c1b92%2F0_2337_5332_4328%2F5332.jpg>
 Fern Brady, one of the launch comedians for NextUp. Photograph: James Robertson
The theory is that creative comedy has a sizable potential audience out there 
that seldom gets to see it. Co-founder Sarah Henley says: “The idea arose 
because we as a team found it exceptionally sad that we’d come to the fringe 
every year and see incredible, lovingly crafted shows, which would … then 
disappear completely. We personally know hundreds of people who would love to 
see those shows but couldn’t make it to the fringe or don’t live in the towns 
the tours visit – and our research tells us there are thousands more who feel 
the same.” They can now accessthe site <http://landing.nextupcomedy.com/>’s 
vault of fringe comedy for a monthly subscription of £3.50 ($4.20); there’s 
also a 30-day free trial.

Founded by the team behind YouTube channel and live comedy night ComComedy 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/COMCOMEDY> – and working with Stuart Snaith, 
formerly of BBC Worldwide – NextUp is a gamble, Henley admitted on launch day. 
Who knows how large the audience really is for the bubbling-under standups 
(Brennan Reece, Lou Sanders, Pat Cahill) whom NextUp will showcase? Is there 
really enough quality to go around? The channel’s Twitter feed bigs up its 
shows as “epic”, “incredible” and “hilarious”, which is setting the bar pretty 
high.

It’s obviously a gamble for the comics too. Their material is their livelihood 
– submitting it for broadcast might shorten its stage shelf-life. Participating 
acts are promised 50% of NextUp’s income, divvied up according to share of 
downloads. But Henley has made no projections for what actual sums might be 
involved.

Acts have been releasing parts of shows on YouTube; to have it professionally 
curated has made it sit more comfortably
Sarah Henley, NextUp 
While acknowledging that comics are rightly protective of their material, 
Henley tells me that “the paywall has allayed their fears. And the industry is 
going that way anyway. Acts have been releasing their shows, or parts of their 
shows, on YouTube. So to now have it done professionally and in a curated way 
has made it sit more comfortably.” NextUp has an audience-development agenda, 
too: it encourages viewers to buy tickets for its acts’ live shows. Which is an 
important emphasis, because the most exciting live shows are exciting partly 
because they’re happening live rather than on a screen. At any rate, comedians 
have been universally positive about the project, Henley tells me – although 
their agents have been less forthcoming. “Some are wedded to the DVD model and 
traditional commissioning formats. There has been a bit of ‘let’s wait and see 
…’”

NextUp’s first batch of shows inspire confidence in its curation: I’ll seize 
the chance to catch up with sets by Lou Sanders,Sean McLoughlin 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/comics/s/33439/sean_mcloughlin> and Jordan Brookes 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/comics/j/34006/jordan_brookes> that I missed on the 
fringe. “We’re trying to get a wide variety,” Henley told me. “We’re looking 
for lovingly crafted hours rather than gag-heavy 20 minutes; shows with a 
narrative or through-line that shows how much work has gone into them. Live at 
the Apollo is a great vehicle for comics to get well known. But the industry is 
broader than that: if you’re a storytelling comic, that format might not work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71fe2a8f0f40cd31d3d391149c2f53a9ca04c4bb%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NextUp%3A%20can%20it%20become%20the%20Netflix%20for%20British%20standup%20comedy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NextUp%3A%20can%20it%20become%20the%20Netflix%20for%20British%20standup%20comedy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71fe2a8f0f40cd31d3d391149c2f53a9ca04c4bb%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Might broadcast exposure affect comedians’ stage earnings? Photograph: Sergio 
Azenha/Alamy 
NextUp has its own issues with variety to resolve, mind you. There aren’t many 
non-white acts visible on the current bill – although you could say the same 
about the Edinburgh fringe. And, while character acts such as Anna Mann and 
Marcel Lucont feature, and there’s one double-act (Twins), sketch comedy is 
conspicuous by its absence. “It is mainly solo standups at the moment,” admits 
Henley. “Sketches are harder to produce.”

The company partners with Turtle Canyon Comedy 
<http://www.turtlecanyoncomedy.com/> to produce its content, and Henley is 
keenly aware that, when it comes to production standards in broadcast comedy, 
expectations have rocketed lately. “You don’t want to watch shoddy content. 
When we produce gigs, we make sure there’s a large audience, we have five 
cameras on it, there are audience mics. Quality has to be to DVD standard.”

Until recently it was an article of faith that “standup doesn’t work on TV”. 
Live at the Apollo, Michael McIntyre’s Roadshow – and even Lee’sComedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> Vehicle – have changed all 
that, but barely changed the narrow parameters of what live comedy is 
considered to be. NextUp’s new initiative can now test whether there’s a hidden 
audience for the offbeat, less mainstream acts that make live British comedy 
such a creative place to spend time. Good luck to them.

Three to see 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a57531ba76b46cc48da989d139899f7b5f54f4d%2F0_279_2688_1611%2F2688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NextUp%3A%20can%20it%20become%20the%20Netflix%20for%20British%20standup%20comedy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NextUp%3A%20can%20it%20become%20the%20Netflix%20for%20British%20standup%20comedy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a57531ba76b46cc48da989d139899f7b5f54f4d%2F0_279_2688_1611%2F2688.jpg>
 Brendon Burns, heading out on tour with his show Black Comedian. Photograph: 
Steve Ullathorne 
Jordan Brookes 
As I mention above, I missed this buzzy show at the Edinburgh festival. If you 
did too, there are two chances to redeem yourself, as theChortle 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/> best newcomer nominee brings his reportedly tricksy 
nugget of meta-comedy to London.
• Museum of Comedy, London <http://www.museumofcomedy.com/whats_on/>, 16 and 
17 November. Box office: 020-7534 1744.

Brendon Burns 
Nestled on the Free Fringe <http://freefringe.org.uk/> in August, Aussie 
veteran Burns scored a quietly impressive hit with Dumb White Guy, one of a 
handful of standup showsinterrogating white privilege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/19/whiteness-standup-new-racial-frontier-fin-taylor-brendon-burns-peter-white-edinburgh-festival>
 – here, in the context of Australia’s relationship with its indigenous 
population. Now renamed Black Comedian, the show tours the UK.
• Hobos, Bridgend <https://www.facebook.com/hobosmusicvenue/>, 17 November. 
Box office: 01656 769576; Le Pub, Newport, 18 November. Box office: 01633 
221477. Thentouring the UK <https://brendon-burns.squarespace.com/gigs/> until 
April 2017.

Jenny Eclair 
Another ex-Perrier champ continues to tour, with her How to Be a Middle Aged 
Woman (Without Going Insane) set. “Tackling the grey areas of the ageing 
process,” it hits London’s Royal Festival Hall this weekend, among other venues.
• Royal Spa Centre, Leamington Spa 
<https://www.warwickdc.gov.uk/royalspacentre/events/event/574/jenny_eclair_-_how_to_be_a_middle_aged_woman_without_going_insane>
, 16 November; Braintree Arts Centre, 19 November. Thentouring the UK 
<http://www.jennyeclair.com/live-dates> until 18 March.
 