
Airstrikes on rebel-held areas of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> and shelling of government-held 
areas of Syria’s largest city resumed after a brief lull on Friday as the US 
and Russia consulted to shore up a collapsing truce after a week of violence.

At least one child died and five people were injured in airstrikes on rebel 
areas, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported, while dozens of Syrian 
andinternational NGOs appealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/29/aleppo-hospital-airstrike-un-syria>
 to Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin to halt “atrocities happening on your 
watch”.


Aleppo mourns Syrian paediatrician killed in hospital airstrike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/29/mohammad-wassim-maaz-syrian-paediatrician-al-quds-airstrike>
The US said it was talking urgently to Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> about reducing fighting in the 
Aleppo area. It said it had agreed a separate “general recommitment” to the 
cessation of hostilities in Latakia and Eastern Ghouta area near Damascus, 
where there had been “persistent violations”. But this was not a new set of 
local ceasefires.

Russian state media said a “regime of calm” agreement sponsored by Moscow and 
Washington would apply for 24 hours in the capital and surrounding area and 72 
hours in Latakia. The Syrian army said the partial truce went into effect at 
1am on Saturday morning. The US asked Russia to include Aleppo but Russia 
declined, the AFP news agency reported.

The cessation of hostilities deal, brokered by the US and Russia, began in 
late February to allow peace talks to continue. But it has all but collapsed in 
the last few days, along with the UN’s Geneva negotiations after the opposition 
walked out. Humanitarian aid deliveries to the neediest besieged areas have 
been blocked.


The French charity Médecins Sans Frontières said on Friday that the death toll 
at Aleppo’sal-Quds hospital, hit by airstrikes, had risen to at least 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/29/mohammad-wassim-maaz-syrian-paediatrician-al-quds-airstrike>
. Seventy-nine NGOs urged Obama and Putin to “immediately use their personal 
diplomatic engagement to save what remains of the cessation of hostilities 
agreement.”

Bishop Antoine Audo, president of the Catholic aid group Caritas Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, said: “The cessation of hostilities 
gave people in Aleppo hope. They were able to breathe again, to walk in the 
park and to live again. However, in light of recent attacks, hope is fading 
fast. World leaders must urgently act to bring about an immediate end to 
attacks by all sides of the conflict.”


The UN human rights chief, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, said violence was “soaring 
back to the levels we saw prior to the cessation of hostilities”. Reports of 
new military build-ups revealed a “monstrous disregard for civilian lives by 
all parties to the conflict,” he added.

The airstrike on an Aleppo hospital is a wake-up call for the UN. It must act 
now | Joanne Lui and Peter Maurer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/29/aleppo-hospital-airstrike-un-syria>
Few details were available about the US-Russian effort, but what was known 
appeared to reinforce worries that the two countries are too close for the 
comfort of the Syrian opposition and their European and Arab supporters, who 
fear that Putin, Bashar al-Assad’s loyal ally, is now calling the shots.

“The US is allowing Russia to claim some form of pat on the back when in 
reality it turns a blind eye to the devastation of Aleppo,” said one analyst. 
“It’s positive if there is a reduction in strikes, but the US really needs to 
put pressure on to keep the cessation of hostilities alive in Aleppo, where 
it’s currently being blown apart.”

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said airstrikes and government 
shelling had killed at least 131 civilians including 21 children in rebel areas 
in the past week. Rebel shelling of government areas had killed 71 civilians 
including 13 children.

The war in Syria, now in its sixth year, has killed 400,000 people, according 
to the UN envoy Staffan de Mistura. He said on Thursday that the ceasefire deal 
was “barely alive”. He has yet to name a date for the resumption of the Geneva 
talks.


The Syrian opposition coalition said massacres committed by the Assad regime 
and Russia in Aleppo represented a “coup de grace” for the truce.
 