
Simon Leonow is a typical Liberal voter, except he no longer votes Liberal. 
The Harvey Norman franchisee from Adelaide now votes forNick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> and he shows no 
interest in reverting to old habits.

Leonow has had it with people he calls “pretend” politicians. “I guess you 
look at the backlash worldwide on politics – people are sick of pretend 
politicians pretending to stick up for the little guy, pretending to try and do 
the right thing for everybody, and people’s perception of politics right now is 
probably the lowest it’s ever been,” the businessman says.

Xenophon, he says, is not a pretender. “He absolutely delivers.”

When I ask for examples, he offers two anecdotes. The first is a story about 
how in 2014 Xenophon tried to protect the interests of long-term caravan park 
residents in a dispute with a local council. “Nick didn’t win the battle, but 
no one else would take that stuff on. They just don’t.”

The second relates to the interests of his business. Leonow wants to be able 
to open his store on Boxing Day, and restrictions on trading hours prevent him 
from doing that. He says he went along 18 months ago to a private dinner with 
Steven Marshall, the state Liberal leader – an intimate fundraiser, with six or 
seven guests, all business people or professionals – to try to get a hearing.

It was a convivial evening. After the meal, the group was treated to a private 
tour of the state parliament. During the down time, the businessman made his 
pitch. “Boxing Day is the biggest trading day of the year in Australia. I 
brought this to Steve Marshall’s attention. He said, ‘Sure, give me a ring.’ I 
sent him an email. I’ve still got the email. He never replied.

Nick Xenophon won’t deal with any legislation until Murray Darling issues 
resolved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/nick-xenophon-wont-deal-with-any-legislation-until-murray-darling-issues-resolved>
“I re-sent the email. He never replied. I sent the email to Nick – and Nick 
and I had been talking about it for 12 months, he’s all over it, and Steven 
Marshall – the first time he acknowledged it was about a month ago in an 
article, using Harvey Norman as an example of howSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> is not open for 
business. Yet he didn’t have a single millimetre of correspondence with us 
about this whatsoever.”

Not good enough, says Leonow. “[The state opposition leader] uses our brand in 
a major article about how the current government is refusing to fix it, when we 
brought it to his attention and he hasn’t done a single thing either. The only 
one who is interested is Nick.”

In September the state Liberals pledged to extend trading hours in South 
Australia, and as a potential party of government they have the power to 
deliver – but clearly it is Xenophon’s personal touch that has resonated with 
the businessman.

You hear that same story over and over in South Australia. Xenophon is 
accessible. He’s approachable. He cares. He’s authentic. His political brand is 
fighting for battlers, which taps into a deep-seated bit of Australian 
mythology, fighting for the fair go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fe242536b6489c086c379b844ff8320d1b2d72e%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fe242536b6489c086c379b844ff8320d1b2d72e%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
 Simon Leonow outside his Harvey Norman store in the Adelaide suburb of Gepps 
Cross. Photograph: Tony Lewis for the Guardian 
Xenophon would flinch at the comparison but, just as Donald Trump barnstormed 
the US with the political equivalent of a mirror that reflected the American 
public’s deep-seated grievances back at them in a mass act of validation, 
Xenophon offers his community the attributes Australians prize.

The watchful child of migrants reflects back larrikin, egalitarian, 
communitarian. That bedrock, and his mild eccentricities and penchant for 
stunts, sets him apart from the automatons of major-party politics.

In Canberra Xenophon is viewed as one of a number of micro-party kingmakers – 
a-balance-of-power player in the upper house, one of an important group on the 
crossbench, who wheels and deals with mixed success.

Sometimes he wins, sometimes he doesn’t. Sometimes he falls on his face, like 
he did in November, kicking up an almighty stink about water allocations in his 
home state, before folding with a cursory administrative undertaking from the 
prime minister.

The conventional measure of success in politics is the sum of your 
achievements, overlaid with analysis about whether your achievements serve the 
national interest. Assessed by this standard measure, Xenophon’s record is 
mixed.

But this is a very Canberra way of looking at a politician. If you change the 
vantage point and observe him at the community level, you see a senator with an 
open door, with deep links to his community, who runs his office as though he’s 
an MP in a marginal seat, fighting for every vote.

Nick Xenophon accused of selling SA 'down the river' on water deal – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/29/australia-coalition-labor-turnbull-shorten-politics-live>
Watching him at ground level gives insight into why he’s popular. The 
benchmarks applied in Canberra seem a long way away.

One more switch in vantage point is required to understand why voters have 
swung his way. You have to experience him through their eyes. You have to walk 
in their shoes. If you do that, you’ll learn that Xenophon supporters are not 
really as fixated on results as a major-party politician, or a Canberra press 
gallery journalist.

The relevant measure is empathy: does he care, does he give a damn, does he 
validate my concerns, is he connected to me, is he my representative, will he 
stick up for me and my interests?

Empathy is a powerful antidote to anger, and voters are angry enough in 2016 
to have propelled Trump into the White House, to have voted for Brexit, to have 
sentPauline Hanson <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> 
back to Canberra, to have allowed Xenophon to expand his footprint in 
Australia’s parliament.

It’s a revolution against politics as usual.

In Leonow’s telling, Xenophon is a breed apart – not because he wins but 
because he cares. I struggle with this concept because it really doesn’t seem 
enough. Don’t most of us care? Don’t most of us try? Is that really all this is 
about?

So I press. If Xenophon didn’t succeed in convincing the state government to 
allow you to trade on Boxing Day, if he struck out, but made a genuine effort, 
would you mark him up anyway? “Yes, absolutely,” Leonow says. “I think it’s the 
Australian way.”

He says he wants the outcome, he wants the result, but “no one is ever going 
to knock you down for having a crack. But have a crack and a real crack, don’t 
pretend, park it or be politically correct and pretend you are going to do 
something about something. Better to have a go than not try.

“Look, there is a backlash globally against politicians who don’t do a great 
deal, but look after themselves and their position, and pretend to be out front 
championing so many different causes. But when the rubber hits the road, very 
little seems to get done. I think the world is just over it. That’s why I think 
around the world more independents are getting support. It’s got to the point 
where I’d rather give anyone a go and let them try something than give the same 
people a go who don’t try anything.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536193f10a9e6ab6f572b7f5345a2c8db3d41374%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536193f10a9e6ab6f572b7f5345a2c8db3d41374%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Nick Xenophon in his pyjamas and slippers meets Jacqui Lambie in the corridors 
of parliament early in March after a marathon Senate session. Photograph: Mike 
Bowers for the Guardian 
“I think that’s the way the world is going. I think that’s why we’ve seen such 
upheaval everywhere and why the major parties are crapping themselves because 
people like Pauline Hanson are getting traction, she probably shouldn’t – but 
just by default. She resonates with people because some of what she says is 
100% spot on. It’s not going to resonate with everybody but she’s got a lot of 
followers.”

Leonow is not angry, or spiteful, or cynical. He’s just fatigued with a system 
that he thinks doesn’t connect and doesn’t respond. He’s sick of being polite 
and being patient. It’s time to vote with his feet. “People are just fed up.”

‘He’s absolutely non-stop’ 

One of the big political stories of 2016 has involved trying to unpick the 
backlash against establishment politics. Reporters and commentators around the 
world have tried to parse the underlying conditions: is this phenomenon 
economic or cultural, or both? Is the anger in the community the natural 
consequence of a lingering economic downturn? Has globalisation fatigue 
prompted a new wave of nationalism and in some cases ugly xenophobia?

A major review of voters by the Australian National University taken just 
after the 2016 election found that 40% of people surveyed were not satisfied 
with our democracy, the lowest level recorded since the 1970s. The survey also 
found 19% of the sample no longer identified with the major parties. Declining 
partisanship is a steadily increasing trend in Australia.

These developments are hard to ponder in the abstract. The best way to try to 
chart what is happening is to get out into the regions intent on breaking with 
politics as usual. In South Australia, we’ve seen the rapid rise of theNick 
Xenophon Team <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon-team>, 
a centrist party with a populist and protectionist tinge. I rode alongside 
Xenophon in Adelaide and the surrounds of the city for a few days in mid 
December to try to assess why his brand of politics was cutting through.

I’ve been on the road in Adelaide with Xenophon before – enough to know there 
are a couple of well-honed rituals. You’ll zip around town in his 2006 Toyota 
Yaris, and you will eat exceptional yiros at Yianni’s on Hindley Street.

Nick's for everybody. That’s the difference with him. He listens while people 
are talking
Vasilios Tsagariolos, of Yianni's cafe 
A wise political person I know says Xenophon is a master of values projection. 
If you don’t know what that means, think of it this way. Dramatists are experts 
in making small things convey larger meanings, and Xenophon has something of a 
dramatist’s flare. He looks for things that convey meaning and intent to 
onlookers – medium as message.

Xenophon always travels economy on planes, which must be a nightmare for 
airlines who associate the word politician with the word upgrade. The car is 
also important as a piece of symbolism. Xenophon invites you, without ever 
asking explicitly, to experience the car as symbol. The little car is an 
extension of himself and his political enterprise: unpretentious, hard working, 
underrated by social climbers and sneerers, overstuffed, a bit of a shambles.

Xenophon has known Vasilios Tsagariolos, the owner of Yianni’s, since 2004. 
With a portable air-conditioner blasting in the corner with all the ferocity of 
a wind machine in a Beyoncé video, and while slicing meat over at the grill, 
Tsagariolos will sing the praises of his political mate. “Nick’s for 
everybody,” he shouts over the shop cacophony. He claims to have turned 
thousands of voters his way over the years. When Xenophon is bailed up by a 
customer, Tsagariolos ducks round the counter to make sure I’ve observed the 
people skills. “That’s the difference with him, he listens while people are 
talking.”

Xenophon is only half listening, as it happens. Multi-tasking is the default. 
He listens, eats, keeps an eye on the phone, frets about the follow-up that 
needs to happen, wonders whether he’ll have time to visit his elderly parents 
later in the evening. He’s also been worried for much of the day that I might 
be bored because this is just normal constituency stuff, nothing high octane. 
“He’s not so good for himself,” Tsagariolos says. “He worries so much.”

The Xenophon experience is frenetic, to say the least. When he sweeps into the 
electorate office at Ebenezer Place his young staff sit up like a bunch of 
meerkats, hoping to snare 20 seconds of the boss’s attention on any one of the 
myriad issues they know he’s pursuing or has hoovered up unexpectedly out on 
the street, which is always a distinct possibility.

His briefcase yawns with piles of paper and notebooks and Wet Ones. At the 
office he works at a large conference table in a meeting room, summoning staff 
as he goes, often with someone on a landline and a mobile. There are piles of 
paper up the table, and a jumble on a bureau at the end.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80869d911290f1c6ca071bcc5f8666258769f167%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80869d911290f1c6ca071bcc5f8666258769f167%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 For Xenophon, politics is like a personal injury law practice being played out 
on a much larger arena. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
Getting the diary in shape has fallen behind because the final parliamentary 
sitting period was so hectic. He’s not happy. This needs attention. He can be 
brusque with staff, not rude, or diva-like, but relentless, and he insists they 
rise to his level of relentlessness. He’s the pacesetter and everyone knows it.

It’s less political office than personal injury law practice, which was 
Xenophon’s first career. Politics for Xenophon is like a personal injury 
practice being played out on a much larger arena. Class actions at 20 paces. 
Jumping on every passing opportunity. No win, no fee.

It’s meant to be a quiet day but a procession of people come through. They are 
alerted to my presence only once they are properly through the door. There’s a 
journalist sitting down the end of the table, that’s OK, isn’t it? At that 
point they are committed. No one objects. It is well-established price of entry 
into the Xenophon office that you will end up, seemingly inexorably, on Today 
Tonight. Xenophon is a regular at the Seven studios. The team out there love 
him. The Yaris could almost drive itself.

Today there are several legal problems: investors stiffed by a property 
developer, a drug-related matter where a person is seeking Xenophon’s help with 
the parole board, another drug-related matter with a distressed mother in a 
regional area looking for support for her family and her ice-addicted son. 
There’s a discussion with a migration agency about how to boost population 
growth in the state, a subject that has become more fraught in political 
circles since the One Nation resurgence.

People are told they are on the clock from the moment they arrive. In one 
meeting we have offsite, coffees are ordered and then sent back when they 
aren’t served in takeaway cups. Xenophon is permanently geared to flight 
because there is always another priority pressing in.

In the daily torrent of in-bound political lobbying, old-fashioned rent 
seeking and affecting stories of personal hardship, there are also Xenophon 
schemes, which you’d categorise as a pipeline of stunts. Today’s involves an 
adult nappy – or possibly a pair of rapidly tailored shorts, it really is best 
not to ask, although the project absorbs a significant amount of office stress 
until it is ultimately abandoned.

Nick Xenophon's water deal clears way for Turnbull victory on ABCC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/nick-xenophons-water-deal-clears-way-for-turnbull-victory-on-abcc>
There’s also a letter to Adele about ticket scalping, which is both stunt and 
serious. Xenophon has a thing about scalpers. It’s one of his causes. He wants 
an audience with the pop star to discuss this issue, so the letter to her 
management has to be composed in and among the blizzard of other things, and 
also somehow be pitch perfect, which is harder than it sounds. Adele is 
threaded through 48 hours of chaotic electoral work.

Xenophon wants to know if I’m familiar with the Adele oeuvre. “Hello, it’s me/ 
I’ve been wondering if after all these years you’d like to meet/ To go over, 
everything … ” I croon, badly, by way of an answer. He’s delighted by the 
synchronicity between lyric and his own objective, and delight will often lead 
to a dad joke. “Hello,” he sings, very quietly. “Does Adele have a surname?” he 
asks me. “The only Adele I know is Adele Ferguson.”

As well as cooking up the stunts, Xenophon is constantly on the phone to local 
journalists. He bulldozes his way into every publication and open microphone in 
town. It’s shameless and highly effective.

Back in the constituency zone, Xenophon pushes through to facts with a view to 
constructing timelines: what’s in dispute, what’s already been done and by 
whom. “I can’t go into bat for you without all the facts. I need an email 
trail,” he says to one visitor, writing furiously without looking up. Staff are 
summoned and dismissed with instructions for note taking or follow up. There’s 
a fair amount of hesitating in doorways in the Xenophon office because 
instructions can be elliptical or the trajectory can be changeable.

One visitor is the state-based representative of the Pharmacy Guild, who wants 
Xenophon to write to the health minister, Sussan Ley, about a dispute the 
sector is having with the government. Given that the guild is among the 
grandmasters of political lobbying in Canberra I’m curious to see the reception 
it gets. “We see Nick once we get nowhere with the government,” Nick 
Panayiaris, the state guild president says. “He’s been a big supporter of 
community pharmacy.” Xenophon agrees to write to Ley and Panayiaris is sent on 
his way with a tick in his column. Over in my corner I raise my eyebrows about 
how easy that was.

Also through the door is a group of businessmen: some local high flyers, 
including Roger Drake of Drakes Supermarkets, and Alister Haigh of Haigh’s 
Chocolates. Xenophon anticipates trouble from this group over company tax cuts 
– but the bugbear today isn’t tax cuts, it’s energy prices, and some skills and 
training issues. Surging power prices in South Australia, alongside the 
potential for more blackouts, is a massive issue locally.

Xenophon is well aware of the anger in the business community about power 
prices but he wants to channel the anger into support from an emissions 
intensity scheme – the scheme dumped ignominiously by Malcolm Turnbull and his 
energy minister, Josh Frydenberg, in early December. Xenophon is irritated by 
the development and dumbfounded that the prime minister has, in essence, 
abandoned a scheme he formulated in 2009 with Xenophon’s support. He’s intent 
on drumming up business support for the intensity trading scheme. The 
evangelism spills over into the meeting with Drake, Haigh and the rest of their 
group. The businessmen look less than convinced. This all sounds a bit like 
gobbledygook.

He'll tell me he wants some thoughts on an issue. He likes to take soundings
Roger Drake, of Drakes Supermarkets 
I grab a word with Drake afterwards on the telephone. Like Leonow, the 
Adelaide supermarket boss looks like aLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> supporter from 
central casting. He’s the biggest private employer in South Australia. Drakes 
is the largest independent grocery retail business in the country, with an 
annual turnover of more than $1bn.

Yet he tells me he votes for the NXT.

Why does he support Xenophon? “He’s approachable. You can get to him,” Drake 
says. Xenophon will ring him regularly, just to chew the fat, no agenda, just 
on the hunt for ideas and for feedback. “I’ve never met a politician who will 
actively ring you,” Drake says. “He’ll tell me he wants some thoughts on an 
issue. He likes to take soundings.”

Xenophon, he says, has been rock solid on competition issues, consistently 
against the dominance of the supermarket giants, which resonates with an 
independent grocer who built a successful business from a three-lane 
supermarket in Adelaide in the mid-1970s. Perhaps the self-made businessman has 
an affinity with the self-made politician, trying to carve out a niche in the 
duopoly of major-party politics.

Bashing Coles and Woolies is easy, feel-good politics. Knocking the Goliaths 
is almost a national pastime. But, like everything, the policy intricacies of 
this argument are complex. Politicians find themselves caught uncomfortably 
between the desire of consumers for low prices, the interests of producers to 
have fair supply arrangements with powerful buyers, and the desire of small 
independent businesses to flourish.

Xenophon doesn’t have to balance the nuances, or attempt to walk several sides 
of the street. He’s chosen a side and he prosecutes it, and his constituency is 
grateful for the unfettered affirmation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b86c36309ceefbd436362d9fb1e0457bced3534%2F0_0_3543_2365%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b86c36309ceefbd436362d9fb1e0457bced3534%2F0_0_3543_2365%2F3543.jpg>
 Nick Xenophon checks results on a tablet at the post-election party on 2 July 
in Adelaide. Photograph: Brenton Edwrds/AAP 
“I admire that he stands up and speaks out,” Drake says. “We have become so 
politically correct that people are afraid to say what they think. I don’t 
agree with everything he says but you’ll get a fair hearing. I think it’s a 
protest vote, like the Trump thing. We are just not happy with the major 
parties.”

I note in passing that Xenophon seems to have an awful lot of balls in the 
air. I wonder, sometimes, where all these balls are going to land, whether some 
of them will ever land.

Drake chuckles, and swerves diplomatically around the point: “I’d hate to work 
for him, as his personal assistant. He’s absolutely non-stop.”

‘Major-party politicians don’t speak so rationally’

The rise of the Xenophon phenomenon presents a serious conundrum for the major 
parties in South Australia. Voters’ expectations are low. In the ANU 
post-election survey, 74% of the sample believed government could make little 
difference to household finances. Policies, they thought, made little or no 
impact.

In that context, a vote for an independent or micro-party candidate doesn’t 
feel like the risk major-party politicians regularly tell them it is. It feels 
like a necessary break in the weather. Although SA has a history of hosting 
centre-right political schisms – the state gave birth to the Australian 
Democrats – Xenophon and his distinctive brand of politics present particular 
challenges for the big parties.

The main one is the risk associated with being the major-party gorilla 
thumping the most popular politician in South Australia. For the government, 
there’s the added complication of needing his vote in the Senate.

In the federal election campaign, the SA Liberals did not take on Xenophon 
aggressively. Labor and the local trade union operation did take him on, to 
some effect. Xenophon thinks the campaign the unions ran against him in the 
final fortnight of the campaign about penalty rates cost him a couple of points 
at the ballot box.

Liberal party sources say federal campaign HQ did not develop a Senate 
campaign for SA in the last election, despite the obvious threat posed by the 
NXT, which had three credible Senate candidates in the field. “We were caught 
entirely flat-footed,” says one party insider.

The local organisation was directed to put resources into lower house marginal 
seats rather than the Senate, a request the senators refused. They sought their 
own research and ran their own race. But there are some who think the campaign 
should have been more aggressive. One says: “Labor whacked him much harder, and 
they got results. Nick really doesn’t like criticism, he’s good at positioning 
as the victim, at making you the bully.” Another person describes the running 
dead strategy as a “self-fulfilling strategy for decline”.

Major-party insiders feel the NXT has not yet peaked in SA, and the 
organisation is professionalising rapidly. There is also considerable 
frustration that Xenophon is judged by a different standard to parties of 
government.

They fully comprehend the picture Leonow painted so vividly – that voters are 
inclined to mark up Xenophon for having a go, and not fixate excessively over 
whether that results in a concrete win or a loss. This yardstick doesn’t apply 
to major-party politics. They are judged on results, not on their empathy. 
Trying to level that playing field can feel like wrestling smoke.

One thing that could disrupt or derail the current growth would be a serious 
breakdown between Xenophon and members of his parliamentary team. Clearly the 
parliamentary group are intelligent, bonded and get on well, although it is 
clear from the first six months in Canberra that the NXT bloc members aren’t 
always on the same page.

Nick Xenophon will block 'retrospective' cuts to paid parental leave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/nick-xenophon-will-block-retrospective-cuts-to-paid-parental-leave>
Xenophon signalled clearly that the group might split in response to 
legislation from the government preventing boat arrivals from ever setting foot 
inside Australia. Splits erode the bargaining power of the group as a whole, so 
they are best avoided. But unlike the Hanson bloc, the group have yet to 
indulge in a bout of public acrimony. Given how many issues make their way 
through the parliament, it seems inevitable there will be other topics where 
differences prove impossible to reconcile, and this could present a significant 
test for Xenophon as leader of the group, particularly as the newcomers build 
their confidence as parliamentary players.

It’s also pretty obvious during the days I spend with Xenophon in Adelaide 
that the party is still working out its internal routines. Xenophon will have 
to learn how to delegate, and the stakeholders used to having ready access to 
him are going to have to learn to cultivate some new people if the party leader 
is serious about building a sustainable political movement, rather than having 
a situation where a group of small moons orbit meekly around one giant planet.

Over lunch I try to engage Xenophon on nuts and bolts issues. He can be candid 
on occasions yet, when he’s minded to, he can also categorically avoid 
answering questions. Conversationally, he can be a master of deflection.

I ask him if the NXT possesses the professionalism and the structures to help 
consolidate its own growth. He tells me causally the group will change the name 
of the party early next year, taking Nick Xenophon out of the title.

So you are actively transitioning to a post-Xenophon phase? The reaction is 
typical. He first lobs the light-hearted banter: “Do you know something I don’t 
know?” I persist. What are you thinking of calling the group, and why would you 
call it the Nick Xenophon Team in a recent election cycle, do all that 
branding, and then call it something else? He shakes his head, disinclined to 
float any working titles. This is clearly a dead end. I move on.

Who are your financial backers? There’s obviously Ian Melrose, I prompt. The 
Optical Superstore founder is a well-known donor, kicking in $175,000 since the 
end of 2014. Melrose and Xenophon share some common passions, justice for 
Timor-Leste being an obvious one; and their worldview overlaps on a number of 
policy issues: buy Australian, protection for whistleblowers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ba7c449e2649fe74a9219eee5e2e3e91a581ced%2F0_0_2048_1385%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ba7c449e2649fe74a9219eee5e2e3e91a581ced%2F0_0_2048_1385%2F2048.jpg>
 South Australian businessman Ian Melrose. Photograph: Ian Melrose 
In 2010 Xenophon declared: “If you give someone $1,000, you support them. If 
you give someone $100,000, you own them.” These comments came back to bite him 
when the level of Melrose’s donations exceeded $100,000. Xenophon had to climb 
down. He said earlier this year the 2010 comments were glib, “perhaps too 
clever by half”.

Melrose also doesn’t mind a conversational deflection. Separately, I ask him 
why he funds the NXT. First, the light-hearted banter: “Because he laughs at my 
jokes.” He gets to the nub in the end. “He’s got intellect, he’s got morals, he 
wants to make a difference.”

He’s got intellect, he’s got morals, he wants to make a difference
Ian Melrose, Optical Superstore founder 
Melrose says he supports Xenophon because the major parties have proved 
incapable of fixing serious problems, such as gambling addiction, or justice 
for the people of Timor-Leste. The system isn’t broken but it’s ailing, Melrose 
says, and “people are waking up to that fact”. He thinks helping Xenophon is 
money invested in worthy causes: “I should be a Liberal person. I’ve worked my 
arse off and I’ve made it, but I don’t intend to be the richest corpse in the 
cemetery.”

I pick up the conversation about the NXT’s nuts and bolts operation with 
Stirling Griff, who joined Xenophon in the Senate after the 2016 election. 
Griff is the organisational player in the group, a former campaign director.

He runs through their metrics: there are 2,400 volunteers in SA. On polling 
day the NXT had 1,900 people in the field, which is substantial for a 
micro-party operation without an institutional base. It also had several 
hundred people working the pre-poll booths for the Senate outside SA.

The NXT has about 1,500 members. Membership brings in about $40,000. Members 
are kept up to date with the various NXT activities and legislative 
achievements, and there are regular events, a bit of afternoon tea, a barbecue. 
On election night, it hired a cinema to give supporters a place to gather and 
watch results.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd640ca99cbe91a343c81358d26d22974285f557%2F0_0_2362_1561%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd640ca99cbe91a343c81358d26d22974285f557%2F0_0_2362_1561%2F2362.jpg>
 George Kontopoulos has been a Xenophon supporter right from the start. 
Photograph: Tony Lewis for the Guardian 
The party federally is contemplating a branch structure similar the major 
parties. Griff confirms Melrose “is our most consistent larger donor”. There 
are people who give small amounts, and also people around Adelaide prepared to 
kick in $10,000 at a time – but no one is naming names.

On one of our journeys around the city we call by the business premises of 
George Kontopoulos, who has been a supporter of Xenophon since the beginning. 
Kontopoulos says his shop, Omega Foods – a fragrant emporium stocked with 
condiments and small goods – is a Xenophon hub. Posters go up during campaigns, 
flyers get handed out, there’s a campaign event. “We create a nice atmosphere,” 
he says with a twinkle. “It’s good for business.” Why do you support him? “I 
like his beliefs, I like what he stands for, he says things other people aren’t 
prepared to say.”

I approach the subject of donations cautiously. This is obviously indelicate. 
Kontopoulos says he’s a donor “when Nick requires”. Xenophon screws up his nose 
by way of rebuttal. “Not much,” Xenophon mouths, almost sotto voce. “He can 
always call on me,” Kontopoulos says, unperturbed.

NXT supporters tend to skew older. Griff says 85% of the supporter base would 
be over 60, but the voter profile is diversifying. A Lonergan poll of 3,000 
South Australians in July indicates that the party was polling more or less 
evenly across the age groups midyear. Men dominated women by only a couple of 
percentage points. Then 18 to 34 cohort had support for the NXT at 21%, 35 to 
49 at 25%, 50 to 64 at 27%, 65 and older was 22%. This gives the NXT a similar 
voting profile to the major parties, although the Liberal party dominates in 
the 65 or over cohort, just as the Greens dominate with young voters.

“This is what’s changed in recent years, attracting people across age groups,” 
says Griff. “Perhaps that reflects the current disenchantment with the major 
parties.”

So my search turns to younger people. Matt Welch is 26 and lives in the 
Adelaide hills. He went to work for BHP as a mining engineer but his real 
passion is computer coding. He’s now thrown in the mining to try to restart his 
career in the IT industry.

When he reached voting age, his inclination was to vote Liberal. In the last 
federal election Welch voted for the NXT candidate in the South Australian 
lower house seat of Grey, Andrea Broadfoot, who came close to snatching that 
seat from the Liberals. In the Senate he voted for the Liberal Democratic party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d95da97a2c2a4ca74f665ed6a5a28b80c7ec907%2F0_0_2362_1574%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d95da97a2c2a4ca74f665ed6a5a28b80c7ec907%2F0_0_2362_1574%2F2362.jpg>
 Nick Xenophon fan Matt Welch at his home the town of Nairne in the Adelaide 
hills. Photograph: Tony Lewis for the Guardian 
Welch says the major parties to him look like little more than manifestations 
of institutional influence. One half looks after business, the other half 
organised labour through the trade union movement. He says the institutional 
influence creates an inherent conflict of interest for major-party politicians: 
they get caught between having to toe the line and having to represent their 
constituents. Too often the constituents lose out.

That’s why voters are looking for alternatives, he says: “No one worries about 
global warming, refugees, mental health. Independents are more likely to listen 
to their constituents. In the past I’ve heard independents speak and think very 
rationally. Major-party politicians don’t speak so rationally because they are 
always worried about the impact on their party.”

During an early-morning walk in the city, and out of the fringes of the city 
at Virginia, I meet two more men in their 20s who voted for the NXT in 2016. 
Their reasoning is more diffuse, and probably more typical of voters who are 
not massively engaged.

Hung Nguyen, who works in his family’s market garden in Virginia, says he 
isn’t entirely sure why he voted for Xenophon but it’s a combination of the 
senator’s visibility inSouth Australian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australian-politics>, the 
fact he’s out and about so often with people, and the name recognition.

You remember that name. It has a positive association. He says friends in his 
age group helped to influence his decision. He tells me there are some young 
farmers’ groups in the district that can get a bit political. People talk about 
politics when they get together, and his peers were mainly of the view Xenophon 
should be supported.

Foti Likouras runs a cafe in the city, and Xenophon pops in for hot chocolate 
semi-regularly. He says he voted Xenophon (“in the columns, right”) because he 
was against the waste dump: “He’s standing up to Jay Weatherill on that.”

For a moment I racked my brain to work out what he was talking about because 
I’m preoccupied by national issues. Which waste dump? A tip? How is that even a 
thing? The penny dropped eventually. “The nuclear waste dump you mean? Xenophon 
is campaigning on that too?”

Likouras looked at me as though I’d just landed from Mars. He nodded. As he 
revs up the milk frother and keeps an eye over my shoulder for incoming 
customers, he says the dump might work out fine, but it also might not. “I 
don’t want to move,” he says. Adelaide is, for him, the perfect city. Hills at 
one end, beach at the other. A city laid out elegantly on a grid pattern. Lots 
of passing foot traffic for caffeine and gourmet sandwiches. This is home, and 
Xenophon gets that: the importance of home.

A young man in a Toll T-shirt had stopped Xenophon on the street near his 
electorate office the day before. He wanted a handshake with the person he 
described without any evident irony as “the great man”. After a brief period of 
showing Xenophon his latest delivery project, and some expressions of mild 
fandom – “My wife voted for you as well” – I asked him why he admired Xenophon.

He visibly straightened his shoulders. “Because he’s independent, because he 
stands up for us, and for South Australia.”

Likouras is more laconic but the sentiment is broadly the same. Parochial, 
local. Loyalty to region and place. “I just like what he’s on about.”

Nick Xenophon Team marshals crossbench support for political donations inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/12/nick-xenophon-team-marshals-crossbench-support-for-political-donations-inquiry>
Another young resident of the Adelaide hills, Rhys Jarratt, 22, also voted NXT 
in 2016. In 2013, his first election as a voter, he backed the Palmer United 
party. This time, he voted for Rebekha Sharkie, who snatched the seat of Mayo 
from the Liberal Jamie Briggs. “Rebekha was very visible, her family’s name was 
known in the hills, and the policies of the NXT are seen as reasonable in South 
Australia,” Jarratt says.

Sharkie has cracked the lower house – a significant milestone for the NXT – 
and she did it convincingly, collecting 54.97% of the two-party-preferred vote.

Jarratt is a tactical voter. He says he lodged a protest vote against Briggs 
in the 2013 and 2016 elections. “I’m sure [Jamie Briggs is] a lovely person,” 
Jarratt says, “but he wasn’t seen in the community as a very sincere 
representative. During the election he wasn’t seen much at all, only when the 
prime minister came up. Rebekha Sharkie did real campaigning, with town halls 
and door knocking.”

Jarratt formed the view Sharkie was “the most likely person to represent us”. 
He says the community looks at major-party politics and sees only tit for tat, 
opposition for opposition’s sake, and political games in Canberra. It all just 
looks like pantomime from a distance. “People just feel disenfranchised.”

‘He’s a magnet that draws people’

The Yaris has developed a perceptible rattle in the engine. This is clearly 
off script, and unwelcome. Xenophon gets me to dial the mechanic while he 
speaks on hands-free. The call goes through to voicemail. Given Xenophon is 
gunning the engine up the freeway to Mount Barker, we are both nervous.

The kilometres are clocking up today because we’ve been out to the market 
gardens in Virginia to speak to residents about water issues. Jordan 
Brooke-Barnett, from AusVeg, a sharp young farm lobbyist in a cap, tells me the 
same story I’ve heard throughout this journey. Xenophon is the only politician 
prepared to go beyond the your-call-has-been-placed-in-a-queue form letter sent 
from a political office. “Look, we’d written to everyone about this particular 
issue, and he was the one person who would come out,” he says.

It’s baking hot and a fierce wind is blowing topsoil across the flat plain. It 
hits our faces like sandpaper as Xenophon cooks up a fledgling 
back-of-the-envelope action plan with residents and Brooke-Barnett. In the 
huddle I hear “food bowl of South Australia” to some general acclamation. A 
young adviser from the office is leaning in and taking detailed notes.


Xenophon has a connection to the area. His father once owned a plot out here 
and the plan was to plant an olive grove. Xenophon senior then maimed his hand 
in a terrible accident out on the plot, and Xenophon junior had to sell off the 
holding. By sheer coincidence we wind up on the Xenophon family plot which is 
now owned by a Vietnamese family. Xenophon is moved by the turn of events, and 
keeps scanning the horizon for landmarks, or ghosts of times past.

A couple of hours later I’m in a garage in a suburb of Adelaide, and Xenophon 
is in a barber’s chair, getting his hair cut by a man with an enormous 
moustache. Ghosts again feature. “We’ve booked twin gravestones so we can walk 
together as ghosts, at night,” Xenophon says of his barber, who is actually his 
best mate, Tullio Nardi.

Nardi chuckles as the cut-throat razor glides expertly down the nape of 
Xenophon’s neck. Xenophon lives up the road and the two men walk at night and 
chew the fat. Both want to lose a bit of weight. Their friendship dates back to 
1992, when Nardi was a client at the law firm.

They call each other Don. I ask – like the mafia, like the Godfather, you are 
like a crime family? Now I comprehend Xenophon’s habit of picking up his mobile 
with a particular caller and shouting: “Don, Don, Don.” Don has been butt 
dialling over the past 48 hours. This would be Don.

Xenophon immediately dismisses my observation that this is an organised crime 
reference, declaring it a term of respect in Italian culture. “Yeah, like the 
Godfather,” Nardi says evenly, stretching the skin, eyes on the razor.

The senator is indulging a brief lull in the barber’s chair in an undisclosed 
suburban location ahead of a swing by the dry cleaners and then the sprint to 
Mount Barker. After he breaks free of me, Xenophon has a full day of meetings 
in Melbourne, and best to look sharp on Collins Street – although sharp can be 
a matter of interpretation.

Xenophon admires thrift. He asks at one point during our perambulations if I 
go to the Canberra Outlet Centre. I acknowledge I do. He says proudly he 
recently tried to get a better price on a $99 suit. “You went to an outlet 
store, and you bargained over the price?” “I did,” he says. Later in the 
afternoon, while I’m intent on my mission, he will decamp for a session in 
Kmart where he’s seen stretch casual shoes for a good price. I tell him they 
sound completely hideous. He seems pleased with the feedback.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cca9036e42aa6a9075ebc40b77f4d9b92efc3b2%2F0_0_3543_2364%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Xenophon%20rides%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fnick-xenophon-rides-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cca9036e42aa6a9075ebc40b77f4d9b92efc3b2%2F0_0_3543_2364%2F3543.jpg>
 Rebekha Sharkie, the new member for Mayo, with Nick Xenophon at the 
post-election party in Adelaide. Photograph: Brenton Edwrds/AAP 
The Yaris does make it to Mount Barker so I can drop in on Sharkie’s 
constituency operation in Mayo. Xenophon speaks of her in glowing terms. Her 
work ethic, he says, is prodigious. She’s always on the move. I sense he means 
she works at his hectic pace, that she has the same commitment to 24/7 
relentlessness as the party leader.

Sharkie has a group of young people in her conference room when we arrive. The 
member for Mayo is up at the whiteboard writing down points of feedback. The 
blinds facing the street are up, people walk and out of the office and mill 
around outside on the footpath.

The kids are eating pizza and sushi and talking about the issues they care 
about. The youth worker at the local council, who is sitting in, tells me 
there’s not been an initiative like this in Mayo before.

The Sharkie office is less frenetic than Xenophon HQ, but the signs of 
activity are evident. There are boxes of surveys of the electorate that are 
being put into the system; 5,000 responses have come in. Sharkie is delighted 
the response rate is that high. At that level, it’s an opinion poll in terms of 
value. She wants to use the survey results to structure some community forums 
in the electorate in 2017. The next day she will make her fifth trip to 
Kangaroo Island since the election.

I was pretty jaded with mainstream politics. He’s a magnet that draws people … 
to make their community a better place
Rebekha Sharkie, NXT member for Mayo 
Sharkie’s pathway to the NXT was working in a law firm, before working in 
political staffing, including for Briggs, the Liberal she went on to unseat. 
She grew tired of Liberal-party politics and left in 2012 for a stint in the 
community sector working with youth “which gave me a lot more insight into the 
complexities of disadvantage”.

She met Xenophon during that period. “Like a lot of people, I was pretty jaded 
with mainstream politics, and he’s a magnet that draws people with the desire 
to make their community a better place.” She says the locals are open to 
alternatives, and are fatigued by the major-party system, which is “not 
delivering enough diversity of thought. It’s very combative, and it really 
doesn’t need to be.”

Again what I’m witnessing at the constituency level is not a revolution in 
practice – Sharkie’s operation would be comparable to any motivated, 
lower-house marginal-seat parliamentarian.

She’s charismatic, determined and brims with enthusiasm. She’s clearly got the 
goods, but this is just good, committed activism by people who are clearly 
well-intentioned, personable and minded to make a difference, and have the 
flexibility to be able to speak to their communities without having to keep to 
the talking points.

Sharkie says her ideal parliament would comprise a number of micro-parties 
that would work together to achieve policy progress. “The Liberal party has 
pulled to the right. They have really lost the art of being fiscally 
responsible while not demonising the disadvantaged. “It’s not just unhelpful. 
It devalues everyone when we do this.”

Her aspiration is pure representative politics, and working with Xenophon 
allows her to pursue precisely that style of public life. Twenty years ago, she 
says, she would not have had the life experience to understand this brand of 
politics was the correct path. The opportunity has opened up at a time when she 
feels ready to maximise it.

“I’m very mindful that I have 100,000 people with me, and representing them is 
a great responsibility. I think people in the major parties can lose sight of 
that.”
 