
Nick Xenophon <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> says 
he will not deal with any government legislation in the final week of the 
parliament until the dispute over water allocations in the Murray Darling Basin 
plan are resolved.


The move will send shock waves through the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> as it scrambles to pass 
legislation before parliament rises on Thursday. Legislation yet to pass 
includes the backpacker tax, the Australian Building and Construction 
Commission (ABCC) and the Vocational Education and Training bills to clean up 
dodgy student loans.

Xenophon holds three of the 10 crossbench votes in the Senate. To pass 
legislation, the government needs eight out of 10 crossbench votes.

It’s not too late to save the Howard government's legacy on water reform | 
Peter Cosier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/its-not-too-late-to-save-the-howard-governments-legacy-on-water-reform>
“We need to sort out this water mess before we sort out any other pieces of 
legislation the government is interested in,” Xenophon said. “I think that 
sends a pretty clear signal all round.”

He said he had discussed the water issue with his colleagues, Mayo MP, Rebekha 
Sharkie, as well as senators Skye Kakoschke-Moore and Stirling Griff and the 
three came to the unanimous position.


He said the party was committed to resolving the water allocations for the 
health of the Murray and forSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> – the most 
vulnerable state in the river system.


In 2009, Xenophon refused to pass the Rudd government’s $42bn stimulus package 
until he secured almost $1bn for water buybacks and environmental flows.

At issue is 450 gigalitres of extra water promised to South Australia in a 
2013 intergovernmental agreement between the commonwealth and the states, which 
was brokered under former Labor prime minister Julia Gillard and the water 
minister, Tony Burke.

The issue was raised at a recent meeting of water ministers, which ended in a 
tirade from the South Australian water minister Ian Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/government-agenda-in-doubt-as-barnaby-joyce-rejects-south-australia-water-deal>
 directed at the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce.

Joyce told Hunter it would not be possible to deliver an 450 gigalitres as per 
the 2013 intergovernmental agreement.

Joyce wrote to Hunter following the meeting suggesting South Australia could 
not get the extra water because the plan stated it could not be delivered if it 
harmed upstream communities.

“If it was genuinely possible to put an additional 450 gigalitres down the 
river without hurting people, then none of us would have a problem with it,” 
Joyce wrote. “The reality is that it will.”

On Friday, Xenophon again described Joyce’s letter as a “brain fart”.

He said he was taking the stand because the South Australian government, the 
Liberal state opposition and his party needed to be satisfied that South 
Australia would not be “dudded in future”.

Xenophon met with Malcolm Turnbull on Thursday regarding the Murray Darling 
Plan and had a long briefing with the prime minister’s senior water advisor, 
who had a role in drafting the 2013 agreement.

“This [2013] agreement is a rock-solid agreement that must be adhered to – 
both to its letter and in its spirit,” Xenophon.

“I would say the federal government’s mind is very much focused on this issue. 
The prime minister offered a lot of reassurance.”

 