
Nigel Farage, of the UK’s rightwing Ukip party, said on Thursday “anything is 
possible”, in response toDonald Trump’s proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/boris-johnson-faces-mps-over-farage-trump-and-climate-change>
 that he become UK ambassador to the US.

Farage, who is the party’s former and interim leader, admitted he did not 
expect to get the position, which the British government has made clear is not 
vacant, but said he “would love to play a constructive middle-man role” between 
the two countries.

Are Farage and Trump really fascists? | Kevin Passmore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/donald-trump-nigel-farage-fascists-intolerance>
“In normal terms, I wouldn’t necessarily put the words ‘Farage’ and 
‘ambassador’ together,” Farage told CNN. “However, 2016 has been a year of 
dramatic change, so I think anything is possible.”

On Tuesday, Trump said he would like Farage to be ambassador 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/800887087780294656?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
. It was unprecedented for an incoming US president to ask a world leader to 
appoint someone from an opposing party as ambassador.

Farage, the first foreign politician to meet with Trump after his victory in 
the US election, said he was “very keen” for the UK and US “to get closer 
again”.

“I don’t think I’m going to be made British ambassador, let’s be honest,” 
Farage said. “I’m not Foreign Office … maybe I’m not the type. But I did have 
20 years in business before getting involved with politics, I do know how to 
cut deals, I do have the support, amazingly, of the president-elect, and I do 
know a number of his team, some of whom I’ve known for years.”

Trump’s shock suggestion prompted representatives across the British 
government toheap praise on Sir Kim Darroch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/boris-johnson-faces-mps-over-farage-trump-and-climate-change>
, who has held the position since January. “We have an excellent ambassador to 
the United States and he will continue his work,”said the spokesman for the UK 
prime minister, Theresa May. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-will-not-be-ambassador-to-us-say-no10-and-foreign-office-donald-trump>

In his interview with CNN, Farage also defended Steve Bannon, Trump’s chief 
strategist and executive chairman of the far-right website Breitbart News, 
which Farage writes for.

The unholy power of that Farage-Trump buddy photo | Jonathan Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/farage-trump-buddy-photo-ukip>
Top Democratic politicians and anti-hate speech groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
 have called Bannon a “white nationalist” who plans to bring antisemitism and 
racism to the White House. “I’ve spent a fair amount of time with him in an 
office environment, but equally in a social environment as well. I’ve never 
heard him say a single racist thing,” Farage said.

Bannon has denied being antisemitic, telling the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/steve-bannon-on-politics-as-war-1479513161> such 
claims were “a joke”, and that he was an economic nationalist, not a white 
supremacist.

Farage’s deepening ties with the US government come amid reports that Farage 
is considering a move to the US. He has not appeared in public with his family 
for 18 months after they were chased out of a pub by anti-Ukip protesters,
according to the Times of London 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/go-west-farage-plans-new-life-in-us-kbtt33v2k>
 on Thursday, and has reportedly told friends he cannot go out for a drink in 
his home county of Kent because people are confrontational with him.


Farage is returning to the US in December 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/23/ukips-nigel-farage-fly-washington-dc-fortnight-meet-donald-trumps/>
 to meet with Trump’s transition team in Washington, though he told CNN he was 
“not seeking anything” from the visit.

“I’m seeking my country getting closer again to the United States of America 
after eight years of Obama, who frankly looked down his nose and sneered at 
us,” Farage said. “We’re about to get back that very special relationship that 
between us did so much for freedom, liberty and democracy in the world.”
 