
In between buffing and burnishing his alarmingly sculpted physique, Cristiano 
Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> likes to take 3am ice 
baths to boost his metabolism. He eats six high-protein meals a day, rarely 
drinks alcohol and refuses soft drinks. Away from the constant task of tweaking 
his already unimprovable musculature, Ronaldo relaxes by swimming, sleeping a 
strict eight hours and – oh yes – doing 3,000 sit ups a day in front of the 
television.

It is of course pointless to compare mere mortals with such extreme athletic 
obsession. But this does still seem to be the lot of Wayne Rooney, in part 
because of the similarity in ages (Ronaldo is eight months older), the bloom of 
their shared youth atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and above all the 
increasingly stark divergence in their physical capacity as the early 30s begin 
to bite.

Wayne Rooney apologises for ‘inappropriate’ behaviour on England duty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/wayen-rooney-spokesman-celebrations-defends-england>
It is a false comparison on other levels. Rooney and Ronaldo are different 
physical types. Rooney has been injured more often. His weight goes up and 
down. Plus of course Rooney smokes and drinks, as confirmed again this week by 
news of his appearance at a wedding reception at the Grove hotel in Watford in 
the wee hours of Sunday when, presumably unable to locate the hotel ice baths, 
Rooney settled instead for swigging red wine and generally behaving in an 
agreeable if slightly goonish fashion. Cue predictable waves of not entirely 
convincing moral outrage at an England player getting a little carried awayon a 
team night off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/wayen-rooney-spokesman-celebrations-defends-england>
.

Does any of this matter? For Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> the choice looks 
simple. Rooney should not be dropped from the England team because he was drunk 
at 5am. Rooney should instead be dropped because he is no longer mobile and 
effective enough to get in the team.

Similarly Rooney should not be dropped from the squad because it is 
unbefitting of theEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 
captain to be stumbling around “like a comedy drunk”, as one onlooker described 
him. He should instead be dropped because his value as an experienced 
substitute is diminished by the cakewalk of qualification. And above all – and 
here the issue of conditioning does come in – because his diminishing 
capacities preclude any sensible Rooney-based planning for a tournament 20 
months from now.

Forget the booze, the funny pics, the perfumed kerchief of phoney outrage. 
Human beings will always like a drink. There is even something quite sweet 
about it all. Had this been Bobby Moore or Dixie Dean turning up at a wedding 
in pre-smartphone, less vicarious times, the whole thing would already be 
safely packaged as a heartwarming don’t-make-em-like-that-any-more tale of fond 
times past. Beyond the basic pleasures of gawping, this is all simply noise.

Above all it is a distraction from the real issue . Which is the increasing 
gulf, the parallax error between Rooney’s status as captain of Manchester 
United and England and the sixth-highest paid footballer in the world, and his 
actual contribution on the pitch.

So stark is the sense of a player simply hanging in there, legs pumping 
roadrunner-style, borne aloft by the warm currents of reputation and status and 
the machinery of sporting celebrity, it is tempting to skip listing once again 
the evidence of decline, and look instead at exactly why English sport makes a 
habit of this kind of thing. The zombie superstar, still staggering past, still 
monetising their brand, insulated by a parasitic corporate structure of aides 
and hangers-on has become a very English phenomenon.

It is a process that takes hold slowly, based in the need, as with Rooney, to 
protect any successful sportsperson from the idiot gusts of tribalism and 
reflexive criticism that comes with simply being successful. The idea that 
Rooney is finished has been washing around since the defeat by Italy on 
penalties at Euro 2012, since when he has scored 24 goals in 40 England games 
and led the team through two qualification campaigns.

To say it now is not spite or revisionism, or an attempt to belittle what has 
been a fine career. Undoubtedly the reaction to Rooney’s decline – the obvious 
dying back of acceleration and explosive power – has at times been hysterical, 
as though Rooney is doing this on purpose, as though he alone is responsible 
for the furred arteries of English football. His crime has been to be good but 
not great, and to be the most visible English talent of an underwhelming 
generation. There is a Pavlovian quality to much of the bile. With each stop in 
play, each misplaced England pass, the TV cameras will cut to Rooney’s pale 
blank flat features, stoking the ambient howls.

Rooney has remained effective enough through this. It has been the correct 
sporting decision to keep him in the team. This is now no longer the case. Adam 
Lallana’sfine 27 minutes against Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/15/adam-lallana-england-draw-with-spain-at-wembley>
 emphasised the fact that Rooney is not England’s best No10. He can’t play as a 
central striker. The discontinued attempts to shoehorn him into a deeper 
position have coincided with a run of one penalty goal in his last eight games. 
His performances as a midfielder (“I can still dictate games” – really? Because 
nobody really does that these days …) only emphasised the quiet craft of the 
genuine midfielder. Rooney, who has always been a star, played central midfield 
like a star, as though constantly solving a problem, floating those telegraphed 
inside-out passes for a cheap round of applause.

It has been a fairly simple process of physical decline. Rooney’s early 
brilliance was based in explosiveness, fearless spring, the ability to move and 
react and follow his urges with sudden and breathtaking power. As these 
qualities diminished so he has become useful instead, a more steady, versatile 
player. But he lacks the really extreme qualities of touch and vision and 
technique to keep playing this way – a Hagi, a Pirlo – into his early dotage.

England dropping Wayne Rooney is not courageous – it is long overdue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/10/dropping-wayne-rooney-england>
And here the Ronaldo comparison does come in. Football is an ever more 
concussive, unforgiving athletic discipline. Rooney is just not suited to 
following the Pochettino-style hard-running game Southgate wants to drill into 
this group of players. He has also been absent for the best moments this year. 
AgainstSpain on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
 andin Germany in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
 England were unusually swift and slick in possession, more athletic, more 
inventive moving the ball in attack. It is simply time to give in to other 
forces, other rhythms. Why hasn’t this happened?

In most sports a performance on the scale of the collective collapse against 
Iceland would have been the final cut for an ageing captain. And yet in the 
last six months the idea Rooney could be dropped has been angrily dismissed in 
the media by ex colleagues or friends or contemporaries. One usually excellent 
TV pundit has even suggested Rooney should carry on as England’s holding 
midfielder. Why stop there? Why not goalkeeper? Why not get him to sing the 
anthems, or sit him on a chair in the centre circle with a bowl of popcorn?

It isn’t hard to see why this kind of stasis happens. Personal loyalties 
aside, Rooney is a power centre, an industry force in English football. There 
are commercial and political pressures here. Is Southgate really ready to face 
them down? To take on Rooney is to take on the Rooney-industrial complex, Big 
Rooney with all its associated power and PR structures. There is a toxic aspect 
to this. Rooney has had seven managers for club and country in the last 
three-and-a-half years. Four have been sacked. All four made him their captain. 
Like all dying stars he seems to giving off more dead heat the closer he gets 
to winking out. Should he be offered the job, and should he have the heart for 
it, Southgate will have the chance to make a decisive call. Forget the 
weddings, the wine-stained lips, the fuzzy 5am frown. For purely sporting 
reasons, it is simply time to take that plunge.
 