
Naomi Klein: today we have war refugees, tomorrow climate change refugees 

Those familiar with activist and writer Naomi Klein’s work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/naomiklein> may also be familiar with her 
fascination with Pope Francis andhis encyclical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/28/pope-francis-environment-rome-naomi-klein-climate-change>
, Laudato Si. Perhaps less known is Klein’s interest in how the “throwaway 
culture” Francis describes is epitomised by thetiny island of Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/01/naomi-klein-tells-qa-australians-should-rise-up-in-protest-over-nauru-detainees>
. The Canadian spoke of how Nauru was “mined from the outside” – both 
literally, by phosphate mining companies, and figuratively by banks of dubious 
credibility, leading to what Klein called the threat of a “double bankruptcy”. 
Add to that list of troubles a kind of moral hollowing out when the island 
began hosting Australia’s immigration detention centre, and the risk that the 
remaining inhabitable coastal strip will be engulfed by climate change. Klein 
said it was a case of the climate change refugees of tomorrow playing prison 
warden to the war refugees of today.

Aylan Kurdi should not have died, Naomi Klein tells Sydney festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/05/greens-leader-calls-for-emergency-intake-of-20000-syrian-refugees>
Murong Xuecun: do not kid yourselves about the Chinese government

Chinese writer Murong Xuecun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/08/murong-xuecun-china-novellist-summoned-beijing-police-tiananmen-event>
 gave a genuinely dangerous talk – at least if his scathing and brilliant 
sketch of the Chinese Communist party and their ever tightening noose around 
public debate was to be believed. “The Chinese government would prefer I shut 
up, but I will continue to speak out,” he said. “And if I can’t speak in 
mainland China, I will speak here.” He was funny too, revelling in the 
absurdity of the cat-and-mouse game that activists and artists play with the 
government and gleefully sharing how Chinese netizens evade the Great Firewall 
(nicknames for China include “yellow Soviet” and “west of North Korea”). Xuecun 
said we should all be wary as we observe politicians, journalists, business 
people and academics of the world kowtow to the growing influence of his 
country’s bureaucracy. He said ominously: “You must not harbour the slightest 
illusion about the mercy of the Chinese government. This government is strong 
enough to have an impact on your lives.”

The Chinese government is strong enough to have an impact on your lives
Murong Xuecun 
Sarai Walker: we’ve been taught to hate fat bodies but that can change


“Don’t you think fat people know they are fat?” – with that author Sarai Walker
 <http://www.saraiwalker.com/dietland/> politely but firmly shut down an 
audience question, regarding how to talk to overweight family members about 
their health. Tensions ran high throughout her talk on “radical fat 
acceptance”, as theDietland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/11/dietland-sarai-walker-review-rape-culture>
 author discussed what she dubbed “the last acceptable form of discrimination”. 
Walker called for the uncoupling of health and weight, saying that thinness was 
not an indication of good health, and that “shaming people about bodies makes 
people less healthy”. Otherwise considerate people who shame overweight people 
but cloak it in concern for their health, suffer from“fat derangement syndrome” 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/05/23/408554829/dietland-a-fight-club-for-women-that-reclaims-the-word-fat>
 she said. “There is nothing natural about hating fat bodies. We have been 
taught to hate them and we can change that.” The author called for greater 
acceptance of all body shapes, and for overweight people to “deprogram” 
themselves about society’s body image messages, and find supportive communities 
to encourage a more positive conversation around the issue.

Jon Ronson: we’d rather people kill themselves than have a boring day on 
social media

Writer Jon Ronson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonronson> is calling 
out the new social media-led era of shaming. That’s right, he’s shaming the 
shamers, an irony not lost on him. Targets of global online scorn have included
Justine Sacco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/23/justine-sacco-tweet-south-africa-aids>
,Rachel Dolezal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/rachel-dolezal-today-show-interview>
 andMike Daisey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2012/mar/17/mike-daisey-this-american-life>
. Where once he would revel in the Twitter pile on, Ronson told us, he 
eventually grew “sick of making damaged people into play things”. His bookSo 
You’ve Been Publicly Shamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/15/publicly-shamed-jon-ronson-is-shame-necessary-jennifer-jacquet-review-think-before-you-tweet>
 illuminates the real people behind such careless actions, and the vitriolic 
and relentless lynch mob who hounded them. “We’ve created the largest 
surveillance network ever, punishing people for poor phraseology and a tweet”, 
he said. “We would rather people kill themselves than have a boring day on 
social media.” When asked how to combat shame culture, Ronson said it was 
important to call it out. Better to do as Ronson does, rather than do as he 
said – the man for whom restraint, boundless empathy and a keen sense of humour 
is second nature.

Martin Ford: your white collar job is not safe from automation

Think of automation at work and you might imagine welding and assembly robots 
moving in tightly choreographed patterns on car assembly lines, while humans 
take care of tasks requiring fine motor skills and dexterity. Martin Ford, a 
software developer and author of two books on automation, said the future is 
much different: machines that can perform physical labour in nonstandard 
environments with super-human precision are merely years away. The orthodoxy 
that automation will free workers to perform more valuable tasksno longer holds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/06/will-robots-create-destroy-jobs>
, he said. White collar jobs, too, are being automated out of existence at an 
even faster rate, because software is so effective at doing the kinds of 
routine office tasks that have become workplace staples. Upskilling and 
retraining will quickly become a thing of the past. A more radical solution is 
needed, Ford said, such as a universal basic wage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fnine-dangerous-ideas-we-learned-at-sydney-opera-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70857db13a57b26a37cf8caefcfa000a0acd7e75%2F0_143_2880_1727%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nine%20dangerous%20ideas%20we%20discovered%20at%20the%20Sydney%20Opera%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fnine-dangerous-ideas-we-learned-at-sydney-opera-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nine%20dangerous%20ideas%20we%20discovered%20at%20the%20Sydney%20Opera%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fnine-dangerous-ideas-we-learned-at-sydney-opera-house%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70857db13a57b26a37cf8caefcfa000a0acd7e75%2F0_143_2880_1727%2F2880.jpg>
 Clementine Ford, Emma Jane, Laurie Penny and Julia Baird at the Festival of 
Dangerous Ideas, Sydney Opera House, Australia, 5 September 2015. Photograph: 
Prudence Upton/Sydney Opera House 
Laurie Penny: men need to talk about feminism every day

If you were under the impression that feminism was all about women, think 
again. In her talkLost Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/16/masculinity-crisis-men>, 
journalist and authorLaurie Penny <http://laurie-penny.com/> flipped the 
feminism discussion on its head with her thesis that the patriarchy restricts 
men into gender roles just as it does women, and that the current feminist 
movement represents an opportunity to “junk the traditional models”. She pushed 
male audience members to acknowledge the current system benefitted them more 
than their female counterparts, and to see this as an opportunity to determine 
what happens next. The final audience question had the room cheering: how to 
bring more men into the conversation? Penny said it was about changing the 
culture, and films likeMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/27/sexists-are-scared-of-mad-max-because-it-is-a-call-to-dismantle-patriarchies>
 were just as powerful as any feminist diatribe. She finished by challenging 
all men to have a daily conversation with a male friend about masculinity, 
feminism or gender equality.

Frank Brennan: Indigenous aspirations should be formalised

Given it’s an issue Tony Abbott said he would “sweat blood” for, the debate 
aroundconstitutional recognition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/19/indigenous-leaders-to-meet-with-tony-abbott-over-constitutional-recognition>
 has beenfraught 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/12/indigenous-australians-want-treaty-not-constitutional-recognition-says-elder>
. The most recent flare up sawAbbott’s reject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/03/tony-abbott-rejects-proposal-to-hold-indigenous-conventions-on-recognition>
 a proposal by Indigenous Australian leaders to hold their own conventions 
regarding recognition (later reversed) saying he didn’t want them to result in 
a “log of claims”. But according to Jesuit lawyer Frank Brennan, this is 
exactly the approach Indigenous Australia should take. Brennan said leaders 
needed to formalise “Indigenous aspiration” into a program that could be 
accepted or adapted by both Abbott and opposition leader Bill Shorten (or their 
successors) in the next parliament.



Cybersexism: women need to get louder, not ‘get the joke’ 

Perhaps the most surprising revelation to emerge from the festival’s panel 
discussion aroundcybersexism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/jul/06/female-guardian-writers-recount-internet-abuse-video>
 was not how graphic and vile most of the abuse is, or how quickly it can be 
transformed from online to physical violence, but that the women who copped it 
weremost nervous about being seen as humourless or “not getting the joke”. Such 
was the finding of journalist turned academic Emma Jane who, along with writers
Clementine Ford 
<http://www.dailylife.com.au/news-and-views/dl-opinion/the-disturbing-backlash-on-speaking-out-about-violence-against-women-20150511-ggz1rl.html>
 and Laurie Penny, shared tales of how the public faces of feminism are the 
target of tidal waves of online abuse – and their strategies for coping with 
it. Often, said Ford, the best response is simply to laugh at the abusers. She 
told a delighted audience how she would reply to lengthy and graphic criticism 
with a Simpsons cartoon. In other cases she would track abusers down, alerting 
partners, employers and their schools of their actions. Penny said she refused 
to be victimised, instead urging women to “stay in the room, get louder, and 
get the support of a girl gang”.

Peter Doherty: science is not the new religion after all

Some of the best minds of the 14th century
Peter Doherty on the Australian cabinet 
At 75, Australian medical researcher Peter Doherty called himself an “old 
dinosaur” and joked that he was “losing his mind”. But he couldn’t be further 
from the truth – Doherty’s homage to science was full of razor-sharp barbs, 
like when he took a dig at Australia’s cabinet members as “some of the best 
minds of the 14th century”. In many ways it was a passionate and eloquent 
defence of science, no doubt necessary in a period ofclimate change denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2015/jul/08/liberals-attack-on-climate-science-is-groundless-ignorant-and-embarrassing-say-scientists>
 andCSIRO cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/26/csiro-funding-cuts-driven-by-pure-ignorance-says-staff-association>
, in which he expounded the deep thinking, creativity and artisanal nature of 
scientific work. “Science is not ‘the new religion’,” he said. “Faith is the 
view you hold when there is no evidence.” He also called for a third revolution 
– the sustainability revolution – and said the way to identify a sceptic 
(scepticism being a vital quality of scientists) from a denier is that the 
former will “continue to engage with the science” and “their conclusion will 
never be rigid”.
 