
The chief executive of Nissan <https://www.nissan.co.uk/> has warned that 
future investment decisions about the company’s car plant in the north-east of 
England will depend on the outcome of Brexit negotiations.

Carlos Ghosn said he was reasonably optimistic that common sense would prevail 
and the UK would remain a key partner of the EU.

The boss of Nissan, which employs 6,700 car workers at the plant in 
Sunderland, was speaking 24 hours after new car sales figures showed previous 
strong growth had come to anabrupt halt in July amid uncertainty after the EU 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/new-uk-car-sales-slow-down-to-a-trickle-in-july>
.

Growth in new UK car sales slows in July
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/new-uk-car-sales-slow-down-to-a-trickle-in-july>
Ghosn said most companies would want to see what was going to happen in trade 
and other talks between Britain and the EU before making decisions about 
investment inSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sunderland>.

“Well I don’t think today you can talk about any impact before we see what is 
the new status of the UK. The question of Sunderland … Sunderland is a plant 
which is a European plant based in the UK,”he told the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-36981182>.

“Most of the production out of Sunderland is exported to Europe. So obviously 
for us the relationship which is going to prevail between the UK andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is very important … So you’re 
going to see a period where most companies are going to be waiting to see 
what’s going to be the new status.”

Ghosn was speaking from Brazil, where his company is a key sponsor of the 
Olympic Games. He added: “We’re reasonably optimistic that at the end of the 
day common sense is going to prevail from both sides … [that the] UK will still 
continue to be a big partner of the European community.”

Nissan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan>, like other British car 
manufacturers, had argued strongly for Britain to remain in the EU. However, 
Sunderland had one of the highest votes in favour of leaving – six out of 10 
people.

Car manufacturing in the north-east and in other parts of the UK has been 
highly successful over the past decade due to heavy investment by a series of 
mainly foreign companies including Japan’s Toyota, India’s Tata (Jaguar Land 
Rover) and Germany’s BMW (Mini). But there are fears that many of these firms, 
such as Nissan, could retreat if access to the EU is in any way restricted.

A spokesman for the North East Chamber of Commerce <http://nechamber.org/> 
said the government must ensure that local employers do not miss out as a 
result of any new post-Brexit trading arrangements. “Nissan is a huge player in 
the region and makes up a huge part of our exports and we need to see long-term 
investor confidence in the north-east and to be seen as a desirable location 
for exporters,” the spokesman said.

Paul Watson, leader of Sunderland city council, said it was good to hear Ghosn 
was cautiously optimistic but added he had concerns manufacturing in the 
north-east would not be a priority compared to the City of London during Brexit 
negotiations.
 