
Government sources have played down reports that Theresa May could promote 
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> as a future 
Nato secretary general, saying no decision has yet been made about whether to 
push for a British candidate.

Jens Stoltenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/going-alone-not-option-nato-chief-jens-stoltenberg-donald-trump>
, the former Norwegian prime minister who currently holds the Nato job, is due 
to serve until at least 2018. Reports have suggested Cameron is being lined up 
as the next head of the military alliance.

One minister was quoted by the Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4072186/Cameron-lined-UK-s-candidate-head-Nato-Britain-pledged-play-greater-role-following-Brexit-vote.html>
 as saying: “We’ve got to find a role for him – he has so much to offer. We 
have got to get him batting for Britain again.” Allies of Cameron said he could 
start to lay the groundwork for the £200,000-a-year post by entering public 
debates about defence and security policy.

Britain’s role in global security has been thrown into doubt by the vote to 
leave the European Union, and putting a candidate forward could demonstrate 
May’s commitment to retaining a senior role in Europe’s defence.

Cameron, who stepped down as prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-resigns-after-uk-votes-to-leave-european-union>
 in June after losing the EU referendum, and whosubsequently resigned his seat 
at Westminster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/david-cameron-to-stand-down-as-mp-for-witney>
, is thought to have been looking for a suitably high-profile role, and has 
also been rumoured to be considering a role in international development.

He would be likely to need the support not just of May, whose aides have 
deprecated the “chumocracy” he created in government since she took over in 
July, but of other European leaders too, some of whom were angry at what they 
felt was Cameron’s negligence in failing to win the referendum.

A Downing Street source insisted no decision had yet been made about whether 
it would be wise to back a domestic candidate.

Another government source expressed scepticism, saying Cameron’s record in 
Libya, where he backed military intervention to remove Muammar Gaddafi, could 
count against him. “His political epitaph is to take short-term decisions and 
not carry them through,” the source said.

Cameron regards pledging to increase aid spending to 0.7% of GDP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/mar/20/george-osborne-historic-moment-aid>
 as a central part of his legacy as Conservative leader.

Former prime ministers can sometimes struggle to find a place in public life 
after leaving Downing Street. Gordon Brown was repeatedly rumoured as a
potential managing director of the International Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/apr/19/gordon-brown-not-most-appropriate-imf-cameron>
 after losing the 2010 election, but would have required George Osborne’s 
backing for the job.


Tony Blair recently suggested he could be preparing to return to the political 
fray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/tony-blair-hoping-to-revitalise-centre-ground-with-political-comeback>
 after several years pursuing other causes.

Cameron appears to have been enjoying his newfound freedom. It emerged before 
Christmas that he had returned to his hobby of grouse shooting, deemed too 
controversial while he was Conservative leader. His Christmas card was a 
cartoon portraying him and his wife as the two halves of a pantomime donkey.
 