
Strict gun laws have brought us many benefits. One of their casualties, 
however, is the TV crime thriller. In the US, the mere act of shortchanging 
someone at a drive-thru (pronounced “drive-through”) invariably leads to the 
destruction of an entire neighbourhood as the irate customer goes postal with a 
legally purchased howitzer.

Not so in the UK and Australia where common sense unfortunately prevails.

Too bad we can’t pop into K-Mart for some coat hangers and emerge with a 
sniper rifle. Nor can we muster (without ammunition vending machines) the same 
kind of high-octane, sexy crime drama as the US. Most of our TV crime 
investigations take place in quaint crumbling villages – see Miss Marple, 
Midsomer Murders – where the proprietor of a muffin shop has violently stabbed 
an eccles cake. And one show that’s been enjoyably plodding in the tradition of 
the slow-paced, small-town crime drama isThe Doctor Blake Mysteries 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/doctor-blake-mysteries/DR1428V004S00>, 
otherwise known as CSI: Beards and Tweed.

Doctor Lucien Blake (Craig McLachlan) is a general practitioner who overly 
meddles in police investigations by solving them brilliantly. Essentially, he’s 
an Aussie Poirot who could probably work out the solution to a sudoku by 
rubbing soil between his fingers and giving it a whimsical sniff. You wonder 
why the begrudging police chief doesn’t just hire him, thus turning Ballarat 
into a crime-free utopia. Oh, that’s right. We wouldn’t have a show.

Instead, we’ve got this one – slow, charming stuff, the TV equivalent of a cup 
of tea and a biscuit. McLachlan is excellent, conjuring a genteel gruffness as 
he goes about his business, picking up cigarette butts and collecting gravel. 
If you want heart-racing action, I must warn you the highlight of the Doctor’s 
latest investigation was asking to see someone’s wheelbarrow (honestly). But if 
you’ve ever wanted to see what the child of Downtown Abbey and Columbo looks 
like, catch it on ABC1 on Fridays, or oniView 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/doctor-blake-mysteries/DR1428V004S00>.

Honourable mention here should also go to British import Grantchester 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/grantchester/ZW0151A002S00> (also ABC), 
another period crime drama with a similar dynamic: a dishevelled, slack-tied 
detective having to put up with a meddling do-gooder, this time in the form of 
a ripped, alcoholic vicar. Again, the sort of show where murder plays second 
fiddle to the picture postcard setting and such pressing issues such as “Why 
are you making cake for the archdeacon?”

To bigger issues

As the Guardian launches its series on the climate crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/06/dont-look-away-now-the-climate-crisis-needs-you>
, what better time to marvel at the horrors that unfolded on the latest episode 
ofViewpoint 
<http://www.skynews.com.au/video/program_viewpoint/2015/03/08/the-economic-cost-of-climate-change-action.html>
? Christine Milne’s remark that Australia’s intergenerational report “devotes 
more time to the debt in Ireland than it does to global warming in Australia” 
prompted host and nightmare of future generations, Chris Kenny, to respond: “It 
really is loopy, I think, to say that the intergenerational report should be 
all about what’s happened to the climate.”

Kenny, there, somehow managed to misrepresent a video clip he’d literally just 
played. He went on to cite the costs of underused desalination plants as proof 
that climate action is needless (or at least needlessly expensive), somehow 
employing criticism of projects aimed at tackling theeffects of climate change 
as evidence we don’t need to prevent it.

It’s an easy mistake to make. A lot of magic slimming pills don’t work and 
that’s why I think it’s OK to eat 289 pies on a daily basis. Viewpoint airs on
Sky News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> Sundays at 8pm. 
Alternatively, Google “climate scepticism” for the same effect or forcefully 
knead chilli paste into your eyes and pray you stumble into a ravine.
 