
It’s been a rough week. So, some much-needed respite via the annual Marc 
Jacobs dress code 
<http://www.wmagazine.com/story/marc-jacobs-is-back-with-another-ridiculously-wonderful-party-dress-code>
 – the John Lewis Christmas advert of the fashion industry. To celebrate the 
launch of his resort collection, the American designer is having a bash. And, 
as per, it involves a dress code whose gnomic screed – currently doing the 
rounds on social media – is always fun to dissect, especially in the current 
mood.Last year’s was inspired by excess and Studio 54 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2015/aug/26/marc-jacobs-party-dress-code-new-york-fashion-week-studio-54>
, and suggested guests arrive by horse. This time, there’s a focus on the 1980s 
(like his collection).

Fashion-wise, it’s in the ether, but what else can we learn? Guests, it 
instructs, should reference Gloria von Thurn und Taxis, the “dynamite 
socialite” (or, possibly,the mail distribution company in Thomas Pynchon’s The 
Crying of Lot 49 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Crying_of_Lot_49> – neither 
end terribly well). “Big eyebrows” are decadent markers of a booming economy, 
as is big hair (Brooke Shields andDebbie Harry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/debbie-harry> both get a mention). Heels are 
a must, or rather “vertiginous pumps like you’re sitting pretty for your Andy 
portrait”, a spirited nod, perhaps, to the cult of celebrity. Equally, dressing 
like a princess, be it one from Monaco or “a punk princess”, is recommended. 
Meanwhile, TED-talk buzzwords such as “success” and “fame” read like a Trumpian 
diktat.

Except, capitalist frenzy this is not. Jacobs, an out-and-out Democrat 
<https://shop.hillaryclinton.com/products/marc-jacobs-tee>, also floats the 
word “paradise”, which may be a tribute tothe famous New York club, Paradise 
Garage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/28/larry-levan-disco-dance-nicky-siano-dj-harvey>
. Until it closed in 1987, Paradise Garage was precisely that: a parking garage 
on 84 King Street in Manhattan. Culturally, however, its clout was huge, as it 
was one of the few clubs in New York that the gay African-American and Latino 
community could call their own. There was no alcohol licence, so it could stay 
open after-hours, and it wasn’t open to the general public. Refuge is a little 
extreme, butpeople certainly came to Paradise to dance without prejudice 
<http://www.djhistory.com/features/larry-levans-paradise-garage>. The Marc 
Jacobs party, perhaps, offers more of the same: “No posers,” warns the dress 
code, “and definitely no preppies.” Hairspray, on the other hand, appears to be 
non-negotiable. 
 