
New satellite images of North Korean prison camps have been released, showing 
the continued existence of political prison camps described by the United 
Nations as being used to perpetrate “unspeakable atrocities”.

North Korea’s government denies such camps exist, but new analysis from human 
rights groups shows several of these camps, also known as kwanliso, have been 
maintained and expanded since beingthe subject of the 2014 UN inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/17/north-korea-human-rights-abuses-united-nations>
.

The UN commission found inmates had been subject to “deliberate starvation, 
forced labor, executions, torture, rape and the denial of reproductive rights” 
and estimated that “hundreds of thousands of political prisoners” had died in 
the camps in the past five decades.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorth-korea-prison-camps-satellite-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa826a0b11e3b5aaef4dbdf004ea849749e7f34f9%2F0_0_1056_816%2F1056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=North%20Korea%20satellite%20images%20show%20prison%20camps%20accused%20of%20'atrocities'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorth-korea-prison-camps-satellite-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=North%20Korea%20satellite%20images%20show%20prison%20camps%20accused%20of%20%27atrocities%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorth-korea-prison-camps-satellite-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa826a0b11e3b5aaef4dbdf004ea849749e7f34f9%2F0_0_1056_816%2F1056.jpg>
 A reported crematorium at one of the camps is shown in the satellite images. 
Photograph: Amnesty International 
Greg Scarlatoiu, executive director of the Committee for Human Rights in North 
Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> (HRNK), a Washington 
DC-based NGO, said on Tuesday: “This regime still relies on a vast network of 
unlawful imprisonment facilities in order to exercise coercion and control and 
punishment of its population.”

North Korean prison abuse sketches – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/feb/17/north-korean-prison-abuse-sketches-in-pictures>
It is estimated that between 80,000 and 120,000 political prisoners were 
detained in political prison camps in 2014. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/feb/17/north-korean-prison-abuse-sketches-in-pictures>
 “The people held there do not have sentences, they are not given sentences. 
Most of them don’t know why they were sent there,” said Scarlatoiu.

Since the UN inquiry, there has been continued activity on agricultural fields 
and in industrial factories at the camps, according to an HRNK report on Camp 
25 that analyzed satellite images and witness testimony from defectors.

The report, combined with other HRNK analyses, also reveals patterns in 
detention facility operations under Kim Jong-un, who became leader of North 
Korea after the death of his father in December 2011.

“Detention facilities close to the border of China have shut down. Inland 
facilities have expanded,” said Scarlatoiu. “Most importantly, thousands of 
people have disappeared in the process of being relocated away from the border.”

HRNK’s findings on Camp 25 were backed by an Amnesty International report 
released last week 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/11/north-korea-prison-camps-very-much-in-working-order/>
, which included satellite photos of Camp 25 and Camp 15 collected in May and 
August 2016.

Amnesty’s photos also showed the government has maintained these camps.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorth-korea-prison-camps-satellite-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74ce059ece7e9345d6fb2cece6b6a8b17bdf3526%2F0_0_1056_816%2F1056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=North%20Korea%20satellite%20images%20show%20prison%20camps%20accused%20of%20'atrocities'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorth-korea-prison-camps-satellite-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=North%20Korea%20satellite%20images%20show%20prison%20camps%20accused%20of%20%27atrocities%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorth-korea-prison-camps-satellite-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74ce059ece7e9345d6fb2cece6b6a8b17bdf3526%2F0_0_1056_816%2F1056.jpg>
 The images are consistent with Google Earth images from May showing 
agricultural work, Amnesty says. Photograph: Amnesty International 
In the two years following the UN inquiry, the camps have added six new guard 
posts and upgraded a building housing a reported crematorium. These findings 
are consistent with Google Earth images from May which show people harvesting 
crops inside the prison perimeter, according to Amnesty.

Kerry Moscogiuri, Amnesty UK’s Director of Campaigns, said: “These images 
chronicle abuse on an industrial scale.”

In 2014, the UN commission, prompted by the inquiry findings, wrote to Kim to 
warn that he could face trial at the international criminal court (ICC) as 
leader of North Korea.

Kim has not faced the court, and diplomatic efforts have recently focused on 
the country’s attempt to build a nuclear warhead.

After North Korea conducted a powerful nuclear test in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/north-korea-nuclear-test-earthquake>
, the UN security council met to discuss the potential for bilateral sanctions.
 