
Is it just me, or are we living through a royalist moment? The preposterous 
drama Victoria on ITV is soon to be followed (hot on the heels of his 
Queen-themed West End play The Audience) by Peter Morgan’sThe Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/27/peter-morgan-the-crown-netflix-queen-elizabeth-ii>
 on Netflix. Comedy too is prey to our monarchic obsession. A new sitcom called
Henry IX <https://www.comedy.co.uk/tv/henry_ix/> has been announced for Gold TV 
“about the king of England having a mid-life crisis”, while cartoonishroyal 
soap opera The Windsors <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-windsors> is to 
return for a second series on Channel 4. Jeremy Corbyn may demur from God Save 
the Queen, but no such scruples from the entertainment world, which is singing 
it lustily.

BBC axes David Baddiel show that aired jokes about Queen's sex life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/05/bbc-david-baddiel-queen-sex-life-radio-4-dont-make-me-laugh>
I get that these are difficult times, from which many prefer to flee into a 
comforting fantasy world of palaces, ermine-lined robes and astronomic subsidy. 
And woe betide those who offend such a vision – witness the cancellation, 
announced last week, ofDavid Baddiel’s Radio 4 show Don’t Make Me Laugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/05/bbc-david-baddiel-queen-sex-life-radio-4-dont-make-me-laugh>
. The show’s apparent offence was to air an item, on her birthday, proposing – 
incontrovertibly enough – that “the Queen must have had sex at least four 
times”. Cue 100-plus complaints.

“Trustees found it hard to imagine circumstances in which this broadcast at 
any time or on any day would not have given rise to significant unjustified 
offence,” said the BBC Trust in its ruling. Obviously it’s hard to judge 
without having heard the episode. But it’s not beyond my imagination to 
conceive of a time, or a day, when a less lickspittle Britain might have let 
mild monarch-ribbing pass. The 1970s, say, when sitcoms more closely resembled 
Citizen Smith, about a (hopeless) Marxist revolutionary, and pop culture 
squawked “God save the Queen / The fascist regime” at us. Or indeed the 1990s, 
when British art wasSensation 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sensation_(art_exhibition)>, theatre was 
in-yer-face, and bedazzlement with the ruling class seemed like yesterday’s 
news.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fqueen-comedy-monarchy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9bdc2bd4bb8619085a0fc1be0482ea67e0f5e7c%2F0_244_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20heard%20the%20one%20about%20the%20Queen%3A%20why%20don't%20comedians%20criticise%20the%20monarchy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fqueen-comedy-monarchy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20heard%20the%20one%20about%20the%20Queen%3A%20why%20don%27t%20comedians%20criticise%20the%20monarchy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fqueen-comedy-monarchy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9bdc2bd4bb8619085a0fc1be0482ea67e0f5e7c%2F0_244_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 The way one was … Spitting Image’s version of the Queen. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
for the Guardian 
Now, you may disagree: apparently 70% of the UK thinks that the monarchy is a 
good thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/may/24/queen-diamond-jubilee-record-support>
. But you’d think comedians, and lovers of comedy, would be disproportionately 
represented in the remaining 30%, wouldn’t you? Isn’t it (at least in theory) a 
dissenting art form, on the side of the little people, against unthinking 
privilege and unaccountable power? Isn’t it – as the rightwing press, andAndrew 
Lawrence 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/men/thinking-man/terrorist-attacks-arent-funny---but-there-may-be-a-joke-in-there/>
, are forever telling us – entirely dominated by strident leftwing voices? If 
so, where is the counterpoint to the orgy of royalism now unfolding? Yes, there 
are Corbynista standups, and the “celebrate your grovelling servitude to the 
Queen” sketch onThe Revolution Will Be Televised 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ytOlkbpxgLs> (four years ago now) leaps to 
mind. But there’s been nothing concentrated on the republican cause.

Some would point to a number of (ahem) satirical TV and radio panel shows, and 
their jokes about the Queen’s “haunted fanny” (Frankie Boyle, way back when) or 
her sex life with the Duke of Edinburgh (Jack Whitehall on Channel 4’s Big Fat 
Quiz of 2012 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2255555/Big-Fat-Quiz-Of-2012-Outrage-British-comedians-make-crude-jokes-Barack-Obama-Queen-Elizabeth.html>
). You’ll notice a theme here: smutty sex jokes that substitute prurience for 
fawning. You might equally argue that The Windsors is “irreverent”, as indeed 
it is; it can be funny, too. But it’s also fundamentally affectionate, 
sponsoring an intimacy with this family (or their caricature alter egos) that 
supercedes any critique of the institution they represent.

Now, I know – people keep telling me – that comedy is just meant to make us 
laugh, and isn’t meant to be revolutionary. (Tell that to Beppe Grillo, Jimmy 
Morales,Jón Gnarr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/15/jon-gnarr-comedian-mayor-iceland>
, Russell Brand, etc.) I know that we (comedians included) have other, arguably 
more urgent things to worry about right now than monarchy. And of course – as 
per the republican argument that it’s not about whether the Queen or Princess 
Michael of Kent are good human beings or not – this isn’t an argument about the 
qualities of any individual comedy show.

It’s just a request for comedy to oppose rather than bend the knee to the 
toadying tone of culture right now. A simple appeal for a comedy, an 
intervention or a satirical voice to call out the obsequiousness of our current 
moment, lay bare the anachronistic daftness of monarchy, and dismember its 
cheerleaders’ arguments piece (it’s good for tourism) by unconvincing piece 
(who’d want a president?). I suspect that activity won’t involve jokes about 
the Queen’s sex life. But even if it did, if we’d discovered a satirical 
republican mode with any teeth whatsoever, then that would be the least of her 
supporters’ worries.

Three to see

Richard Gadd: Monkey See, Monkey Do

Post-Edinburgh life begins for the show that won this year’s Edinburgh Comedy 
award, as the Fife comic bringshis extraordinary confessional multi-media set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/12/richard-gadd-review-banshee-labyrinth-edinburgh>
, about abuse, masculinity and psychological breakdown, to Soho.

• At Soho theatre, London 
<http://sohotheatre.com/whats-on/richard-gadd-monkey-see-money-do>, until 12 
November. Box office:020-7478 0100 <>. 

Felicity Ward: 50% More Likely to Die
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fqueen-comedy-monarchy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d022b0a339b7f1ccad7d5016fc581fc557b2c38%2F101_194_2846_1707%2F2846.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20heard%20the%20one%20about%20the%20Queen%3A%20why%20don't%20comedians%20criticise%20the%20monarchy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fqueen-comedy-monarchy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20heard%20the%20one%20about%20the%20Queen%3A%20why%20don%27t%20comedians%20criticise%20the%20monarchy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fqueen-comedy-monarchy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d022b0a339b7f1ccad7d5016fc581fc557b2c38%2F101_194_2846_1707%2F2846.jpg>
 Me and my IBS … Felicity Ward performs at Edinburgh. Photograph: Scott 
Campbell/Getty Images 
First UK tour for Edinburgh fringe fixture Ward, the neurotic, 
hundred-words-a-minute Aussie comic, following up her hit 2015 showWhat If 
There Is No Toilet? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/20/felicity-ward-what-if-there-is-no-toilet-edinburgh-festival-review-pleasance-courtyard>
 (about irritable bowel syndrome) with a new set about anxiety disorder.

• Cliff Dixon Studio, Southend 
<https://southendtheatres.org.uk/online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=F1D3EB41-6788-4D47-8A4B-6E9C709DE85C>
, 19 October. Box office: 01702 351 135.New Greenham Arts, Newbury 
<http://cornexchangenew.com/events/info/felicity-ward-50-more-likely-to-die>, 
20 October. Box office: 0845 5218 218. Thentouring UK until December 
<http://felicityward.com/>. 

The Elis James and John Robins Experience

The Radio X show and podcast takes to the stage. Reports from preview 
performances at Latitude suggest a show brimful of in-jokes for existing fans 
of the twosome’s on-air banter – but with plenty to enjoy for the uninitiated.

• Birmingham Glee Club 
<https://www.glee.co.uk/performer/elis-james-john-robins/>, 19 October. Box 
office: 0871 472 0400.Cambridge Junction 
<http://www.junction.co.uk/the-elis-james-and-john-robins-experience>, 22 
October. Box office: 01223 511 511. Then on UK tour until November 
<http://www.elisandjohn.com/>. 
 