
The Australian maintenance, construction and detention centre company 
Transfield Services officiallychanged 
<http://www.businessspectator.com.au/news/2015/11/3/construction-and-engineering/transfield-changes-name-broadspectrum>
 its name last month, to Broadspectrum. The firm claimed it was “a better 
representation of the company’s business”. Clearly there was an element of 
necessity too: the corporation’s founding memberswithdrew permission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/25/detention-centre-operator-transfield-services-to-be-renamed-broadspectrum>
 to use the Transfield name and logo over ongoing allegations of abuse at its 
facilities on Nauru and Manus Island in Papua New Guinea.

A name change isn’t likely to improve its public image, battered by 
never-ending stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/21/transfield-could-face-legal-action-over-naura-and-manus-abuses-group-warns>
 of asylum seekers abused while in limbo.

'Grab from the excuse bag' – how health firm IHMS tackled asylum seeker targets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/22/grab-from-the-excuse-bag-how-health-firm-ihms-tackled-asylum-seeker-targets>
One of the first rules of public relations is to take heat off a target by 
attempting to change the focus of controversy. Recall American private security 
firm Blackwater, embroiled in numerous scandals of employeeskilling 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/23/us/blackwater-verdict.html> innocent 
civilians in Iraq and elsewhere, firstchanging its name 
<http://www.thewire.com/business/2012/08/time-blackwater-change-its-name-again/55532/>
 to Xe Services, then Academi. Blackwater founder Erik Prince left the US, 
moved to Abu Dhabi and today works with Chinese companies thatfinancially 
benefit 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303465004579324650302912522> from 
the African resources boom.

In 2014, Academi became a division of Constellis Holdings, along with another 
private contractor, Triple Canopy. These descendants of Blackwaterrake in 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2014/07/01/blackwaters-descendants-are-doing-just-fine/>
 cash from US government contracts, the years of scandals against its multiple 
owners and employees seemingly forgotten.

Broadspectrum will be hoping for similar success. Although profits were down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/27/transfield-profits-drop-as-shareholders-sell-over-asylum-abuse-on-nauru-manus>
 8% this year, a number of key shareholders were publicly opposed to its 
involvement in detention services. Someprotested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/28/transfield-contract-to-operate-manus-and-nauru-extended-by-four-months>
 its recent AGM in Sydney.

The company looks set to continue 
<https://newmatilda.com/2015/09/29/transfield-insiders-account-we-were-shocked-our-immigration-detention-contract-was/>
 a billion-dollar contract to run facilities on Nauru and Manus Island. As was 
the case for Blackwater and its descendents, it’s hard to imagine what would 
have to transpire for the federal government to sever its contract with the 
company.

Nonetheless, the growing push for divestment 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-09-21/transfield-investors-urged-to-divest-shares/6791242>
 against Broadspectrum is an encouraging sign that companies profiting from 
offshore misery could suffer serious harm. Shen Narayanasamy, executive 
director ofNo Business in Abuse <https://www.nobusinessinabuse.org>, rightly 
argues that, “you don’t deal with abuse by changing your name, you deal with 
abuse by stopping the abuse. No amount of spin changes Transfield’s complicity 
in abuse. Transfield/Broadspectrum doesn’t have to sign a five-year contract to 
continue profiting from the abuse of vulnerable people. That’s their decision.”

There’s no reason, apart from corporate Stockholm Syndrome, to defend the 
actions of Transfield. Arecent op-ed 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2015/10/28/comment-dont-attack-transfield-over-detention-centres-attack-contract>
 by PhD candidate Carly Gordyn, published in SBS Online, made embarrassing 
excuses for the firm (“The contractors are doing only what they are being asked 
to do.”) and insisted that refugee activists should principally target the 
government, which implements the detention policy.

Surely a strategy of highlighting official and corporate complicity is the 
most logical idea. During my years of investigating the role of British 
multinational Serco, both on the Australian mainland and Christmas Island, 
leaked internal documentsproved 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/stopping-the-boats-is-bad-for-business-20130802-2r4vy.html>
 that company management was price gouging, under-training staff and 
instructing regional managers not to report problems to avoid government fines.

And IHMS, the company that provides healthcare for Australia’s asylum seekers 
in detention, admitted in documents published earlier this year by Guardian 
Australia that “inevitable” fraud would be committed as it tried to meet 
government standards.

Of course, one company can be replaced with another with relative ease if the 
authorities are determined to outsource their responsibilities.

Sydney Biennale and a question of corporate sponsorship | Antony Loewenstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/12/sydney-biennale-transfield-sponsorship>
The time is ripe for a vociferous divestment campaign against Serco in 
Australia for its past and present activities. The firm is havingfinancial 
troubles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/02/serco-rupert-soames-outsourcing-privatisation>
 and is economically vulnerable to shareholder pressure. Broadspectrum will 
face a growing public backlash as long as it’s involved in the privatised 
detention business, although it’s unlikely to collapse from that alone.

Lessons from other states prove that this is only half the battle (for 
example, European detention firms aremaking money 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/how-companies-have-been-exploiting-the-refugee-crisis-for-profit-a6706587.html>
 from the current refugee crisis) and that uncovering the financial and 
ideological ties that have led to the modern trend of outsourcing asylum 
seekers to corporations is the far larger and more difficult battle. It means 
challenging an economic model that places a monetary value on every human being.
 