
Solicitors for the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> government have 
failed in their bid to scratch 13 witnesses, including former Don Dale inmate 
Dylan Voller, from the royal commission’s public hearing list this week, 
claiming disorganisation and last-minute changes have left them unable to 
prepare.

The complaints, heard on Thursday morning before the inquiry into the 
protection and detention of children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
, have beenrepeatedly raised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/06/fears-northen-territory-juvenile-detention-inquiry-rushed-and-inadequate>
 by parties from all sides but other legal teams said their clients wished to 
carry on regardless.

After two hours of arguments and deliberations, Commissioner Margaret White 
dismissed the application, telling the hearing “the disadvantage is more 
imagined than real and can be worked through”.

Dylan Voller fears reprisals if he gives royal commission evidence from prison 
– mother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/dylan-voller-fears-reprisals-if-he-gives-royal-commission-evidence-from-prison-mother>
The witness list for the second public hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/royal-commission-told-new-detention-centres-no-solution-to-incarceration-crisis>
, which began on Monday and is scheduled until next Friday, remains unclear, 
but Thursday’s argument revealed 13 people including seven “vulnerable 
witnesses” such as Voller and other current or former detainees, are expected 
to appear.

The NT government’s solicitor general, Sonia Brownhill, had said the 
allegations expected to be aired by the witnesses could prompt adverse findings 
by the commissioners, and she needed time to prepare a thorough response and 
cross-examination.

“It is obvious there is potential for the allegations that are proposed to be 
made ... to have potentially damaging consequences to the reputations of both 
individuals and the NT government, and could give rise to or support either 
civil actions or criminal proceedings,” Brownhill said.

Voller’s testimony alone contained 31 named officers amid his allegations, 
Brownhill told the hearing, adding that one statement had taken a week and 
three days to be delivered to her legal team after it was signed by the witness.

She requested the royal commission not elicit evidence from any of the 13 as a 
matter of procedural fairness. While her team could respond to allegations 
later, “what’s critical is our capacity to cross-examine and deal with evidence 
as it’s led”, she said.

Senior counsel assisting the commission, Peter Callaghan SC, labelled the NT 
government’s application as “melodrama” and said Brownhill knew “full well” 
redactions and vulnerability concerns had to be addressed before statements 
were passed on.

He acknowledged the government had “many challenges” in cooperating with the 
royal commission and that it did not have the level of resources enjoyed by 
others, however “everyone here is labouring under significant difficulties”.

“The application is that the  <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23NTRC>royal 
commission should simply refrain from hearing any more evidence in these 
hearings,” he said. “That is startling.”

The royal commission has heard repeated concerns about its rushed nature and 
apparent inability to give enough notice of appearances to parties.

John Lawrence SC, who represents one of the young former detainees, said the 
government was already familiar with the evidence his client would raise, and 
to delay his appearance any longer would add to the boy’s trauma.

Voller’s lawyer, Peter O’Brien, claimed the same.

On Wednesday Voller’s mother told Guardian Australia her son was considering 
withdrawing as a witness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/dylan-voller-fears-reprisals-if-he-gives-royal-commission-evidence-from-prison-mother>
 over fears of retribution, and said the royal commission had left her and son 
feeling unsupported and vulnerable.

On Thursday afternoon Natasha Fyles, the NT attorney general, said the 
solicitor general had “broad instructions” from the NT government to act before 
the commission and that day-to-day operations were a matter for her office.

“The royal commission is a huge project, a huge amount of work, and I think it 
was acknowledged by counsel assisting that the Northern Territory is a small 
jurisdiction and everyone is labouring … to do their best and provide as much 
as possible,” she said.

“But obviously in light of events this morning, the SG made a decision that 
she thought the NT’s best interest was to be asking for that delay in time so 
she could prepare the information and the witnesses.”

Fyles said the NT government would look at providing more resources if the 
solicitor general said that was needed.

Royal commission tours Don Dale: 'This is where that young fella was held'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/royal-commission-tours-don-dale-this-is-where-that-young-fella-was-held>
Government staff have been working overtime to meet the royal commission’s 
requests for 10 years’ worth of information and resources, amounting to more 
than 2m papers.

It was a “balancing act” between a thorough investigation by the royal 
commission and the need to continue running the system and addressing issues 
for the children in detention right now, Fyles said.

The royal commission is widely expected to request and be granted an extension 
of time beyond the March 2017 reporting date, however Fyles flagged on Thursday 
the NT government’s next budget was being prepared with the original date in 
mind. Any changes “would be incorporated into the budget of the day”.

The commission continued on Thursday afternoon with evidence from the deputy 
chief executive of the Territory Families department.
 