
The outgoing US administration is poised to hit Russia with further sanctions 
beforeBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> leaves 
office next month, in response to allegations of Russian hacking and 
interference in the US electoral process.

The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has had a rocky 
relationship with Russia and has already imposed several rounds of sanctions on 
Moscow, mainly for its actions in Ukraine.

The US president-elect, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, by contrast, has repeatedly 
praised the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and has dismissed claims that 
Russia intervened to get him elected.

But the prominent Republican senator Lindsey Graham, a hardliner on Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and a constant critic of Trump, told 
a news conference in Latvia that Congress would “investigate the Russian 
involvement in our elections”.

“There will be bipartisan sanctions coming that will hit Russia hard, 
particularly Putin as an individual,” Graham told CNN. “I would say that 99 of 
us believe the Russians did this and we’re going to do something about it.”

A recent report 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/the-white-house-is-scrambling-for-a-way-to-punish-russian-hackers-via-sanctions/2016/12/27/0eee2fdc-c58f-11e6-85b5-76616a33048d_story.html?utm_term=.a6a506e0a38f>
 in the Washington Post said the White House was already close to announcing 
new sanctions on Russia in retaliation for the hacking. The White House did not 
respond to a request for comment on the report.

The fate of new sanctions remains unclear, however, with Trump due to take 
over the White House in little more than three weeks. During the campaign, 
Trump not only suggested he might lift sanctions on Russia, but also said he 
would look into the possibility of recognising Crimea, annexed from Ukraine in 
2014, as part of Russia.

Asked by reporters at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida if the US should 
sanction Russia over hacking activities, Trump said on Wednesday: “I think we 
ought to get on with our lives. I think that computers have complicated lives 
very greatly. The whole age of computer has made it where nobody knows exactly 
what’s going on.”

Rex Tillerson, Trump’s pick for secretary of state, has also raised eyebrows, 
given hislong history of doing business with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
 as head of Exxon Mobil, and his close personal friendship with Igor Sechin, 
head of the Russian oil giant Rosneft. Sechin is one of Putin’s closest 
associates, and is on the US sanctions list.

Tillerson said in 2014 that Exxon did not support sanctions in general because 
they were hard to implement effectively. At an economic forum in Russia earlier 
this year, he laughed off a question on sanctions, while saying he agreed with 
“my friend Mr Sechin”.

Not all the sanctions currently in place would be easy for Trump to revoke, 
even if he wanted to do so. Most difficult would be those against Russian 
individuals implicated in human rights abuses,linked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/12/us-moscow-sanctions-threat-russians>
 to the Magnitsky Act, named after the whistleblowing lawyer Sergei Magnitsky, 
who died in prison. They were put in place in 2013 using an act of Congress, 
and as such Congress would be required to revoke them. It is likely that the 
White House would also ensure any new sanctions related to hacking could not be 
easily rescinded by Trump.


However, the wider ranging sanctions that were introduced by the Obama 
administration over Russia’s annexation of Crimea and meddling in east Ukraine 
were implemented by presidential executive order, and as such could be revoked 
by Trump with the stroke of a pen.

Were Trump to do so, European businesses would put major pressure on their 
governments to lift EU sanctions as well, so as not to allow US companies an 
unfair advantage on the Russian market.

In a televised interview last week, Putin’s spokesman Dmitry Peskov said 
Russia was hoping for “new, fresher and more constructive approaches” from 
Trump’s administration. He said Russia would welcome further dialogue but was 
not pushing for sanctions to be lifted.

“We didn’t initiate the sanctions dialogue and we won’t initiate their 
removal,” said Peskov. He said Russia and the US had not been particularly 
affected by sanctions, unlike European agricultural producers, who suffered 
losses from Russia’s counter-sanctions banning the imports of many food items.

However, there is no doubt that Russia would be extremely pleased to see the 
sanctions gone, not least because of the broader redefinition of the 
relationship it would signify. There have also been US business voices keen for 
the sanctions to be dropped.

Alexis Rodzianko, president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Russia, 
said: “The sanctions have been annoying and unhelpful for business interests. 
They had a direct impact, in the banking sanctions, and an indirect impact in 
that attitude towards US business.”


Brian Zimbler, managing partner at Morgan Lewis law firm in Moscow, said: 
“There is intense interest in Russia about future US policy, and lots of 
speculation that sanctions may be reduced or removed next year.

“Reduced sanctions would open up new opportunities to obtain funding for 
Russian-based projects, and potentially generate momentum for increased foreign 
investment in Russia, which has fallen to low levels.”


Bilateral ties have been extremely strained since Russia’s annexation of 
Crimea and the sanctions. US diplomats say they have been routinely harassed by 
Russian authorities. Footage released over the summer showed a diplomat rugby 
tackled to the ground by a policeman while trying to get back inside the 
embassy compound. The diplomat was lateraccused of spying and expelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/09/russia-expels-two-us-diplomats-over-incident-with-moscow-policeman>
.


In June, the foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said 
<https://twitter.com/mfa_russia/status/747755291538755586>: “Diplomacy is based 
on reciprocity. The more the US damages relations, the harder it will be for US 
diplomats to work in Russia.”


Russian officials, who cheered Trump’s victory, are hoping he will launch a 
complete overhaul of western policy towards the country, including sanctions.

“Officially nothing has changed, but the mood has changed perceptibly. It’s 
like a pre-honeymoon honeymoon period. They are openly happy, but only time 
will tell if they are right to be,” said Rodzianko.
 