
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> is facing 
growing pressure from congressional Democrats in both houses demanding further 
disclosures regarding Russia’s role in the 2016 US elections.


The White House has not responded to a week-old letter signed by every 
Democrat and aligned member of the Senate intelligence committeeseeking 
declassification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/senators-hint-russian-interference-us-presidential-election>
 of “additional information concerning the Russian government and the US 
election”.

Senators call for declassification of files on Russia's role in US election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/senators-hint-russian-interference-us-presidential-election>
Now a group of senior House Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> has also written to the 
president, seeking a classified briefing for colleagues on “Russian entities’ 
hacking of American political organizations; hacking and strategic release of 
emails from campaign officials; the WikiLeaks disclosures; fake news stories 
produced and distributed with the intent to mislead American voters; and any 
other Russian or Russian-related interference or involvement in our recent 
election.”

The letter was signed by Democratic whip Steny Hoyer of Maryland, as well as 
the top Democrats on the House judiciary, intelligence, armed services, foreign 
affairs and oversight committees.

Both communiques from the congressional Democrats, several of whom have access 
to classified intelligence, strongly implied that the Obama administration and 
the intelligence agencies know significantly more about Russian involvement in 
the election than they have disclosed. Alternatively, the politicians could be 
raising suspicions without evidence to weaken the incoming president, Donald 
Trump, whom his former opponent Hillary Clinton dubbed a “puppet” of the 
Russians.

On 7 October, the top US intelligence and homeland security officials formally 
accused the Kremlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 of directing the hack of the Democratic National Committee and implied that 
the Russians used WikiLeaks, which published extensive internal communications 
among top Democrats, to launder responsibility for the release. The unusual 
public accusation held that the Russians were attempting to “interfere” in the 
election.

Yet it is unclear if or when the White House will follow through on the 
elaboration its Democratic allies seek.

A senior administration official said the October statement came into being 
after the FBI and the intelligence agencies developed a mosaic of information 
about culpability for the hacks and had extensive internal discussion of what 
they were comfortable saying publicly.

“Any further declassification would need to follow the same framework, 
consistent with law enforcement and intelligence equities,” the official said.

As yet, there is no scheduled classified briefing of the sort sought by the 
House Democrats, though the White House is said to be open to one.

The official said the administration had conducted regular legislative 
briefings in the past months “regarding malicious cyber-activity related to our 
elections infrastructure” and was “committed to working with Congress to brief 
members and staff as appropriate”.

For his part, Trump again absolved Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> of culpability for the hack on 
Wednesday, though it is unclear if the intelligence briefings he attends 
include internal attributions of responsibility beyond the October statement.

Montenegro's accession to Nato faces hurdle as US Senate session nears end
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/montenegro-nato-us-senate-balkan-states-trump-russia>
Trump told Time magazine that he believed US intelligence was accusing Russia 
of the hack because of politics and said he rejected their conclusion.

“I don’t believe it. I don’t believe they interfered,” Trump told the magazine 
<http://time.com/time-person-of-the-year-2016-donald-trump/?xid=homepage>, 
which bestowed its“person of the year” accolade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/donald-trump-named-as-time-magazines-person-of-the-year>
 on the president-elect.

The senior Democrat on the intelligence committee, Adam Schiff of California, 
took umbrage at Trump’s implication that “the intelligence community is lying” 
and said Trump was not acting presidentially.

“Notwithstanding the abundance of evidence that Russia hacked our political 
institutions during the presidential campaign and dumped documents in an effort 
to meddle in our political affairs, President-elect Trump’s comments this 
morning continue to contradict our intelligence professionals and carry water 
for the Kremlin,” Schiff said on Wednesday.
 