
Andreas Åhrman, global sales and marketing director of Nudie Jeans 
<http://www.nudiejeans.com/>, bought his first denim from the company back in 
2003, when he was still a student. “I knew a guy who worked at the store who 
got me a discount. I got carried away and tried to buy three pairs and some 
T-shirts, and my credit card got refused. The staff were so nice they let me 
pay the difference when I had more money. That was pretty impressive.”

In the 12 years since, the Nudie attitude to suppliers and customers hasn’t 
changed that much. The company is a member of theFair Wear Foundation 
<http://www.fairwear.org/>, which strives to improve working conditions in the 
textile industry. It also works withTextile Exchange 
<http://textileexchange.org/> – an organisation that supports the organic 
cotton industry. Nudie only partners with a small, carefully picked group of 
suppliers so it’s possible to ensure that they comply to the Nudie code of 
conduct.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DApc4V9_vaAg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DApc4V9_vaAg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DApc4V9_vaAg&media=>
As a customer, if you buy their jeans, they’ll repair them for you. If you’re 
bored of their jeans, hand them into a store and you get a 20% discount off 
your next pair and Nudie recycles the denim.

Sounds simple, right? Well, it’s not easy to stick to your principles: “It was 
a huge struggle at the beginning. We wanted to be 100% organic, but we weren’t 
big enough to buy in that sort of bulk. Now we can buy large amounts and that 
helps our supplier to sell small orders to smaller companies. It would have 
really helped if something like Nudie had been around when we were starting 
out.”

Now, though, Åhrman says the company message is simple: “Buy high-quality 
product. Look after it and repair it. When you’re sick of it, share it though 
our repair shop or by giving it to a friend. Keep clothes alive so we can 
reduce consumption.”

Runners-up: Here Today Here Tomorrow; Java Rock Necklace 
 