
It’s not often that UN secretary-general Ban Ki-moon makes Harry Potter jokes, 
but after actorEmma Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-watson>’s 
speech at the UN’s New York HQ last September, he declared she had waved a 
magic wand over her audience. The description was surprisingly apt. Watson was 
appointed UN Women Goodwill Ambassador in July 2014 and became involved in the 
organisation’sHeForShe campaign <http://www.heforshe.org/> – which calls for 
one billion men to declare their support for gender equality. Watson was 
visibly nervous as she spoke, but what she said about her own experience of 
feminism and the confusion and unhappiness that gender stereotypes can create 
for men and women struck a chord. Women related to her stories about being 
called bossy, about being sexualised at too early an age. Men listened when she 
talked about the impact of mental illness or them being unable to express their 
emotions. She obviously spoke for a lot of people: the speech has been watched 
more than 7m times on YouTube and 331,220 men have now signed up for the 
HeforShe campaign.

Her campaign has also won Watson a place on Time’s 100 Most Influential People 
list for 2015 – in at 26

Watson also showed great equanimity about the inevitable backlash. Straight 
after the speech, a website appeared threatening to post naked pictures of 
Watson and efforts were made to make #RIP EmmaWatson trend on Twitter. Her 
response? “This is why I have to be doing this. If they were trying to put me 
off, it did the opposite.” She also made sure that the inspiring responses she 
received from men to her speech – men who supported her, men who wanted to make 
sure their daughters grow up in a fairer world – received as much publicity as 
the trolling. The campaign has won Watson not only theObserver Campaigner of 
the Year Award, but also a place onTime’s 100 Most Influential People list for 
2015 (in at 26, and one of only four Britons on the list) and the Feminist 
Celebrity of the Year from the Ms Foundation forWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fobserver-ethical-awards-2015-winners-emma-watson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435683466202%2Fe7227444-1d95-49eb-9f32-d731ceed9b24-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Observer%20Ethical%20Awards%202015%20winners%3A%20Emma%20Watson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fobserver-ethical-awards-2015-winners-emma-watson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Observer%20Ethical%20Awards%202015%20winners%3A%20Emma%20Watson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fobserver-ethical-awards-2015-winners-emma-watson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435683466202%2Fe7227444-1d95-49eb-9f32-d731ceed9b24-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Emma Watson spoke about her own experience of feminism and the confusion and 
unhappiness that gender stereotypes can create. Photograph: Mark Garten/UN Photo
HeforShe may be her most high-profile campaign, but it’s not Watson’s first. 
Alongside the acting career she started at 11 and her studies at Oxford and 
Brown University in the US, Watson is a long-standing advocate of schooling for 
girls. She’s been an ambassador for Camfed International, which fights to 
educate girls in rural Africa, since 2012. Most recently, on behalf of the UN 
she’s been in Uruguay campaigning for women’s political participation 
(currently only 13% of Uruguay’s parliament are women, whereas the world 
average is 28%).

UN Women executive director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka thinks Watson is a strong 
voice for young people worldwide. “Her commitment to the issues that we work on 
at UN Women multiplies our ability to reach and engage more young people – who 
are key to advancing gender equality.” She’s absolutely right, but somehow that 
misses the unique quality Watson brings to all her work: a quiet determination 
to succeed and an enquiring mind coupled with the ability to be enthusiastic, 
open and vulnerable. When explaining a campaign message to the public, that’s a 
combination that’s better than magic.

Runners-up: Bez; Shami Chakrabarti; Leonardo DiCaprio; Bianca Jagger; Naomi 
Klein; Lewis Pugh; Mary Robinson; Boyan Slat; Carry Somers; Orsola de Castro
 