
Mark Tanzer, chief executive of the Association of British Travel Agents, has 
my sympathy. For the last few days, he will have been deafened by cries of 
“Well, you would say that, wouldn’t you!?” Not literally deafened, I don’t 
suppose. He may already be deaf for all I know. I certainly haven’t checked – 
but it’s statistically unlikely.

Maybe I should have said “swamped”. But then you can’t be swamped by cries, 
even in a metaphor. I suppose you could be swamped by tears. Theoretically. 
Though I doubt it’s ever happened to a human. Some of those tiny hopping flies 
have probably come a cropper to a tsunami of grief or sadness that coincided 
with a meal they were attempting to share. Mealtimes can be stressful. 
Particularly at Christmas. But then there aren’t many of those hopping flies 
around at Christmas.

'Well, you would say that, wouldn’t you?!' is as diminishing and unanswerable 
as 'Look what you’ve done now!'

Except I was forgetting about the southern hemisphere as usual – hi guys, hope 
this hasn’t woken you. Yes, the tears and spluttering of fractious, 
sun-drenched (not literally – it’s heat and light, not liquid) Australian 
family Christmases must be a deathtrap for the antipodean equivalent of those 
little hopping flies. Which are venomous and have pouches, for all I know. I 
certainly haven’t checked.

So why will Mark Tanzer be drowning in the blinding light of this 
heart-stopping chorus of “Well, you would say that, wouldn’t you!?” The main 
reason is that, last week, hesaid something publicly 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/airbnb-story-vjlm3r5lt>. “Well, you would 
say that, wouldn’t you!?” is the knee-jerk response to anyone saying anything 
in public.

Not always specifically that phrase, I should add for the benefit of those 
currently suffering from a pedantic itch (try a corn plaster and lots of talc), 
but responses that basically mean that. At last the effects of the new GCSE 
history syllabus of the late 1980s are kicking in. Increasingly people are 
asking themselves why a certain person has said a certain thing, and are no 
longer as easily convinced that the answer is “because it’s true”. This is good 
news – everyone’s questioning their sources. The only irritant is that they’re 
often questioning them directly on social media.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fyou-probably-already-know-social-media-david-mitchell-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe689df9b353a5db2065c0329cc7de95ac522f4a9%2F0_354_1948_1946%2F1948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obviously%20you%20know%20what%20I%E2%80%99m%20about%20to%20say%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fyou-probably-already-know-social-media-david-mitchell-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obviously%20you%20know%20what%20I%E2%80%99m%20about%20to%20say%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fyou-probably-already-know-social-media-david-mitchell-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe689df9b353a5db2065c0329cc7de95ac522f4a9%2F0_354_1948_1946%2F1948.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Julius Caesar never had to deal with thousands of personal messages 
complaining that his accounts of victories in Gaul were unconfirmed by the 
Gauls, and seemed designed more to advance his own career than exhaustively 
document a complex conflict. “Oh yeah, you would say that, Julius! But I heard 
the Gauls were a pushover and you got lucky with the weather!” never popped up 
on the great man’s phone when he was trying to look up the price of slaves. He 
may not even have had a phone – I certainly haven’t checked. So Caesar went to 
his stabbing (I checked) blissfully unaware of the cynical clamour of posterity.

That’s not how it works these days, as Mark Tanzer will have discovered. 
Anyone who says anything loud enough to be heard above the hashtags is 
immediately and repeatedly informed that they only said that because they’re 
them. It’s a difficult point to refute. We are all who we are. Getting an 
objective view on things outside our own selves is impossible, except for those 
people who claim they remember looking down on their own bodies soon after 
being given an anaesthetic, and could see objects on the top of cupboards. 
Though I’ve never heard such a person say they felt a greater political 
objectivity in those moments – even as they stared down at their unconscious 
forms, they remained just as likely to vote to minimise their tax burden.

“Well, you would say that, wouldn’t you?!” is as diminishing and unanswerable 
as “Look what you’ve done now!” “Bloody you, with that youness of yours which, 
as you’ve long suspected, everyone else hates. You. You would say that.” What 
can you say in response? Only something else that you would say. And you can’t 
deny that you would say the first thing. Because not only would you say it, you 
actually have said it. Of all the almost infinite variety of phrases that, 
given the right circumstances, you would say, this offending one belongs to the 
minority that you already have.

You may have guessed that this tirade is inspired by the fact that I stated 
online which way I was going to vote in last week’s referendum. In quite mild 
terms, I thought. I didn’t, except by implication, even advocate voting that 
way. I won’t restate here which way it was because, as I was told seconds 
later, I would vote that way so there was no point mentioning it. Mentioning it 
was just annoying to all those who didn’t need reminding of all the shitty 
things which I, being me, would do. It was not an opinion, it didn’t come from 
reason or conviction, it was simply an inescapable and lamentable consequence 
of the creature I am, like a skunk’s stink. That was the view of a fair 
proportion of respondents who planned to vote the other way. So, you know… they 
would say that.

Caitlin Moran: 'social media is like a baby screaming and throwing tantrums'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/21/caitlin-moran-social-media-twitter-abuse>
I was expecting this response, so I didn’t much mind – but it wasn’t what 
you’d call uplifting. So when I read that the chief executive of the 
Association of British Travel Agents had told a conference that he was worried 
about the impact on Barcelona and Florence of increased visitor numbers caused 
bywebsites such as Airbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/01/berlin-authorities-taking-stand-against-airbnb-rental-boom>
, I managed to cut off my instinctive response at the “Well…” Because maybe he 
is worried. Maybe, when he says “You can see the strain not just on the tourist 
experience but on the actual fabric of the city and on the residents there”, 
he’s being completely sincere.

Obviously he’s also worried about the loss of market share that travel agents 
are suffering, and is keen for more regulation of how properties are informally 
sub-let. But maybe his view is not just a protectionist desire to shore up his 
own association, but also a genuine fear for the tourist experience and a 
warning that, if Airbnb remains unchecked, the world’s beauty spots will be 
wrecked and tourism will, as he put it, “kill tourism”.

So he has my sympathy as he tries to cope, like so many people at the moment, 
with the impact of an online juggernaut on his way of life. What he said may 
indeed have just been what a man in his position inevitably would. But that 
doesn’t make it any more dishonest than someone shouting “Help!”
 