
Police named Abdul Razak Ali Artan as the assailant in an Ohio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio> State University attack on Monday, 
hours after he drove into a crowd of people, exited the car and stabbed 
bystanders with a butcher knife. Police said Artan, who was fatally shot by 
police, was a student at the university.

The university president, Michael Drake, said he had heard it was Artan’s 
first semester, but would not provide further details because the investigation 
is ongoing.

Unconfirmed reports, citing anonymous sources, said Artan was born in Somalia 
and had permanent residency in the US. There has been no direct public 
statement on this by police, the university or other officials.

Eleven people were hurt, one critically. Most of the injured were hurt by the 
car, and at least two were stabbed, officials said. One had a fractured skull.

Nine people were being treated at area hospitals with stab wounds and injuries 
related to being hit by a car, according to a hospital spokesperson. An earlier 
report from the Columbus fire department had said at least 10 people had been 
transported from the scene.


“We prepare for situations like this but always hope never to have one,” said 
Drake, at a press conference at the university’s Wexner Medical Center.

Andrew Thomas, chief medical officer for Wexner, said victims were taken to 
three area hospitals with stab wounds and other injuries.

A warning to shelter in place was lifted around 11.30am after police said they 
had secured the scene.

Monica Moll, OSU public safety director, said “we do believe the threat ended” 
when the officer shot the suspect.

OSU police issued an alert about the situation around 9.52am local time on 
social media. Police advised people on campus to shelter in place and follow 
the “run, hide, fight 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-act-violence/201408/the-truth-behind-the-run-hide-fight-debate>
” safety protocol for when a shooting takes place. It means: Run, evacuate if 
possible; hide, get silently out of view; or fight, as a last resort, take 
action to disrupt or incapacitate the shooter if your life is in imminent 
danger.

The university’s police chief, Craig Stone, said that the assailant 
deliberately drove over a curb outside a classroom building and then got out 
and began attacking people with the knife. A campus officer who happened to be 
nearby because of a gas leak arrived on the scene and shot the driver in less 
than a minute, Stone said.

Angshuman Kapil, a graduate student, was outside the building when the car 
barreled on to the sidewalk.

“It just hit everybody who was in front,” he said. “After that everybody was 
shouting, ‘Run! Run! Run!’”

Student Martin Schneider said he heard the car’s engine revving. “I thought it 
was an accident initially until I saw the guy come out with a knife,” Schneider 
said, adding that the man didn’t say anything when he got out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fohio-state-university-campus-shooting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2529ea05f18a83a4adaf082c430a85dd474e195%2F0_212_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ohio%20State%20University%20attack%3A%20suspect%20shot%20dead%20after%20injuring%2011&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fohio-state-university-campus-shooting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ohio%20State%20University%20attack%3A%20suspect%20shot%20dead%20after%20injuring%2011&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fohio-state-university-campus-shooting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2529ea05f18a83a4adaf082c430a85dd474e195%2F0_212_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Students leave buildings surrounding Watts Hall as police respond to reports 
of a shooting on campus. Photograph: John Minchillo/AP 
OSU student Cydney Ireland spoke to ABC6 
<https://www.facebook.com/WSYXABC6/videos/10153524256854364/> from a bathroom 
she said she was hiding in on campus. “The first thing I heard were screams,” 
Ireland said.

She said she then heard a whistle, followed by at least three gunshots that 
“sounded like a handgun”.

Witnesses told local news that after a fire alarm went off, a car jumped the 
curb and drove into a crowd of students.

After the car crashed, a man attacked bystanders with a knife, Jerry Kovacich, 
a third-year student,told the college newspaper, the Lantern. 
<http://thelantern.com/2016/11/police-active-shooter-on-north-campus/>

“The guy ended up just coming and hopping the curb with his car and trying to 
mow down a couple people,” Kovacich said. “He lost control, and I think he 
ended up hitting three people, and then people were around the car.

“Somebody asked him if he was OK and the guy just hopped out of the car with a 
butcher knife and starting chasing people around.”

The incident was said to have occurred on the north-east part of campus on the 
first day of class after the Thanksgiving holiday break. All classes were 
cancelled on Monday.

Asked at a news conference whether authorities were considering the 
possibility it was a terrorist act, the Columbus police chief, Kim Jacobs, 
said: “I think we have to consider that it is.”

Surveillance photos showed Artan in the car by himself just before the attack, 
but investigators were looking into whether anyone else was involved, the 
campus police chief said.

Ohio’s governor, John Kasich, was monitoring the situation and spoke with the 
Drake, according to a governor’s office spokeswoman.

“Ohio’s thoughts and prayers go out to the Ohio State community,” Kasich said 
in a statement. “Be safe, listen to first responders.”


The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives said its field 
division is responding to the scene and the FBI has joined the investigation.

 