
Oil and gas companies <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oilandgascompanies>
 in North America are lagging behind their European counterparts in cleaning up 
their operations, new research has found, with higher greenhouse gas emissions 
and less investment in clean alternatives.

ExxonMobil and Chevron of the US, alongside Canada’s Suncor, ranked lowest in 
a review conducted by theCarbon Disclosure Project <https://www.cdp.net/en> 
(CDP) of 11 of the world’s biggest oil and gas companies. At the top of the 
table came Statoil of Norway, Italy’s Eni and the French company Total.

Companies were rated on criteria including their greenhouse gas emissions and 
their asset mix, which is determined by the hydrocarbons they extract, and the 
methods used; their climate-related goals, such as investments in renewables 
and other forms of low-carbon energy, if any; whether they make efforts to 
capture and use methane, or flare it; their use of water, and whether they are 
likely to be affected by water shortages; and the efficiency of their 
operations.

The Guardian view on climate change: Trump spells disaster | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/13/the-guardian-view-on-climate-change-trump-spells-disaster>
The North American companies ranked so low in part because of their exposure 
to tar sands, particularly in Canada, and their lack of investment in 
conventional gas. This is in part explained by the history and geography of the 
different companies involved: Suncor, for instance, from its headquarters in 
Montreal, set up the first commercial operation toexploit the Canadian oil 
sands in the 1960s <http://www.suncor.com/about-us/history>; while Statoil, 
with its history of exploration in the North Sea, has had a longer focus on 
conventional gas.

However, factors such as investment in alternatives to fossil fuels, and 
efforts to reduce emissions from their operations, are matters that are within 
each company’s control. European companies also face more pressure from 
governments and activists to become cleaner and reduce emissions, while such 
pressure is likely to abate further in the US in the next few years under the 
presidency of Donald Trump and a Republican-dominated Congress.

Three major companies – Saudi Aramco, Russia’s Rosneft and PetroChina – were 
unranked in the CDP report, entitled In the Pipeline and published on Tuesday, 
because they refused to respond to the organisation’s questions.

The Bank of England is also pursuing greater disclosure on climate change 
issues from the oil and gas sector, with a view to assisting investors. Mark 
Carney, the governor, has asked ataskforce on climate-related financial 
disclosure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/29/carney-warns-of-risks-from-climate-change-tragedy-of-the-horizon>
 to report to him in December, giving information that would be useful for 
investors to judge the climate strategies of fossil fuel companies.

Paul Simpson, chief executive of the CDP, said: “There are reasons to be 
optimistic. Some oil and gas majors have the balance sheets to transition to 
much lower carbon business models, and play a key role in implementing the 
goals of theParis agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
.”

Tarek Soliman, senior analyst for investor research at the CDP, said: “On both 
sides of the Atlantic, international oil and gas majors need to look at how 
they fit into an energy system which achieves the goals laid out in the Paris 
agreement. Our research shows that European companies have been more active in 
developing transition strategies for the coming decade, which is expected to 
feature peak oil demand, and are starting to implement these. But more needs to 
be done across the board.”
 