
It was the sort of move that is more routinely associated with the skill 
buttons on the PlayStation. But whenOlivier Giroud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olivier-giroud> blurred the line between 
the virtually real and the gloriously tangible, he did more than set Arsenal on 
their way to victory over Crystal Palace. He lit up the Emirates Stadium and 
provided a memory for years to come.

Giroud’s 17th-minute opener recalled the finish of Henrikh Mkhitaryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/manchester-united-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 for Manchester United against Sunderland on Boxing Day. There were shades of a 
scorpion kick, albeit with only one leg; a rainbow flick or whatever else the 
gamers want to call it.

But when Giroud’s back-heeled flick – recalled from a distance behind him and 
on the run, too – arched in off the underside of Wayne Hennessey’s crossbar, 
the stadium and the watching TV millions felt their jaws drop. Even Giroud 
looked a little stunned.

Arsenal 2-0 Crystal Palace: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/01/arsenal-v-crystal-palace-premier-league-live>
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> coasted to the points 
thereafter, with Alex Iwobi providing the tempo and incision in the No10 role 
in the absence of Mesut Özil, who was ill. Iwobi added the second goal; a 
looping header after Palace had left him unmarked only four yards out. Palace’s 
defending continues to be a cause of high anxiety.

Sam Allardyce’s team had a brief flurry around the hour mark but it was not an 
afternoon when the club’s new manager could trumpet too many positives with any 
conviction. It said much that he substituted Yohan Cabaye, Andros Townsend and 
Christian Benteke well before the end, with one eye, perhaps, on conserving 
energy for the home game against Swansea City on Tuesday.

Giroud’s goal transcended the occasion and if the finish was a thing of 
exquisite class, it was worth going over every detail of the buildup, including 
the striker’s role in it, which was crucial.

After Lucas Pérez – who looked off the pace on a rare Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> start – had slid in to 
intercept on the edge of his own area, Héctor Bellerín initiated the break with 
a sharp pass up to Giroud but it was what happened next that really got Arsenal 
moving. With his first back-heel, he found Granit Xhaka and he played in Iwobi 
who, in turn, made the right pass forward to Alexis Sánchez.

Giroud had bolted up in support but, when Sánchez’s cross arrived, it was a 
full yard behind him. No problem. Giroud adjusted his body shape and, in a 
moment of improvisational genius, he had reached back his left boot, located 
the ball and flicked it with his heel over his head and towards the roof of the 
net. Hennessey could do nothing to keep it out.

The first thought was of Mkhitaryan but Giroud was further out than the United 
forward – he was about 12 yards from goal – and the goalkeeper had looked 
better placed. As the Arsenal supporters who filed past the press box were also 
keen to point out, Giroud was onside; Mkhitaryan had been just ahead of the 
last man. Whatever the arguments, it was plain that Giroud had illuminated this 
game to a degree that went beyond merely shaping it.

In classic Giroud and Arsenal style, he had been guilty of a bad miss from an 
easier chance on seven minutes, after Xhaka’s dinked pass out to Nacho Monreal 
and the full-back’s low, first-time cross. In front of goal, Giroud could not 
set his feet in time and Mohamed Elneny’s follow-up shot was headed away by 
James Tomkins. Giroud had sorted himself out by the time that Sánchez crossed 
for him shortly afterwards.

It was only Giroud’s second Premier League start of the season but he now has 
five goals in the competition and the statistics show that they have come at a 
rate of one every 69.8 minutes. The next best record in the top flight belongs 
to Watford’s Stefano Okaka, who has scored once every 97.5 minutes.

Arsenal called the tune and it said everything that when Cabaye had a shot on 
target in the 37th minute, which was the definition of routine for the Arsenal 
goalkeeper, Petr Cech, the travelling fans celebrated wildly. “We’ve had a 
shot, we’ve had a shot,” they chorused, sarcastically.

Palace’s chaotic streak at the back, which Allardyce has been charged with 
stamping out, was evident in first-half stoppage time, when a Bellerín cross 
sparked such panic that the only surprise was the Keystone Cops did not arrive 
on the scene. With Martin Kelly all over the place, Iwobi won the ball and 
Sánchez had a chance from close range. His shot, though, was too close to 
Hennessey, who blocked. Arsène Wenger would lament his team’s failure to kill 
the game sooner than they did.

Palace were poor in possession in the first half but they had what Allardyce 
described as “our defining moment” on 47 minutes, when Townsend crossed for 
Benteke and one of the best headers of a ball in Europe found himself up 
against Bellerín at the far post. He failed to get a clean connection and the 
effort bobbled wide.

The visitors had their purple patch after Iwobi’s goal, which followed 
Monreal’s cross and Scott Dann’s diversion high into the air. Benteke worked 
Cech with a header from a corner and Cabaye went close with the follow-up while 
Kelly swung and missed when well placed and Cech was made to save by Townsend. 
This game, however, was all about one player and one moment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Farsenal-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F417b1464830a46fad3c360a2e437c7176c0715ac%2F0_271_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20Giroud%E2%80%99s%20brilliant%20back-heel%20helps%20Arsenal%20sink%20Crystal%20Palace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Farsenal-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20Giroud%E2%80%99s%20brilliant%20back-heel%20helps%20Arsenal%20sink%20Crystal%20Palace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Farsenal-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F417b1464830a46fad3c360a2e437c7176c0715ac%2F0_271_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Olivier Giroud twists to score his superb opening goal for Arsenal against 
Crystal Palace. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
Arsène Wenger calls Olivier Giroud goal against Crystal Palace ‘a work of art’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/arsene-wenger-olivier-giroud-crystal-palace-work-of-art> 