
Olivier Giroud <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olivier-giroud> says he 
has yet to sign a contract extension at Arsenal but hinted he could be willing 
to commit his future to the club, despite spending the majority of the season 
playing second fiddle to Alexis Sánchez.

Arsenal’s Olivier Giroud snatches late win against West Brom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/arsenal-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
The France forward scored the winner against West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/arsenal-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
 on Boxing Day to end Arsenal’s two-match losing streak in his first Premier 
League start of the season. It meant Giroud has now scored in each of the three 
starts he has made this year, having also found the net in the Champions League 
ties against Ludogorets and Paris Saint-Germain in November.

The 30-year-old’s contract is due to expire at the end of next season and 
Arsenal’s manager, Arsène Wenger, has previously urged Giroud to sign a new 
deal. Reports in France this month said he has already extended his contract 
but the playerpurchased from Montpellier in June 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/26/arsenal-complete-oliver-giroud-signing>
 has denied that is the case. “People have been saying I have signed a new 
contract,” he said. “It is not true but may be soon.”

With Danny Welbeck having returned to full training and Lucas Pérez also back 
from injury,Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have a 
plethora of attacking options at present, although Wenger has opted to use 
Sánchez in a central role for most of the season. Despite his manager’s 
attempts to explain his decision to prefer the Chilean, Giroud admitted it has 
been difficult to spend so long on the substitutes’ bench having previously 
established himself as first choice.

“It is all about keeping the focus high. Always keep working hard at 
training,” he said. “I was speaking with the boss, we had a couple of 
discussions together and he explained to me why I hadn’t played too much until 
here. But football is an everlasting new beginning, as I used to say, and you 
always have to keep focused and wait for your time.

“Today I played, I tried to give everything for the team and hopefully things 
will change for me. But as long as the team is getting better I am happy and I 
am part of the club since five years and I want to carry on. But we have to 
see, I need more time of games but we will see in the future. The best thing is 
to keep within distance of Chelsea.”

Theo Walcott is expected to miss the match against Crystal Palace on Sunday 
and the trip to Bournemouth on 3 January because of a calf problem, meaning 
Giroud could continue to deputise in his absence. Having returned to pre-season 
late after helping France reach the Euro 2016 final, he was limited to three 
substitute appearances by the end of September before a groin injury forced him 
to miss a further four weeks.

Now Giroud is hoping his goal against West Brom will be a turning point in 
Arsenal’s season, with Wenger’s side nine points behind the leaders, Chelsea, 
with almost half the season completed, despitebeating Antonio Conte’s side 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 at the end of September.

“I came back a bit late from the Euros and it was nice for my body because I 
could rest but not good for me because the team was doing well and another 
striker was doing well up front,” he said.

“This season has been difficult because also I was injured for a month and a 
half, so it hasn’t been easy. I don’t want to talk too much about me but it was 
a big day for me but also a turning point for the team because, if we didn’t 
win, we would have been in trouble. We always try to be positive and keep the 
faith in our game, keep going and keep believing and at the end of the day that 
has paid off.”
 