
The designated safety officer of the Olympic Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-stadium> resigned in May after 
becoming deeply concerned about the retractable seating and its impact on the 
structure of the ground’s lower tier, the Guardian has learned.

Chris Baker, an experienced, career stadium safety officer, is understood to 
have resigned shortly before the concert by the rock band AC/DC, which was held 
on 4 June, only two months beforeWest Ham United’s first match at the renamed 
London Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/04/west-ham-domzale-europa-league-match-report>
.

London Stadium chairman David Edmonds quits amid costs investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/london-stadium-chairman-david-edmonds-resigns-costs-investigation>
One of Baker’s deputy safety officers, Ravi Sharma, who worked at the AC/DC 
concert, is understood to have raised serious concerns afterwards about the 
management, policing and stewarding of the crowd at the event and also decided 
not to work at the stadium again.

Baker is understood to have become concerned about the potential conflict of 
interest of Newham council, which is the authority legally responsible for 
certifying the stadium is safe, while it also owns a 35% share and, having
loaned £40m towards the stadium’s conversion costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/02/west-ham-olympic-stadium-deal-explained-london-mayor-sadiq-khan>
, makes money back from the events it hosts.

Baker, who formerly worked at Brighton & Hove Albion when the club moved into 
their new Amex Stadium in 2011, and Sharma, whose full-time role is head of 
safety and security for Stoke City, declined to talk to the Guardian. However, 
sources with knowledge of their situation said both men voiced their safety 
concerns internally but believed they were not being taken seriously enough and 
so took the decision no longer to work at the stadium.

West Ham’s opening matches at the stadium have been overshadowed by complaints 
that its layout and some of its policing and stewarding arrangements have been 
inadequate,culminating in ugly scenes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/west-ham-chelsea-efl-cup-match-report>
 andmany supporters feeling in danger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/27/six-areas-of-contention-west-ham-united-london-stadium>
 at the EFL Cup game with Chelsea last week. Initial problems included police 
not having adequate radio signal around the stadium, and there are worries the 
stewarding operation is not experienced enough, as many of the 300 stewards who 
formerly worked for West Ham at the Boleyn Ground have not moved across to 
Stratford.

On Tuesday the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, announced an inquiry into the 
financing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/sadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry>
 of the stadium, which has now cost £752m and been handed over to West Ham for 
a £15m one-off payment and £2.5m annually, which covers the whole operation and 
maintenance, including stewarding and policing. Khan’s investigation is 
particularly focusing on the escalating cost of the retractable seating, 
constructed over the retained athletics track, which has risen from a projected 
£300,000 each time to as much as a projected £8m.

Baker, who became the official safety officer in November 2014, was in his 
post for Rugby World Cup and rugby league matches held last year, and for the
Race of Champions motor racing event 
<http://www.raceofchampions.com/news/latest-news/london-to-stage-2015-race-of-champions-at-the-former-olympic-stadium/>
 for which the seats over the track were retracted. The system now installed 
involves the seats being moved manually rather than hydraulically, and Baker is 
thought to have been concerned the track itself and parts of the lower tier had 
been damaged in the process. When the issue was not dealt with to his 
satisfaction, his concerns are said to have grown over Newham council’s 
oversight role, and he resigned.

Sharma, who was one of several deputy safety officers and worked at the London 
Stadium on a contract when fixtures and duties at Stoke City’s bet365 Stadium 
permitted, took the role of safety officer at the AC/DC concert, the Guardian 
understands. He is said to have been unhappy about the levels of policing in 
the Olympic Park itself, the approach to the stadium and around it, and the 
management of the crowd when entering and leaving.

Since 96 people died at Hillsborough in 1989 and the subsequent report by Lord 
Justice Taylor on safety, all major stadiums must be certified as safe 
according to strict statutory standards applied by the relevant local 
authority, and must have a full-time, qualified, designated safety officer. 
Newham council’s position is not unique in being the legal safety licensing 
authority for a stadium in which it has an ownership, and such potential 
conflicts of interest have to be managed to ensure there is no compromise with 
safety.

A Newham council spokeswoman said its co-ownership of the stadium “in no way 
impacts on [our] role in monitoring safety which we take very seriously”. The 
council’s safety role, she said, is fulfilled by specialist, qualified 
officers, while its commercial interest in the stadium is managed by the 
ownership vehicle E20 which, she said, “operates independently”.

West Ham and LS185, the contracted stadium operator for whom Baker and Sharma 
were working, stressed the safety of its arrangements and experience of the 
officers who replaced them. The stadium’s head of safety and security, Steve 
Riley, is a former match commander at Chelsea and safety officer at Fulham, and 
he and the safety officer, Peter Smith, are former Metropolitan police 
officers. Graham Harris, who replaced Sharma as a deputy safety officer, 
previously worked for three years in safety and security management at Wembley 
stadium.

The stadium owner E20, owned 35% by Newham council, 65% by the London Legacy 
Development Company –whose chairman, David Edmonds, resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/london-stadium-chairman-david-edmonds-resigns-costs-investigation>
 on Thursday following Khan’s announcement of an inquiry –appointed the former 
Metropolitan police commissioner Chris Allison 
<http://www.whufc.com/News/Articles/2016/September/15-September/E20-confirm-Chris-Allison-CBE-appointment>
 in September to oversee safety and security, following the crowd problems at 
West Ham’s first matches.

A club spokesperson said: “West Ham United are satisfied with London Stadium’s 
current safety team and their experience to manage the safety at our matches.”

The Sports Grounds Safety Authority, a government agency responsible for 
overseeing compliance with the law, sits on the London Stadium’s safety 
advisory group, which is chaired by Newham council. A spokeswoman said despite 
“challenges for West Ham moving into the stadium”, the body has “no reason to 
doubt the local authority’s commitment to public safety”.
 