
When Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> was dumped by the 
Liberal party in 2009 because he refused to renounce support for emissions 
trading, the man now about to assume responsibility for implementing Donald 
Trump’s evisceration of US climate change policy was elated.


 Myron Ebell, a veteran warrior against action on global warming, wrote on his 
“competitive enterprise institute” blog that “toppling Turnbull was a necessary 
step” in defeating Australia’s cap and trade scheme. And he understood exactly 
who deserved credit.


“A number of Liberal members have risked their careers to stop cap-and-trade, 
including Cory Bernardi and Nick Minchin as well as Tony Abbott. They should 
all be honored for their courageous stand,”Ebell enthused 
<https://cei.org/blog/cap-and-trade-takes-big-hit-australia>.

Trump, who has claimed the “concept” of global warming was concocted by the 
Chinese to hurt American manufacturing,has vowed to withdraw from the Paris 
climate change treaty, abolish the Environment Protection Authority’s climate 
policy role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
, scrap Barack Obama’s centrepiece Clean Power Plan and dismantle any curbs on 
fossil fuel developments.

Australia being 'left behind' by global momentum on climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/03/australia-being-left-behind-by-global-momentum-on-climate-change>
Trump’s transition to government website says 
<https://www.greatagain.gov/policy/energy-independence.html>: “We will 
streamline the permitting process for all energy projects, including the 
billions of dollars in projects held up by President Obama, and rescind the 
job-destroying executive actions under his Administration. We will end the war 
on coal, and rescind the coal mining lease moratorium ... and conduct a 
top-down review of all anti-coal regulations issued by the Obama 
Administration.”


Ebell, whose organisation has had financial links to the coal industry, is 
widely reported to be in charge of that transition at the EPA. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/science/myron-ebell-trump-epa.html>
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to 
make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive.
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/265895292191248385> November 6, 
2012 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/265895292191248385> 
Little wonder that his “honored” friends in Australia are elated.

Abbott declared Trump’s election would “put climate change into a better 
perspective” and diminish the “moral panic” about global warming. Presumably 
the better perspective is one where we don’t do very much about it, and the 
“morality” not worth panicking about is the idea that we should not leave our 
children a world experiencing dangerous and irreversible change.

And since the Liberal party dumped Turnbull the first time, some new 
conservatives have arrived who would also probably earn Ebell’s praise.

One of them is the man Turnbull has now appointed as resources minister, the 
Liberal National party senator Matt Canavan.

From the moment he took up the portfolio, Canavan has talked up the 
“uncertainties” of climate science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/19/matthew-canavan-says-there-is-uncertainty-around-cause-of-climate-change>
.

And soon after Trump’s election, Canavan was hailing it as a budgetary boon 
for Australia, in part because coal mining would be able to continue 
unconstrained.

“Donald Trump is good for fossil fuels, good for steel and good for 
Australia,” hetold the Australian. 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/foreign-affairs/us-election-donald-trump-win-worth-10bn-to-budget/news-story/07e047d3231df2830cfa30dc4fa2170d>
“President-elect Trump was very clear in his support for the coal mining 
sector, whereas President Obama had taken steps to restrict expansion of the 
coal industry,’’ he said.

Trump administration could roll back US environmental protection, critics fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
“The newly elected president has said he’ll rescind those regulations and 
that’s having an effect on world markets.”


But at exactly the same time, Turnbull was announcing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/10/turnbull-signals-australia-wont-follow-trumps-lead-on-paris-climate-agreement>
 that Australia would go ahead and ratify the Paris agreement, despite some of 
his own backbenchers declaring thatTrump’s victory had rendered the deal 
“cactus” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/11/josh-frydenberg-insists-paris-climate-deal-lives-on-despite-mps-claims>
.

The Paris pact, Turnbull declared, was “a watershed and a turning point”.

Problem is, it’s only a turning point and a watershed if nations do what they 
promised – that is, constrain global warming to “well below 2C”, which requires 
them not only to meet the greenhouse emissions reductions already pledged but 
also to increase them over time to actually meet that aim.

And that requires the phasing out, over time, of coal. 

The latest world energy outlook from the conservative International Energy 
Agency shows that under the scenario necessary to meet the existing Paris 
targets (still not enough to limit warming to 2C), fossil fuels decline from 
67% of the energy mix to 24%, and 16% of that 24% is carbon capture and 
storage, the viability of which remains uncertain.

A Climate Analytics report has found that developed countries will have to 
stop burning coal for electricity by 2030, China by 2040 and the rest of the 
world by mid-century in order to meet commitments made in Paris.


Matthew Canavan: 'rock star' Barnaby Joyce can lead Nationals to great things
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/22/matthew-canavan-barnaby-joyce-nationals-great-things>
To underline the obvious, we really cannot simultaneously hail the Paris 
agreement as a turning point and rejoice in a glorious long-term economic 
future for the coal industry. Except that is exactly what the Turnbull 
government is doing.

There are many difficult choices facing Australia as a Trump administration 
upends the existing world order.

And the Turnbull government was already stretching credulity with its 
insistence that it could meet the Paris targets, despite the emissions 
reduction fund probably running out of money next year and its suggestion that 
a looming policy review won’t impose any new requirements on industry.

But, as in so many other ways, the ascent of Trump is polarising things, 
forcing a choice between the agenda of Ebell and Abbott, and the ever more 
urgent efforts to do something about global warming. We cannot keep pretending.

Back when Ebell celebrated his ousting, we knew where Turnbull stood. He 
wouldn’t lead a party that wasn’t as committed to action on global warming as 
he was. Now he does, but those who overthrew him believe that despite his 
return to the leadership, they have him tamed. Time is running out for him to 
prove otherwise. And Trump’s radical reverse gear on climate makes it even 
harder for his government to continue its obfuscation.
 