
Donald Trump will begin his presidency in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concedes-election-donald-trump-speech>
 with the rare luxury of control by his party of both chambers of Congress, 
raising the prospect that he might be able to dislodge some of the gridlock 
that has paralyzed Capitol Hill.


Hillary Clinton concedes presidential election to Donald Trump: 'We must 
accept this result'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concedes-election-donald-trump-speech>
It will be the first time since Barack Obama suffered his midterm “shellacking”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/03/barack-obama-midterms-better-job>
 in 2010 at the hands of the Tea Party that one-party rule has returned to 
Washington. In the first instance, it raises the chances of Trump being able to 
fulfill some of his promises to his supporters – that he will act as an agent 
of change, putting, as he said in his victory speech on Wednesday morning, 
“millions of people to work”.

With Republican control of the House and Senate, Trump can hope to act quickly 
on legislation of wide appeal to conservatives, notably cutting taxes and 
pumping dollars into job-creating infrastructure projects. Those objectives 
were central to the billionaire’s bid for the presidency and are popular among 
congressionalRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> and 
their voters.

But the president-elect should not expect the early days of his administration 
to be plain sailing. Though Democrats might come onboard for infrastructure 
spending, they are likely to vociferously oppose tax cuts that benefit the rich.

They still have one wild card in their hand: the Senate filibuster. If it is 
wielded, the party in power must receive 60 votes for legislation to pass. That 
number remains beyond the reach of Republicans.

“We are going to see the use of the filibuster by Democrats to a degree that’s 
unprecedented,” said Ross Baker, professor of political science at Rutgers 
University. “Republicans didn’t offer Obama a honeymoon in 2009 and nor will 
the Democrats for Trump.”

Democrats will fight to the last ditch on Obamacare
Ross Baker, Rutgers University 
The filibuster is almost certainly going to be invoked by Democratic senators 
in an attempt to save the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, which is seen on 
the left not only as a vital part of the sitting president’s legacy but also as 
a political line in the sand.

“Democrats will fight to the last ditch on that,” Baker said.

Other major battles, potentially involving the filibuster, lie ahead over 
other core Trump pledges, notably his threat to round up 11 million 
undocumented immigrants, to build a wall along the Mexican border and to 
introduce “extreme” entry controls for Muslims.

The new president, backed by Republican leaders in Congress, is likely to try 
to find a way around any such blockage by invoking the so-called budget 
reconciliation provision, which allows reforms to be put into finance bills 
with just 51 Senate votes required.

Still, Trump will face challenges from his own party, given his frosty 
relationship with many top Republicans and widespread disapproval on the right 
of several of his policy stances, including his aversion to trade deals and his 
contentious views on immigration. His relationship with the House speaker, Paul 
Ryan, is close to glacial. In the Senate, such an influential figure asLindsey 
Graham <https://twitter.com/LindseyGrahamSC/status/796097713917947904?lang=en> 
let it be known on Twitter that he did not vote for his own party’s nominee.

Should Trump run into the familiar roadblock of an intransigent Congress, he 
does have the final resort adopted by Obama: to bypass Congress by using his 
executive powers. The continued Republican dominance of the Senate will come in 
extremely handy, though, when it comes to picking a ninth US supreme court 
justice to lock in conservative dominance over the highest court for possibly a 
generation to come.

Obama has found that the greatest threat to his executive orders has been the 
court system, which has put paid to his efforts tocombat climate change 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/10/us/politics/supreme-court-blocks-obama-epa-coal-emissions-regulations.html>
 and extendlegal status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/23/supreme-court-blocks-obama-immigration-plan>
 to millions of undocumented immigrants. With the nation’s top judicial panel 
leaning his way, Trump is likely to suffer no such impediment.

Likely appointments
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fsarah-palin-at-trump-hq-were-going-roguepeople-are-going-to-take-back-control-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20Palin%20at%20Trump%20HQ%3A%20%E2%80%98we%E2%80%99re%20going%20rogue%E2%80%A6people%20are%20going%20to%20take%20back%20control%E2%80%99%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fsarah-palin-at-trump-hq-were-going-roguepeople-are-going-to-take-back-control-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20Palin%20at%20Trump%20HQ%3A%20%E2%80%98we%E2%80%99re%20going%20rogue%E2%80%A6people%20are%20going%20to%20take%20back%20control%E2%80%99%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fsarah-palin-at-trump-hq-were-going-roguepeople-are-going-to-take-back-control-video&media=>
Sarah Palin at Trump HQ: ‘We’re going rogue … people are going to take back 
control’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/sarah-palin-at-trump-hq-were-going-roguepeople-are-going-to-take-back-control-video>
In terms of key appointments, Trump’s win presents an opportunity for a cadre 
of loyalists who backed the candidate when few others would.

During his idiosyncratic run for the White House, when even campaign insiders 
expected him to lose, Trump put little emphasis on a transition effort. He is 
also an ideological blank slate, having shifted positions on virtually every 
issue.

That means personnel could in effect become policy, with cabinet secretaries 
and officials likely to have surprising latitude in an administration led by a 
president who has shown very little interest in policy nuance.

Reports widely tip Reince Priebus, the Republican National Committee chair who 
has stood behind Trump since he gained the nomination, as favorite to be White 
House chief of staff.

A rightwing supreme court could be Donald Trump's most insidious legacy | 
Scott Lemieux
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-legacy-right-wing-supreme-court-civil-rights>
Other loyalists could be in position to take top cabinet posts. In his victory 
speech, Trump mentioned three former rivals for the nomination: New Jersey 
governorChris Christie <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chris-christie>, 
former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee and neurosurgeon Ben Carson. All could 
get major roles. Christie even appeared on stage with Trump, notably the 
closest person to the president-elect, outside members of his family.

Although Christie has been tainted by his proximity to the Bridgegate scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/bridgegate-chris-christie-allies-convicted-new-jersey-closures>
, his appearance was a clear signal that Trump will not be deterred by the 
convictions of four top Christie aides for the politically motivated shutting 
down of lanes on the George Washington Bridge.

Vice-President-elect Mike Pence is likely to have a major portfolio. It was 
reported over the summer thatDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> Jr had contacted the Ohio 
governor, John Kasich, a defiant rival, and offered to make him the most 
powerful vice-president in history. Now that role may fall to Pence, an ardent 
social conservative who served as governor of Indiana.


Another figure likely to take a major role is former House speaker Newt 
Gingrich <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/newt-gingrich>. A longtime 
advocate for Trump, and with Christie one of the final candidates for running 
mate, Gingrich is widely reported to be a contender to become secretary of 
state.


Trump is also likely to look to the business world. Steven Mnuchin, a former 
Goldman Sachs banker who oversaw Trump’s finance efforts, is well positioned to 
be treasury secretary. Other potential cabinet figures from the business world 
include the fracking mogul Harold Hamm.

The president-elect has also floated the 2008 vice-presidential nominee Sarah 
Palin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-legacy-right-wing-supreme-court-civil-rights>
 for a cabinet position. The Alaskan could become secretary of the interior or
secretary of energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/06/sarah-palin-donald-trump-energy-secretary-obama-alaska>
. Her own transition from politics to reality television prefigured Trump 
taking the opposite path. Now she may follow him back to the fray.
 