
In 1988, the photographer Richard Misrach found a couple of Playboy magazines 
that had been used for target practice near the Nevada Nuclear Test Site, where 
more than a thousand US and British nuclear weapons had been detonated.

As he looked, a breeze ruffled the pages of the magazine. Every page had a 
starry constellation of bullet holes scattered across it. Misrach later 
recalled: “I realized that the women on the covers of both magazines were the 
intended targets, but that the violence that was directed specifically at the 
women symbolically penetrated every layer of our society. Every aspect of our 
society … was riddled with violence.”

I thought of his big color photographs, all ripped through by bullets, when I 
began to contemplate the Isla Vista massacre which took place a year ago today.

On the evening of 23 May 2014, a 22-year-old went on a rampage that left six 
dead and injured many more, grazed by bullets or slammed into by his car, 
before he killed himself with his handgun.
 People hug at a public memorial on the Day of Mourning and Reflection for the 
victims of Isla Vista. Photograph: David McNew/Getty Images 
The killer, whose name should not be remembered, who should not be glorified 
as the Columbine killers were, had no friends, though he had lived there for 
nearly three years (he grew up on the edge of the Hollywood movie industry). He 
had long planned a bloodbath as revenge on a world he thought owed him sex, 
adoration, friendship and success. His hatred was particularly directed at 
women, and the men who enjoyed their company.

The autobiography the young man posted online that day is notable for its 
shallowness and its entitlement. Those are harsh words, but there’s no other 
way to describe his utter lack of empathy, imagination and engagement with the 
life of others. He’s often described as mentally ill, but he seems instead to 
be someone who was exceptionally susceptible to the madness of the society 
around him.

His misogyny was our culture’s misogyny. His sad dream of becoming wealthy, 
admired and sexually successful was a banal, widely marketed dream. His 
preoccupation with brand-name products and status symbols was exactly what the 
advertising industry tries to inject into our minds. His fantasy of attaining 
power and status at the point of a gun is the fantasy sold to us by the gun 
lobby and the action movies in which some invulnerable superman unerringly 
shoots down the bad guys, a god made a god by his gun.

“My first act of preparation was the purchase [of] my first handgun,” he wrote 
about his long-planned rampage. “After I picked up the handgun, I brought it 
back to my room and felt a new sense of power. I was now armed.Who’s the alpha 
male now, bitches?I thought to myself, regarding all of the girls who’ve looked 
down on me in the past.”

Who was the last victim?
 Christopher Michaels-Martinez, with his father and uncle at graduation. 
Photograph: supplied 
Richard Martinez had one child; now he has none. He wears rubber bracelets, 
the kind given out for charitable causes and campaigns, stacked atop each other 
on his right wrist. Each commemorates a child killed somewhere in the US by 
guns, at Sandy Hook and other mass shootings, and he can sort through them and 
speak of where and when each victim was killed. It’s an arm like a cemetery.


“I would give the rest of my days for one more day with Christopher,” Martinez 
told me a couple weeks ago.

That day a year ago, the 22-year-old killer stabbed to death three young men 
in his apartment, apparently ambushing them one at a time. Two were his 
roommates, one a visitor: Weihan ‘David’ Wang, age 20, Cheng Yuan ‘James’ Hong, 
also 20, and George Chen, 19. He then set out with his guns for the sorority he 
thought had the most beautiful women and banged on the door, hoping to go in 
and massacre them all. Alarmed by the angry, persistent pounding on the 
sorority’s front door, no one opened it. The killer instead shot three women 
out front, 22-year-old Katherine Cooper, 19-year-old Veronika Weiss, and a 
third woman who survived, aided by passersby and then sheriff’s deputies.

While the young women bled in front of the sorority, the murderer had already 
moved on to shoot at his peers, out on skateboards and bicycles and foot on 
that mild southernCalifornia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> 
evening, and to try to run more of them over with the black BMW his parents had 
bought him. In the end he injured 14 and killed six others before he shot 
himself while being pursued by sheriff’s deputies.

Christopher Michaels-Martinez, 20, was the last person to be shot at by the 
killer before he took his own life. At about 9.30pm, a bullet entered the left 
side of Christopher’s chest and exited through the right side, puncturing the 
liver and right ventricle of the heart. He died immediately, despite CPR 
attempts by a 19-year old-woman.


I have the sense, every time I’ve spoken with Martinez, that he had to do 
something to extract meaning from the unbearable pain of losing his son. He 
couldn’t escape it, but he could do something with it, so he quit his job as a 
public defender and went on the road, throwing himself intogun control advocacy 
<https://donate.everytown.org/donate/support-everytown-end-of-year1/?source=ggnp_EverytownBrand&utm_source=gg_n_&utm_medium=_p&utm_campaign=EverytownBrand>
.

Christopher’s uncle, Alan Martinez, a San Francisco architect, speaks fondly 
of the boy’s curiosity and intelligence. He recalls discussing Cicero, the 
Alhambra, Aids, Buddhism and everything else under the sun with the nephew who 
loved Latin and basketball. The young man planned to attend law school and, 
like his lawyer parents, work for social justice.

There’s a photograph of Alan and Christopher lying on their backs on a green 
California hillside, both laughing at the same joke, or just the joy of the 
moment. And then there was the press conference the day after, where Alan stood 
at Richard’s side and Richard said, in a voice thick with anguish, “not one 
more” – which eventually became the slogan for his campaign for gun control.

Richard Martinez last spoke with Christopher a few hours before his death. To 
this day, he wonders if they had stayed on the phone a moment longer, or ended 
the conversation a moment sooner, whether his son would still be alive. So many 
of the bullets just grazed people or injured them in nonfatal locations; it 
took an endless string of coincidences to put Christopher exactly where a 
bullet would rip into his heart.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fone-year-isla-vista-massacre-victim-father-gun-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F18%2F1431976525122%2F37389eaf-7d73-4a0f-8908-37aa56a7741f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20year%20after%20the%20Isla%20Vista%20massacre%2C%20a%20father's%20gun%20control%20mission%20is%20personal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fone-year-isla-vista-massacre-victim-father-gun-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20year%20after%20the%20Isla%20Vista%20massacre%2C%20a%20father%27s%20gun%20control%20mission%20is%20personal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fone-year-isla-vista-massacre-victim-father-gun-control%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F18%2F1431976525122%2F37389eaf-7d73-4a0f-8908-37aa56a7741f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Uncle and nephew in the grass. Photograph: supplied 
Each time I’ve met his father, I’ve seen more of who the son was: in stories, 
photographs, cellphone videos. He was a handsome young man noted for his 
kindness, athleticism and intelligence. Each time I see him Richard shows me 
more videos and photographs, his phone a memorial that travels with him.

At 16, Christopher wanted to go skydiving and his parents forebade it; four 
years later, a few months before he died, he went. After his death, someone 
gave Richard the video, which he showed me earlier this month. It shows 
Christopher in a yellow jumpsuit, preparing to get into the plane, in the 
plane, free-falling in a blue sky with the instructor, and then falling more 
gently after the parachute opens, to the green California earth. The great grin 
never leaves his face.


US stuck in a war zone at home

You can look at the causes of the murder rampage various ways. 

Feminists, myself included, focused on the killer’s misogyny, his furious 
sense that women owed him something, that he had a right to whatever pleasure 
and adulation they could deliver.

 Discussion of this crime spree joined the wider conversation about violence 
against women. Because men kept popping up to say “not all men”, sometimes in 
the form of the hashtag #notallmen, a young woman who tweets under the name 
Gilded Spine coined the hashtag #yesallwomen.

It was meant to say that yes, we know not all men commit these crimes, but the 
point is that all women are impacted by them. The hashtag went viral in the 
months after Isla Vista, though Gilded Spine received so many menacing tweets 
she went silent for a long time. Even speaking up about violence was dangerous, 
and the men who posted jeering remarks, pornographic images and threats didn’t 
seem to realize they were all demonstrating why feminism is necessary. 
Nevertheless, it was perhaps the most widespread of the hashtags that have 
been, in recent years, the umbrellas for collective conversation and bearing 
witness about violence and survival.

And then there’s the gargantuan American arsenal of weapons and the havoc 
wreaked with it.

Thirty three Americans are killed by guns every day, 12,000 a year, more than 
20 times the level of other industrialized nations, according to Martinez’s 
organization, Everytown for Gun Safety. It looks as though the gun homicide 
rate hasn’t risen, but that’s not because fewer people are shot than a decade 
ago. More are shot, but emergency rooms and trauma centers are better at saving 
lives. The number of nonfatal gunshot wounds doubled between 2002 and 2011.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fone-year-isla-vista-massacre-victim-father-gun-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F18%2F1431976726880%2F90cda8f4-61b0-4418-b168-451ab6bde36c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20year%20after%20the%20Isla%20Vista%20massacre%2C%20a%20father's%20gun%20control%20mission%20is%20personal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fone-year-isla-vista-massacre-victim-father-gun-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20year%20after%20the%20Isla%20Vista%20massacre%2C%20a%20father%27s%20gun%20control%20mission%20is%20personal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fone-year-isla-vista-massacre-victim-father-gun-control%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F18%2F1431976726880%2F90cda8f4-61b0-4418-b168-451ab6bde36c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Twelve thousand Americans are killed by guns very year. Photograph: Igor 
Golovniov/Zuma Press/Corbis 
We are a war zone in two ways. The first is the literal war that produces 
those 12,000 corpses a year, including suicides, domestic violence homicides 
(3,110 women killed by partners or former partners between 2008-2012), other 
murders, accidental deaths.

The second is a war of meaning. On one side are the people who constantly tell 
us that guns will make us safer, and that we need more guns in more hands in 
more places, stores, on the streets, in the schools and on the campuses. They 
constantly hawk scenarios in which “a good guy with a gun stops a bad guy with 
a gun.”

It is surpassingly rare that a person with a gun enters a chaotic situation 
and, like the gunman-hero in a western, shoot accurately and effectively, 
taking out bad people and not harming good ones. The other scenarios involving 
guns – homicides, suicides and horrible accidents – happen incessantly.

When small children find guns and shoot friends, siblings or parents, we are 
told that it was a terrible accident rather than something likely to happen 
with easily available weapons. The argument in favor of more guns is not about 
facts, but about guns as icons of identity, of fantasy about being dominant, 
masterful, in control; the same old impossible macho dream of being, as the 
killer in Isla Vista put it, an alpha male.

For hardcore gun advocates, the weapons are totemic objects of identity, 
rather than the tools that actually take those 12,000 lives a year.

One response to the Isla Vista rampage is a California law, AB 1014, that 
allows family members and law enforcement to petition a court to remove guns 
from the possession of someone who may be a risk to others. The Gun Violence 
Restraining Order, as it’s called, could have prevented at least part of the 
homicidal rampage carried out in Isla Vista and maybe undermined the whole 
scenario (the murderer’s mother had called the Santa Barbara sheriff’s office 
to report her concern about him earlier that month).

It may prevent other murders when it goes into effect on 1 January 2016. Good 
legislation has been passed in Oregon and Washington state as well, Martinez 
told me, and Texas and Florida measures to expand gun rights were defeated this 
year. But knives as well as guns, even a car, were used to harm others that 
terrible evening a year ago.

There is no easy solution to the violence in this country, and no single 
cause. As Misrach noted when he contemplated those Playboy magazines used for 
target practice: “Every aspect of our society … was riddled with violence.”

 It’s worth keeping in mind that the willingness to negotiate, the love of 
life, generosity and empathy are also powerful forces in our culture. As the 
murder spree unfolded, people rushed to comfort, shelter and provide emergency 
aid to the injured and dying, and 20,000 came to the memorial at the UCSB 
stadium that week. But the people who embody the best of us, like all of us, 
live in a climate where violence can erupt anywhere, at any time.

There is a scholarship in Christopher Michaels-Martinez’s name, for English 
majors who are committed to social justice. There are memorial events, exhibits 
and a garden being prepared for the one-year anniversary at University of 
California, Santa Barbara. There are laws passed and pending, and a strong 
feminist conversation about violence and misogyny.

But the dead are still dead, the bereaved are still grieving and the set-up is 
still ripe for more murders.

• This article was amended on 26 May 2015. An earlier version said 88 
Americans were killed by guns every day; that figure has been amended to 33.
 