
One Nation has sought to play down internal rumblings shadowing the early 
stages of itsQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
election campaign, including claims a key party figure is profiting from 
printing expenses and “double standards” in scrutiny of candidates’ social 
media.

Former party treasurer Ian Nelson has accused Pauline Hanson’s chief of staff, 
James Ashby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/hanson-brushes-off-complaints-her-staffer-threw-phone-at-rod-culleton-aide>
, of “intimidating” candidates into using his printing businesses for a $3,500
state election campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/18/one-nation-to-run-in-36-queensland-seats-after-poll-shows-support-at-16>
 package, raising fears they’ll be disendorsed if they don’t.

Meanwhile, Andy Semple, who withdrew the day after his selection as a 
candidate over party complaints about his Twitter feed, has questioned whether 
One Nation applied “double standards” to Facebook posts by another candidate, 
Shan Ju Lin.

Rodney Culleton quits One Nation citing 'un-Australian behaviour'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/rodney-culleton-quits-one-nation-citing-un-australian-behaviour>
Lin has called for a worldwide ban on Islam, which she said was “dictatorship 
and evil”, and posted a mocking picture of Barack Obama in make-up and 
jewellery, declaring that same-sex marriage was the highlight of his 
achievements as US president.

One Nation’s state and national secretary, Jim Savage, rejected Nelson’s 
claims candidates were being pressured to have their campaign material printed 
at Ashby’s businesses, Coastal Signs & Printing and Black Bull.

The party last week emailed candidates saying it “will be providing a campaign 
‘package’ for your use” costing $3,500 but did not state where the printing 
would be done. The work will be worth at least $126,000.

Nelson told the Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/news/knives-out-for-hanson-staffer-ashby-accused-of-profiting-off-candidates-20161220-gtepe4?login_token=J9CWyFIZIZ7H09HsDpfDPzhjMw3Z9um71RCLjYgDZW9IiETphSwIwY4Pg3bFemsTOgu__fAr4PQQ6UgATq7MfQ&expiry=1482280364&single_use_token=Z6s0xFrqphpmxHWUoyG94rhJOWaxoAMwfNCnf_rBU4H4sRU2KdYjnopzCMfNJpED-m7RTnjHraBohO02YXew3Q>
: “Ashby needs to stay right away from the candidates because he’s intimidating 
them, he’s insisting that they buy his product, which is much dearer than 
anything else, when these candidates should be able to buy their own from the 
local constituency ... In other words if you don’t do it this way, well you 
know what, you’re not going to get endorsed. I’ve heard it from the mouths of 
the candidates.”

Savage told Guardian Australia he knew of no basis to Nelson’s claims about 
Ashby, who he found to be “very professional, very good to our candidates, no 
one’s had any issues”.

One Nation promises greater scrutiny as Rod Culleton’s 2014 arrest catches it 
by surprise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/one-nation-promises-greater-scrutiny-as-rod-culletons-2014-arrest-catches-it-by-surprise>
“I am in the hot seat 24 hours a day and I have not had one single issue 
raised,” he said. “I think people have to be aware that when people leave 
parties, they may have axes to grind, I don’t know.”

Savage said there had been no decision about which printer would gain the work 
but that “we will have our material printed by the cheapest contractor we can 
find”.

Asked if the party would advise candidates if Ashby’s businesses undertook the 
work, Savage said: “Of course we’ll tell them.” But he said “James Ashby 
happens to be the chief of staff of Senator Hanson, he has not got time to go 
running around printing people’s corflutes”.

“We haven’t done any of our corflutes or posters yet so for somebody to say 
that any particular company’s doing it before we’ve even decided it is absolute 
bullshit,” he said. “I don’t even know for Christ’s sake, and I’m the campaign 
manager.”

Ashby told the AFR Nelson’s claims were “massively wrong” and candidates were 
“more than welcome to go and find a cheaper signwriter”.

One Nation to run in 36 Queensland seats after poll shows support at 16%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/18/one-nation-to-run-in-36-queensland-seats-after-poll-shows-support-at-16>
But he did not rule out being the supplier for the Queensland election 
material. He said: “I created the brand for One Nation. Yes, I’m protective of 
our brand just as any business operator is.”

Queensland electoral commission records show One Nation paid Ashby’s companies 
$17,200 for printing and advertising in the first half of 2016.

Semple said he saw no more potential for offense in his post joking about the 
acronym LGBT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/20/one-nation-candidate-quits-two-days-inappropriate-tweet>
 than Lin’s mocking of Obama for supporting same sex marriage. “Apparently my 
freedom of speech is not worth as much as hers,” he said.

Asked about this by Guardian Australia, Savage said, “You don’t find c-u-n-t 
unacceptable?” Savage said another of Semple’s posts referring to that word 
were a concern to the party along with the LGBT joke. It is understood both 
Hanson and Ashby raised concerns about the latter tweet. However, Semple said 
Savage had asked him to delete the LGBT joke only and raised no other post with 
him.

He said his Twitter references to the word “cunt” were via the phrase, Charlie 
Uniform November Tangos, such as when he called the ABC “a bunch of Charlie 
Uniform November Tangos” for its treatment of gay marriage opponent and former 
tennis great Margaret Court last month.

Savage there was “no comparison whatsoever” between posts by Semple and Lin, 
with the latter saying “nothing that’s offensive or crude and that’s what it’s 
all about”.

Since news of his withdrawal as One Nation’s candidate for Currumbin, Semple 
said he had received a threatening phone message that he would report to police 
on Wednesday.

One Nation candidate quits after two days over 'inappropriate' tweet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/20/one-nation-candidate-quits-two-days-inappropriate-tweet>
Lin, believed to be the first ethnic Asian candidate in One Nation’s history, 
told ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-21/one-nation-candidate-shan-ju-lin-defends-pauline-hanson/8135684>
 on Wednesday she was not offended byHanson’s 1996 remark that Australia was at 
risk of being “swamped by Asians” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/pauline-hanson-damages-australias-standing-in-asia-penny-wong-to-warn>
. She said One Nation would win the votes of “good Asians” who feared the 
rising influence of the communist Chinese state on Australian politics.

Savage said the focus on Lin’s Taiwanese nationality in media reports, amid 
suggestions an Asian candidate was incompatible with the values of a party once 
accused of spouting racist rhetoric towards Asian migrants, was offensive.

“I have an Asian wife and adopted Asian children and I’m in the process of 
fighting [immigration minister] Peter Dutton right now to bring my abandoned 
nieces, who are orphans, into Australia and he won’t let them in because I was 
president of One Nation at the time,” Savage said. “I find that offensive.”
 