
“This is the bit of the job I love. Loved. The human-contact bit, the 
breaking-the-ice bit. The breaking-into-a-smile bit,” says Stella, played by 
Tanya Moodie, a social worker whose project funding has run out just as she is 
trying to help a vulnerable young woman, called Joanne.

Stella is one of five characters in a five-act play depicting women at the 
frontline of overstretched public services. There’s also a police officer with 
a troubled past, an NHS receptionist working nights in A&E for just £9 an hour, 
the manager of a homeless hostel who’s mopping the rooms because the cleaner is 
off with stress and agency staff cost too much, and a teacher, haunted by the 
memory of a vulnerable pupil she wished she’d been able to help, called Joanne 
(yes, the same one). We never see this young woman, but she draws together each 
of the separate monologues, written by five different playwrights, and is the 
name of the play being staged in London by award-winning theatre company,Clean 
Break <http://www.cleanbreak.org.uk/>.

Joanne review – angry sketches of the invisible woman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/20/joanne-review-soho-theatre-london-tickets>
It’s been well documented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/28/women-austerity-charities-cuts-gender-inequality>
 by charities,academics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/sep/21/spending-cuts-women-report> 
and innon-fiction accounts 
<http://www.policypress.co.uk/display.asp?K=9781447315704&sf1=contributor&st1=Mary%20O&m=1&dc=2>
 that women are bearing the brunt of the cuts to public spending, both as 
employees and as users of services. More women are employed in client-facing 
roles, which are buckling under the strain of increased workloads, recruitment 
freezes and lack of resources. And they are losing their jobs asstaff are culled
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/mar/25/public-sector-workforce-shrink-record-low-2017>
, or services close.

Women are also disproportionately affected by cuts to benefits and tax 
credits. TheFawcett Society reported 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/2015/03/women-could-miss-out-on-economic-comeback/>
 earlier this year that since 2010, 85% of all the cuts to welfare have come 
from women’s pockets. Stella is a good example of the double whammy hitting 
thousands of women: not only is she about to become an unemployed public 
servant, she also cares for her elderly mother who lives with her and depends 
on a range public services from GP surgeries and district nurses to adult 
social care.

Given this assault on women, it’s fitting that a play about government cuts 
should be written, directed and acted by women. It was inspired by the theatre 
company’s own experiences. Clean Break was founded in 1979 by two female 
prisoners and combines theatre productions with an education programme that 
works with female offenders and women at risk of offending in custodial and 
community settings. During 2015, the theatre company found itself offering 
support services, including emergency housing clinics and food bank vouchers to 
the women attending its theatre education programme in order to compensate for 
the pressure on almost all the essential services they use, says Róisín 
McBrinn, Clean Break’s head of artistic programme and director of Joanne.

“In addition, the backdrop to these pressures was reduced access to legal aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/dec/03/legal-aid-cuts-devastating-to-women-abuse-victims>
 and a probation service undergoing privatisation,” she adds. McBrinn says she 
began to see the female employees as “the ‘faces’ of our public services” and 
as the “frontline of a very brittle army, kept fighting through good will and 
human endurance”. So she wanted to create a piece of theatre that looked at 
“the fallout of this unsustainable system – to look at the pressure on the 
frontline and where it actually implodes”.

Joanne is the invisible fallout, who shares her story with the women that 
Clean Break works with day in, day out. Could she have been helped and diverted 
away from prison and her ultimate fate if she had received the right 
intervention from any of the public services she’d come into contact with?

Tanya Moodie’s engaging performance as the five diverse and very human faces 
of our public services touches us in a way that news stories and reportage 
can’t.

Joanne is at the Soho Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in 
London until 31 October. cleanbreak.org.uk
 