
The last week of the federal election campaign opened with news that 
Indigenous people in Western Australia’s Kimberley region areseven times more 
likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/27/indigenous-suicide-rates-in-kimberley-seven-times-higher-than-other-australians>
 to take their own lives than other Australians.

If ever a revelation might halt an election in its tracks, prompt politicians 
and the media who trail them around Australia on their set-piece campaign 
operations, to pause and reflect for a day – even an hour or a moment – then a 
disclosure of such tragic human import should, surely, have done so.

But the major party caravans just bumped along, each attacking the other with 
fallacious claims about alleged changes to Medicare and border protection 
policies. While policy argument was anchored in the illusory, there was no 
substantive, mainstream political engagement with this real tragedy in the 
Kimberley.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57e38e2ecd10e6abb1bea78fc38859c6dc131af8%2F0_0_660_952%2F660.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57e38e2ecd10e6abb1bea78fc38859c6dc131af8%2F0_0_660_952%2F660.jpg>
 1993 Design by Michael Callaghan Printing Photograph: Michael 
Callaghan/Redback Graphix for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Electoral 
Information Service, Australian Electoral Commission (via AIATSIS) 
The social, political and economic indicators of Indigenous Australian 
wellbeing have, since the 1950s, been an acute source of international 
embarrassment to Australian federal and state politicians. Indeed, 
international opprobrium – which rightly lumped Australia’s treatment of its 
first people in with South Africa’s apartheid regime – were, together with the 
burgeoning civil rights movement, instrumental in delivering the federal vote 
to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in 1962.

As leading suffragette and Indigenous rights campaigner Jessie Street told the 
United Nations in 1961: “Australia, South Africa, and the southern states of 
the United States seem to be the only countries where the colour bar still 
operates.”

The enfranchisement of Indigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> coincided 
with a civil rights movement that had earlier vigorously fought to obtain 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people access to some pensions, 
unemployment benefits and maternity allowances.

But there is no doubt that the decision to grant Indigenous Australians the 
vote, state by state and then federally, was driven by assimilationist ideology 
– that Aboriginal people who integrated with the rest of Australia should, in 
theory, therefore enjoy the same civil and political rights.

This ultimately proved something of a double-edged sword for Indigenous 
Australians who were expected to forego links to culture and country in order 
attain more equal civil treatment from what many viewed – and still do – as the 
“settler state”.

In 1961, a federal select committee recommended (after extensive consultation 
over the “capacities” of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to vote 
responsibly; no such consideration was afforded the capacity of non-Indigenous 
voters to cast their ballots responsibly) first Australians be enfranchised.

 The committee chairman, HG Pearce, said the 1962 legislative change to the 
Commonwealth Electoral Act would “be a large step forward in the assimilation 
and integration of the Aboriginal people”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff76821c53be9cb971668217638658899cff92b86%2F0_110_1866_2354%2F1866.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff76821c53be9cb971668217638658899cff92b86%2F0_110_1866_2354%2F1866.jpg>
 1964 material from the Western Australian Department of Native Welfare 
Photograph: Western Australian Department of Native Welfare (via AIATSIS) 
When then Interior Minister Gordon Freeth introduced the legislation extending 
the franchise to Indigenous Australians he said he hoped it would “proclaim to 
the world that . . . the Aboriginal people of Australia enjoy complete 
political equality with the rest of the community”.

But the living reality today for 700,000 first Australians, 3% of Australia’s 
population, has little reference to equality.

Politicians misunderstand Indigenous priorities

 While politicians, hectored by denialist shock-jocks and puerile tabloid 
historical revisionists,remain mired 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/federal-election/federal-election-2016-bill-shorten-cools-on-treaty-support/news-story/275c03773a1bd9f041bdef634afa18a0>
 in unambiguously resolved argument about whether Australia was invaded in 
1788, and obsessed with “don’t blink” bipartisanship protecting the obtuse 
proposal for constitutional recognition, more and more first people are being 
forced off traditional lands by state and territory governments and by mining 
companies that pay little or no tax on this continent.

Politicians and mainstream media remain similarly obsessed with the annual 
“closing the gap” statement – an arbitrary, bipartisan stocktake of the 
disparity between Indigenous and other lives in Australia. Given most of the 
gaps are widening, Closing the Gap seems to have more to do with reassuring the 
world that Australia is still watching the Indigenous disaster space while 
failing to actually respond to it urgently, meaningfully, with – for example – 
debate about the need for an international aid-delivery-style response.

Yes, Indigenous people, to Australia’s enduring shame, are suiciding and 
self-harming in shocking numbers, in no small part due to the generational 
reverberation of trauma linked to the extreme violence of the colonial 
frontier. Such violenceaccounted for the murders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/why-the-number-of-indigenous-deaths-in-the-frontier-wars-matters>
 (and other killings) of, by some credible estimates, perhaps 100,000-plus 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.

 As Murray Chapman, Clinical Director of Kimberley Mental Health and Drug 
Service,wrote about the suicides in his area 
<https://theconversation.com/indigenous-suicide-rates-in-the-kimberley-seven-times-national-average-61502>
: “ . . . prior to colonisation and all that came with it, suicide appears to 
have been unknown in traditional Indigenous society.

“Indigenous suicide has been characterised as one potential outcome of an 
intergenerational transmission of mass trauma – including massacres, being 
pushed off traditional lands, policy resulting in the loss of parent/child 
attachments (Stolen Generations), social inequality and institutionalised 
racism.”

Don't tell me to 'get over' a colonial past that is still being implemented 
today | Luke Pearson for IndigenousX
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/apr/02/dont-tell-me-to-get-over-a-colonialism-that-is-still-being-implemented-today>
To this, you’d have to add the social and psychological impact of the 
appalling, radically disproportionate, rate of incarceration of Indigenous 
Australians.

This raises another point many Indigenous Australians will ponder this 
election Saturday: aside from the difficult-to-negotiate Native Title Act and 
the highly restricted, legalistic, “apology” to the stolen generations, 
supposed equality of civil and political rights for Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander people has had negligible impact on the retention of their 
Indigenous rights.

The proposal for treaties shouldn’t be contentious. Yet it is seen as a major 
medium-term impediment to the white politicians’ preferred Recognise, the 
campaign for which tens of millions of public dollars are now invested.

Earlier in the election campaign a significant coalition of Indigenous 
organisations released the “Redfern Statement”,demanding greater engagement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/09/we-vote-too-indigenous-groups-warn-both-parties-they-want-action>
 from the major parties. The response barely amounted to lip service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc65a3f0c4d7530b477f5b5d65dbcab5a70636a70%2F0_0_628_945%2F628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc65a3f0c4d7530b477f5b5d65dbcab5a70636a70%2F0_0_628_945%2F628.jpg>
 1993 Enrol to Vote Design by Tony Thorne Photograph: Redback Graphix for 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Electoral Information Service, Australian 
Electoral Commission (via AIATSIS) 
The Australian Electoral Commission officially estimates about 58% of 
Indigenous Australians are enrolled to vote at Saturday’s election.

This is a generous assessment; the real enrolment figure is said to be closer 
to 50%. More importantly, however, is the private assessment by some Indigenous 
leaders, non-government and government agencies, that only 25 to 30% – or about 
half – of Indigenous Australians who are enrolled actually cast a formal vote.

Is it really any wonder?

The historical mish-mash of Indigenous franchise

The Australian Institute for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies has 
conducted detailed research into the history of Indigenous enfranchisement 
ahead of a forthcoming online exhibition aboutgovernment public awareness 
campaigns <http://aiatsis.gov.au/> after the 1962 federal suffrage legislation. 


The curators, Blake Singley and Charlotte Craw have uncovered some remarkable 
promotional artwork designed to heighten Indigenous awareness about the right 
to vote federally, dating to the early 1960s.


For example, “Franchise for Aborigines”, was a 1962 series of rudimentary 
images designed for projection onto a screen or wall in remote Australia. It 
assumed little understanding of Australian parliamentary democracy and voting 
systems, and focused on the practicalities of voting. While it did not offer 
insight into how voting might potentially impact on Indigenous lives, it 
nonetheless incorporated Indigenous traditions of seated discussion – in this 
case about whether to take up the opportunity to vote.

The exhibition material also highlights the many anomalies between state, 
federal and territory Indigenous enfranchisement.

While all Indigenous Australians were granted the right to vote federally in 
1962, they were not enfranchised in Western Australia until the same year.

Queensland did not allow Indigenous people to vote until 1965.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15da0d5951078f272c433a1b31c47760e8e5a57%2F0_0_3188_4646%2F3188.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15da0d5951078f272c433a1b31c47760e8e5a57%2F0_0_3188_4646%2F3188.jpg>
 Australian Electoral Office poster, 1980 Photograph: Australian Electoral 
Office (via AIATSIS) 
In 1964 the Western Australian Department of Native Welfare produced 
“Citizens”, a pamphlet designed to explain voting rights and numerous 
legislative changes that removed some restrictions to the civil liberties of 
the state’s Indigenous people. It is the earliest item in the exhibition to 
address urban Indigenous communities – a reflection of the increasing 
demographic shift of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to the cities 
and regional centres.

By 1965, the rudimentary abstract figures used in the Commonwealth Electoral 
Office’s promotional material had been replaced with more sophisticated, 
realistic renderings of black and white Australians voting together. The 
AIATSIS collection also includes a 1969 card from a Weet Bix breakfast cereal 
box, “Aborigines Voting” from a series titled “The World of the Aborigine”.

In the late 1970s the Australian Electoral Office intensified its education 
campaign through other media including a film featuring popular Indigenous 
singer Jimmy Little. He performed several songs and spoke about absentee and 
postal voting.

In 1979 the federal Aboriginal Electoral Education Program’s You Can Have Your 
Say campaign shifted the Commonwealth focus from the mechanics of voting to the 
importance of the ballot box in the democratic process. It used evocative 
imagery – resonant of civil rights campaign artworks in Australia and America – 
including a stylised picture of a young Aboriginal man with an afro, casting 
his vote.

Highlight of the AIATSIS collection selected for use in the exhibition are the 
adapted Phantom comics (the Phantom is a revered character in Indigenous 
Australia), beginning in 1988 with The Phantom Enrols & Votes.

Curator Charlotte Craw says the collection items represent “changing 
approaches to cross-cultural design and education”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F188d05abb45f9bd6e593f27929bd7d57b418ab39%2F0_0_779_1090%2F779.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F188d05abb45f9bd6e593f27929bd7d57b418ab39%2F0_0_779_1090%2F779.jpg>
 Australian Electoral Commission Artwork by Garage Graphix Photograph: Garage 
Graphix/AEC; King Features Syndicate; Garage Graphix (via AIATSIS) 
“The earliest materials present very limited roles for Aboriginal 
participation in the parliamentary process and make little effort to engage 
with existing governance structures in communities or with the concerns of 
potential Indigenous voters. Later approaches show Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander people in a much greater variety of roles, and foreground the 
importance of the political process as a means to addressing the concerns of 
communities and individuals.”

Co-curator Blake Singley says: “This material, though produced to convey dry 
government information, often exceeds this context, providing powerful images 
of political empowerment. These items serve as a reminder and celebration of 
the efforts of Aboriginal, Torres Strait Islander and non-Indigenous activists 
to achieve universal suffrage for all Australian adults.

“It is important to note that the early attempts to produce electoral 
education material was hindered by legislative constraints making it an offence 
to encourage Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders to vote.”

Because voting was compulsory for those enrolled at Australian federal 
elections, legislators decided to give Indigenous people the option of 
enrolling. The decision to make it an offence to encourage Indigenous people to 
vote was freighted with the apparently unchallenged misconception that they 
might be easier to induce and manipulate en masse than others.

That is one of the many anomalies – rooted in racial prejudice and assumptions 
about the intelligence and aptitude of Indigenous Australians – that influenced 
the state, territory and federal paths to enfranchisement.

That path began in 1850 with the self-regulation of the Australian colonies 
and the granting of the vote to all adult males in South Australia (1856), 
Victoria (1857), New South Wales (1858) and Tasmania (1896). This included 
Indigenous men who were, however, discouraged from voting.

In 1895 all (including Indigenous) adult women in South Australia won the 
right to vote. The Australian Electoral Commission’sHistory of the Indigenous 
Vote <http://www.aec.gov.au/indigenous/history.htm 
http://www.aec.gov.au/indigenous/history.htm>includes a photograph of Laura 
Harris (Spender) who was enrolled to vote in South Australia before Federation 
in 1901.

Then came the Commonwealth Constitution Act of 1901. It was conveniently 
interpreted to deny all Indigenous people – except those already on state 
electoral rolls before 1901 – the vote.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1d379a1dd50075e522ae71bbec214fc6c8774d5%2F0_0_4683_3544%2F4683.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%2058%25%20of%20Indigenous%20Australians%20are%20registered%20to%20vote.%20We%20should%20be%20asking%20why%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fonly-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1d379a1dd50075e522ae71bbec214fc6c8774d5%2F0_0_4683_3544%2F4683.jpg>
 1979 Australian Electoral Office cards Photograph: Australian Electoral Office 
(via AIATSIS) 
In 1949 Indigenous people who had served in the armed forces or who were 
enrolled in their own states, were granted the federal vote. Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islanders in Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern 
Territory were not permitted to vote in their own state and territory elections 
and, so, remained federally disenfranchised.

In 1957 Commonwealth law declared most Indigenous Western Australians to be 
wards of the state – that is, in need of government protection. Wards of the 
state were not permitted to vote. On that basis the denial of the vote to them 
was effectively legislatively reinforced.

Then came the 1961 federal parliamentary committee report and the change to 
the electoral act in 1962, which finally gave the federal vote to all adult 
Indigenous Australians. The anomalies continued however; Northern territory 
Aboriginal people were only then granted the right to vote in territory – and 
therefore, federal elections, but Queensland’s Indigenous people did not get 
the state vote until 1965.

Perhaps the greatest irony relates to the 1967 referendum, which changed the 
Constitution so that Indigenous people could be counted in the census along 
with other Australian citizens. The referendum also empowered the Commonwealth 
to legislate specifically for Aboriginal and Torres Strait islander people.

So, since 1856 and 1895 respectively, Indigenous men and women had the right 
to vote in some state elections. From 1962 all could vote in federal elections. 
But they still were not counted among the Australian citizenry in the census 
until 1967.

The right for Indigenous Australians to vote federally resulted from a 
confluence of increasingly vocal Aboriginal activism and an embarrassing 
international perspective that viewed Australia’s “colour bar” in the same 
light as segregation in America and apartheid in South Africa.

25 years of reconciliation and what do we have to show for it? | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/jun/03/25-years-of-reconciliation-and-what-do-we-have-to-show-for-it>
The 1967 referendum is often cited as the seminal moment in Indigenous 
recognition and civil rights attainment in Australia thus far. But 1967 
actually followed numerous hard-won, incremental steps relating to voting, in 
the ongoing Indigenous fight for civil and political rights.

Indigenous Australians can vote this Saturday.

But the rest of Australia should be asking why it is that so very many who are 
eligible to do so, will not bother.

Join the #IndigenousVotes discussion on Twitter
 