
If you need a distraction ahead of Tuesday’s potentially cataclysmic US 
election, imagine a world in which all Britons and Americans knew about each 
other came from popular TV drama imports.

US viewers would envisage a place in the iron grip of a monarch with 
presidential powers over law and war (Victoria and, from tomorrow, The Crown), 
who rules with the help of the aristocracy (Downton Abbey) and cerebral 
super-detectives (Sherlock).

Brits would imagine over there to be overrun with doctors (ER, House), cops 
(NYPD Blue), lawyers (The Good Wife, LA Law) and flatmates (Friends) who have a 
standup’s knack for one-liners. Such savvy chat even comes from the chemistry 
teachers turned drug barons (Breaking Bad) and the pathologists (Dexter) who 
are secret serial killers.

The TV overview of Britain that Americans are given is nostalgically positive, 
while the image of Americans transmitted in the UK perhaps exaggerates the 
sense of humour of the average citizen.

But in documentaries made about the other country, a very different picture 
emerges. American factual TV largely ignores Britain (and most other 
countries), except for reports on Princess Diana and her sons or profiles of 
showbiz hit-Brits such as Adele.

Failing to return the compliment, British docs about the US tend to represent 
America as what the novelist Saul Bellow called in 1990 (adopting a phrase from 
Wyndham Lewis) “the moronic inferno”. Such films – representing an attitude 
that ranges from “Only in America!” to, at its most extreme, “Even in America!” 
– show a nation of morbidly obese racist evangelical Christians, waving a 
weapon in one hand and voting for Ronald Reagan or George W Bush – or now 
Donald Trump – with the other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fcdbd3b01b1aa5096852fd3b2f6ee1fe08de1a1%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%20in%20America!%20UK%20TV's%20fascination%20with%20the%20US's%20gun-toting%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%20in%20America%21%20UK%20TV%27s%20fascination%20with%20the%20US%27s%20gun-toting%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fcdbd3b01b1aa5096852fd3b2f6ee1fe08de1a1%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Eye-popping … Jadin, aged nine, fires a gun in a firing range as his mum 
Courtney films him. Photograph: Rogan Product/Channel 4 
On the eve of what will bring either the Trump presidency, or four years of 
resentment from his thwarted fans, comes another trio of examples of this. Two 
of them compete in the 9pm slot tonight – The Conspiracy Files: The Trump 
Dossier (BBC2) and The Gun Shop (Channel 4) – while the third-party candidate 
is American High School (iPlayer).

Although one aim of documentary is to explain a foreign culture to outsiders, 
The Gun Shop presents an aspect of America that, however good the film, will 
remain inexplicable to most outsiders. Shot at Freedom Firearms, a 
weapon-and-ammunition store in Battle Creek, Michigan, it works for a Channel 4 
audience as weirdo TV. In the most eye-popping scene, a mother films proudly as 
her nine-year-old son has his first gun lesson at the shop’s firing range.

But far more than most offerings on the topic, this film sometimes twists its 
pointing finger to scratch its chin. Customers’ backstories show them to be not 
merely gung-ho, but traumatised. The mum of the son with the gun was the victim 
of an armed car jacking, while other first-time gun buyers are shown to have 
been motivated by a random mass shooting nearby or the killing of an 
African-American driver by police.

That man was shot after telling police he had a gun, so tooling up could be 
seen as a poor insurer of personal safety. But a logic has taken hold that is 
sharply expressed by a Freedom Firearms client: “If everyone’s going to carry a 
weapon, I don’t want to be the one without one.” This logic may ensure more 
deaths, but the father of one shooting victim acknowledges that there is no 
possibility of the US becoming “anti-gun.” Those who think an armed population 
is a bad idea will have to settle for “anti-carnage.”

A similar check to idealism from realism can be found in American High School, 
a six-part series filmed in South Carolina at Orangeburg-Wilkinson, an academy 
with a majority African American and “high poverty index” student body.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde5b9fafa563fcb2720f7a1170895ce24c1cea3e%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%20in%20America!%20UK%20TV's%20fascination%20with%20the%20US's%20gun-toting%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%20in%20America%21%20UK%20TV%27s%20fascination%20with%20the%20US%27s%20gun-toting%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde5b9fafa563fcb2720f7a1170895ce24c1cea3e%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 A bigger test than most … Dr Stephen Peters, the principal of American High 
School. Photograph: BBC/Swan Films 
The conceit of a charismatic headteacher trying to reform a failing school is 
familiar here from series such as Educating Yorkshire, but Dr Stephen Peters, 
the new principal at O-W, is sitting a bigger test than most. In a key scene, 
he is dealing with the use of a weapon in a corridor when news comes that two 
cars filled with gang-members are heading towards campus to avenge the honour 
of the suspended student.

Liberalism and sentimentality tend to encourage educational documentaries 
towards the most hopeful case studies and American High School has one of those 
(the story of a star student raised by a single father), but it doesn’t flinch 
from the painful fates likely to claim many of her classmates.

In both The Gun Shop and American High School, the impending election is a 
constant subtext – through the issues of racial and social division – but it is 
most directly addressed in The Conspiracy Files: The Trump Dossier, which has 
been re-edited up to the last minute to reflect the latest twists in Trump’s 
problems with females and Hillary Clinton’s with emails.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11de77b575f4b3af221f2ca386e9f1416c105f96%2F113_302_3387_2032%2F3387.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%20in%20America!%20UK%20TV's%20fascination%20with%20the%20US's%20gun-toting%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%20in%20America%21%20UK%20TV%27s%20fascination%20with%20the%20US%27s%20gun-toting%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Famerica-uk-tv-documentary-us-guns-conspiracy-freedom-firearms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11de77b575f4b3af221f2ca386e9f1416c105f96%2F113_302_3387_2032%2F3387.jpg>
 The Conspiracy Files: The Trump Dossier reflects the latest twists in Donald 
Trump’s problems with females – and Hillary Clinton’s with emails. Photograph: 
Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
The thrust of John O’Kane’s film is that Trump has shaped his campaign around 
unproven or disproven conspiracy theories: Republican rival Ted Cruz’s dad may 
have helped to kill JFK, Barack Obama faked his US birth certificate, the 
Clintons had White House aide Vince Foster murdered.

Carefully presenting evidence from forensic experts and “citizen 
investigators” on both sides of such matters as alleged typographical 
discrepancies on Obama’s paperwork or disparities in Foster’s supposed suicide 
note, the film will inevitably be seen by anyone who disagrees with its 
conclusions as part of the conspiracy (BBC-Establishment-pro-Clinton.) But – 
more profitably – it explores the creation of an American political climate in 
which there is no such thing as facts, and even the democratic process is 
constantly questioned.

An odd omission in an otherwise exhaustive film was the absence of Clinton’s 
claim, as First Lady, that her husband was the victim of a “vast rightwing 
conspiracy” to bring him down. This is significant because Hillary’s belief 
that Washington was not to be trusted seems likely to have played a part in her 
unwise decision to secrete and delete emails while serving as Secretary of 
State.

What The Conspiracy Files didn’t state – but may lead many viewers to conclude 
– is that, if Clinton does win, she will become the third Democratic President 
in succession (after her husband and Obama) whose occupancy of the office has 
been relentlessly contested by conspiracy theorists and other “citizen 
investigators”. And, as a Trump presidency would be viewed with horror in half 
of the US and much of the world, there should be no shortage of material for 
more “Even in America!” documentaries.
 