
Two visions of the future of farming played out in Oxford this week.

The five-year-old Oxford Real Farming Conference 
<http://www.oxfordrealfarmingconference.org/> (ORFC) at the town hall, 
sponsored by organic farming company Sheepdrove and dominated by small-scale 
farmers, food campaigners, and the agro-ecology movement, has now outgrown the 
establishment conference, the decades-oldOxford Farming Conference 
<http://www.ofc.org.uk/>.

While the latter’s delegates – predominantly larger-scale landowners and the 
agrifood industry’s corporate representatives – were enjoying morning prayers 
in University College chapel, before a Barclays Bank breakfast, followed by a 
political session sponsored by agriculture equipment manufacturer Massey 
Ferguson with environment secretary, Liz Truss, and her labour shadow, Kerry 
McCarthy, and then dinner in Christ Church college, the alternative conference 
was debating proposals to radically reform the industrialised intensive model 
of agriculture they represent.

The current agroindustrial food system is “serving the world so badly it needs 
to wither on the vine,” said Colin Tudge, founder of the ORFC.

Calling for a complete rethink of the way we farm and cook, he said step by 
step reform of the status quo would not address the crisis in the global food 
system, which currently leaves a billion people worldwide chronically hungry, 
another billion suffering from food that is not fit for purpose but makes them 
ill, and endangers many species and wild habitats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Forganic-small-scale-alternative-vision-for-future-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F345e61e1335ac9f7b2b99a81cc6cfa4e5c99eabc%2F0_251_4917_2946%2F4917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Organic%20and%20small-scale%3A%20An%20alternative%20vision%20for%20the%20future%20of%20farming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Forganic-small-scale-alternative-vision-for-future-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Organic%20and%20small-scale%3A%20An%20alternative%20vision%20for%20the%20future%20of%20farming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Forganic-small-scale-alternative-vision-for-future-farming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F345e61e1335ac9f7b2b99a81cc6cfa4e5c99eabc%2F0_251_4917_2946%2F4917.jpg>
 Phil Hogan (L), EU commissioner for agriculture and rural development, 
Charlotte Smith (chair) and Owen Paterson MP at this year’s Oxford Farming 
Conference. Photograph: DAVID HARTLEY/REX/Shutterstock 
A new rural manifesto to tackle inequality in the countryside 
<http://landworkersalliance.org.uk/2016/01/equality-in-the-countryside-a-rural-manifesto-for-the-parliamentary-opposition/>
 was launched at the alternative conference by the Land Workers’ Alliance and 
The Land magazine. The alliance said there was a crisis of housing in rural 
areas with many young people being driven out of their native villages by a 
lack of affordable accommodation and public transport. It outlined government 
action needed on rural housing, transport, energy, employment and land reform, 
to prevent the countryside becoming the “preserve of the affluent” who live but 
do not work there.

“Family farms are declining in numbers, commercial farms are becoming larger 
and increasingly corporate, entry into the industry is increasingly difficult 
and the average age of farmers is worryingly high,” said land campaigner, Simon 
Fairlie .

The manifesto calls for agricultural subsidies to be capped at €150,000 per 
individual farmer so that taxpayers’ money is redirected to smaller and active 
farmers and away from richer landowners. It also calls for the break up of 
oligopolies of processors and retailers to protect famers from aggressive 
pricing.

Farming as currently structured has become economically unsustainable, as well 
as socially and environmentally destructive, according toTom Lines 
<http://www.tomlines.org.uk/>, expert in commodities pricing at University of 
London’s Goldsmiths college, told the conference.

Over the last four decades the cost of inputs had risen far more than the 
value of agricultural commodities, meaning the money farmers could make from 
food production was inadequate to keep people on the land in many countries 
including the UK, Lines warned.
 