
Mark, a 34-year-old former tax inspector from Copenhagen, lives in hotels. He 
leads a nomadic existence, moving from room to anonymous room around the city 
every night, renting out his own properties on Airbnb and communicating with 
his guests remotely through a series of invented aliases. “I sell dreams,” he 
says,in a short film <http://www.living-architectures.com/> by Ila Bêka and 
Louise Lemoine that is showing as part of the 2016 Oslo architecture triennale,
After Belonging <http://oslotriennale.no/en/afterbelonging>. “Short, customised 
dreams.”

He and his former wife first experimented as Airbnb hosts a few years ago when 
they went away for the weekend. They returned to find their clothes left in 
unusual places around the apartment and, after a bit of Instagram snooping, 
discovered their guests had been rifling through their wardrobe and acting out 
their lives in a kind ofdomestic cosplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/13/cosplay-sci-fi-weekender-dressing-up-fantasy-characters>
. Rather than stop hosting, Mark decided to invest in some spy cameras, which 
he dotted around the house to keep an eye on future guests. That’s when things 
got weird.

“Before we knew it, we were spending every Saturday night in a hotel room, 
watching the livestream of our own home,” he says. “We were watching people 
wearing our clothes, reading our books, having sex in our bed.” Perhaps 
understandably, his wife thought this was all rather strange and left him. “She 
wanted kids, a dog, a car: the Danish idea of true happiness,” says Mark who, 
undeterred, has expanded his Airbnb empire into a full-time business. His 
catalogue of apartments belong to a cast of fictional hosts, from a gay couple, 
to a lonely artist, to a perfect Danish nuclear family – the most popular of 
the bunch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff44cd1a37107da81c0f4da5a9732edbbd4244f09%2F0_0_5747_1080%2F5747.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oslo%20architecture%20triennale%3A%20Airbnb%20cosplay%20for%20the%20gig%20economy%20nomad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oslo%20architecture%20triennale%3A%20Airbnb%20cosplay%20for%20the%20gig%20economy%20nomad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff44cd1a37107da81c0f4da5a9732edbbd4244f09%2F0_0_5747_1080%2F5747.jpg>
 ‘I became free’ ... Mark in Selling Dreams by Ila Bêka and Louise Lemoine. 
Photograph: Ila Bêka and Louise Lemoine/Oslo Architecture Triennale 
“People believe the house will be bigger and happier when the host is a 
family,” he says, touring the camera around an apartment he has lovingly 
decorated with a pink, doll-filled room for his imaginary daughter and an 
equivalently boyish one for his fictional son. Family photos, downloaded from 
the internet, dot the mantelpiece, completing the elaborate fairytale. By 
supplying stage sets for the fantasies of others, Mark has liberated himself 
from his own. “I don’t need belongings any more. I feel I’ve managed to 
disconnect. I lost my wife, my home, my things. I became free.”

This surreal story is one of the most compelling things on show at the 
triennale, which this year tackles the “crisis of belonging”, focusing on 
questions of identity, property and residence in an increasingly globalised, 
migratory world. Curated by five Spanish architects and academics, based 
between New York and Rotterdam, who are all connected to Columbia University’s 
notoriously theory-heavyGSAPP architecture school 
<https://www.arch.columbia.edu/>, the scope of their project is mind-bogglingly 
vast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4b868e2a0fbb309b0ebf9394e9f4697216803eb%2F0_0_6994_4668%2F6994.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oslo%20architecture%20triennale%3A%20Airbnb%20cosplay%20for%20the%20gig%20economy%20nomad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oslo%20architecture%20triennale%3A%20Airbnb%20cosplay%20for%20the%20gig%20economy%20nomad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4b868e2a0fbb309b0ebf9394e9f4697216803eb%2F0_0_6994_4668%2F6994.jpg>
 From the installation Movement as Civil Disobedience, focusing on the Greek 
island Lesbos. Photograph: Istvan Virag 
Through a pair of exhibitions (On Residence 
<http://oslotriennale.no/en/onresidence> and In Residence 
<http://oslotriennale.no/en/in-residence>), a conference and an events 
programme running until the end of November, they seek to interrogate 
everything from the spatial politics of national borders to the destabilising 
effects of thegig economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/26/will-we-get-by-gig-economy>
 and the “pornification” of the home. The contents list reads like a litany of 
PhD proposals – and many of the exhibited results feel just as dense.

There are a lot of abstract installations, projections and sound pieces to 
baffle and bemuse. “Movement as Civil Disobedience: Mapping Migration and 
Solidarity on Lesvos Island” looks at networks of human rights activists on the 
Greek islandthrough which 450,000 Syrian refugees have  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/05/refugees-in-lesbos-are-there-too-many-ngos-on-the-island>
passed since 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/05/refugees-in-lesbos-are-there-too-many-ngos-on-the-island>
. The result is a series of acrylic panels etched with maps and diagrams and 
hung in front of each other so as to be rendered illegible. Another project 
focuses on the furniture exchange platformfinn.no <http://finn.no/> (the 
Norwegian Craigslist). It claims to “interrogate the relation between the lack 
of economic exchange value of these objects and the accumulation and 
construction of historical or affective value”. The exhibit is a load of coffee 
tables and chairs hung in a big pile.

There’s more meat to be found in a short film by Spanish architect Andrés Jaque
 <http://andresjaque.net/>, who has woven a series of seemingly unrelated 
strands into a thought-provoking tale on identity and exoticism. He begins with 
theVictoria amazonica, a species of flowering water lily native to Brazil, for 
which Joseph Paxton built a dedicated hothouse at Chatsworth, Derbyshire, 
recreating the plant’s humid habitat and its first momentous flowering in 1849. 
We then jump to sleepyboy.com, the UK’s number-one male escort directory, on 
which “Brazilian” is the most searched term.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bb18323747a08e96f17474171e09f466b65c3dc%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oslo%20architecture%20triennale%3A%20Airbnb%20cosplay%20for%20the%20gig%20economy%20nomad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oslo%20architecture%20triennale%3A%20Airbnb%20cosplay%20for%20the%20gig%20economy%20nomad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bb18323747a08e96f17474171e09f466b65c3dc%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 A still from Andrés Jaque’s Pornified Homes (2016). Photograph: Jorge Lopez 
Conde and Eduardo López/Kaia Hødnebø Nelson 
In vivid high-definition camerawork, we meet Rafael at home in his tiny 
basement flat in Chelsea, and Bruno who lives around the corner in Kensington, 
both Brazilian rent boys who have created “pornified” lairs, manufacturing an 
image of sexy Brazilian exoticism to fulfil their clients’ desires. There are 
hundreds of such spaces across the city, we discover, creating what the 
narrator terms a “secluded and sexualised backyard architecture of otherness” – 
the contemporary equivalent, in Jaque’s logic, of Paxton’s hothouses: 
artificial capsules for exotic species displaced and re-socialised for the 
purpose of pleasure.

Other contributions take a more macro look at the world. Air Drifts presents a 
video about Nasa’s fascinatingGlobal Modelling and Assimilation Office 
<https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/>, which produces beguiling psychedelic animations 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1SgmFa0r04> of the flows of toxic aerosols 
around the globe. Swirling pink plumes of nitrogen dioxide billow from mainland 
China, while thin arteries of CO2 inscribe the paths of ships ploughing across 
the oceans, computing five million data points every six hours into a 
tumultuous tapestry that foreshadows generations of climate change to come.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx1SgmFa0r04&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx1SgmFa0r04>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx1SgmFa0r04&media=>
Watch the Nasa video A Year in the Life of Earth’s CO2 <http://A Year in the 
Life of Earth's CO2> 
Italian group Folder <http://www.studiofolder.it/> unearth the history behind 
such satellite technologies, presenting a series of model globes inscribed with 
the scanning footprint of theLandsat programme <http://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/> 
– the longest running satellite imaging initiative – over the last half 
century. Inked using a home-made drawing machine (similarly to theirItalian 
Limes <http://www.studiofolder.it/wp/italian-limes/> project at the 2014 Venice 
Biennale), the globes show a variegated collage of the satellites’ increasing 
coverage, as well as political black spots, reproducing in physical form this 
invisible orbiting infrastructure.

Most of this is in On Residence, at the Norwegian Centre for Design and 
Architecture <http://doga.no/en/>(Doga). Across town, the National Museum of 
Architecture hosts In Residence, a show of such tenuous ambition and muddled 
curation as to be rendered almost entirely meaningless. Once again, the 
subjects are promising: the negotiation of resources in Kirkenes, a town on the 
Norwegian border with Russia; an asylum seekers’ reception centre in Oslo; 
self-storage facilities in New York City; and the healthcare tourism industry 
in Dubai. But the resulting “intervention strategies”, bar Beka and Lemoine’s 
film, get variously lost in translation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa69d26b9d7d34d99f4fe9af8f60104cfc2594c93%2F0_0_5806_3875%2F5806.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oslo%20architecture%20triennale%3A%20Airbnb%20cosplay%20for%20the%20gig%20economy%20nomad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oslo%20architecture%20triennale%3A%20Airbnb%20cosplay%20for%20the%20gig%20economy%20nomad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foslo-architecture-triennale-review-after-belonging%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa69d26b9d7d34d99f4fe9af8f60104cfc2594c93%2F0_0_5806_3875%2F5806.jpg>
 Uncharted (2016) by Folder, part of the On Residence exhibition. Photograph: 
Istvan Virag 
The curators say they aim to “untangle the agency of spatial interventions as 
well as the capacity of the architect in transforming the definition of these 
spaces in relation to legal, political and economic frameworks.” But, having 
attempted to digest both exhibitions on several repeat visits, it’s hard not to 
feel they’ve been tangled in their own convoluted web of deterritorialised 
liminal flows, strained the muscles of their disaggregated spatial practices, 
and disappeared up their own alternative participatory imaginaries. If you want 
to get a feel for the tone of whole thing, look no further than theLandscape 
Urbanism Bullshit Generator <http://www.ruderal.com/bullshit/bullshit.htm>.

The curators say that the “After” in After Belonging refers to a search, a 
pursuit, a quest for belonging. But they must also decide where they themselves 
want to belong: choose to engage with the real world, or retreat to the realms 
of arcane theorising? They have identified a fascinating field of 
investigation, and clearly had no shortage of ambition. Sadly, too many of the 
projects take compelling topics and murder them with a toxic cocktail of wilful 
complexity, pseudointellectual posturing and dumb conceptual art.


• Oslo Architecture Biennale: After Belonging <http://oslotriennale.no/en/> 
runs until 27 November.
 