
Owen Smith still receives death threats following his unsuccessful challenge to
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> for the 
Labour leadership last summer but, as the Pontypridd MP reflects on 2016, he 
has no regrets.

“I’m proud that I showed the leadership to challenge and to seek to revive the 
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party,” he says, sitting 
bolt upright at the table in his quiet Westminster office.

Smith was soundly beaten by Corbyn, and has deliberately stayed out of the 
public eye since September, after a bruising contest that saw his past as a 
special adviser for the Blair government, and a lobbyist for drugs company 
Pfizer, raked over for evidence that he was a “red Tory”.

 “Jeremy won a big and clear victory, and I made it very clear all summer as 
to what I thought the issues were and why I thought I was a better bet to lead 
the Labour party back to power than Jeremy. Clearly the majority of the 
membership didn’t agree with me and, therefore, I didn’t think I needed to 
inflict myself on them any more,” he says. “They’d seen lots of me all summer 
long and they’d probably had a guts full of me.”

The fate of the MPs who plotted a coup against Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/mps-plotted-coup-jeremy-corbyn-coup-where-are-they-now>
He has not spoken to Corbyn since he stepped off the stage in Liverpool after 
the results were announced at the start of the party’s annual conference in 
September.

But asked whether he has any regrets about throwing his hat in the ring – and 
knocking out Angela Eagle, who had been the first to declare – he says: “No, 
because that would have been cowardly and it wouldn’t have been showing 
leadership.

“I think I can look back with respect to myself at having said, very clearly, 
what I thought about our party, its past and its future.”

 Some of Eagle’s supporters still feel Smith should have thrown his weight 
behind her and they point out that she suffered intense personal abuse for 
being the first to put her head above the parapet. But he says: “Angela was, 
yes, brave to challenge; but I think we both took a lot of flak over the 
summer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fowen-smith-frustrated-and-disappointed-but-hopeful-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F597e08f74845ec7e3f228881b21bec035869fa06%2F191_2088_3036_3036%2F3036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Owen%20Smith%3A%20frustrated%20and%20disappointed%20but%20hopeful%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fowen-smith-frustrated-and-disappointed-but-hopeful-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Owen%20Smith%3A%20frustrated%20and%20disappointed%20but%20hopeful%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fowen-smith-frustrated-and-disappointed-but-hopeful-for-the-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F597e08f74845ec7e3f228881b21bec035869fa06%2F191_2088_3036_3036%2F3036.jpg>
 Angela Eagle was the first Labour MP to put forward a challenge to Corbyn’s 
leadership. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
He repeats his insistence that he was never involved in any coup and was not 
contacted by the shadow ministerswho took part in a wave of resignations in the 
days after the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/mps-plotted-coup-jeremy-corbyn-coup-where-are-they-now>
. He also admits that many Labour members, particularly those who had joined to 
back Corbyn, believed he had not been given long enough to make his mark on the 
party. “The reality is, I think we stumbled – others stumbled, truthfully – 
into the challenge to Jeremy.”

 Asked why he believes Corbyn inspires such passionate loyalty, he says: “I 
think in part it is a rejection of New Labour, and there is a visceral sense 
among many in the party, old and new members, that New Labour wasn’t radical 
enough and New Labour wasn’t Labour enough.

“That’s definitely out there and felt by many, many people. I think there was 
also just a human, emotional reaction to the notion that Jeremy was being 
unfairly challenged.”

 He adds that efforts by the party’s national executive committee to prevent 
new members from voting, which led to a legal challenge, “compounded the 
narrative that this was an attempt by the parliamentary Labour party, which is 
sort of like a swear word these days in the party, to undermine Jeremy.”

In the event, Smith won the support of two-thirds of members who had been part 
of Labour for more than a year, but Corbyn thrashed him among new recruits.

As 2016 began, Smith was settling into his role as shadow work and pensions 
spokesman and enjoying needling his opposite number, Iain Duncan Smith, over 
tax credit cuts and the cruelties of the benefits regime. He was regarded by 
colleagues as a good communicator with a bright future, but few would have 
expected that by the summer, he would be crisscrossing Britain in a campaign 
bus bidding to dislodge Corbyn.

Both major parties were plunged into turmoil by the referendum result, but 
such was the Conservatives’ ruthless efficiency atstabbing each other in the 
back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/michael-gove-denies-stabbing-boris-johnson-back-conservative-leadership-campaign>
 – or, in Andrea Leadsom’s case,shooting herself in the foot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/10/andrea-leadsom-apologises-for-motherhood-remarks>
 – that their leadership crisis was resolved in early July, in plenty of time 
for MPs to head off for a restorative summer break.

There was no vacancy for Labour leader but the simmering discontent with 
Corbyn’s leadership exploded into open revolt after the EU referendum. The 
result was a deeply personal race, which lasted until September.

Smith says now that he was not surprised at the attacks he endured, but thinks 
the tone of debate in the party has become more strident. “Part of the big 
difference was definitely social media and the extent to which Jeremy 
supporters were very, very active, and very aggressive on social media,” he 
says. “I think they did very effectively play the man as well as the ball.”

And he confirms that he is still receiving a rough ride. “I had police at my 
surgery last Friday because of some of the death threats I’ve had,” he admits. 
“Some of those are to do with the contest and some of those are to do with 
other political things I’ve said.” During the summer, he says he had “lots and 
lots” of death threats. Asked how that felt, he says, with a clipped laugh: “A 
bit miserable.”

Now Smith says he is ready to return to the fray, in a modest way at least, 
cooperating with backbench colleagues to formulate some of the policies a 
future Labour government might need, particularly on tax reform.

 “One of the glaring examples of weakness on the left is the fact that we have 
not really engaged in any meaningful debate about reform of taxation in this 
country,” he says. “The one big step that Labour took in the 1990s and 2000s 
was the introduction of tax credits but, other than that really, we left tax 
untouched and it’s the biggest tool in the state’s armoury. It’s the most 
important underpinning of everything you can do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fowen-smith-frustrated-and-disappointed-but-hopeful-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca35b79a7c1ff943e0fbcc66ccd175ff7866e7da%2F0_122_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Owen%20Smith%3A%20frustrated%20and%20disappointed%20but%20hopeful%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fowen-smith-frustrated-and-disappointed-but-hopeful-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Owen%20Smith%3A%20frustrated%20and%20disappointed%20but%20hopeful%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fowen-smith-frustrated-and-disappointed-but-hopeful-for-the-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca35b79a7c1ff943e0fbcc66ccd175ff7866e7da%2F0_122_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn comprehensively beat Smith in the summer’s leadership contest. 
Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
He talks about the need for the left to rethink the role of the state and how 
best to tame unfettered markets.

Smith is careful not to be too openly critical of the current shadow 
frontbench. But it is clear his plans emerge partly from a concern that, while 
Corbyn and his colleagues style themselves as radicals, their detailed policies 
do not always match that rhetoric.

 “We need to have specific, concrete ideas that people see are credible and up 
to the scale of the task we face today,” he says. “One of the things I can help 
do behind the scenes is think about those things and convene discussions about 
it.”

 Choosing his words carefully, he welcomes Corbyn’s improved performance at 
prime minister’s questions, which has been widely remarked upon in Westminster. 
“I think he’s definitely done better at PMQs; he’s been much sharper at PMQs, 
more forensic, and pursued a single theme more effectively, so I think that’s 
really encouraging.”

 But it is clear that he stands by the apocalyptic picture he painted back in 
the summer, of a political party peering into the abyss. “Anybody who looks at 
modern politics, across the world, and thinks that parties can’t disappear, is 
looking with their eyes closed. It can absolutely happen. As I said over the 
summer, parties take a long time to rise, but history shows they can disappear 
overnight.

 He believes the Brexit vote was a response to long-term changes to society 
and the economy that will make it harder for Labour to unite its traditional 
supporters. “The ability Labour had previously to forge a coalition, in those 
more homogenous communities, has been in decline for a long period. Brexit 
shone a light on that, it highlighted those fissures, but it’s deeper-rooted 
than that, I fear.”

 Despite his bleak mood, however, Smith has no intention of following the 
example of Copeland MP and fellow Corbyn-sceptic Jamie Reed, who announced just 
before Christmas that he was stepping down from parliament. “I’m frustrated and 
disappointed that I didn’t win and I’m frustrated and disappointed that we’re 
still at a low ebb, but I’m hopeful that we can revive and I’m hopeful that I 
can continue to play a part.”
 