
About 170 countries gathered at the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> for a ceremonial signing of 
the landmark Paris agreement on Friday, in a powerful display of global efforts 
to fight climate change.

A dozen countries – mainly the small island states at risk of being drowned by 
rising seas – said they would take the additional step on Friday of ratifying 
or granting legal approval to the agreement.

The renewed commitments, and the personal appearance at the UN by about 60 
heads of state, delivered a sense of momentum to efforts to bring the agreement 
into force far earlier than had originally been hoped.

The agreement reached in Paris by 196 countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
 still needs formal approval from 55 countries representing 55% of global 
greenhouse gas emissions to come into force. In some cases, that means a vote 
in parliament.

The US, China and India - the three biggest climate polluters - have all 
committed to join the agreement, possibly as early as this year.

Leaders said the events on Friday were a sign that governments, business 
leaders and campaign groups were aligned with trying to move swiftly to phase 
out the use of fossil fuels and move almost entirely to clean sources of energy 
by the middle of the century.

“Today’s signing ceremony reaffirms the commitments made last December and 
delivers a jolt of energy to international climate efforts,” Felipe Calderón, 
the former president of Mexico, said.

The signature ceremony, kicked off by François Hollande, as host of the Paris 
climate talks, will be an elaborate affair. Leaders will make their way 
one-by-one in alphabetical order to a special podium at the General Assembly to 
sign the single copy of the agreement, translated into six languages.
Paris climate deal graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/climate_accord/giv-27167G6DxTWjhdAZ9/>
Amid the celebratory atmosphere, with Leonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/22/leonardo-dicaprio-climate-talks-paris-agreement>
 scheduled to appear, leaders and scientists agreed: the measures covered by 
the Paris agreement still fall far short of reaching the goal of limiting 
temperature rise to1.5C to 2C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/21/study-reveals-greater-climate-impacts-of-2c-temperature-rise-heatwaves>
 above pre-industrial levels, and time is running out.

Last year was the hottest year since record keeping began in 1880 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/20/2015-smashes-record-for-hottest-year-final-figures-confirm>
. Temperatures for the first three months of this yearhave already demolished 
that record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/15/march-temperature-smashes-100-year-global-record>
 – confounding scientists by the scale and pace of temperature rise.

In the Arctic, there was almost no winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/15/record-breaking-temperatures-have-robbed-the-arctic-of-its-winter>
, with temperatures at the North Pole rising above freezing even in December, 
the depths of the polar night. Temperatures were up to 16C above normal.

On Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, some 93% of coral showed evidence of 
bleaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/19/great-barrier-reef-93-of-reefs-hit-by-coral-bleaching>
, because of long term ocean warming due to carbon emissions, and the El Niño 
weather phenomenon.












 * The article was corrected on 27 April. A temperature rise in the Arctic was 
given as 30C rather than 30F.
 