
The decision by China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and the US, 
the world’s two biggest greenhouse gas emitters, to ratify the landmark Paris 
accord on climate change heralds a new era of global cooperation on limiting 
emissions.

Only a few years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/dec/09/durban-climate-change-connie-hedegaard>
, such a commitment looked like a pipe dream. Today, with the two most powerful 
nations on board, the United Nations can celebratea victory on this 
world-changing issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 that has been more than 20 years in the making.

President Obama’s commitment is particularly significant in its timing. The 
presidential contenderDonald Trump has vowed to unpick the Paris accord if 
elected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/donald-trump-climate-change-science-sierra-club>
, but if it were to come into force before he came into office, that would 
become difficult if not impossible under US law and political conventions.

G20 summit: US and China ratify Paris agreement in major step for climate 
change fight - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/sep/03/g20-summit-obama-to-make-climate-change-announcement-as-may-heads-to-china-live>
But vital though the joint declaration is, it is not yet enough to bring the 
Paris agreement into force, nor halt the impacts of human activities on the 
climate. Making this work in practice will take much more.

First is the task of getting more nations to ratify. The US and China make up 
about 39% of global emissions. Under the foundation treaty,the 1992 UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change <http://newsroom.unfccc.int/>, at least 
55 countries must ratify for the agreement to enter force, and countries 
accounting for at least 55% of global greenhouse gas emissions must be 
represented.

With China, the US and a host of smaller countries signed up 
<http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9444.php>, the biggest emitter left 
outstanding is the EU, which negotiated the agreement as a bloc. The EU is 
unlikely to be able to ratify the accord any time soon, because of the 
mechanics of getting legal surety from its 28 member states.

There is a way around this. Nicholas Stern, chairman of the Grantham Institute 
on Climate Change and author of the landmark 2006 report on the economics of 
climate change, called on EU member states and the UK to ratify the agreement 
individually, through their national parliaments, to speed up the process. EU 
members are legally parties to the accord at a national as well as a bloc 
level, so if enough major countries – including the UK and Germany – were to 
enact the necessary processes then the accord could pass the final hurdle.

Breakthrough as US and China agree to ratify Paris climate change deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
“This is a tremendous opportunity,” Stern told the Guardian. “It’s very 
important for the credibility of the process [of gaining global agreement on 
climate action through the UN] to get the treaty ratified this year. EU 
countries can and should ratify as soon as possible. It’s not sensible to hold 
back, when they could make a big difference.”

The second, and more important, problem is that the agreement itself – the 
first that is both legally binding and likely to cover all countries – is just 
the beginning. The document, reached ata historic conference last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations>
 after 20 years of tortuous stop-start talks, commits countries to holding 
global warming to no more than 2C above pre-industrial levels, which scientists 
regard as the limit of safety, beyond which climate change is likely to have 
catastrophic and irreversible effects.

It does not specify what actions countries must take. Nearly all signatories 
set out targets oncutting their future greenhouse gas emissions beyond 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
, when current commitments expire. But the cuts in carbon dioxide implied by 
those targets will not be enough to hold to the 2C threshold, let alone limit 
the world tothe 1.5C of warming included as an “aspiration” and required to 
save the globe’s most low-lying areas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
.

In addition, though the framework is legally binding, the commitments on 
emissions are not. National governments will be relied upon to flesh out their 
targets themselves, through policies that could be controversial and perhaps 
expensive in the short term, such as pursuing renewable energy and leaving 
fossil fuels unexploited. That process has barely begun for many.

Green campaigners called on national governments to act urgently both to 
fulfil the legal pledges of the Paris accord, and the moral promises made to 
their people to halt dangerous climate change.

Li Shuo, senior policy advisor for east Asia at Greenpeace 
<http://www.greenpeace.org.uk/>, said: “Political ambition must keep up with 
rising sea levels faced by vulnerable communities. Touting the Paris ‘triumph’ 
while handing out money to the fossil fuel industry is simply not compatible 
with the Paris agreement. Governments mustkeep coal, oil and gas in the ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/keep-it-in-the-ground>, and 
urgently focus on a just transition to renewables. The G20 meeting must be the 
moment when leaders lay out a timetable for eliminating fossil fuel subsidies, 
a practice which the Paris agreement has made all the more hypocritical.”

Mike Childs, head of policy at Friends of the Earth <http://www.foei.org/>, 
added: “Countries need to commit to even deeper cuts than they promised in 
Paris and they need to enact policies to turn warm words into meaningful 
action.”

Early ratification would give governments the spur needed to formulate new 
policies on limiting carbon, and give businesses a clear signal that they 
should invest in reducing their impact on the climate, said Nick Mabey, chief 
executive of the E3G thinktank. “[The US and China announcement] sends a strong 
signal to investors and businesses that they can continue investing on the 
assumption that the Paris [commitments] will be delivered,” he told the 
Guardian. “At a time of increasing geopolitical turbulence this sends a welcome 
signal that cooperation to tackling climate change is resilient to worsening 
relations among the world’s superpowers.”

Jake Schmidt, director at the US-based Natural Resources Defense Council, 
added that other governments must take note. “The US and China are sending a 
powerful signal to other countries that the time for action is now,” he said. 
“It shows to countries and investors that the world’s two largest economies and 
biggest polluters are preparing to help lead the shift to a low-carbon economy. 
Only a few short years ago, countries were trying to drag the US and China into 
the global climate agreements, and now these two are among the first to join 
the new legal regime. That is an important shift, which reflects the reality 
that countries now realise acting on climate change is in their own 
self-interest and failing to act is no longer a smart choice.”

The UK’s position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/25/eu-out-vote-puts-uk-commitment-to-paris-climate-agreement-in-doubt>
, as the government negotiates exit from the EU, is of particular concern, as 
UK support over the course of more than two decades of UN climate negotiations 
has been a key influence.

Childs told the Guardian that the prime minister should not delay, saying: 
“It’s up to Theresa May to make sure that the UK ratifies the agreement too, 
and quickly. Otherwise the UK will go from being leader to laggard on climate 
change.”
 