
There are few things in sport as exciting as pure speed. Remember the stodgy 
start to the Rio Olympics? The empty seats, the greasy drizzle, the sense of an 
entire Games drifting into the arena of the unwell? Usain Bolt fixed that, 
instantly and without argument, by turning up, goofing about waving at people, 
and then running as fast as humans ever have for a combined total of one minute 
and 40 seconds, erasing everything else outside that brilliant, luminous moment.

In his American football novel End Zone, Don DeLillo spends a lot of time 
marvelling at the speed of his fictional running back Taft Robinson. “Speed is 
the last excitement left, the one thing we haven’t used up,” DeLillo writes, 
and you kind of get what he means. For all the cladding, the fine points of 
craft and tactics, there will always be some part of us tapping our foot, a 
little glazed, nodding politely as the coffee is passed round, just craving a 
little bump of the pure stuff.

Speed: it’s a kick. At which point, enter Pat Cummins, still the most 
interesting young fast bowler in the world, and now back playing cricket again 
for Australia after endless strains and twangs. This weekCummins took four 
wickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/david-warners-latest-century-makes-his-year-among-best-of-all-time>
 against New Zealand in Canberra, the best of them a zingy lifter to Martin 
Guptill that took a lovely crunchy edge – Cummins gets great edges – and gave 
another thrilling, teasing suggestion of the pure speed wrapped up in that 
corkscrew action.

Glenn Maxwell public criticism: disproportionate or good leadership? | Sam 
Perry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/maxwell-criticism-disproportionate-politics-good-leadership>
Cummins is still just 23. Strange to think he made his Test debut for 
Australia almost exactly five years ago. Back then he was basically a lovely 
idea, a lithe and coltish teenager able to bowl over 90mph while floating in, 
springing up like a bouncy cartoon tiger and slingshotting through the crease 
in a blur of fast-twitch limbs.

The thing about Cummins was his clarity. From the outside he had come from 
nowhere, making his T20, first-class, ODI and Test debuts within the space of 
10 perfect months. Five games into his professional career he was the leading 
wicket-taker in the Big Bash. That November he made a dreamy Test debut against 
South Africa at the Wanderers, taking six for 73,the youngest Australian to 
take an international five-for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/nov/30/pat-cummins-australian-fast-bowlers>
. He even hit the winning runs.

Australia swooned at a cloudless, very Australian kind of talent. The future 
was wide open.

Cummins has not played a Test match since. Last year he was out for 14 months 
with a back strain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/07/why-is-a-fast-bowlers-work-so-back-breaking>
. A series of doomed, maddeningly bitty cameos have brought a combined 69 
international wickets at 21 apiece. He still bounds and springs, hair lopping, 
like some cinematic ideal of limpid Australian athletic vitality. He still 
bowls with real pace at a wildly attacking length. He is also still basically 
an idea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpat-cummins-australia-need-for-pure-speed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64b601cff4aec723a261a476f258162be122f412%2F0_190_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pat%20Cummins%2C%20Australia%20and%20our%20need%20for%20pure%2C%20frictionless%20speed%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpat-cummins-australia-need-for-pure-speed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pat%20Cummins%2C%20Australia%20and%20our%20need%20for%20pure%2C%20frictionless%20speed%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpat-cummins-australia-need-for-pure-speed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64b601cff4aec723a261a476f258162be122f412%2F0_190_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Pat Cummins (left) and Mitchell Starc high five during Australia’s win over 
New Zealand in Canberra this week. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP 
Something is happening, though. I don’t want to jinx it. But Australia’s lost 
boys, the ghost attack that cricket fans have muttered about vaguely for the 
last few years, is quietly assembling around him. Something seems to have 
stirred in late 2011. James Pattinson, also prodigious, rapid and fragile,made 
his Test debut two weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/dec/04/james-pattinson-australia-new-zealand>
 after Cummins. Mitchell Starc, currently the fastest bowler in the world, made 
his a week later. Josh Hazlewood, steadier but hugely effective, had played his 
first game for Australia 18 months before.

All four are in their shared sporting prime. Between them they have exactly 
300 Test wickets at 26 since that explosive dawn in 2011. And yet Starc, 
Pattinson and Cummins, three genuinely scorching mid-20s fast bowlers, have 
played one game together for Australia. Hazlewood, Starc, Pattinson and Cummins 
– in and out, crocked, dropped – have still never played together in any 
format. Not once.

There is hope, though. This week Cummins, Starc and Hazlewood got on the field 
together for just the third and fourth occasion in five years of shared 
timeline. Pattinson could be back for the Big Bash. The Ashes are a year away. 
That ghost attack is beginning to hover once again at the edge of things, 
flickering in and out like Victorian garden sprites. It is a seductive idea for 
many reasons. Despite the concertina-effect of looking back, a long-term fast 
bowling unit is a pretty rare thing.

David Warner rescues Australia with another ton in win over New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/david-warner-rescues-australia-with-another-ton-in-win-over-new-zealand>
Cummins, Pattinson and Starc are all properly quick, of an age and, on the 
face of it, a fine tessellation of skills and angles. This really does not 
happen much. Plus, of course, they are Australian and in many ways Australian 
speed is the best speed. If only because, like baseball in America, Australian 
cricket is an aspect of how that country likes to see itself, part of some 
half-imagined shared pastoral soul, something pure and sun-bleached and 
essentially youthful.

Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> matters in Australia, just 
as the idea of an Australian fast bowler has a genuine vitality, an energy that 
seems to come out of the soil and the sun. Just walking into the Waca in Perth, 
the mottled, streaky patterns of the desert grass under those great alien 
concrete lights, is a thrill in itself. Seeing England’s batsmen shaken by the 
sight of Mitchell Johnson gliding in, moustache writhing, arm winding back 
behind him like a man about to throw the javelin, you admired them more for 
being able to stand there at all.

Like all kinds of myth-making, I am aware there is something obviously deluded 
and soppy about this. The idea of a long-term Test pace attack is old-fashioned 
in itself. Cummins and Pattinson will, with any luck, get a good run at things 
now, but this is likely to be in white-ball cricket, short spells that preserve 
that brittle fast bowler’s frame.

This is just what sport does, keeping us coming back in search of things that 
probably never existed in the first place. Just as watching Cummins and Starc 
this week it was hard not to be caught up again by that same quality, the dream 
of pure, frictionless speed.
 