
It’s lunchtime in a London park on the warmest day of the year, so naturally 
Patrick Marber <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/marber> has ordered porridge 
for breakfast. He sits in the sun with the tub of hot gruel placed next to his 
e-cigarette. His shoulders are hunched as though he’s chilled to the bone or 
braced for invisible storms. Who cares what time it is? Who cares what season? 
He wants what he wants and he brings the weather with him.


What an iconoclastic career Marber has had, which is another way of saying 
that it’s been confounding, erratic and prone to bouts of self-sabotage. We’ve 
known him as a spluttering clown, a mainstay of BBC’s The Day Today and as a 
respected man of letters, the author ofCloser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/23/closer-review-donmar-warehouse-london>
, and, for a period of five years, we didn’t know him at all when he sat 
marooned at his desk and “couldn’t write a sod”. He’s switched hats, lost his 
way and then stumbled on it again. I’d like to hail this, his third act, as a 
happy ending of sorts, but that would be too easy, it doesn’t fit with his 
nature. “Careful,” he cautions. “There’s always a crisis lurking.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b1d3c99097d4b49aea4bd47097d435f34680d7a%2F0_236_2200_2750%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Marber%20on%20five%20years%20of%20writer's%20block%3A%20'We%20were%20in%20debt.%20I%20was%20depressed.%20It%20was%20awful'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Marber%20on%20five%20years%20of%20writer%27s%20block%3A%20%27We%20were%20in%20debt.%20I%20was%20depressed.%20It%20was%20awful%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b1d3c99097d4b49aea4bd47097d435f34680d7a%2F0_236_2200_2750%2F2200.jpg>
 Strindberg in England … Helen George and Richard Flood in rehearsals for 
Marber’s After Miss Julie. Photograph: Nobby Clark 
The good news is that, at 51, the dramatist is back and writing again. His 
latest play,The Red Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/11/the-red-lion-review-patrick-marber-football-play-daniel-mays>
, won heartening reviews at the National Theatre last summer. He’s scripting an 
adaptation of a Michael Cunningham story (By Nightfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/23/by-nightfall-michael-cunningham-review>
); he’s poised to direct a revival he can’t talk about yet (“It hasn’t been 
announced, which is bloody annoying”). Then there is the matter ofAfter Miss 
Julie <http://www.theatreroyal.org.uk/page/3009/After-Miss-Julie/1222>, 
overhauled from the Strindberg and updated to postwar England, which is poised 
to roll out through the regions.

Marber wrote the thing 20 years ago and says he’s content to maintain a 
supportive interest, resist the temptation to fiddle; the play seems to work 
well enough as it is. Then he spoons more porridge and admits that, besides, he 
was never a fan of the Strindberg original: “It goes on and on.” He adds that 
this isn’t unusual. “Almost every play is 10, 15 minutes too long.” A rueful 
grimace. “I probably shouldn’t be saying this.”


The trouble is that Marber started in standup and still subscribes to its 
ethos. Hit the audience hard and then get off the stage quick before the crowd 
gets too rowdy. “I have the comedian’s fear of bottles flying. I’ve never been 
bottled off, but I have had things thrown at me. Bag of crisps. And there’s 
still a part of me, when I sit in an audience, that thinks people are going to 
start heckling the play.”


He was a moneyed middle-class boy. His initial plan was to become a revered 
novelist. I’m wondering how he first stumbled on to the open-mic circuit. 
“Well, I was a bit hair-shirt about it,” he says. “I’d been to a posh school 
[Cranleigh] and then a posh university [Oxford]. And I wanted to do something 
where none of that privilege was of use to me at all. I’d been to theComedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Store, and I loved the terror of 
it and the way the best comedians could control the crowd. What confidence that 
would give you, if you could somehow survive. The first time I did it I lasted 
a minute.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8781cc5318b248740dd2a9053f0f42c5054928b%2F0_21_3080_1848%2F3080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Marber%20on%20five%20years%20of%20writer's%20block%3A%20'We%20were%20in%20debt.%20I%20was%20depressed.%20It%20was%20awful'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Marber%20on%20five%20years%20of%20writer%27s%20block%3A%20%27We%20were%20in%20debt.%20I%20was%20depressed.%20It%20was%20awful%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8781cc5318b248740dd2a9053f0f42c5054928b%2F0_21_3080_1848%2F3080.jpg>
 A London-set La Ronde … Julia Roberts and Jude Law in the 2004 film Closer. 
Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
I first became aware of him on The Day Today, supporting Chris Morris and 
Steve Coogan. He playedChapman Baxter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2L4IrgZHvzk>, the wall-eyed serial killer with 
an Elvis fixation, andPeter O’Hanraha-hanrahan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TknnvlcLsYI>, the hapless reporter who “loses 
the news”. Along the way he helped devise the character of Alan Partridge and 
farmed the man out to his own TV series. He looks back on his collaboration 
with Coogan as a life-changing moment.


“We got close very quickly, at a point where we were at a crossroads. We were 
both a bit depressed, not knowing where to go next. Steve needed an organising 
force and I could be that. I thought he was really talented and really 
unfocused. I knew how to help him and that was a good feeling. I saw him the 
other day actually. We talk about the old days with great weepy fondness.”


Coogan once told me that the educated, cerebral Marber helped “stop him 
becoming Alan Partridge for real” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/26/steve-coogan-philomena-interview>
. But the association cut both ways. “My performing was good up to a point,” 
Marber explains. “But when you encounter someone like Steve, who’s touched with 
genius, you think, ‘Well, I’m never going to be that good. But maybe I can be 
really good at writing instead.’”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa91dcf83cb9eb42d4c26c5a65efa6fd0895cb77d%2F0_193_2126_1275%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Marber%20on%20five%20years%20of%20writer's%20block%3A%20'We%20were%20in%20debt.%20I%20was%20depressed.%20It%20was%20awful'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Marber%20on%20five%20years%20of%20writer%27s%20block%3A%20%27We%20were%20in%20debt.%20I%20was%20depressed.%20It%20was%20awful%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpatrick-marber-after-miss-julie-by-nightfall-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa91dcf83cb9eb42d4c26c5a65efa6fd0895cb77d%2F0_193_2126_1275%2F2126.jpg>
 Slamming the wasps from the pure apple of truth … The Day Today, with, from 
left, Chris Morris, David Schneider, Patrick Marber, Rebecca Front, Doon 
Mackichan and Steve Coogan. Photograph: BBC 
Perhaps, in hindsight, the transition was too easy. His first play, Dealer’s 
Choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/28/dealers-choice-review-royal-and-derngate>
, sparked; the second,Closer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/23/closer-review-donmar-warehouse-london>
, exploded. A London-set La Ronde of sexual intrigue, it mined the darkest 
recesses of Marber’s wild youth and psyche and established him as one of the 
vivid, unflinching dramatists of his generation. He bagged an Oscar-nomination 
for adaptingNotes on a Scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/feb/02/drama.periodandhistorical>, 
rustled up a couple more playscripts and then hit the wall. Marber partly 
blames Sussex, where he had moved with his wife and two kids. Mostly, he blames 
himself. He thought he could write anywhere and it turned out he could not. He 
says, “We were in debt. I was depressed. And it was awful. It was shit.”


I was never bottled off – but I did get crisp packets thrown at me

So he sat at his desk and stared at the screen for five years. He accepted 
screenplay commissions, then had to hand back the cash. “And all the while your 
stock’s going down. I thought I was on a blacklist and I probably was. I was a 
serial refuser. A serial non-deliverer.”


By now he’s polished off the porridge and moved to the e-cigarette. He used to 
smoke 25 fags a day. Now he vapes, which he likes. “It’s vulgar but it’s good. 
You get the same lovely tap at the back of the throat.”


Today he’s safely back in London, still burned by the experience, taking it 
one step at a time.The Red Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/07/daniel-mays-football-just-gateway-betrayal-loss-ambition-patrick-marber>
, thank heavens, marked a redemption of sorts, summoning up the urgent tale of 
a young football star torn between the attentions of a decent, dogged kitman 
and a corrupt, wheedling manager. Ostensibly, The Red Lion was prompted by 
Marber’s own Sussex sideline as adirector of the community-owned Lewes FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/aug/22/patrick-marber-boardroom-lewes>
. But I suspect it’s about his creative struggles as well.


“Oh yeah,” says Marber. “I’m the boy in the play but I’m also the conflicting 
forces. I’m the bully and I’m the nurturer. So it’s about how you manage 
whatever talent you have. And those two forces are the voices in my head. And I 
think you need both. Or at least I think that I do.”


The trick, he concludes, is to be less hard on himself. Marber points out that 
for years he was unable to put dialogue on the page. Now he has learned to cut 
himself some more slack. He says:“If I get anything out, producing anything, no 
matter whether it’s good or not, I allow myself a little pat on the back.” 
Sometimes the work itself is its own reward. Everything else is a bonus, the 
honey on his oats.

• After Miss Julie is at the Theatre Royal Bath 
<http://www.theatreroyal.org.uk/page/3009/After-Miss-Julie/1222>, 24-28 May. 
Box office: 01225 448844. Then touring toBrighton 
<http://www.atgtickets.com/shows/after-miss-julie/theatre-royal-brighton/>, 
Richmond <http://www.atgtickets.com/shows/after-miss-julie/richmond-theatre/> 
andMilton Keynes 
<http://www.atgtickets.com/shows/after-miss-julie/milton-keynes-theatre/>.
 