
David Moyes has no money to spend next month and remains somewhat shocked by 
the news that Sunderland are up for sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/david-moyes-may-not-have-taken-sunderland-job-if-known-cash-woes>
, but at least Patrick van Aanholt is on his side.

This most attacking left-back scores more freely than some supposed specialist 
forwards and his latest goal, a left-foot shot glanced in off the inside of a 
post, proved sufficient to lift Moyes’s team to the dizzy heights of 18th. 
Significantly, it also spares Wearsiders the psychological burden of being 
bottom at Christmas.

“We’re still in touch,” said Sunderland’s manager. “It’s an important win. We 
gave away a lot of stupid free-kicks and were lucky not to be behind before 
Patrick scored but we also showed some steel. We’ve got a good siege mentality.”

At the end of a week when Moyes made it crystal clear that he feels badly let 
down by the failure of Ellis Short, the club’s owner, to honour perceived 
assurances regarding proposed January investment, this represented a most 
welcome boost.

Jamie Vardy in red card controversy as 10-man Leicester battle back to draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/stoke-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
It also left Watford ruing a litany of spurned chances on a day when they 
appeared well capable of subjectingSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> to further pain but were, 
instead, repeatedly thwarted by an amalgam of sub-standard final balls and 
Jordan Pickford.

The England under-21 goalkeeper quickly emphasised his authority with a 
stunning diversion of Nordin Amrabat’s volley that was bound for the top corner 
after an Étienne Capoue corner won in the wake of Odion Ighalo’s 
defence-bisecting advance. Pickford is excellent with his feet as well as his 
hands, and it would not be too much of a surprise were Pep Guardiola to try to 
buy him next month.

For the moment, though, he remains a vital element of Sunderland’s survival 
bid and offered much-needed reassurance asWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> initially destabilised Lamine 
Koné and/or Papy Djilobodji almost every time they attacked, with Ighalo, in 
particular, unnerving the home backline.

Even so, Watford should have taken the lead when Miguel Britos connected with 
a José Holebas free-kick but somehow headed wide from point-blank range. “We 
cannot miss all these chances,” said a disbelieving Walter Mazzarri. “If you 
miss them all you get punished.”

Having switched to 4-2-3-1 from the reasonably resilient 3-4-3 formation 
deployed duringWednesday’s 1-0 home defeat by Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/watford-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, Sunderland looked distinctly vulnerable until Victor Anichebe began worrying 
Watford, making all the second-half difference.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsunderland-watford-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F843950acfdd4cb39e930e978e5211d35f60f7ad6%2F0_62_3028_1818%2F3028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20van%20Aanholt%20lifts%20Sunderland%20with%20vital%20win%20over%20Watford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsunderland-watford-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20van%20Aanholt%20lifts%20Sunderland%20with%20vital%20win%20over%20Watford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsunderland-watford-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F843950acfdd4cb39e930e978e5211d35f60f7ad6%2F0_62_3028_1818%2F3028.jpg>
 Miguel Britos climbs highest but sees his header slip past the post. 
Photograph: Andrew Yates/Reuters 
Indeed, Christian Kabasele, on for the injured Sebastian Prödl, found Anichebe 
so irritating he attempted to get him sent off by collapsing clutching his face 
after the pair challenged for the ball. Admittedly, the Nigerian flung out an 
arm during their tussle but it made contact at chest rather than chin level and 
Anichebe merely received a talking-to.

Roused by the crowd’s indignation, Sunderland finally placed Watford under 
pressure with an arguably offside Van Aanholt seeing a shot blocked by Heurelho 
Gomes, the hitherto underworked goalkeeper.

Middlesbrough add to Swansea City’s woes as Álvaro Negredo hits double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/middlesbrough-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
The mood had turned distinctly edgy by the time the same player gave 
Sunderland a 49th-minute lead with his, and the team’s, second real chance. 
Created by Adnan Januzaj’s high-calibre through pass and Jermain Defoe’s cross, 
it featured Van Aanholt swivelling sharply and scoring after Kabasele partially 
blocked his initial effort.

Instantly, Sunderland looked transformed. Newly resolute in defence, they took 
turns to stretch their former team-mate Younès Kaboul and friends in Mazzarri’s 
back three. If Ighalo had provoked first-half panic, Anichebe was now firmly 
centre-stage and curled a shot marginally wide with Gomes beaten after being 
adroitly cued up by Defoe.

With Watford waking up again, the unmarked Troy Deeney stuck on 99 club goals 
headed Amrabat’s cross narrowly wide while Pickford subsequently saved smartly 
from Ighalo and Daryl Janmaat.

Tellingly, at the final whistle, Koné and Djilobodji raced to embrace their 
goalkeeper.
 