
Paul Dacre <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre> took home £1.5m in 
2016, maintaining his position as Britain’s best-paid newspaper editor.

The editor-in-chief of the Daily Mail, Mail on Sunday and Mail Online received 
£1.44m in salary and fees and a further £59,000 in taxable benefits.


These benefits include a company car with a taxable value of £31,000, a 
£10,000 car allowance and a fuel benefit of £15,470.


The 68-year old, who is on a rolling 12-month contract, was also awarded the 
equivalent of just over £1m in shares as part of along-term investment plan 
(LTIP) he was moved on to last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/18/paul-dacres-pay-falls-by-almost-40>
. However, this is not reflected as part of Dacre’s annual remuneration for 
2016, as he will receive a payout when the first year of the three-year scheme 
vests next October.

Dacre has accrued the equivalent of more than £2m in shares in the two years 
he has been part of the plan, at the current share price of the newspaper’s 
parent company, Daily Mail & General Trust (DMGT).


“Paul Dacre’s performance measures for awards … are to continue to invest in 
strong brands of digital consumer media – particularly Mail Online, and to 
ensure the financial sustainability of the Mail titles,” the company said.


Dacre has accrued a pension pot that pays out £688,000 a year. DMGT no longer 
makes any contributions towards his pension.


Before 2014, Dacre’s remuneration was about £2m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/22/paul-dacre-earnings-up-annual-report-reveals-daily-mail>
, as he received an annual salary supplement of £500,000. From 2015, he moved 
to an annual LTIP award with a value equivalent to 70% of salary vesting after 
three years.


Overall, DMGT paid out £12.2m in pay, benefits and bonuses to its top 
executives in 2016, almost 40% more than the £8.8m paid out in 2015.


Viscount Rothermere, the chairman whose family controls DMGT, took home 
£1.94m, down from £2.06m in 2015.

Martin Morgan, who stood down as chief executive of DMGT in the summer, took 
home £2.9m, well up on 2015’s £1.94m thanks to a £1.4m payout relating to an 
LTIP scheme vesting.


Similarly, Stephen Daintith, the outgoing finance chief, took home £2.35m, up 
from £1.4m in 2015, thanks to a £1m-plus LTIP payout.

 