
Paul Feig’s next project will be Supermodel Snowpocalypse, a comedy based on 
the true story of a group of models who got snowed in during a ski resort 
photoshoot.

Feig isn’t directing, but will produce the film for Paramount, according to 
Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/paul-feig-developing-supermodel-snowpocalypse-at-paramount-1201823516/>
. It will be based on anElle magazine article 
<http://www.elle.com/fashion/celebrity-style/a33930/snow-bound-drug-fueled-supermodel-lost-weekend/>
 that purports to reveal “fashion’s best-kept secret”.

In 1977, a group of male and female models, including up-and-coming star Jerry 
Hall, left New York for Chile, where they were to pose for a catalogue – The 
Fabulous Furs ofNeiman Marcus <http://www.neimanmarcus.com/> – on top of a 
mountain two hours northeast of Santiago. The weather turned after they arrived 
at their hotel, stranding the models with little more than their furs, some 
disco music and – thanks to some enterprising locals – drift-fuls of cocaine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsupermodel-snowpocalypse-paul-feig-jerry-hall-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a83c7f86ca6a5153c6634aef5e12eac54a0ad49%2F543_11_1684_1010%2F1684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Feig%20to%20fashion%20comedy%20from%20tale%20of%20supermodels%20lost%20in%20blizzard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsupermodel-snowpocalypse-paul-feig-jerry-hall-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Feig%20to%20fashion%20comedy%20from%20tale%20of%20supermodels%20lost%20in%20blizzard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsupermodel-snowpocalypse-paul-feig-jerry-hall-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a83c7f86ca6a5153c6634aef5e12eac54a0ad49%2F543_11_1684_1010%2F1684.jpg>
 Jerry Hall in 1977, she was one of the group stranded in Chile. Photograph: 
Roy Jones/Getty Images 
The film will be written by Mickey Rapkin, author of the Elle piece and the 
book Pitch Perfect, on which the hit film about competitive a cappella singing 
was based.

Feig’s Ghostbusters reboot <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters> has 
performed fairly well at the US box office after a flurry of fury from sexists 
furious that the property was being relaunched with an all-female principal 
cast. It’s currently fourth in the US box office chart, having opened with 
$46m, below expectations. With a production budget of $144m, studio Sony was 
hoping to make the shortfall at the global box office, but has been hampered by
China banning the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/ghostbusters-china-ban-supernatural-theme>
. Chinese censors do not allow films that “promote cults or superstition”.
 