
If 2015 was all about the world drafting a blueprint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/25/global-goals-summit-dignitaries-convene-for-a-day-to-define-the-world>
 to build a fairer, safer and more prosperous future, this year will be about 
picking the best tools for the job, with theworld humanitarian summit 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> bringing aid workers together to 
make those critical decisions.

As head of the summit’s secretariat, Antoine Gérard 
<http://blog.worldhumanitariansummit.org/author/antoine-gerard/> is the man 
charged with making sure the May meeting in Istanbul delivers on hopes 
expressed during years of consultations 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/bitcache/e3fbcccf47864aa35c1f193958fabb9ee8742196?vid=559079&disposition=inline&op=view>
 with humanitarians around the world.

“Let’s hope the summit will set in stone a number of key engagements that show 
humanity matters; we need to encourage political actors to reaffirm their 
adherence to humanitarian principles, reaffirm that protection of individuals 
is absolutely key, and reaffirm that we can deliver dignified humanitarian 
action in time of conflict and avoid any politicisation of aid,” says Gérard.

“We can’t ignore the fact that the people affected by disasters and conflict 
have asked us to do much better.”

Speaking in November, Stephen O’Brien, the UN under-secretary general for 
humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator,said 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/bitcache/c3305e77fa1b9736286eada0310ba156dfa1178e?vid=562337&disposition=inline&op=view>
 no single country or organisation could deal with the protracted crises,urban 
need 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/31/one-generation-save-cities-arup-urbanisation-population-climate-change-gregory-hodkinson>
 and fragility that are now the new normal.

“The landscape in which we are operating is changing. We must all adapt and 
evolve. Business as usual is simply not good enough,” he said. “Whereas 2015 
will be remembered for setting new frameworks, 2016 will be assessed by its 
ability to start translating these into action.”

Among the priorities for the summit are building resilience in an increasingly 
fragile world, better preparation for disasters, and giving a bigger role to 
local NGOs and the private sector. Another hot issue will be the plight of 
millions of people driven from their homes by war and poverty.


Forced displacement is now recognised as a long-term problem that will only 
grow as rising seas and higher temperaturesforce people to leave their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/27/dont-let-paris-climate-talks-ignore-people-displaced-by-global-warming>
.

Budgets – and how to make the most of them – will also be discussed in 
Istanbul. For 2016, the UN has launched its largest appeal, seeking$20bn 
(£13bn) to help 87 million people 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/world/un-and-partners-launch-2016-humanitarian-appeal-asking-201-billion-aiming-reach-over-87>
. That’s a fivefold increase on what it sought in 2005, and comes on the heels 
of a 2015 appeal that was only 50% funded.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpeople-disaster-response-aid-world-humanitarian-summit-antoine-gerard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aaade101bb6c029b8dc200375c8c65d3206812b%2F0_74_1496_1043%2F1496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=People%20hit%20by%20disaster%20want%20us%20to%20do%20much%20better%2C%20says%20humanitarian%20chief&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpeople-disaster-response-aid-world-humanitarian-summit-antoine-gerard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=People%20hit%20by%20disaster%20want%20us%20to%20do%20much%20better%2C%20says%20humanitarian%20chief&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpeople-disaster-response-aid-world-humanitarian-summit-antoine-gerard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aaade101bb6c029b8dc200375c8c65d3206812b%2F0_74_1496_1043%2F1496.jpg>
 Antoine Gérard, pictured during his time at the UN, says humanitarian 
responses need to improve. Photograph: World humanitarian summit 
Gérard, who previously worked at the UN’s Office for Coordinating Humanitarian 
Affairs, says he hopes to see clear ideas on how best to use the money that 
does come in, with emphasis on multi-year funding and longer-term strategies.

Last year, the world adopted the 17 sustainable development goals and 169 
targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 meant to provide a blueprint for development over the next 15 years, with the 
overarching aim of leaving no one behind.


The ambitious agenda will cost trillions of dollars and there is broad 
acceptance that donors and humanitarian agencies cannot do it alone, not least 
because simultaneous crises have left NGOs, and the UN, struggling to keep 
multiple programmes running.

At a financing summit ahead of the UN meeting to adopt the sustainable 
development goals, there was a clear push to increase the role of the private 
sector. Gérard says it is not just about money.

“We should not only look at the private sector as a source of funds. They 
should be recognised as key partners of humanitarian action,” he says, noting 
the role of private firms in organising satellite communications for relief 
agencies during the Nepal earthquake and in fighting Ebola in west Africa.

“The private sector is not only seen as a key partner to mobilise additional 
funding but also, in certain contexts, as a key actor to support the response, 
facilitate communications and the transfer of funds, or logistics.”


During emergencies, local forces need to be reinforced rather than substituted
Antoine Gérard 
Local NGOs need to come into the humanitarian mainstream, Gérard says. “Some 
of us are saying ‘act local, think global’ because at times of emergencies 
mobilisation of global capacity can support local action.

“At the time of the Haiyan typhoon in the Philippines we saw the government 
taking the lead to ensure more consultation with local actors … there is a 
recognition that during emergencies, local forces need to be reinforced rather 
than substituted.”

This call has been taken up by Jan Egeland, the former UN undersecretary for 
humanitarian affairs and now head of theNorwegian Refugee Council 
<http://www.nrc.no/>. 

“I hope the summit can help empower, fund and energise local humanitarian 
groups understandably angry that, in everything from the Nepal earthquake to 
resilience building in the Horn of Africa, they are underfunded and neglected, 
and too much attention is paid to white, male relief workers, like myself, 
Egeland says”

He sees an urgent need to rethink the global response to the plight of nearly 
60 million people who have been displaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/16/syrian-refugee-crisis-world-bank-unhcr-sea-change>
. He would like to see a kind ofMarshall plan 
<http://marshallfoundation.org/marshall/the-marshall-plan/> to help host 
countries cope.

“Where is the leadership in all of this? Everybody sees that it is wrong to 
treat this forever as if it was a competition in getting out as many blankets 
as possible to refugees and civilians. It is a crisis of now protection on one 
side … and secondly it is a question of sustainability.”

The World Bank and the UN refugee agency have called 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/16/syrian-refugee-crisis-world-bank-unhcr-sea-change>
 for a paradigm shift in the way the world responds to refugee crises, warning 
that the current approach is nearsighted, unsustainable and consigning people 
to poverty.

“We’ve been talking around impartiality, neutrality and independence of 
humanitarian action … there will also be a strong sign at the summit to think 
better around the humanity we would like to build and leave to future 
generations,” says Gérard.

“We need to make sure we are shielding humanitarian action from politicisation 
because we have an obligation to deliver that sense of humanity and rebuild the 
dignity of individuals affected by those crises.”
 