
Pep Guardiola has insisted that he has not tried to sign Lionel Messi for 
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> but said 
that if the Argentinian ever decides to leave the Camp Nou, he will be among 
those waiting in the queue for him.

“I did not call Messi because what I want is for him to play for Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> for many years,” Guardiola 
said, reacting to local media reports here. “I hope he ends his career here. 
But maybe one day the lad will decide that he wants to play somewhere else. 
Maybe he will want his kids to learn English, I don’t know. And if that 
happens, which I hope it won’t, then there will be a list of four, five or six 
clubs who will want to sign him.”

I like my Barcelona – and Pep Guardiola’s too, says Luis Enrique
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/barcelona-manchester-city-luis-enrique-pep-guardiola-champions-league>
Guardiola’s comments came in response to what he sees as a campaign against 
him and broke the tone on a day that was otherwise about mutual appreciation 
and fondness. There was bitterness and hurt here.

The Catalan sports newspaper El Mundo Deportivo, which is close to the club’s 
president, Josep Maria Bartomeu, has long positioned itself against Guardiola, 
as part of a divide that goes back to the Johan Cruyff era. It accused the 
former manager of trying to encourage players to leave the club. A month ago, 
its front page ran with the headline “Not like this Pep” alongside a picture of 
Messi and Neymar.

But asked if he had called any Barcelona players this summer, Guardiola said: 
“No, I didn’t call any Barcelona players this summer.” He continued: “I know 
that there are some battles that are lost before they start at this club. I 
have known that for years. I know this place well, but it would be good if 
people checked the [different] versions [of the story].”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Flionel-messi-pep-guardiola-manchester-city-leave-barcelona-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2bca8e664b50d9db3c7a851df48de1d356f3a2e%2F0_0_1749_1115%2F1749.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pep%20Guardiola%20denies%20trying%20to%20sign%20Lionel%20Messi%20%E2%80%93%20but%20would%20like%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Flionel-messi-pep-guardiola-manchester-city-leave-barcelona-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pep%20Guardiola%20denies%20trying%20to%20sign%20Lionel%20Messi%20%E2%80%93%20but%20would%20like%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Flionel-messi-pep-guardiola-manchester-city-leave-barcelona-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2bca8e664b50d9db3c7a851df48de1d356f3a2e%2F0_0_1749_1115%2F1749.jpg>
 Lionel Messi with Pep Guardiola, during his spell as Bayern coach. Photograph: 
Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters 
“I have always been clear with Thiago [whom Guardiola signed from Barcelona 
for Bayern Munich.] He wanted to play, always. His agent is my brother and I 
signed him. Two or three years ago [while still at the Camp Nou] I called 
Neymar so that he would sign for Barcelona. Then, when I was in New York 
[having left the club], I found out that there were doubts about the signing 
and I called his dad to ask. But I told him: ‘If you have the chance to sign 
for Barcelona, do it.’ His dad can confirm that.

Arsenal must challenge to keep Mesut Özil and Alexis Sánchez, says Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/arsenal-mesut-ozil-alexis-sanchez-arsene-wenger-champions-league>
“I repeat: I have not called Messi, Suárez, Neymar, Busquets or Iniesta. Ter 
Stegen is a different case. He wanted to play and then he decided to stay. We 
needed a goalkeeper like him and we signed Bravo. And if I ever call a player 
from Barcelona it will be because he is not playing. And I would have a right, 
too. Barcelona call players, too.”

Guardiola finished his answer but just as the next question was about to be 
asked, he added of journalists who had written the story: “And if they don’t 
believe me, well they have a good relationship with the president, Mr Bartomeu, 
and they have his number so maybe they can call him and he can tell them the 
story better than I have.”
 