
Pep Guardiola kept Manchester City’s players in the dressing room for 50 
minutes after their1-1 draw with Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/manchester-city-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 and has said he will fight to discover the reason why his side have gone five 
matches without a win.

City are top of the Premier League but have not won since late September. On 
Sunday John Stones presented Nathan Redmond with a goal before the half-hour 
and they could score only once in reply through Kelechi Iheanacho.

Kelechi Iheanacho rescues Manchester City as Southampton make a point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/manchester-city-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
It is the first time Guardiola has gone five matches without a win since he 
was manager of Barcelona in 2009. The City manager refused to blame individual 
errors for his team’s bad run, despite there having been a number of blunders 
in recent games.

Asked why his post-match debrief in the dressing room had taken so long, 
Guardiola joked: “The red wine was good today and I took a little bit longer 
with my glasses. No, we’re together, we speak, nothing special.

“We spoke about the situation we have and from this situation try to go up. I 
was a player and know this can happen. We didn’t create too much but in the 
second half we were there as a team.

“Now we are going to accept the situation. This five games without winning is 
because something happened. We have to accept that we start from a little bit 
lower to go up. That is the situation right now.

“Sometimes you are able to win 10 times in a row and after not to win five 
times. That is part of football. We have to accept that. I have to discover the 
reason why and I’m going to fight for that.”

Manchester City 1-1 Southampton: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/23/manchester-city-v-southampton-premier-league-live>
Of his side’s individual errors Guardiola said: “There is something more, 
something about the team, how you rebel and react in the situations. I have to 
help them achieve what we had in the second half.”

City played three at the back after their 4-0 defeat by Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report-messi>
 in midweek, having previously drawn against Everton and Celtic and lost to 
Tottenham, after those 10 straight wins at the start of the season.

Redmond, who has been in fine form for Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton>, said he had expected 
scoring opportunities. He said: “We can take a positive from it, come away with 
a point. With our mentality we wanted all three points.

“Even though we drew, we are frustrated to take a point but we keep moving. 
From watching them in preparation we knew they would give us chances – they 
only play three at the back. I was anticipating it and it was just about 
keeping a cool head and putting the chance away.”

City’s next game is against Manchester United at Old Trafford in the EFL Cup 
on Wednesday, before an away match at West Bromwich Albion and Barcelona at 
home.
 