
“I know we are not going to win at some point … I know what’s going to happen 
to me when we don’t.”Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> were unbeaten and still 
freewheeling through the light traffic of early season when Pep Guardiola was 
asked in September about his chances of winning the quadruple. His reply was 
most memorable for its exasperated, commendably fluent grasp of English 
swearing. More significant was his realism about the traps already laid, the 
sense of semi-crisis, real or imagined, that has always been waiting to break.

And so it came to pass. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-form>
 Fifteen league games and a relativity small helping of tactical free jazz into 
Guardiola’s first season as City manager, the dawning of the age of Pep has 
already begun to chug through its first spell of heavy weather. City play 
Arsenal at the Etihad on Sunday at the end of a week of diffuse but genuinely 
fascinating pressure, alleviated a littleby victory at home to Watford on 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/manchester-city-watford-premier-league-match-report>
.

Manchester City’s Ilkay Gündogan set to miss rest of season with cruciate 
injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/manchester-city-ilkay-gundogan-ruled-out-season-cruciate-injury-knee>
As high-pressure systems go, the current squall doesn’t seem to have a lot to 
do with points gained, likely long‑term outcomes, or much beyond the 
thrillingly tenacious identity politics of English football. City are fourth in 
the Premier League, with more points at this stage than in four of the last 
seven seasons.

There have been bumps and jolts but Guardiola took a while at his previous 
clubs to groove the machine and junk the spare parts. He remains the acme of the
Prozesstrainer coach, whose methods must be taken like a dose of medicine, 
complete with minor side effects and a need to complete the course.

The noises off will continue, and rightly so given the run of five wins in 16 
matches across all competitions; albeit stoked by a degree of iconoclastic glee 
at the error-strewn defeat by an inspired Leicester City. Plus, of course, 
there is the business with the tackles.

To recap: pressed on the fact City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/14/pep-guardiola-ronald-koeman-manchester-city-everton-full-english>
 had failed to “win a tackle” in the opening 35 minutes against Leicester, 
Guardiola went off on one of his familiar prickly, theory-laden digressions, 
announcing at one stage: “What is tackles? I don’t coach tackles.” At which 
point you could almost hear the headline klaxon, the high fives back on the 
desk, the T-shirt slogans being printed. Oh, Pep. No. Not tackles.

The backlash and the backlash against the backlash have followed. Let’s face 
it, elements of English football have been desperate for a chance to portray 
Guardiola as effete and entitled, for our own muscular island league to “find 
him out” in some decisive fashion. If you believe what you read, Sunday 
afternoon can’t come quickly enough for Arsenal, who have finally found a team 
they can kick off the park, anArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> all of their own. This time, 
finally, they get to be Gary Neville.

An equally pointed response has followed from those more sympathetic to the 
methods of a coach whose fingerprints areall over the outstanding club football 
achievements of the last decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/28/barcelona-manchester-united-champions-league-final>
. There is a little of the old reflexive fear of abroad here. Jozef Venglos, 
the first genuine overseas manager in England, was condemned 25 years ago for 
his refusal to shout loudly enough at his Aston Villa players. The end came 
shortly after Venglos banned the drinking of tea during training.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpep-guardiola-manchester-city-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62ac1288c5f6246fed1fbd7a148f8aa9ed787082%2F0_152_4096_2606%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pep%20Guardiola%E2%80%99s%20poor%20buys%20and%20endless%20tinkering%20take%20toll%20on%20Manchester%20City%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpep-guardiola-manchester-city-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pep%20Guardiola%E2%80%99s%20poor%20buys%20and%20endless%20tinkering%20take%20toll%20on%20Manchester%20City%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fpep-guardiola-manchester-city-arsenal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62ac1288c5f6246fed1fbd7a148f8aa9ed787082%2F0_152_4096_2606%2F4096.jpg>
 Leicester City’s Jamie Vardy exposed the weaknesses in a Manchester City 
defence that included John Stones, left. Photograph: Hannah Mckay/EPA 
With this in mind, Arsène Wenger will perhaps have a little sympathy for his 
opposite number. Wenger was also an alien interloper in his time, although not 
quite with the samekneel-before-Zod  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKDFop0aqYQ>intensity. Guardiola, unashamedly 
academic, preposterously roll-necked, openly hostile to the dominant culture, 
is perhaps the least English non-English manager ever to visit these shores. 
Not to mention a presence that tends to chafe with his self-possession, his 
army of converts and zealots. Lo, he is come. To deliver us into the light.

The truth is somewhere in between. For a start Pep was right. He does not 
coach tackles. His Barcelona crop of 2010‑11, the most notable club team of the 
last 20 years, finished 19th out of 20 in La Liga’s tackle league. Anyone who 
watched them press and hog the ball knows they still left the opposition 
battered and drained. Xavi, the best midfielder in the world at the time, was 
the 285th most prolific in terms of tackles in the division, making 32 all 
season. There are more ways to strangle an opponent than simply putting your 
hands around his neck.

The Leicester game was fascinating for other reasons. More worrying for City 
is the fact Leicester out-skilled rather than out-tackled them, scoring four 
excellent goals while having only 22% possession and 371 touches to City’s 903. 
Pablo Zabaleta touched the ball 106 times and had 96% pass completion but still 
spent the first half looking utterly confused in a strange false 2 role. Riyad 
Mahrez made only 17 passes and in effect decided the match.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpep-guardiola-looks-for-answers-after-leicester-defeat-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pep%20Guardiola%20looks%20for%20answers%20after%20Leicester%20defeat%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpep-guardiola-looks-for-answers-after-leicester-defeat-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pep%20Guardiola%20looks%20for%20answers%20after%20Leicester%20defeat%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpep-guardiola-looks-for-answers-after-leicester-defeat-video&media=>
Pep Guardiola looks for answers after Leicester defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/11/pep-guardiola-looks-for-answers-after-leicester-defeat-video>
These are the details that will concern Guardiola. City lost because their 
execution was poor. Not because they did not tackle but because they did not 
pass like Mahrez or finish like Jamie Vardy. The problem was not too much 
fine-point Pep-ball. It was not enough of it. Plus, of course, some obvious, 
rather conventional failings of personnel and positioning.

Under pressure, holes have appeared. Since the bruising 3-3 draw with Celtic, 
City have lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 all four of their domestic matches against teams in the top seven by a 
combined score of 10-3. Guardiola himself has been oddly vague in places.

Pep was right. He does not coach tackles. His Barcelona of 2010‑11 finished 
19th out of 20 in La Liga’s tackle league

It seems fair to ask how, given his contacts at City, and given Joe Hart’s 
very public 10-year career, it took Guardiola until after the season had 
started to decide he needed to source another goalkeeper.Claudio Bravo may or 
may not be a high-class shot-stopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/claudio-bravo-manchester-city-goalkeeper>
 but Guardiola has hardly given him a fair shot, signing him on 25 August and 
depriving him of a pre-season in his new team, some privacy to make mistakes 
and settle. For a master of detail, a man who never sleeps, brain always 
whirring like a chess computer, this seems a very rushed piece of major surgery.

City also managed to spend £115m in the summer on players they do not really 
need right now: two inside‑forwards, a so-so sweeper‑keeperand an apprentice 
ball-playing centre‑half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-city-complete-signing-of-john-stones-from-everton>
. OK, fine. But you forgot the full-backs and the A-list backup for Vincent 
Kompany and Sergio Agüero. Obvious holes remain, holes that Pep, DVD-scouring 
obsessive, must surely have noticed. Instead, a system has been plastered 
across the available personnel with all the attendant wrinkles and snags.

Guardiola has some more everyday problems for Sunday. The absence of Agüero 
will once again dull City’s attacking edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/chelsea-manchester-city-fined-brawl>
. Fernandinho has been a vital cog but is likewise still suspended.The injured 
Ilkay Gündogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/manchester-city-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 will be hugely missed. Beyond this City are simply a streaky team generally. 
This is the seventh season since the good times started to roll and each has 
brought a sticky run at some point.

This time last year City won seven times in 15 games. The year before it was 
four in 15 from the end of January. There is still a jumpiness, a need to drive 
this team on from within that has in the past come from Kompany or Yaya Touré.

Guardiola and Koeman recognise difficulties of tackling the full English | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/14/pep-guardiola-ronald-koeman-manchester-city-everton-full-english>
Guardiola’s defence will concern him, too. Back-three or back-four City had 
not kept a clean sheet in eight games before Watford in midweek. Rather than 
bringing the expected fluidity and verve, the endless subtle changes and 
tinkering seem to have furred the arteries. City are yet to play the same 
midfield shape and personnel in two successive matches. At times it has looked 
a little too much to take on the hoof.

This is the dilemma Guardiola faces in mid-season, a familiar test of 
principle for a genuine, often infuriating footballing aesthete. It seems fair 
to say that had Hart played the past 14 games and City’s summer budget been 
spent on a solid centre-half and two full‑backs then they might be top of the 
league. But they would also be essentially the same team, further away than 
they are now from a state of total Pep, that coherent, fluid, possession‑based 
bundle of Guardiola‑spec parts that is the ultimate goal.

Hence the jarring insistence on applauding players who make mistakes, most 
notably the Bravo-John Stones axis, who even when they play poorly, play poorly 
Pep-style and are therefore still part of the process. Stones has given the 
ball away more than any other regular central defender in the league. But he 
has also carried the ball forward more times over 90 minutes than any other 
defender in Europe, an indication of progress perhaps, but above all of a 
principle taken on board.

Win or lose against Arsenal, Guardiola will maintain the time he really starts 
to fail is not when players make mistakes learning the system but when he 
abandons it for a compromise. Arsenal will press relentlessly at that tender 
central defence. For once Wenger’s team approach this fixture as insiders, a 
settled domestic force ready to offer another test of Premier League virtues. 
It promises, as ever with this evolving Project Pep, to be a fascinating 
spectacle.
 