
Rotation, rotation, rotation! Alexander Calder and his high-wire circus act
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/09/alexander-calder-performing-sculpture-tate-modern-london-review-art>
Hearing the first performance in this country – and the first anywhere in over 
30 years – ofEarle Brown’s Calder Piece 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/performance-and-music/earle-browns-calder-piece-and-alexander-calders-chef>
 in the Turbine Hall at London’s Tate Modern, part of its currentCalder 
exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/09/alexander-calder-performing-sculpture-tate-modern-london-review-art>
, revealed one of the 20th century’s most subtle and satisfying symbioses of 
the visual and the musical. Brown’s 1966 work is a sonic animation of his 
friend’s mobileChef d’orchestre 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/performance-and-music/earle-browns-calder-piece-and-alexander-calders-chef>
.

The sculpture sits in the centre of the four percussionists, all students at 
theGuildhall School of Music and Drama <http://www.gsmd.ac.uk/music/>. This 
mobile “conductor” is much more than the passive backdrop to Brown’s music, 
more than a loosely decorative background to the multidimensional percussive 
symphony of metal, skin and wood instruments that the players created. Instead, 
there were long passages in the 20-minute performance when the movements of the 
sculpture were turned into volleys of notes, as the players reacted with 
subtlety, sensitivity and skill to the unpredictable movements of the 13 mobile 
plates that Calder suspended from his conductor-sculpture.

As Richard Bernas 
<http://www.sas.ac.uk/about-us/news/institute-musical-research-fellow-richard-bernas-presents-bbc-radio-3-programme-john-c>
, the Tate’s music consultant, explained,Brown’s open-form musical aesthetic 
<http://www.chelseaspace.org/archive/december1952-pr.html> was catalysed by his 
encounter with Calder’s mobiles in the early 1950s. Brown’s works define areas 
of musical material, but it’s up to the performer to determine precisely when 
and in what combination these musical “mobiles” are played, meaning that every 
performance of a work such asNovember 1952 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nII-RKNjL0g>, which the four percussionists 
also played in the Turbine Hall, will be an unrepeatable one-off.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fperforming-sculpture-alexander-calder-earle-brown-tate-modern%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F13%2F1447416579853%2F26334b3c-8db2-45d0-90bd-512ece0140f5-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Performing%20sculpture%3A%20Calder's%20mobile%20comes%20in%20for%20a%20hammering&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fperforming-sculpture-alexander-calder-earle-brown-tate-modern%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Performing%20sculpture%3A%20Calder%27s%20mobile%20comes%20in%20for%20a%20hammering&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fperforming-sculpture-alexander-calder-earle-brown-tate-modern%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F13%2F1447416579853%2F26334b3c-8db2-45d0-90bd-512ece0140f5-680x1020.jpeg>
 Beat out that rhythm on a … mobile, in this case Calder’s Chef d’orchestre, 
Turbine Hall, Tate Modern, London. Photograph: Tom Service 
In Calder Piece, which was first performed in Paris in 1967, Brown’s material 
creates a lexicon of notational possibility that the players must interpret. 
Performers have to project an image of where they see the plates in their orbit 
on to the notes in front of them, so that the collections of pitches they play 
correspond to the position of the mobile’s surfaces. “The music must never be 
independent of [this] particular mobile,” Brown wrote. What’s more, they must 
perform everything from relatively precise rhythms and pitches to sonic 
interpretations of the shapes and swirls of Brown’s graphic symbols.

Most importantly of all, they play on the sculpture itself, so that it’s their 
musical striking of the plates that gives Chef d’orchestre its movement. Brown 
remembers how the audience reacted when the mobile was hit during the first 
performance: “The sounds of breath-holding could be heard in the audience when 
the musicians first approached and played the mobile. One of Calder’s slightly 
disappointed comments after that performance was: ‘I thought you were going to 
hit it much harder – with hammers.’”

There are a few scratches on the sculpture – which has been in private hands 
in the US for the last three decades – but these were not caused, alas, by 
percussionists’ hammers, and certainly not by the gentle, wool-headed beaters 
used by the musicians to create their mobile tintinnabuli in the Turbine Hall.

The sections when all four musicians were walking around the sculpture, 
turning Calder’s artwork into sound and motion, had a vivid, ritualistic power, 
before they returned to their percussion-stations to respond to the slow dance 
of the sculpture through the sounds they made.

The Tate’s exhibition is called Performing Sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/09/alexander-calder-performing-sculpture-tate-modern-london-review-art>
; arguably, that’s made most tangible through these fascinating performances. 
Experience Calder Piece live if you can, but don’t worry if you’re not there in 
person: the Tate has filmed the performances, and a video will be up onits 
website 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/search?f[]=im_vid_45:1762&f[]=im_vid_47:1863>
in due course.

 * At Tate Modern 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/performance-and-music/earle-browns-calder-piece-and-alexander-calders-chef>
, London, 15 November. Box office: 020-7887 8888.  