
Stories about the declining bee population and its effects on the environment 
trickle through the news cycle nearly every day. To keep track of the latest 
bee news and make sense of the issues,we're highlighting the major bee stories 
each week, with analysis from the Guardian's Alison Benjamin, co-author of A 
World Without Bees 
<http://www.amazon.com/World-Without-Bees-Allison-Benjamin/dp/B006CDGQKW>, Bees 
in the City: The Urban Beekeepers' Handbook 
<http://www.amazon.com/Bees-City-Urban-Beekeepers-Handbook/dp/0852652313> and 
Keeping Bees and Making Honey 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Keeping-Bees-Making-Honey-2nd/dp/1446303551/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1375193993&sr=1-2>
.

New pesticide labels will better protect bees and other pollinators 
<http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/d0cf6618525a9efb85257359003fb69d/c186766df22b37d485257bc8005b0e64!OpenDocument>

What happened: The US Environmental Protection Agency has created new 
pesticide labels that prohibit the use of certain pesticides in areas where 
bees are present. Some of these pesticides are the widely used neonicotinoids 
thatsome <http://citybugs.tamu.edu/factsheets/ipm/what-is-a-neonicotinoid/> 
scientists <> have linked to mass bee die-offs.

Key quote:

Multiple factors play a role in bee colony declines, including pesticides. The 
Environmental Protection Agency is taking action to protect bees from pesticide 
exposure and these label changes will further our efforts," said Jim Jones, 
assistant administrator for the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution 
Prevention.

Why it matters: Neonics have been implicated in bee deaths world wide. The EPA 
is right to make the labelling clear that these bee toxic chemicals shouldn't 
be applied when plants are flowering and being visited by foraging bees. This 
may prevent thousands of bees being killed by a spray or drifting dust, as 
happened in the large scale bee poisoning inGermany's Rhine valley in 2008.  
<http://www.bee-doc.eu/general_info.php>

However, the systemic nature of neonics means that they are often applied to 
the seed of the plant and as the plant grows the pesticide is distributed 
through the stem, leaves and flowers – getting into the pollen and nectar, even 
water droplets secreted by some plants, which is then collected by the bees. So 
these new labels will not prevent neonics getting into the bees' dinner. These 
tiny amounts ingested won't kill the bees outright but they have been shown to 
weaken the bees' immune system and make them more susceptible to viruses and 
diseases and toimpact on their ability to find their way home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/29/crop-pesticides-honeybee-decline>
.

The EPA needs to enforce much more rigorous tests on neonic manufacturers to 
ensure these insect neurotoxins are safer for bee colonies before they grant a 
license for their use.

Your garden may be a pesticide-tainted death-trap for bees 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fqz.com%2F115135%2Fyour-garden-may-be-a-pesticide-tainted-death-trap-for-bees%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHJQT9TemyOagsQualkrO2NpC9QpA>

What happened: A first-of-its-kind study shows that some "bee-friendly" plants 
purchased in the US are contaminated with neonicotinoids. Researches found that 
54% of flowers and vegetable plants sold at large home and garden stores 
contained neonicotinoids, sometimes at concentrations 220 times higher than the 
amount used on agricultural crops.

The scientists analyzed the plant's stems, leaves and flowers – but not pollen 
– so it is unclear how much of the pesticide bees may ingest.

These plants were likely contaminated because either the seeds were 
pre-treated with neonicotinoids or because the pesticide is present in the 
plant's potting soil.

Key quote:

Gardeners may be unwittingly purchasing toxic seedlings and plants attractive 
to pollinators for bee-friendly gardens, only to poison them in the process," 
said the report from the Pesticide Research Institute and the environmental 
group Friends of the Earth. "Unfortunately, pollinator friendly nursery plants 
sold to unsuspecting consumers carry neither a list of pesticides used, nor do 
they carry a warning that these pesticides could harm pollinators.

Why it matters: A major way to help bees is to buy bee-friendly plants from a 
garden centre and transform your back yard into a buzzing paradise. So this 
research from the US is disturbing if those plants are doing more harm then 
good. Customers of the big garden retailers such as Home Depot and Lowe must 
boycott them and campaign to stop the practices of coating seeds with neonics 
and adding it to potting soil.

In the UK and Europe, customers should ask before they buy. Earlier this year, 
after UK campaign groups and customers raised concerns about weed killers sold 
by garden centres containing neonics,B&Q and Homebase, the largest retailers, 
removed a lawn grub killer from their shelves 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/gardening/9835181/BandQ-Homebase-and-Wickes-remove-bug-killers-blamed-for-decline-of-bees.html>
.

But what about their plants – are they treated with neonics? Unless we can be 
100% certain, we should only buy from organic suppliers.

'Food prices to rise' after honey bee deaths 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/environment/food-prices-to-rise-after-honey-bee-deaths-1-3044251>

What happened: More than a third of managed honey bee colonies were destroyed 
in Scotland last winter, twice the amount lost the previous year, according to 
research by the University of Strathclyde.

The smaller bee population poses a serious threat to agricultural yields 
because plants rely on pollination. A limited food supply would also cause a 
rise in food prices.

Researchers said the losses were caused by extreme weather conditions, but the 
use of pesticides also played a role in the destruction. The Scottish 
government announced a £200,000 fund earlier this year to help bee farmers 
restock and rebuild colonies.

Key quote: 

Honey bees worldwide are having to contend with habitat loss and reduction in 
variety of forage sources due to pressures of intensifying land use, increasing 
spread of new and old pests – caused by globalisation of trade in bees and bee 
products – as well as possible adverse effects of agricultural pesticides," 
said Dr Alison Gray, co-author of the study. "For bees in northern Europe, poor 
weather conditions – combined with these other factors – are certainly making 
beekeeping a challenge and survival difficult for honey bees generally.

Why it matters:  Bees' pollination services increase the yield of many 
commercial crops – some by up to three times. Without this pollination there 
will be less food, and scarcity leads to price rises. Other pollinators could 
do the job, but they are threatened by bad weather, habit and forage loss, and 
honeybee hives are easily transported from orchards to fields. So, you'd think 
it would be in government's interests to look after bees.

In England and Wales, a similar level of bee mortality was recorded as in 
Scotland and for the same reasons, but here no fund was available to help bee 
farmers buy new bees to restock their apiaries. The bee farmers had to use 
savings or take out bank loans to rebuild their colonies. Insect pollination 
(of which much is by honeybees) has been valued at£400m per annum to the UK 
economy and €153 bn per annum globally (pdf) 
<http://centaur.reading.ac.uk/25072/2/Insect_pollination_in_UK_agriculture_Final.pdf>
.

National Honey Bee Day <http://www.nationalhoneybeeday.com/>

What happened:
Campaigners in the US and Canada named this past Saturday national honey bee 
day to raise awareness on the plight of honey bees in local communities.Cities 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.courierpress.com%2Fnews%2F2013%2Faug%2F17%2Fno-headline---gl__national_bee_day%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEjLLt-q7Jh-XHm5LVEWOChBuc2VQ>
across 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fthegardenisland.com%2Fnews%2Flocal%2Fkauai-celebrates-national-honey-bee-day%2Farticle_5d72482a-06e6-11e3-843a-0019bb2963f4.html&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGhuH4pxxfuqWaEvEdBU2qMz9CMhA>
 the country celebrated with festivals to educate people on ways to protect the 
bee population and on beekeeping.

Key quote:

Their whole ecosystem is crashing," Lisa Arkin, director of environmental 
group Beyond Toxic,told Oregon's KVAL news channel 
<http://www.kval.com/news/local/If-bees-werent-pollinating-we-wouldnt-have-half-of-this-produce-220063391.html>
. "Without bees we would lose a third of the food that comes to our tables 
every day.

Why it matters:  Raising awareness about the importance of honeybees and other 
bees and pollinators to our ecosystem and our diet is vital in the fight to 
help them. So a national honey bee day in the US and Canada is important. 
Hopefully it will lead to a new generation growing up much more knowledgeable 
about the benefits of insects and why we need to live in harmony with them.

• The picture on this article was changed on 22 August 2013. Originally, a 
picture of a bumble bee was chosen to illustrate this article about honey bees. 
This has now been corrected.
 