
The veteran golf commentator Peter Alliss has suggested that women who want to 
play at Muirfield should marry a member.

BBC apologises for sexist remark by commentator Peter Alliss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/21/bbc-apologise-peter-alliss-open-sexist>
The 85-year-old former Ryder Cup player was reacting to a vote on accepting 
women into the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/muirfield-golf-club-votes-to-continue-excluding-women>
, that narrowly failed to achieve the two-thirds majority required to bring 
about change. Muirfield has staged the Open Championship 16 times, most 
recently in 2013, but it has been taken off the Open rota as a result of women 
being denied permission to join.

Alliss, one of the most distinctive voices in golf, told BBC Radio 5 Live 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03vmxk0>: “The women who are there as wives 
of husbands, they get all the facilities. If somebody wants to join, well you’d 
better get married to somebody who’s a member.

“I believe clubs were formed years ago by people of like spirit: doctors, 
lawyers, accountants, bakers, butchers, whatever they like. And they joined in 
like spirit to talk amongst them and to do whatever. I want to join the WVS 
[Women’s Voluntary Service] but unless I have a few bits and pieces nipped away 
on my body I’m not going to be able to get in.”

Alliss said: “It’s a very emotive subject. I don’t think all the true facts 
have come out. I was at the Open Championship two or three years ago and I used 
to go in for a coffee every morning. There’s a very nice drawing room in the 
clubhouse at Muirfield and it was full of ladies who were all chatting - 
‘Hello, Peter how are you doing?’ - and me in my usual, jocular, quiet way 
suggested, ‘What great times are coming, you’ll be able to join the club’.

Muirfield members’ letter on ballot to admit women embarrasses golf | Ewan 
Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/18/muirfield-members-ballot-admit-women-golf>
“And there was a look of horror on the faces of the ladies, ladies whose 
husbands were members, and I was met with ‘Good Lord, no we don’t want to be 
members. If we joined, our husbands would have to pay thousands of pounds for 
our entry fee and our subscriptions. We can come and play and do pretty much 
what we wish for nothing’.”

Alliss suggested a single woman might have to wait eight to 10 years in a 
queue for membership, were they allowed to join, and face paying thousands of 
pounds for “maybe 20 games of golf a year”.

In July last year, the BBC was forced to apologise after Alliss made a sexist 
comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/21/bbc-apologise-peter-alliss-open-sexist>
 about the golfer Zach Johnson’s wife, Kim Barclay. While commentating on 
Johnson’s putt as he aimed to secure victory in The Open, Alliss said: “She is 
probably thinking – ‘if this goes in I get a new kitchen’.” He faced further 
criticism in April after saying that attempts to give women equal rights in golf
have “caused mayhem”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/07/peter-alliss-women-equality-golf-clubs-open-championship>
 