
A petition asking the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, to call in the media 
regulator, Ofcom, to investigate Fox’s £11.7bn takeover of Sky is on track to 
collect 100,000 signatures in less than two days.

On Thursday, Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox tabled a formal bid to buy the 
61% of Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-pay-tv>
 it does not already own. After the announcement a petition was posted on the 
campaigning website 38 Degrees, titledStop Murdoch taking over Sky 
<https://speakout.38degrees.org.uk/campaigns/1705>, which has rapidly clocked 
up almost 45,000 supporters.


From films to Fox News: Rupert Murdoch's far-reaching media empire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/10/from-films-to-fox-news-rupert-murdochs-far-reaching-media-empire>
Lorna Greenwood, a campaigns manager at 38 Degrees, said the pace of 
signatories adding their support meant it would most likely pass the 100,000 
mark by the end of Friday.


The petition calls on Bradley to refer the takeover to Ofcom on the grounds of 
potential media plurality issues. Bradley has 10 working days to decide whether 
the deal raises public interest issues, namely whether it potentially gives 
Murdoch too much influence and control over the UK news industry.

The deal would bring Sky, which owns Sky News, fully under the control of 21st 
Century Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox>, which owns 
Fox News and the 20th Century Fox film studio. Murdoch also controls the Times, 
the Sunday Times, the Sun and the news and sport station TalkSport through the 
separate News Corp company.


“The fact that 37,000 people signed this petition in just 24 hours proves that 
there is a huge amount of public opposition to this deal,” Greenwood said. 
“Karen Bradley now needs to show she’s doing everything to ensure that the deal 
is properly scrutinised and refer it to Ofcom.”


Campaigning group Avaaz has also launched a petition 
<https://secure.avaaz.org/campaign/en/uk_media_regulation_loc_/> calling for 
Ofcom to launch a “fit and proper” person investigation, given the historical 
issues of phone hacking, and lobbying Bradley to refer the deal to the media 
regulator.

It has so far drawn almost 40,000 supporters and Avaaz says that 7,000 
messages have been sent directly to Bradley and the prime minister, Theresa May.

Another campaign group, Hacked Off, also launched a petition 
<http://hackinginquiry.takeaction.org.uk/petition/murdochbids4sky> on Thursday 
calling for Bradley to refer the deal to regulators.


There were also 38 Degrees petitions in 2011, when Murdoch abandoned an 
earlier bid to take full control of Sky due to the fallout from the 
phone-hacking scandal. The first, whichcalled on Ofcom to block the deal 
<https://home.38degrees.org.uk/2011/07/08/the-campaign-to-stop-murdochs-bskyb-powergrab-continues/>
, attracted 60,000 signatures. Ofcom did not block the deal but did rule that 
there were media plurality issues, which resulted in Murdoch offering to spin 
Sky News off as a separate company. Then 38 Degrees launched a second emergency 
petition asking for a referral to the UK competition regulator, which drew 
70,000 signatures.
 