
Tim Finchem, the outgoing head of the PGA Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour>, believes golf’s showing at the 
Olympics will be sufficient to see the sport retained in the Games for the 
“long term”.

A wave of bad publicity, instigated in part by the refusal of a number of 
high‑profile players to appear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/13/justin-rose-disappointed-top-golfers-not-at-olympics-in-rio-video>
 in Rio, preceded golf’s Olympic return after a 112‑year absence. With the 
sport factored in only for the Games of 2016 and 2020, there has been a 
widespread view that it could be dropped from the schedule.

Jordan Spieth prioritises Ryder Cup victory over a second FedEx Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/jordan-spieth-ryder-cup-fedex-cup-10m>
Yet Finchem, who was a key part of the lobby for golf’s inclusion, insisted on 
Tuesday that such fears are unfounded. “The question mark was having some 
players that didn’t want to play,” Finchem said. “But I think that, based on 
the reaction of some of those players afterwards having not gone, and learning 
about the difference between negative commentary ahead of an Olympics and 
reality which you see before every Olympics – nothing’s going to be ready, 
everything’s going to fall down, the venues can’t work etc – it’s a lesson for 
us in golf.

“I had an interesting conversation with Thomas Bach, the president of the IOC 
over there. He came to our venue on Sunday, he spent an hour and a half to two 
hours around the property. He was blown away. I think we were the only sport 
that was sold out. He was blown away by the galleries.

“Without me having to explain the situation to him, he explained to me why at 
the outset of our entry to the Olympics we had some hesitation. He said: ‘We’ve 
seen it in a few other sports.’

“Now they [the players who didn’t attend] understand the power of being an 
Olympian, of being able to compete on this stage, of being able to interface 
with these wonderful athletes from all over the globe. Just ask the players who 
did go. It was a game-changer in their minds.”

A decision on golf’s future is expected before the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo. “We 
can expect mammoth galleries in Japan,” Finchem said. “We played the World Cup 
there in 2001, and if you just look at the footage, thousands and thousands and 
thousands of people came out. So it’s going to be a big event in Japan and I 
think golf is there for the long term. I think we’re going to be fine in the 
fabric of golf.

Justin Rose wins gold in Olympic golf for Great Britain at Rio 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/justin-rose-olympic-games-golf-gold-medal-great-britain-rio-2016>
“We may want to do some tweaking in the format. It would be nice to have some 
more medals, in my view, but that will be something that the team will work on 
going forward.”

Finchem, who is to step down from his post this winter after more than 20 
years in office, also revisited the issue of a global golf tour. “I still 
maintain that over time golf will come together,” he said. “It’s so obvious, 
the benefits it would generate from players and fans and media partners and 
sponsors. I think it will happen.”
 