
They are leading experts in the field of heir hunting, unearthing surprise 
legacies from distant relatives. But their bitter rivalry in business and on 
television has rocked the normally genteel world of genealogy.

Philip Turvey’s company has helped trace the ancestral lines of Sebastian Coe, 
Minnie Driver and Sheridan Smith for the family history programmeWho Do You 
Think You Are? <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b013yx6f>, while Daniel Curran 
is a regular on another BBC show, daytime seriesHeir Hunters 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007nms5>.

In a high-profile legal fight between the two probate detectives, Turvey has 
won a settlement for defamation.

Curran will pay Turvey’s costs and make a donation to charity in lieu of 
damages in a settlement announced on Wednesday. He has also apologised for a 
cloak-and-dagger social media campaign which directed prospective customers to 
a petition that wrongly accused Turvey of fraud, burglary, harassment and 
witness intimidation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Frival-tv-genealogists-clash-in-high-court-defamation-wrangle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea3b95545083058344bfda792e336cc9a41cdb59%2F0_0_3072_3838%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Turvey%20wins%20defamation%20settlement%20against%20Daniel%20Curran%20of%20Heir%20Hunters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Frival-tv-genealogists-clash-in-high-court-defamation-wrangle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Turvey%20wins%20defamation%20settlement%20against%20Daniel%20Curran%20of%20Heir%20Hunters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Frival-tv-genealogists-clash-in-high-court-defamation-wrangle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea3b95545083058344bfda792e336cc9a41cdb59%2F0_0_3072_3838%2F3072.jpg>
 Daniel Curran is a regular on BBC show Heir Hunters. Photograph: 
ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
The two men are well known in their field, which can be fiercely competitive. 
There are small fortunes to be made from heir hunting. In exchange for helping 
connect people with their unexpected legacies, probate detectives charge a 
commission: typically 10% but can be as high as 40%.

The names of individuals who die intestate 
<https://www.gov.uk/inherits-someone-dies-without-will> (with their estates 
unclaimed) are published every Thursday by the Treasury solicitor, on a list 
known asBona vacantia 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/bona-vacantia>, (ownerless goods). 
Rival companies race to sign up new customers and the competition for business 
can lead to sharp practices.

Curran has been exposed for taking matters too far. In a humiliating 
climbdown, the TV expert admitted that he used false names and accounts on 
social media to make defamatory claims about the Turveys.

He is a regular on Heir Hunters, which recently completed a 20-episode series 
on BBC1. After leaving school at 16, he started his business in 1997 and 
operates from offices in Silicon Roundabout, London’s technology hub.

The trouble began in July 2014 with a series of anonymous tweets against 
Philip Turvey and his father, Peter, , who foundedAnglia Research 
<http://www.angliaresearch.co.uk/articles/behind-the-scenes-at-wdytya/> and 
still works for the business. The tweets referred to them as “Purvey”. After a 
legal battle for disclosure it was revealed the accounts had been created by an 
employee of Curran’s firm.

In November 2014, the claimants saw a petition published on Change.org by a 
squatter they had evicted from a property in Charlton. As well as tracing 
heirs, Anglia provides administration services to help individuals claim the 
assets in an estate.

The petition accused Phillip of stealing the home of the man, named only as 
Dave from Charlton. It claimed he had broken into Dave’s home and relayed how 
Dave had sprayed him with a red dye he described as “criminal identifier spray”.

Though he was not involved in creating the petition, Curran has now admitted 
to actively circulating it. In November the link was sent to 37 freelance field 
agents who worked as heir hunters. That month someone using the name John 
Davies and claiming to be from Turvey’s hometown of Ipswich published two 
defamatory about him comments under the petition.

Legal disclosures revealed that the creator of the John Davies account was, in 
fact, Curran.

In December 2014, the claimants said Curran again posed as a member of the 
public, this time with a notional claim to an estate. He posted a link to the 
petition on the consumer protection website Which?, where it appeared under an 
article headlined: Are heir hunters cheating us out of our inheritance?.

By circulating the petition, Turvey argued Curran was in effect endorsing it. 
He was being wrongly accused of having “conspired with a police sergeant who 
had sinister criminal connections to steal the property of a vulnerable adult, 
commit a series of serious criminal offences including conspiracy to pervert 
the course of justice, fraud, burglary, harassment, witness intimidation and 
offences under terrorism legislation”.

The petition was eventually removed from Change.org. But a trawl through 
Curran’s emails, ordered by the courts, found the boss had sent a pdf version 
to his employees with the instruction: “for use whenever it may be appropriate”.

In July 2015, Turvey’s solicitors wrote to Curran warning of legal action. One 
month later, Anglia sued for damages.

The two firms have clashed in court before. In 2013, Finders won a county 
court claim against Anglia, for £5,000 including costs.


The pair have now released a joint statement, which says: “Finders and Daniel 
Curran have apologised unreservedly to Philip Turvey for what happened, for the 
distress these incidents will have caused him, and for the harm that has been 
caused to his reputation as a result of the publications.”


● This article was amended on Wednesday 19 October. The article originally 
stated that the dispute had been settled after a high court case, when it never 
reached trial and was settled out of court. It was also amended to make it 
clear that Curran did not directly accuse Turvey of the allegations made in the 
petition.

 