
Philippe Parreno’s interest is in blurring the recognisable boundaries that 
distinguish fiction from documentary, film from other forms of artistic 
expression, and real time from the cinematic illusion of how time passes.

In the retrospective of the French multidisciplinary artist’s films, 
Thenabouts, showing now at the Australian Centre for Moving Image inMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>, the structure of the 
experience itself illustrates his exploration of deliberate uncertainties. 
Thenabouts offers Parreno’s 30 short films in Acmi’s vast underground chamber 
like a visual art installation, the screen rising from a carpet that has no 
fixed seating but floating balloons shaped like fish. Lights go on and off, 
surround sound swallows the moments of darkness, and the projectionist and 
their equipment are lit in a glass box, fixed and visible in the centre of the 
room.

Opening Hearts unwraps offshore detention: 'it's about letting yourself feel 
something'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/07/opening-hearts-unwraps-offshore-detention-its-about-letting-yourself-feel-something>
 It’s a nod to the theatrical values brought to the presentation; in another 
destabilisation of expected boundaries, the projectionist is the protagonist of 
Thenabouts’ action – empowered to choose, repeat, deselect, reorder or quit the 
films according to their mood or taste.

 The stage curtains serve a theatrical function as they play with or against 
the films, and more still comes from the exhibition attendants, who appear in 
shadows behind the screen, or talk through microphones, or approach members of 
the audience to chat about the films, the work, the artist. In my case, a woman 
appeared from the shadows to show me a portfolio of Parreno’s preliminary 
sketches, composed by hand from ink and wax, for a short piece of animation.

 It’s perhaps because the rituals of cinema viewing are thwarted and rewritten 
that the challenges posed by the films themselves receive appropriate 
amplification. After watching Parreno resurrect Marilyn Monroe (in an empty 
hotel room where machines replicate her handwriting and recordings describe the 
furniture of her last days), a boy wandering with demons through the streets of 
New York’s Chinatown, and a large-eyed storyteller in a crown repeating a 
circular fairytale into a decaying VHS tape, it’s a short called The Crowd that 
provokes in me both fear and realisation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fphilippe-parreno-to-apply-art-to-political-resistance-is-always-a-bit-complicated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1af44757b9ab02eee6b4bef2e65958358ab294a9%2F0_0_1417_670%2F1417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philippe%20Parreno%3A%20'To%20apply%20art%20to%20political%20resistance%20is%20always%20a%20bit%20complicated'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fphilippe-parreno-to-apply-art-to-political-resistance-is-always-a-bit-complicated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philippe%20Parreno%3A%20%27To%20apply%20art%20to%20political%20resistance%20is%20always%20a%20bit%20complicated%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fphilippe-parreno-to-apply-art-to-political-resistance-is-always-a-bit-complicated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1af44757b9ab02eee6b4bef2e65958358ab294a9%2F0_0_1417_670%2F1417.jpg>
 A still from Philippe Parreno’s 2015 film The Crowd. Photograph: © Philippe 
Parreno. Courtesy Pilar Corrias, Barbara Gladstone, Esther Schipper 
 For The Crowd, Parreno had volunteers hypnotised to move by following cues 
from lighting effects and recorded music. In the film of the event, the 
dead-eyed participants waltz and circulate in and out of shadows to tunes that 
emanate from a piano that no one is playing.

 I realise this is the perfect metaphor for the Trump political moment, and it 
is terrifying.

 I mention this to Parreno when we meet, and it becomes clear the political is 
certainly on his mind. He’s just learned ofMatteo Renzi’s resignation in Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/matteo-renzi-to-resubmit-resignation-as-italys-prime-minister>
, and is concerned by the “the fascists in the north, parading at the win”. As 
an artist with a background informed by Situationist ideas of event, spectacle 
and connectivity, Thenabouts has given him opportunity to reflect on his 
antecedents, his practice and the context of now.

 Of his early work, he describes going out “with kids, going out to 
demonstrations, explaining what it could mean to be together under the same 
slogan and demanding the same attention”. For him, however, the artistic idea 
that “we could all be a part of the same image” on the screen became less 
interesting; he started working with directors of photography and using the 
camera to explore details of individual drama.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fphilippe-parreno-to-apply-art-to-political-resistance-is-always-a-bit-complicated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff985ebbe158d6ec2cd5903b2a66e31e32b9f71ca%2F649_192_3671_2998%2F3671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philippe%20Parreno%3A%20'To%20apply%20art%20to%20political%20resistance%20is%20always%20a%20bit%20complicated'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fphilippe-parreno-to-apply-art-to-political-resistance-is-always-a-bit-complicated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philippe%20Parreno%3A%20%27To%20apply%20art%20to%20political%20resistance%20is%20always%20a%20bit%20complicated%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fphilippe-parreno-to-apply-art-to-political-resistance-is-always-a-bit-complicated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff985ebbe158d6ec2cd5903b2a66e31e32b9f71ca%2F649_192_3671_2998%2F3671.jpg>
 Philippe Perrano thwarts and rewrites the rituals of cinema. Photograph: 
Charlie Kinross 
 Although his work has had the prestige of selection for the Tate Modern’s 
Turbine Hall, his most famous piece is no doubt his feature filmZidane: A 21st 
Century Portrait <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/sep/29/documentary>, 
which focused solely on French soccer star Zinedine Zidane as he plays a game 
of football.

 Film is, of course, no less political for a refusal to engage in explicit 
political terms. For Parreno, the Zidane film was a provocation for audiences 
to: “Look in the face of an Arabic eye. Apart from the fact I’m in love with 
him, I wanted people to look him in the face for an hour and see a man from 
Algeria who is not white, but who everyone worships.”

 He explains: “I think the problem of art is form, and [form] is a complicated 
thing to do. Form is not an object, it is a moment of attention – to apply art 
to political resistance is always a bit complicated, but there are ways to do 
it.”

 I confess that it’s the suggestive, metaphoric nature of The Crowd that has 
perturbed me. He suggests it’s because his subjects are a canvas of projected 
fears.

 “You don’t know to what they’re exposed but they’re exposed to something,” he 
says. “Fear you produce with your own anxiety – they are suspended within 
potentialities, but as a viewer you feel that potential with your own anxiety. 
They are facing your own demons.”

Ten years of feel-good modernism: Brisbane's Goma still raises the bar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/05/ten-years-of-feel-good-modernism-brisbanes-goma-still-raises-the-bar>
 It’s an explanation, perhaps, of Trump’s following, the Le Pen-type 
nationalism that seeks to “turn Europe into a cultural theme park”, the Brexit 
vision of a homogenous Britain that Parreno finds “not interesting”.

 It’s a challenging time for art as well as politics, we both admit. “But it’s 
good to be at war again, perhaps?” says Parreno, as I’m leaving, with a smile.

• Philippe Parreno: Thenabouts 
<https://www.acmi.net.au/exhibitions/philippe-parreno-thenabouts/> is showing 
at Acmi until 13 March
 