
Phyllis Schlafly, the 92-year-old founder of the Eagle Forum who died on 
Monday evening, is best known for her grassroots movement that prevented 
ratification of the equal rights amendment in the 1970s. But conservative women 
say that it would be a mistake to think of her as solely involved or interested 
in countering the feminist agenda.

They credit her reach as spreading far beyond that, to empowering women in the 
conservative movement, many of whom now lead their own national women’s groups 
whose areas of focus have broadened to include “free markets”, “personal 
liberty”, and “family values”.

“It wasn’t a women’s-only cause that she led,” explained Lil Tuttle, the 
policy director at the conservative Claire Booth Luce Policy Institute. “It was 
a conservative cause.”

Phyllis Schlafly won some battles, but she lost the war | Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/phyllis-schlafly-era-issues-feminism-working-women-lgbt>
“She encouraged us to speak out and speak boldly,” Tuttle added. “She was a 
uniter in a lot of ways.”


Tuttle’s organization works to “prepare young women for conservative 
leadership” and promote conservative leaders. Its board members include Donald 
Trump’s campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, and Marji Ross, the president of 
the conservative Regnery publishing house. Its speakers bureau includes Bay 
Buchanan, the sister of conservative presidential candidate Pat Buchanan who, 
with Schlafly,forced 
<http://www.alternet.org/election-2016/phyllis-schlafly-dies> the Republican 
party’s anti-abortion platform to eliminate all references to exceptions in 
1996; and Lila Rose, the founder of Live Action who, with conservative 
filmmaker James O’Keefe, participated in a series of stings against Planned 
Parenthood clinics.

“Perhaps it is part of her legacy that conservative women found their voice,” 
mused Tuttle. “She certainly promoted activism.”

Schlafly got her start in politics writing about and campaigning for 
conservative candidate Barry Goldwater in 1964 because ofher interest 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/06/obituaries/phyllis-schlafly-conservative-leader-and-foe-of-era-dies-at-92.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=photo-spot-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&_r=1>
 in opposing communism, and gained renown when she turned a grassroots movement 
of conservative women – many of whom were stay-at-home mothers with little 
prior political activism – into a force that could not only credibly counter 
but defeat the ratification of the equal rights amendment.

Phyllis Schlafly obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/06/phyllis-schlafly-obituary> 
The ERA, which at one point had been part of both the Republican and 
Democratic party platforms and the culmination of decades of work by women’s 
rights campaigners, was just three states shy of ratification when Schlafly 
began her campaign against it in 1972. Galvanized by the US supreme court’s 
1973 decision legalizing abortion in Roe v Wade, Schlafly and her volunteers 
began knocking on doors and delivering homemade baked goods to state 
legislators, claiming that a 54-word amendment to the US constitution 
guaranteeing women equal rights would force women out of the home and into the 
workplace, add them to the ranks of military draftees and combat veterans, 
institute universal unisex bathrooms and force everyone to perform same-sex 
marriages, among other then terrifying visions of the future.

Schlafly won, defeating the ERA, but lived to see the US supreme court 
legalize same-sex marriage, the US military accept women in combat roles, 
Congresspoised  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/15/us/politics/congress-women-military-draft.html>
to require women to register for the selective service, and even the issue of 
same-sex bathrooms – the subject ofher last published column 
<http://www.eagleforum.org/publications/column/setback-for-the-transgender-agenda.html#.V8cvZgZFvp8.twitter>
 – come to the fore. Nearly 60% of adult women nowwork outside the home 
<https://www.dol.gov/wb/factsheets/qf-laborforce-10.htm>, comprising 47% of the 
overall US workforce, and equal pay remains the top issue for working women,
Americans tell pollsters 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/178373/americans-say-equal-pay-top-issue-working-women.aspx>
.

And though by the time Schlafly gained political prominence there were 
individual Republican women who had been elected to national office, her 
anti-ERA efforts led to the founding of the Eagle Forum in 1975, an influential 
conservative organization with active state chapters often led by women.

Cathie Adams, who has served on the national board for several years and was 
the president of the Texas chapter of the Eagle Forum, said that Schlafly 
“would look across America and lift us up into leadership roles”.

“It was a wonderful place to go learn, and Phyllis Schlafly was a wonderful 
mentor,” she added, noting that Schlafly and the Eagle Forum taught generations 
of women how to lobby and advocate for conservative causes at the state level.

But Adams, Schlafly’s daughter, and several other board members are now 
embroiled intwo 
<http://themissouritimes.com/33168/release-eagle-forum-board-members-file-new-lawsuit-preserve-integrity-legacy-phyllis-schlafly/>
lawsuits 
<http://www.stltoday.com/news/local/govt-and-politics/schlafly-s-eagle-forum-board-sues-to-remove-ed-martin/article_6fb3925b-1ffd-52aa-b625-d921e0d986ec.html>
 with the president of the organization over the Eagle Forum’s future and their 
continuing presence on the board.

Adams doesn’t plan to stop her work with the organization. “I’m still a member 
of the national board for which I’m most grateful,” she wrote in a statement. 
“It’s a position appointed by Phyllis Schlafly to continue her legacy into the 
future.”


Charlotte Hays, who serves as the cultural director of the 
conservative-leaning Independent Women’s Forum, acknowledged with an 
appreciative laugh that Schlafly “drove the feminists crazy”.

But she agreed that Schlafly pioneered conservative women’s activism on more 
than just women’s issues. “She was involved in every movement of the Reagan 
years”, and not just opposing the issues championed by feminists.

“She was just absolutely indomitable, absolutely essential,” said Hays.

The Independent Women’s Forum focuses on the issues of “free markets and 
personal liberty” and counted Trump campaign manager Conway among its board 
members until she recently took a leave of absence, and Lynne Cheney, the wife 
of the former vice-president, among its board directors emeritae.

In an interview with NPR 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/09/06/492775661/phyllis-schlafly-who-opposed-equal-rights-amendment-dies-at-92>
, Penny Young Nance, the president and CEO of Concerned Women for America, 
credited Schlafly with her own organization’s success.

“I stand today on her shoulders in that I have a national platform to speak 
about the life issue and conservative issues,” she said.

The CWA considers itself one of the frontline organizations in America’s 
ongoing culture war, promising to “bring Biblical principles into all levels of 
public policy” by focusing on issues of “the family, the sanctity of human 
life, religious liberty, education, sexual exploitation, national sovereignty, 
and support for Israel”.

 * This article was amended on 8 September 2016 to clarify that there is a 
continuing dispute over who will remain on Eagle Forum’s board.  