
Phyllis Schlafly believed feminism was a losing battle. The conservative icon, 
whodied on Monday aged 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/06/phyllis-schlafly-outspoken-rightwing-activist-has-died-aged-92>
, insisted that the movement for gender equality was “a fight with human nature 
<http://www.npr.org/2014/07/21/333582322/phyllis-schlafly-explains-why-feminism-has-made-women-unhappy>
”, and therefore doomed to fail. Women belonged in the home, she believed, men 
belonged in the workforce and women didn’t need any more rights than the ones 
they were already afforded.

But despite Schlafly’s predictions and beliefs, the world she left behind this 
week is one that largely embraces the issues she most feared.Feminism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> is more popular than ever, women 
are in the workforce en masse, LGBT rights are front and center and the country 
is mostly pro-choice.

It turns out “human nature” is more attached to social progress than it is the 
idea that women belong in the kitchen. And with Schlafly’s death, we’re 
witnessing the end of a particular brand of conservative antifeminism that 
simply can’t survive in a country that has moved well beyond its values.

Phyllis Schlafly, outspoken rightwing activist, has died aged 92
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/06/phyllis-schlafly-outspoken-rightwing-activist-has-died-aged-92>
Schlafly spent decades painting feminism as a war against men and traditional 
gender roles. She also insisted that “virtuous women 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/phyllis-schlafly-a-conservative-activist-has-died-at-age-92/2016/09/05/513420e2-73bc-11e6-be4f-3f42f2e5a49e_story.html>
” aren’t sexually harassed and that there was no such thing as marital rape.
During a talk to students at Bates College 
<http://www.rightwingwatch.org/content/schlafly-reiterates-view-married-women-cannot-be-raped-husbands>
, she said: “By getting married, the woman has consented to sex, and I don’t 
think you can call it rape.” She said this in 2007, by the way, not 1967.

To conservatives, she was a breath of fresh feminine air – proof that women 
didn’t really want equality after all. To feminists, she was the worst kind of 
hypocrite, a person who claimed women’s place was in the home while she herself 
traveled the country giving speeches and published more than 20 books.

But her national profile and inarguable successes – the most famous of which 
was her campaign in the 1970s to block the passage of the Equal Rights 
amendment – simply couldn’t stop progress.

Schlafly’s argument against the ERA, for example, was that it would mean the 
legalization of “homosexual marriage”, women in combat,unisex bathrooms 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2015/11/04/houston_s_hero_was_defeated_by_transphobic_bathroom_panic_pioneered_in_1970s.html>
 and public funding of abortion. Today – even without the amendment – same-sex 
marriage is legal,women can serve on the front lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/04/women-military-combat-front-lines-official-recognition>
, bathroom laws are shifting and a self-identified feminist who wants to 
overturnthe Hyde amendment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/abortion-rights-clinton-hyde-amendment-federal-funds>
 is running for president. (In fact, Schlafly died on the 21st anniversary of 
Hillary Clinton’s “women’s rights are human rights 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xXM4E23Efvk>” speech.)

Before she passed, Schlafly threw her support behind Donald Trump, saying at a 
March rally 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/03/11/phyllis-schlafly-endorses-trump-in-st-louis/>
: “We’ve been following the losers for so long – now we’ve got a guy who’s 
going to lead us to victory.” Her book, The Conservative Case for Trump, comes 
out on Wednesday. Schlafly’s endorsement was an anomaly amongconservative 
women’s organizations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/07/women-hate-donald-trump-no-time-to-fix-it>
, which have mostly been disdainful or silent on Trump’s run.

That Schlafly’s last political act was supporting a candidate whose disdain 
for women borders on the psychotic seems appropriate, as does Trump’s statement 
that Schlafly was a “champion for women 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/772946028865523712>”.

Though Schlafly’s fight for an America that doesn’t exist anymore has come to 
an end, her fellow conservatives will surely rage on. But just as her lifetime 
of waging war on cultural and political progress failed, so will Trump’s. So 
will Republican’s. Because real human nature is about moving forward, not 
living in the past.
 