
Another week, another site that demonstrates a brilliant use of the 
possibilities of the web to enrich musical experience in hitherto-undreamed-of 
ways: pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard’sInside the Score 
<http://www.explorethescore.org/gy%C3%B6rgy-ligeti-piano-works-inside-the-score.html>
 project, on the piano music of György Ligeti. It’s an astonishingly 
multi-dimensional insight into two short pieces, the 13th of his Etudes for 
solo piano,L’escalier du Diable 
<http://www.explorethescore.org/gy%C3%B6rgy-ligeti-piano-works-inside-the-score-%C3%A9tude-13.html>
, (“The Devil’s Staircase”) and the first movement of the much earlierMusica 
Ricercata 
<http://www.explorethescore.org/gy%C3%B6rgy-ligeti-piano-works-inside-the-score-musica-ricercata-no-i.html>
 – and as a collaboration with the Ruhr piano festival, it’s completely, 
absolutely free for anyone to view,and you should 
<http://www.explorethescore.org/gy%C3%B6rgy-ligeti-piano-works-inside-the-score.html>
.

Here’s why: in the Etude 
<http://www.explorethescore.org/gy%C3%B6rgy-ligeti-piano-works-inside-the-score-%C3%A9tude-13.html>
, Aimard (who wasLigeti’s 
<http://www.explorethescore.org/gy%C3%B6rgy-ligeti-piano-works.html> favourite 
interpreter of this music) takes you on a revelatory journey into the inner 
workings of one of Ligeti’s most immediate yet complex, virtuosically dazzling 
yet emotionally dark pieces. The score scrolls alongside Aimard’s specially 
recorded performance of L’escalier du Diable, but there’s much more: Aimard 
tells us about his relationship with the piece, his view on the essential drama 
of the music (“a struggle that goes nowhere … maybe only to the apocalypse”), 
and describes his interpretative approach to the difficulties of performing the 
five-minute-long Etude, technically and poetically. And at every point in the 
score, you can click an icon to watch amasterclass 
<http://www.explorethescore.org/gy%C3%B6rgy-ligeti-piano-works-inside-the-score-%C3%A9tude-13.html>
, from last year’sAldeburgh festival 
<https://tickets.aldeburgh.co.uk/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=EB3C1F64-779C-45A6-9955-A11CBD4CD990&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=CB14E973-BD09-41BE-825D-0737FF695F47>
, in which Aimard takes a pianist through the score’s challenges. There’s also 
testimony from the scientist who inspired Ligeti’s explorations in fractals and 
chaos theory at the time he was writing the Etudes, and you can see Ligeti’s 
own comments on the piece, collated from the available manuscript sources.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr8oDzgF62Xg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr8oDzgF62Xg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr8oDzgF62Xg&media=>
Which all sounds nerdily marvellous if you happen to be preparing a 
performance of L’escalier du Diable (and there’s a similar richness on Musica 
Ricercata as well). But even if – like me and most of humanity – you haven’t 
got the pianistic chops to contemplate playing the Etude, this is a chance to 
delve deeply into some of the richest piano music of the late 20th century, in 
the company of arguably its finest interpreter. Aimard’s site opens a world of 
imagination in L’escalier du Diable, from Ligeti’s cycling through a storm in 
California, which was the real-life experience of “useless effort” that 
inspired the piece, to the polyrhythmic pile-up that defines the musical drama 
of the work. There are other Etudes and movements from Musica Ricercata, which 
will be added to the site in due course; for now though, throw yourself 
gleefully on to Ligeti’s thrilling, devilish musical staircase.
 