
Two things spring to mind when I think of Bob Higgins and Southampton. The 
first is that Higgins was an exceptional football coach. The second is that it 
was a bloody strange week that I spent at an army barracks one year, singing a 
Michael Jackson number in front of Higgins in a dormitory, receiving a personal 
hygiene lecture that strayed into the importance of keeping your penis clean, 
and watching lads stroll in and out of a room wearing nothing but a cup.

To give this some sort of context I was 13 at the time and I also want to make 
it clear that I’m not in any way trying to portray myself as a victim in this 
awful scandal that has engulfed football. But at the risk of stating the 
obvious, I witnessed some weird things under Higgins.

Matt Le Tissier accuses ex-Southampton coach of 'very wrong' actions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/matt-le-tissier-accuses-ex-southampton-coach-of-very-wrong-actions>
I first started training with Southampton when I was 12, back in 1987, and it 
didn’t take long to realise that Higgins ran the show when it came to schoolboy 
football at The Dell. He was the kingmaker, the only man whose opinion 
mattered, and we’d all hang on his every word – children, their parents and 
Higgins’ staff at Southampton.

Higgins had this aura about him that seemed to cast a spell over people, so 
much so that players who trained alongside me in his academy almost 30 years 
ago have been on the phone this week to say how they now feel that they were 
totally brainwashed. “My dad just told me that I took more notice of Bob than I 
did of him at that time,” said one player, who remembers being devastated when 
Higgins left Southampton in 1989.

It’s easy to see why young, impressionable wannabe footballers blindly 
followed Higgins. He was a brilliant coach who could also demonstrate what he 
wanted you to do and that earned him respect. Little things stick in my mind, 
such as the way he would break down the technique behind heading the ball into 
such detail and how he could hang in the air.

We were all in awe of him. He had a track record of producing players and, 
perhaps more than anything, an incredible amount of power in his hands. Every 
youngster in that academy knew that Higgins held the key to their future at 
Southampton. You did what he said and never questioned it, right down to silly 
little things, such as smearing your forehead with Vaseline before matches to 
stop the sweat running in your eyes (the fact that sweat had never gone into my 
eyes didn’t enter my mind).

I trained once a week in Bath, in one of many regional hubs that Southampton 
had around the country at the time. During the school holidays we would often 
go to Tidworth army base, in Wiltshire, and stay away for five or six days with 
lads from all over the country. In the morning and afternoon it was football. 
In the evening, Higgins sometimes liked us to take part in shows.

On one occasion I was one of the contestants in what is probably best 
described as a 1980s version of The X Factor. Higgins, lying on a bed in one of 
the dormitories, surrounded by 40-50 boys aged between 12-14, handpicked those 
who had to get up and perform and I had the misfortune of being selected. I 
sang Smooth Criminal and I dread to think what Simon Cowell would have made of 
it. Everyone laughed, Higgins took the piss and I was given a mark out of 10 
that was at the lower end of the scale. Another lad, who went on to be a 
professional footballer, sang Bobby Brown’s My Prerogative and Higgins enjoyed 
it so much that he asked him to do it again.

At the time I thought it was some sort of character-building exercise and, if 
we give Higgins the benefit of the doubt, maybe that was the case. Perhaps it 
was also a way of having a bit of fun during some downtime and creating a bit 
of camaraderie. Except nothing seems quite so innocent now that we know 
Higgins’ name has cropped up again and again in connection with allegations of 
historical sexual abuse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fplaying-for-bob-higgins-southampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f8c006fbcf544007dd9e0441f2c3f790e1d7c0d%2F0_0_1273_1695%2F1273.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Playing%20for%20Bob%20Higgins%2C%20the%20football%20kingmaker%20who%20cast%20a%20spell%20over%20us%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fplaying-for-bob-higgins-southampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Playing%20for%20Bob%20Higgins%2C%20the%20football%20kingmaker%20who%20cast%20a%20spell%20over%20us%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fplaying-for-bob-higgins-southampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f8c006fbcf544007dd9e0441f2c3f790e1d7c0d%2F0_0_1273_1695%2F1273.jpg>
 Stuart James playing for Salisbury City. Photograph: Michael Regan/Action 
Images 
I find myself questioning everything and so do other people who were there at 
the time. Was all of this performing actually for Higgins’ gratification? Why 
did some lads walk into the room later that evening, in another part of the 
“entertainment”, with a polystyrene cup covering their genitals? Was it normal 
to be taught about cleaning your penis while being away with a professional 
football club?

Some will wonder why I and others didn’t seek answers to those questions at 
the time. Yet I never even discussed it with my parents and I don’t recall 
there being any conversation among the lads I played alongside. Furthermore, 
Southampton was the only professional club that I’d been involved with at that 
time and I just assumed that was how football worked.

Looking back now, Higgins, with his tight inner-circle of coaches (most of 
whom were useless, as several lads have since reminded me), had created such a 
strong powerbase that it enabled him to operate exactly how he wanted and free 
of any restrictions. Some of the schoolboys were routinely staying at his 
house, which everybody, from other players to all the parents to the staff at 
Southampton, knew all about. Yet this was a different era and no one thought it 
was odd – or if they did, they didn’t say anything.

Not long before Higgins left Southampton he took a large group of young boys 
to a tournament called the Gothia Cup, which I was unable to attend. The 
parents who travelled to Sweden had little contact with their children, who 
vividly recall spending evenings in a gymnasium, lying on beanbags, looking at 
lads cuddling up to Higgins while listening to Whitney Houston love songs. 
“Thinking about it now, it was like being part of some sort of cult,” said one 
of the players.

When Higgins hastily departed, with no explanation from Southampton to the 
parents or the players (little did we know that the club was investigating 
allegations of sexual abuse over which he was later cleared), there was a mass 
exodus. I signed for Aston Villa and eventually joined Swindon Town on a 
two-year apprenticeship before turning professional in 1994.

Higgins was lying on a bed in one of the dormitories, surrounded by 40-50 boys 
aged between 12-14

Higgins, who has in the past denied any wrongdoing, never crossed my mind 
again until I received a phone call after the Dispatches programme went out in 
1997, drawing my attention to the allegations that a number of Southampton and 
Peterborough players had made.

Like the rest of the football world, I carried on without thinking too much 
about the subject until Andy Woodward bravely spoke out last month about the 
horrific sexual abuse he suffered at Crewe Alexandra. As soon as that story 
broke, I thought it was only a matter of time before Higgins would be named and 
so did others at Southampton.

I made some calls to those who knew Higgins and also received a few, including 
one from a former Peterborough apprentice who saw the Football League letter 
that the Guardian published showing that every professional club was warned in 
1989 to stay away from Higgins. Peterborough chose to employ Higgins as their 
youth-team coach six years later and it is extraordinary to hear some of the 
stories about his one season with the club.

Higgins, it is alleged, brought someone else in on a Saturday to drive the 
youth-team minibus to matches so that he could follow behind in his car. One 
player – and one player only – was allowed to travel with him on each journey. 
At Peterborough, it seems Higgins again kept preaching the importance of 
“trusting him” and, as absurd as it sounds now, it became a challenge among 
many of the apprentices, in particular the younger ones, to see who could be 
invited into his car.

Once inside, I have been told, Higgins played slow music, talked about being 
“like a second dad” and, according to one of the players, placed his hand on 
the youngster’s knee. “It was grooming. And it was the most uncomfortable two 
hours of my life,” he said.

Football League warned all its clubs about Bob Higgins in 1989
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/football-league-warned-all-its-clubs-about-bob-higgins-in-1989>
On other occasions, Higgins would bring the players back into London Road on 
an evening to do an aerobic class in just their shorts. There were the 
notorious “soap water massages” that have been mentioned in relation to many 
Southampton players, lectures in the London Road boardroom about sex, and one 
individual evaluation session took place while Higgins was naked in the bath.

Once again, Higgins was holding all the cards the whole time. “The way you 
felt was if you didn’t do what he wanted you to do, or wouldn’t do what others 
in the team under his spell were doing, you were behind in the pecking order on 
the football side,” one former Peterborough player explained. “And yet none of 
those things he wanted you to do had anything to do with football.”

There are so many questions that need to be answered in relation to Higgins 
that it is difficult to know where to start. In the meantime perhaps we should 
comfort ourselves with the knowledge – and I hope this doesn’t sound naive – 
that it is hard to believe any coach could operate in the same way at a 
professional club these days, with so many more checks in place and much 
greater vigilance.

From a personal point of view, I don’t believe that Higgins held my football 
career back in any way. Yet given what we know now, there is no pleasure to be 
taken from the fact that I was once part of his soccer academy. As someone who 
knew Higgins well told me earlier this week: “He was a good coach. But he ain’t 
a good man.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%3A%20how%20the%20story%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%3A%20how%20the%20story%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video&media=>
Football sexual abuse scandal: how the story unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/08/football-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video> 