
Sony has announced a new, more powerful version of its PlayStation 4 console. 
Named thePlayStation 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> 
Pro, the machine features 4K compatibility, faster processor and enhanced 
graphics capabilities. It will launch on 10 November with a price point of 
$399, £349 and 399 euros.

PlayStation boss Andrew House said the new machine is, “targeted to the 
hardcore gamer or those who have invested in high end display technology”. 
System architect Mark Cerny promised that the new model has twice the graphics 
processing power, with a GPU based on – and exceeding - AMD’s newPolaris 
<http://www.amd.com/en-gb/innovations/software-technologies/radeon-polaris> 
tech.

The increased system power will pave the way for true 4K resolution games. 
Update:At this stage it appears a majority of games will not run in full native 
4K resolutions 
<https://www.engadget.com/2016/09/07/playstation-4-pro-4k-handson/> – instead, 
developers will be able to access enhanced rendering options, to provide higher 
than 1080p resolutions.

Pro also offers more visually detailed virtual reality titles to support Sony’s
PlayStation <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> VR headset 
which is launching on 13 October. The original PS4 will still be able to run 
virtual reality titles, but with lower screen resolutions or at lower frame 
rates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fplaystation-4-pro-announced-release-date-and-price-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa2c1d7c2dd048d08993c797e2148a18bb9849f1%2F69_318_3762_2257%2F3762.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PlayStation%204%20Pro%20finally%20breaks%20cover%20and%20begins%20a%20mid-generation%20battle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fplaystation-4-pro-announced-release-date-and-price-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PlayStation%204%20Pro%20finally%20breaks%20cover%20and%20begins%20a%20mid-generation%20battle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fplaystation-4-pro-announced-release-date-and-price-revealed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa2c1d7c2dd048d08993c797e2148a18bb9849f1%2F69_318_3762_2257%2F3762.jpg>
 The PlayStation 4 family, with new slimmer PS4, PlayStation 4 Pro and 
PlayStation VR headset Photograph: David Cornish 
Several forthcoming PlayStation titles, both from Sony and third-party 
publishers are set to support features of the PS4 Pro, including Call of Duty: 
Infinite Warfare, Fifa 17 and Horizon: Zero Dawn.Sony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> also announced that many already 
released titles will receive patches to take advantage of the Pro’s new 
graphical capabilities, including Uncharted 4 and Middle Earth: Shadow of 
Mordor.

“Even if you own an HDTV that does not support either 4K or HDR, PS4 Pro still 
provides a number of benefits,” said House. “All games will run in 1080p 
resolution, and some will even run in a higher or more stable framerate. If 
you’re a gamer that wants to be at the forefront of innovation, PS4 Pro is for 
you.”

New YouTube and Netflix apps are on the way, especially designed for the PS4 
Pro and offering hours of 4K content. The Netflix app will feature Luke Cage 
and Narco season two in 4K. However, news site Business Insider is reporting 
that thePS4 Pro does not support playback of 4K Blu-ray discs 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/playstation-4-pro-doesnt-support-4k-blu-ray-playback-2016-9>
, unlike the new Xbox One S.

PS4 originally launched in November 2013, and a refreshed iteration has been 
talked about for months under the codename PlayStation 4 Neo. Supposedly leaked 
technical documentspreviously suggested 
<http://www.pocket-lint.com/news/137424-ps4-neo-ps4k-vs-project-scorpio-what-s-the-rumoured-difference>
 that the machine would feature a 4.14TFLOP 
<http://www.thefreedictionary.com/TFLOPS> graphics processor with 
218GB-per-second GDDR5 memory.

After the PlayStation Meeting event, Sony distributed a press release that 
showed the leaked specs were indeed correct. PlayStation 4 Pro features an 
x86-64 AMD Jaguar, eight-core CPU and an AMD Radeon-based graphics engine, 
promising a performance of 4.20 teraflops (floating-point operations per 
second).

The PlayStation 4 Pro will arrive a whole year before Microsoft’s updated Xbox 
One, currently codenamed Project Scorpio, which is set for release in Winter 
2017. Little is known about that technology as yet, but at the E3 expo in Los 
Angeles in June, Microsoft claimed its new iteration will boast an eight-core 
central processing unit, six teraflops of graphical power and support 4K 
resolution gaming. AMD, the graphics chipset manufacturer behind the original 
Xbox One,has confirmed 
<http://www.techradar.com/news/gaming/microsoft-just-confirmed-its-project-scorpio-console-for-holiday-2017-1323149>
 that it is supplying the hardware for Scorpio.

PlayStation 4 appears to be winning this generation’s console battle. The 
company claims to have sold more than 40m PS4 units, and although Microsoft is 
not revealing sales for its Xbox One, analysts suggest it has shifted around 
22m units. However, this mid-lifespan update, may well test PlayStation’s 
dominancy. “Microsoft’s cheaper Xbox One S steals some of Sony’s Pro thunder, 
with a significant overlap in 4K features between the two consoles,” said 
analyst Piers Harding-Rolls of IHS Markit Technology.

Both companies are keen not to alienate current PlayStation 4 and Xbox One 
owners by making the original machines obsolete. Sony and Microsoft claim that 
all forthcoming game releases throughout the lifetime of these machines will 
run on all iterations of the hardware – discs and downloaded titles will 
include augmented versions of the game code for the more powerful PlayStation 4 
Pro and Project Scorpio machines.

Sony also announced a new smaller version of PS4. The announcement mirrors 
Microsoft’s recent successful launch of the re-engineered Xbox One S machine. 
However, Microsoft’s update also added 4K video and HDR visual support, while 
the slimline PS4 will only support HDR functionality.

 * Keith Stuart attended the PlayStation Meeting in NY on a press trip with 
other UK journalists. Transport costs were paid by Sony.  