
After years of uncertainty, the once-profitable copper mine on Bougainville, 
an autonomous province ofPapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> (PNG), could well be 
reopened.

PNG leader apologises to Bougainville for bloody 1990s civil war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/29/papua-new-guinea-apologises-bougainville-civil-war>
The chairman of Bougainville Copper Limited (BCL), Peter Taylor, told the 
Australianrecently 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/bougainville-mine-now-in-play-government-says/story-e6frg8zx-1227310920825>
 that “the Bougainville government seems to want the mine reopened, but we have 
to sit down … and see what’s doable.”

BCL’s Panguna mine opened in 1972, three years before PNG was granted 
independence from Australia. Bougainvilleans barely benefited from the 
operation, a deal that smacked of colonial arrogance and resulted in pollution.

In response, locals launched a rebellion in the 1980s against the mine, BCL, 
and the PNG and Australian governments.The resistance won 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/kristian-lasslett/fog-of-peace-postconflict-environments-as-sites-of-impunity-denial-and-dispossessi>
 the ensuing civil war but at a steep human cost: up to 20,000 killed and 
infrastructure broken.


Today Bougainville is beset by poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/19/bougainville-mine-locals-who-oppose-its-re-opening-must-have-a-voice>
 and economic stagnation. I witnessed this myself during two visits in recent 
years.

The polls opened last week 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-05-11/bougainville-elections-underway-as-island-looks-to-independence/6459016>
 to elect a new government in the lead-up to an independence referendum 
scheduled before 2020. The local government, along with BCL andCanberra 
<https://ramumine.wordpress.com/2014/12/17/australias-neocolonial-strategy-on-bougainville/>
, is pushing for the mine to be Bougainville’s financial saviour, first.

But according to a Jubilee Australia report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/15/opposition-to-bougainvilles-panguna-mine-higher-than-media-suggest>
 last year, the vast majority on the island oppose BCL’s return. This tallies 
with what I heard in towns and villages.

The potential reopening of the mine is one piece of an Australian strategy to 
open up South Pacific nations to foreign interests. As Australian foreign 
minister Julie Bishopsaid 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/world/julie-bishop-in-png-to-sell-private-sector-approach-to-aid/story-e6frg6so-1226818811611>
 in 2014: Australia should “stimulate the [PNG] private sector through growth”.

The situation in Bougainville perfectly encapsulates the parlous state of 
affairs in PNG as it approaches the 40-year anniversary of its break with 
Australia.

On 16 September 1975 a ceremony was held in the PNG capital Port Moresby, at 
which Australian prime minister Gough Whitlam, Prince Charles and PNG’s first 
prime minister, Michael Somare, declared PNG a constitutional monarchy with 
membership of the Commonwealth.

The country was was granted independence 
<http://www.naa.gov.au/collection/fact-sheets/fs261.aspx> but its path has been 
torturous ever since. Canberra never allowed its northern neighbour to fully 
leave a relationship of dependency, and today provides $577m annually inaid 
<http://dfat.gov.au/geo/papua-new-guinea/development-assistance/pages/papua-new-guinea.aspx>
 that primarilybenefits 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-06/aid-monitor-says-australia-needs-to-do-more-to-stop-corruption-/6285162>
 Australian companies making money there.


The PNG exposed blog – an independent and reliable news and analysis website – 
hascriticised 
<https://pngexposed.wordpress.com/2015/02/12/australias-boomerang-aid-will-not-assist-governance-in-png/>
 Australia’s attempts to teach PNG leaders how to avoid corruption.

According to the blog, Canberra turns a blind eye to billions of dollars of 
“PNG taxpayers money [siphoned] through Australian banks and into real estate 
schemes in Brisbane and Cairns, posh Australian public schools, its glitzy 
casinos and expensive private hospitals”.

Forty years after breaking free from Australia, PNG suffers shockingly high 
levels ofHIV infection 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-12-11/the-aids-problem-in-papua-new-guinea-fact-file/5936666>
, maternal health issues, domestic violence,aggression against women 
<http://www.pngfacts.com/stop-violence-against-woman/png-domestic-violence-statistics>
 andilliteracy <http://www.education.gov.pg/NLAS/Literacy_in_PNG-NLAS.html>. 
Even the PNG government itselfadmits 
<http://www.education.gov.pg/NLAS/Literacy_in_PNG-NLAS.html> that “PNG’s adult 
literacy situation is in dire straits”.


This isn’t solely Australia’s fault; endemic corruption has blighted PNG for 
decades (US State Department cables released by Wikileaksconfirm this 
<http://www.smh.com.au/world/australia-us-damn-pngs-rotten-political-practices-20110902-1jq9a.html>
). Yet Western donors and resource companies are principally to blame for 
engaging inneo-colonialism 
<http://www.afr.com/news/policy/foreign-affairs/bhp-blasted-for-colonial-era-mentality-20130115-jibvj>
, treating the country as nothing more than a source of wealth for outsiders.

Some of the mining projects currently in operation may be familiar: Ok Tedi, 
Porgera, Lihir, Ramu. They’re all environmentally destructive and offer little 
benefit to local communities. At the Porgera gold mine,cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/03/canada-barrick-gold-mining-compensates-papua-new-guinea-women-rape>
 of “extreme sexual violence” by security guards against tribal women and girls 
resulted in offers of compensation.

It’s unsurprising that most Papua New Guineans I met were sceptical about 
foreign investment in their country, knowing they would never feel or see any 
benefit from it.

Others are more hopeful, like US Democratic presidential hopeful Hillary 
Clinton. During her time as US Secretary of State, she was open in admitting 
that the huge energy resources in PNG, especially the Exxon-Mobil LNG gas 
pipeline that opened in 2014 and is alreadystruggling 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-12-23/low-oil-and-gas-prices-pushing-png-towards-crisis/5986244>
 due to collapsing global commodity prices, was part of aregional contest with 
China 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2011-03-07/png-would-welcome-more-us-investment/57464>
. She chastised China for “wining and dining” Asia-Pacific politicians.


“If anybody thinks that our retreating on these issues is somehow going to be 
irrelevant to the maintenance of our leadership in a world where we are 
competing with China, that is a mistaken notion,” she said.


The people of PNG have only been impoverished by so-called leadership from 
Washington and Canberra. Meanwhile, corruption is rife; PNG’s anti-corruption 
agency, Taskforce Sweep, wasstarved of funds 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-02-04/png-anti-corruption-taskforce-starved-of-funding/6070170>
 earlier this year following allegations they made against prime minister Peter 
O’Neill.


Perhaps the clearest indication of how Australia views PNG is the Manus Island 
asylum seeker deal. Slammed by a leading PNG provincial governor as “
neo-colonialist 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-12-18/governor-slams-neo-colonialist-png-asylum-seek-deal/5977560>
”, locals receive little benefit and are really helping the Australian Liberal 
and Labor parties solve a domestic political problem.

Journalist Jo Chandler, writing recently in the Monthly 
<https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2015/february/1422709200/jo-chandler/manus-balance>
, shows in great detail the way “Australia is primarily concerned with building 
the infrastructure to service their interests and comforts.” This is also an 
accurate summary of the dynamic between Port Moresby and Canberra since 1975.


There’s huge potential in PNG to be a nation that isn’t known internationally 
for mining andwitch burning 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-12-13/an2013---png-sorcery/5154246>. 
Grassroots groups, such as the Madang-basedBismarck Ramu Group 
<https://www.facebook.com/bismarckramugroup>, aim to protect local communities 
and inform them of viable alternatives to resource extraction – such as 
agriculture.


Bougainville mine: locals who oppose its re-opening must have a voice | Antony 
Loewenstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/19/bougainville-mine-locals-who-oppose-its-re-opening-must-have-a-voice>
Yet this year’s 40th anniversary of independence should be a sombre occasion 
to reflect on four decades of failed Australian interference in PNG. Canberra 
views Port Moresby as overseeing a massive quarry Australian firms have the 
right to plunder. We dump asylum seekers on PNG territory while still claiming 
to be a victim of unscrupulous people smugglers. And our aid money? It’s is an 
insurance policy against a failed state on Australia’s northern border.
 