
When the US supreme court enshrined same-sex marriage as an inalienable civil 
right last month, justices managed to both expand and cement a traditional 
notion of “family”. It expanded because now two men or two women could marry 
and make a family – but that reiterates the very conservative notion that 
marriage is the linchpin of the family unit.

For many, marriage is the symbolic cornerstone to the definition of family, 
and I’m ecstatic that whomever wishes to marry will never be constitutionally 
prohibited from doing so. But I’d also like to acknowledge that marriage isn’t 
always what every person desires or achieves. And family, as a concept, isn’t 
fixed to marriage. It is a fluid relationship of intimacies between communities 
that aren’t always confined to blood.

In the US, families are increasingly “more ethnically, racially, religiously 
and stylistically diverse than half a generation ago,” according to a 2013 New 
York Timesstory 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/26/health/families.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0> 
about the shift. Family compositions now include “good friends [who] join 
forces as part of the ‘voluntary kin’ movement, sharing medical directives, 
wills, even adopting one another legally” or “single people live alone and 
proudly consider themselves families of one — more generous and civic-minded 
than so-called ‘greedy marrieds.’”

Political discourse appears to lag behind this lived reality. Stump speeches 
and commentary still feature something akin to looking at the country through 
soft-focused, sepia-toned glasses of 1950s sitcoms. But I’m no longer willing 
to accept any presidential candidate or current sitting president repeating a 
narrative of absenteeism and condescension. Let’s retire that calcified 
thinking and language.

I’m looking at you, President Obama. Too often, he returns 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2015/05/12/obama_responsibility_politics_my_brother_s_keeper_president_defends_approach.html>
 to the narrative of black father absenteeism, using traditional families as 
the touchstone for what counts as good. It makes my teeth itch; though there is 
undoubtedly a small subset of children (not only of color) who are harmed by 
absent dads, they are a very particular category of at-risk youth thatdoesn’t 
reflect <http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr071.pdf> the black population 
writ large. And when he condescends to black audiences in churches or college 
commencement addresses promulgating that canard, he is also indirectly 
devaluing other family compositions. Republicans hoping to succeed him alsofail 
<http://takingnote.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/06/12/jeb-bushs-family-values/> to 
value 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/rickungar/2012/03/02/wisconsin-gop-leader-proposes-legislation-to-blame-single-parents-for-child-abuse-and-neglect/>
 “unconventional” families.

Intergenerational households and singles count too in creating stability for 
children, and a father in the home isn’t always a guarantee of a child’s 
success in the face of stagnant wages or outright theft of working poor people. 
A father in the home is no balm for hyper-segregated communities starved of 
goods and services. A father in the home is no salve for a crumbling 
infrastructure and pitiful public transportation networks for women and men 
seeking sustainable employment so far out of their communities or for children 
commuting to decent schools. A father in the home doesn’t stop a wave of public 
school closures. It also bespeaks of a very patriarchal way of thinking about 
family (and an untrue one; according toa 2013 report 
<http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr071.pdf> from the US Department of 
Health and Human Services, black fathers are deeply involved in parenting their 
kids).

Candidate Hillary Clinton seemed to intimate a more nuanced framing of the 
concerns of the new American family, adapting a language that tipped toward an 
inclusive and fluid definition of family in the American body politic. “[I]t is 
way past time to end the outrage of so many women still earning less than men 
on the job — and women of color often making even less. This isn’t a women’s 
issue. It’s a family issue,”she said 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/06/hillary-clinton-campaign-rally-speech-transcript-118973.html>
:

Just like raising the minimum wage is a family issue. Expanding childcare is a 
family issue. Declining marriage rates is a family issue. The unequal rates of 
incarceration is a family issue. Helping more people with an addiction or a 
mental health problem get help is a family issue. In America, every family 
should feel like they belong.

Clinton is right. We should recognize that family isn’t defined by marriage or 
children, or by how many people comprises the unit. This isn’t an argument 
against family structure, but a challenge to those who hope to run the country 
to expand their rhetoric, push the definition of traditional family structure 
as man, woman and child. We exist in community. We already act accordingly, and 
our leaders should speak that way, too.
 