
Just months after hosting the Olympics, the west zone of Rio de Janeiro 
resembled a war zone this weekend as a police helicopter crashed amid shootouts 
and execution-style murders that left at least 12 people dead.

Gunfire was reported in half a dozen locations across the city, highlighting 
fears of a public security crisis worsened by budget cuts, striking police, a 
change of government and uncertainties over the future of the favela 
“pacification” policy.

The worst clashes occurred in and around the Cidade de Deus (City of God) 
favela, a few miles from the Olympic Park,which just three months ago was 
celebrating the success of the local judoka Rafaela Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/the-city-of-god-home-of-brazils-first-gold-of-the-games>
 in winning Brazil’s first gold medal.


On Saturday, however, the community echoed with the sound of gunfire as gangs 
and police fought their deadliest battle in several years, which started at 7am 
and continued through the night.


One mobile phone video shows a police helicopter flying low over the favela as 
a volley of shots rings out. A voice says: “We brought the eagle down” amid 
cheering. Other clips show the helicopter crashing and locals staring at the 
wreckage.

 The state government said four officers were killed in the crash, the cause 
of which is under investigation. Initial reports suggest none of those on board 
was hit by bullets.

Following the downing of the helicopter, extra military police flooded into 
the Cidade de Deus, arresting four residents and seizing weapons.

Soon after, seven bodies of local young men were found, some of whom appeared 
to have been murdered in execution-style killings. Residents blamed police for 
indiscriminate extra-judicial retribution. There are also claims that they were 
killed in fights between gangs.

The public security office of the state government did not respond to the 
Guardian’s request for a response to these allegations.

The police operation is ongoing and residents in parts of the Jacarepaguá 
region have been warned not to leave their homes.

If it is proved that the police helicopter was brought down by gunfire, it 
would be the first time it has happened in Rio since 2009.

Over the following few years, the city’s security situation briefly improved 
thanks to the favela “pacification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/07/2014-world-cup-rio-favela-pacification>
” policy, a stronger economy and changed policing priorities (such as giving 
rewards for low crime rates rather than killings of “traffickers”).

These gains, however, are disappearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/08/the-city-should-not-be-this-way-fears-over-violence-in-rio-with-olympics-near>
 as a result of budget cuts, late payment of wages and reports of police 
violence. There were3,649 reported murders in the first nine months of this year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/olympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela>
, up 18% on the same period in 2015.

Public security experts warn that the police could now be returning to the 
repressive tactics of the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/03/rio-police-violent-killing-olympics-torture>
.

According to Amnesty International, police are responsible for 2,500 deaths in 
the past seven years 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2016/06/deadly-side-rio-olympics-2016/>
. Human Rights Watch saysone-fifth of all killings in the city are carried out 
by police 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2016/07/07/good-cops-are-afraid/toll-unchecked-police-violence-rio-de-janeiro>
. Three-quarters of the victims are black men.

Funerals will be held on Monday for the four officers who died in the 
helicopter, along with a military policeman who was shot in the operation in 
Jacarepaguá region.
 