
Both Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> hit their marks in the 
CNN’s New Hampshire town hall debate, making sure to hammer home at the 
signature topics that have brought them here. Both also enjoyed genuinely 
amusing human moments that let voters feel like they “know” these candidates.

Clinton’s warmest moment of the evening, besides an anecdote about sneaking 
out of the White House incognito to be a civilian for a day (including, 
apparently, being asked by tourists to take pictures of them and their families 
outside the White House), came in a quick reply to moderator Anderson Cooper.

Cooper referred to a famous Clinton quote from the 1990s, asking: “Do you 
still believe in a ‘vast rightwing conspiracy’?” Without missing a beat, 
Clinton replied: “Don’t you?” before going on to state that it’s only gotten 
bigger. She’s right. It got a laugh, and for the first time all night, she 
seemed to be enjoying herself.

New Hampshire town hall: Clinton and Sanders spar over progressive record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/04/new-hampshire-town-hall-clinton-and-sanders-spar-over-progressive-record>
Sanders’ entire debate approach was more humanizing than Clinton’s. Although 
he later ramped up to his standard intensity, he initially eschewed his default 
semi-shouty firebrand delivery. The quietness probably evoked something like 
intimacy, but his best candidate-as-person moments of the night came when 
talking about himself.


In addition to referring to his own folk music album as “one of the worst 
albums of all time, people can’t believe how bad it is”, he answered Cooper’s 
question about his car with what eventually voters will probably start to think 
of as signature “Berniness.” The car is red, and it is American made. A 
Chevrolet. “It is one of the smallest Chevys that they make.”


The fun stuff aside, both candidates sought to refine their pitches to a 
divided Democratic base going into New Hampshire and, soon, South Carolina.

Sanders again emphasized that he has refused to take Super Pac money and has 
amassed the largest number of donations (to this point in a campaign) in 
history, at roughly $27 per donation. He hammered Clinton for accepting $15m in 
Wall Street donations and for accepting hundreds of thousands of dollars for 
speaking to Goldman Sachs.

Despite shaky answers on the issue of terrorism, where he will never be as 
broadly salable as the more hawkish Clinton, he was on sure footing criticizing 
Clinton’s endorsements of trade deals that offshore jobs and deplete 
opportunity for the American working class. He also enjoyed a really winning 
moment, for his campaign, when questioned about taxes.


A man named Chris, who said he earned $41,000 per year, asked Sanders to 
explain his middle-class tax hike. Sanders explained that, by adopting a 
Medicare-for-all approach to universal healthcare, Chris’ tax burden would 
increase by $500, but he would likely save $5,000 per year from no longer 
having to pay insurance premiums. Cooper followed up: “Chris, does that work 
for you?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fhighlights-democratic-town-hall-meeting-iowa-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Highlights%20from%20the%20Democratic%20town%20hall%20meeting%20in%20Iowa%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fhighlights-democratic-town-hall-meeting-iowa-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Highlights%20from%20the%20Democratic%20town%20hall%20meeting%20in%20Iowa%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fhighlights-democratic-town-hall-meeting-iowa-video&media=>
Chris replied: “If it saves me on health insurance premiums, I will gladly pay 
more taxes.” The Sanders campaign couldn’t have hoped for a better soundbite to 
express the incentives of progressive healthcare policy and progressivism in 
general.


Clinton opened her night taking the fight to Sanders’ charges that she is not 
progressive, something thatplayed out on Twitter earlier in the day 
<https://storify.com/dmartind/some-days>. Cooper reiterated some of Sanders’ 
criticisms and asked for Clinton’s response. “It’s interesting that Senator 
Sanders is setting himself up to be the gatekeeper on who is and isn’t 
progressive,” she said. “By those definitions, president Obama isn’t a 
progressive, vice-president Biden isn’t progressive”.


Her framing was very shrewd. Clinton has made a point of leveraging her 
identity as a woman to harness a dedicated base of female voters, as well she 
should. It’s very effective. And her casting Sanders as a gatekeeper telling 
her what she can and can’t be works as an effective dog-whistle to those 
voters, who hear her regularly invoke the imagery of shattering the last great 
glass ceiling for women. It casts Sanders as a kind of anti-Obama for women: No 
You Can’t.


The Obama connection doesn’t end there. Clinton enjoys tremendous name 
recognition among African American voters, who will be key to winning South 
Carolina, and namedropping the president doesn’t hurt. Especially when she can 
do it in a way that makes Sanders appear critical of the nation’s first black 
president.


Clinton’s night got rougher when pressed on her millions in Wall Street 
donations and her speaking fees from Goldman Sachs. When asked why she took 
$300,000 from them, she replied, shrugging: “That’s what they offered.” It’s 
nice to have such problems. In a campaign for the hearts and minds of 
Democratic voters, one which involves showing an understanding of everyday 
struggles, being offered $300,000 puts Clinton somewhere on another planet.

But Clinton has bigger problems than seeming relatable. She doesn’t have a 
very persuasive explanation for any of her Wall Street money. Clinton is a very 
capable speaker, but she doesn’t burn down the house with her talks, and she’s 
not a quant. So it’s very natural to ask what Wall Street could possibly have 
been purchasing with that kind of moneyother than influence.


Clinton pointed to billionaire-funded Super Pacs running ads targeted at her, 
saying that the billionaire class knows she will go after them. But trade 
agreements that are very friendly to the investor class – as well as an 
opposition to the reinstatement of Glass-Steagall’s banking reforms – don’t 
sound like much of an attack. (Besides, finding Wall Street guys who hate
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> isn’t hard; there’s 
always going to be a few.)


And $15m in donations prompts a pretty tough question: these guys know how to 
buy things with their money, so what are they buying? With Sanders leading 
substantially in New Hampshire and enjoying nearly home field advantage there, 
it looks like South Carolina will be the next test of whether Clinton has 
satisfactorily answered the question.
 