
When it comes to women’s progress, the United States doesn’t exactly bring 
home the gold. We rank72nd <http://www.ipu.org/wmn-e/classif.htm> in women’s 
political participation, with women holding less than20% of congressional seats 
<http://www.cawp.rutgers.edu/women-us-congress-2015>. Paid maternity leave? The 
United States comes in last. 
<http://fortune.com/2014/05/15/america-comes-in-last-place-on-paid-maternity-leave/>
 But at long last, we’re number one at something:Texas has the highest maternal 
mortality rate in the developed world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/texas-maternal-mortality-rate-health-clinics-funding>
.

This dubious honor is a recent one, with a study showing that the rate of 
women dying from pregnancy complications doubled from 2010-2014. It’s not a 
coincidence, of course, that there was another major happening around women’s 
health inTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> during those years: 
the deliberate closure of clinics that provide abortion and a drastic funding 
cut to the state’s family planning budget.

As my colleague Molly Redden points out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/texas-maternal-mortality-rate-health-clinics-funding>
, Texas gutted the state’s family planning budget by more than $73m in 2011, 
forcing clinics to shut down and dramatically reducing the number of women they 
could provide services to. By 2014, 600 women had died from pregnancy-related 
complications.

It’s almost as if what feminists have been saying for years is true: limiting 
reproductive rights hurts women across the board. Access to reproductive care 
is necessary not just to prevent or end pregnancies, but to ensure healthy 
outcomes for those who choose to carry their pregnancies to term.

Sarah Wheat of the Planned Parenthood of Greater Texas told the Dallas Morning 
News 
<http://www.dallasnews.com/news/politics/headlines/20160817-texas-rate-of-pregnancy-related-deaths-nearly-doubles-and-neither-researchers-nor-the-state-knows-why.ece>
 that these clinics were “an entry point into the health care system” for many 
women, especially those with fewer resources.

“Chances are they’re going to have a harder time finding somewhere to go to 
get that first appointment.”

It’s an ironic but telling turn of events for the activists and legislators in 
Texas who insisted that laws shuttering abortion clinics were about protecting 
women’s health – a claim that thesupreme court thoroughly debunked. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/27/us-supreme-court-texas-abortion-ruling>

In the decision to overturn Texas’ extreme anti-choice law, the opinion read: 
“When directly asked at oral argument whether Texas knew of a single instance 
in which the new requirement would have helped even one woman obtain better 
treatment, Texas admitted that there was no evidence in the record of such a 
case.”

Instead of helping women, the law hurt women. But for the politicians and 
activists who want to stop them from accessing their right to abortion at all 
costs, women’s health was never really the point.

If Texas wants to turn this horror show around, officials need to start 
supporting women’s choices, give up their transparent and cruel war on 
reproductive rights, andstop rejecting the expansion of Medicaid 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/05/29/texas-pays-a-big-price-for-saying-no-to-medicaid-expansion.html>
, which could provide much-needed help and care to the state’s vulnerable 
communities. And with Zika becoming more of a risk for Americans, these steps 
cannot come soon enough.

Women’s health is not a political chip to be played; it’s not an afterthought. 
Our health and lives – whether we choose to have children or not - are central 
to the health of our country and communities.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in Texas, women in America, 
deserve better than this.
 