
Support for Malcolm Turnbull’s government has fallen four points over summer 
while the prime minister’s net approval rating has fallen 15 points, a new poll 
shows.

The Fairfax-Ipsos poll 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/fairfaxipsos-poll-voters-cool-on-malcolm-turnbull-as-coalition-support-drops-below-2013-election-levels-20160214-gmtnd1.html>
 shows the Coalition government now leads the Labor opposition 52% to 48% after 
preferences, down from the 56% to 44% margin it recorded in the previous such 
survey in mid-November.

The result is also lower than the Coalition’s 53.5% two-party-preferred 
support when Tony Abbott won the 2013 election.

Malcolm Turnbull's new cabinet and ministry: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/malcolm-turnbulls-new-cabinet-and-ministry-the-full-list>
The poll, taken from Thursday to Saturday, shows 62% of people approve of 
Turnbull’s performance compared with 24% who disapprove. The difference between 
the approval and disapproval scores produces a healthy net approval rating of 
38, which is 15 points lower than in the previous poll.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, continues to 
languish with just 30% approving of his performance and 55% disapproving, 
resulting in a net approval rating of minus 25 (an improvement of three points 
since the last poll).

The poll of 1,403 people was taken during a tough week for the government, 
when it came under sustained parliamentary pressure over a “private” trip to 
China in 2014 by the then assistant defence minister Stuart Robert.

Robert, who attended an event celebrating a mining deal involving a major 
Liberal party donor and then met a Chinese vice minister, was forced out of the 
ministry after an investigation by a senior public servant found he had 
breached ministerial standards.

Stuart Robert loses job as minister after China trip furore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
The poll, which has a margin of error of 2.6%, also follows the government’s 
decision toback away from the option of raising the goods and services tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/treasurys-gst-modelling-shows-rise-to-15-would-not-improve-growth>
 as part of forthcoming tax reforms.

It shows support for increasing the GST has plummeted after a summer 
parliamentary break during which Shorten campaigned heavily against “a 15% tax 
on everything”.

Asked whether they backed an increase in the rate of the GST if accompanied by 
other tax cuts and compensation for those on a household income of less than 
$100,000 a year, about 37% said yes, down 15 points from the November poll.

Opposition to the proposal rose from 41% to 57%.

Pollsters also asked voters about the prospect of an early election. About 22% 
said they backed a federal election as soon as possible, while 74% said the 
government should serve its full term.

Turnbull announced a ministry reshuffle on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/turnbull-announces-cabinet-reshuffle-aimed-squarely-at-next-election>
 before travelling to Queensland to campaign for three days.





 