
Poverty <https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty>, desperation and the 
desire for revenge are the key factors pushing young Syrians to join Isis and 
other extremist groups – and are more significant than ideological or religious 
motivation, according to research by a peace-building group.


Adolescent boys and young men between the ages of 12 and 24 were found to be 
most at risk, along with children and young adults not in education, internally 
displaced people and refugees without supportive family structures.


UN demands protection for war zone hospitals after 'epidemic of attacks'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/03/un-demands-protection-for-war-zone-hospitals-after-epidemic-of-attacks>
Interviews with more than 300 young Syrians – in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, Lebanon and Turkey – point to 
factors of both vulnerability and resilience to recruitment by Isis and Jabhat 
al-Nusra (al-Qaida’s Syrian affiliate), which are both proscribed as terrorist 
organisations by the UN.


“Radicalisation is not an explanation for joining a violent extremist group 
per se,” said the study by International Alert 
<http://international-alert.org/sites/default/files/Syria_YouthRecruitmentExtremistGroups_EN_2016.pdf>
 (pdf). “For many young Syrians, belief in extreme ideologies appears to be, at 
most, a secondary factor in the initial decision to join an extremist group. 
Religion is providing a moral medium for coping and justification for fighting, 
rather than a basis for rigid and extreme ideologies.”

Vulnerability is driven by a combination of extreme trauma, loss and 
displacement, lack of alternative ways to make a decent living, the collapse of 
social structures and institutions, including education, and the desire to take 
revenge against the regime of President Bashar al-Assad, the report says.

Its findings about the causes of extremism are broadly in line with a recent 
widersurvey of Arab youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/12/vast-majority-young-arabs-isis-shunning-poll>
, which situated the causes of radicalisation in a lack of jobs and 
opportunities. In eight of the 16 countries surveyed, employment problems were 
a bigger pull factor for Isis than extreme religious views.


Young Syrian men also said that joining armed groups provides a strong sense 
of purpose, honour and self-worth – “a new life where they are wanted”.


Economic imperatives explained why individuals have switched membership and 
allegiance based on salaries, resources and the regularity of payment. Fighting 
for an extremist group is normally far more lucrative than fighting for a 
moderate one. Nusra fighters are paid $300–400 (£205-275) per month. Fighters 
in the Free Syrian Army are paid only – and often late – about $100 per month.

In the words of one interviewee: “An 18-year-old guy I met was fighting with 
the Free Syrian Army … After two days of fighting, his unit ran out of 
ammunition. For two further days, he remained there, waiting to be hit by 
Syrian regime forces. He then managed to escape his unit, went over to Jabhat 
al-Nusra’s territory and [the group] offered him ammunition and a salary to 
fight for [it]. He didn’t believe in [its] ideology but [it] had the bullets.”


Nusra had been more successful than Isis in establishing itself as a 
“quasi-legitimate, community-based organisation providing relative security, 
protection, education and structure on a daily basis”, the survey found.

But trauma played an important role in extremist recruitment – one young man 
joined Isis after being raped and tortured in a regime prison. A friend 
described him as now being “completely brainwashed”.

The report shows that the collapse of Syria’s education system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/12/syria-refugee-children-lebanon-double-shift-schools>
, with about 2 million children now out of school, has also greatly contributed 
to young people’s vulnerability to joining violent extremist groups, which are 
filling the gap by providing segregated and sectarian teaching.

Comprehensive, inclusive and quality education, including trauma healing and 
psychosocial support – such as that being implemented through International 
Alert’speace education project 
<http://www.international-alert.org/what-we-do/where-we-work/middle-east-and-north-africa/syria/projects/13595>
 in Syria and the region – was one of the four key factors that could prevent 
recruitment.


“In Syria, children who aren’t engaged in [psychosocial support] like this are 
so vulnerable … they could be directly recruited by Daesh [Isis] or al-Nusra,” 
said one peace educator in Lebanon. “We give them tools to express themselves 
in the community, rather than using weapons to express anger at their losses.”

Other preventive factors included providing alternative and respected sources 
of livelihood, access to supportive social networks and alternative avenues for 
non-violent activism.

The conflict in Syria erupted at the height of the Arab spring in March 2011. 
It has claimedup to 400,000 lives  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/report-on-syria-conflict-finds-115-of-population-killed-or-injured>
anddisplaced 6.6 million people internally and prompted 4.8 million more to 
flee the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/22/syrian-refugee-crisis-underestimated-by-british-public-finds-humanitarian-study>
.
 