
1) When will Sturridge get his next Liverpool chance?

One of the marvellous things about football is that you can quite easily leave 
your best player out of the team and still strengthen it, through little fault 
of their own. It might be a bit of a stretch to call Daniel Sturridge 
Liverpool’s best player, but he’s certainly their best striker, and the most 
natural finisher they have. If he could keep himself fit for long enough, he’d 
easily be a 20 goals a season man, but Liverpool have such an exceptional front 
four at the moment that he – or indeed any traditional centre-forward – is not 
required. Philippe Coutinho, Roberto Firmino, Sadio Mané and Adam Lallana are 
doing very nicely indeed without him. Sturridge popped up andscored twice 
against Tottenham in the EFL Cup on Tuesday, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/liverpool-tottenham-hotspur-efl-cup-match-report>
 at least reminding Jürgen Klopp that he remains a very good striker indeed. 
“I’ve never been in doubt about him,” said Klopp, but will the kind words 
translate to a place in the team? One wonders if it’s more frustrating or less 
for Sturridge that he is not in Klopp’s first-choice team, but really due to no 
fault of his own.NM

 * Mignolet promises to fight Karius for No1 spot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/liverpool-simon-mignolet-loris-karius>

 * Liverpool v Leeds among EFL Cup quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/manchester-united-west-ham-efl-cup>
European absence gives Liverpool chance to end long wait for league title | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/26/european-absence-gives-liverpool-chance-to-end-long-wait-for-league-title>
2) Another tough opportunity for Moyes to get off mark


There was a touch of David Brent to David Moyes last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/21/sunderland-david-moyes-relegation-battle-transfer-window>
 when he said: “My job is to win and I would say my biggest strength is to find 
a way of winning. If you asked me about my strengths I’d say: ‘Put David Moyes 
in charge of a team and he will win.’” Well OK, maybe he will – but when and 
against whom? This weekend against Arsenal? That seems highly unlikely given 
how comprehensively awful Sunderland have been so far this season – a habit of 
conceding late goals reflects badly on their mentality and the manager’s 
substitutions, and the early signs are that so far Moyes has got the three 
crucial Ts wrong: transfers, tactics and talking. Maybe Sunderland can look to 
Arsenal for a glimmer of hope, as Arsène Wenger’s team, who only manageda draw 
at the Stadium of Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/sunderland-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 in April, have been decidedly edgy in their recent Premier League outings. 
They could have lost rather than drawnat home to Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/arsenal-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
 last week, came close to throwing away victory against Swansea in the previous 
league match, and only overcame Burnley in the match before that thanks to a 
freakish late goal by Laurent Koscielny. Maybe this will be the weekend when 
luck turns against Arsenal and in favour of Sunderland, and Moyes finds a way 
to win in the league at last. This is not a tip.PD

 * Arsenal’s Iwobi told he ‘must banish nerves to start scoring’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/arsenal-alex-iwobi-banish-nerves-arsene-wenger>
 * Sunderland grounded in Southampton after fog  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/sunderland-southampton-plane-journey-fog-bournemouth-airport>
 * Pérez set to miss six weeks with ankle ligament injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/arsenal-lucas-perez-six-weeks-ankle-injury>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47f2041ec288c429c6df1e227f7528f43c5d3074%2F95_0_1272_763%2F1272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47f2041ec288c429c6df1e227f7528f43c5d3074%2F95_0_1272_763%2F1272.jpg>
 David Moyes has endured a nightmare start at Sunderland, with his team winless 
in the league after nine matches. Photograph: Carl Recine/Reuters 
3) Mkhitaryan to return from his Old Trafford exile?

José Mourinho can’t seem to catch a break at the moment. No sooner has he 
broken his club’s domestic winless run (which stretched, it should be 
remembered, to just three games) then people start asking questions about how 
he did it. Or, more specifically, which playersdidn’t do it. Or more 
specifically still, why the heck Henrikh Mkhitaryan wasn’t one of those in the 
matchday 18 for the City game. Mourinho, arch-contrarian that he is, might just 
sling the Armenian straight into the starting XI against Burnley simply to show 
that everyone was making a fuss about nothing. But if, as seems more likely, 
Mkhitaryan’s exile continues (his last appearance saw him dragged off at 
half-time in September’s Manchester derby) and particularly if United remain 
stilted in attack (they may havewon in midweek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/manchester-united-manchester-city-efl-cup-match-report>
 but were largely unimpressive against a shadow City XI) then the sense that 
all is not quite right between the manager and his £30m summer signing will 
intensify. The Manchester press this week have suggested that it could be a 
character issue, with Mourinho favouring the more brash personalities in his 
squad to the relatively reserved Mkhitaryan.JA

 * Mkhitaryan determined to fight for his Manchester United place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/henrikh-mkhitaryan-manchester-united-fight-for-place>

 * Shaw eager to prove himself to Mourinho and Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/manchester-united-luke-shaw-prove-himself-jose-mourinho-gareth-southgate-england>
 * Paul Wilson: United heal wounds with win over City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/manchester-united-heal-wounds-manchester-city-win>
4) Okazaki central to Leicester’s improvement on the road

Leicester’s Premier League away record so far this season is: played four, 
lost four, goal difference -10. Admittedly their assignments have mostly been 
tough – they’ve been to Liverpool, Manchester United, Chelsea and,er, Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/hull-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 – but that run is atrocious by anyone’s standards, let alone the defending 
champions. They go to White Hart Lane, however, on the back of last weekend’s 
victory over Crystal Palace, hailed by Claudio Ranieri astheir best performance 
of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/leicester-city-shinji-okazaki-crystal-palace-claudio-ranieri>
. The manager could do worse than stick with the same lineup or, at least, 
sticking with Shinji Okazaki, who has enough dynamism to help out in midfield, 
where Leicester risk being overrun by Spurs.PD

 * Dier: Spurs’ Janssen will adapt to Premier League life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/eric-dier-vincent-janssen-adapt-to-life-premier-league-football>
5) Guardiola ends rough week at the Hawthorns

Six games without a win, then, for Pep Guardiola. It’s a disturbing statistic 
for the Manchester City manager, even taking into account the fact that he 
wasn’t really bothered about the EFL Cup game in midweek (“It’s the last 
competition in terms of importance,” he said minutes before the game and, to be 
fair, he’s not wrong). Nevertheless, it’s been a rough week. Guardiola could do 
with a winning end to seven days that began with a 50-minute dressing room 
inquisition afterSunday’s draw with Southampton, tumbled into midweek with an 
admission that he was still learning aboutthe energy-sapping nature of English 
football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-frantic-pace-exhausting>
 and reached a nadir with that derby defeat. West Brom provide the opposition 
on Saturday afternoon andonly Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/west-bromwich-albion-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 have escaped The Hawthorns with three points this season. On the flip side, 
only West Ham have gone home empty handed.JA

 * Manchester City fans filmed ‘vandalising toilets’ at Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/manchester-city-fans-vandalising-toilet-old-trafford-derby>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fguardiola-defends-young-city-squad-after-defeat-to-manchester-united-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardiola%20defends%20'young'%20City%20squad%20after%20defeat%20to%20Manchester%20United%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fguardiola-defends-young-city-squad-after-defeat-to-manchester-united-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardiola%20defends%20%27young%27%20City%20squad%20after%20defeat%20to%20Manchester%20United%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fguardiola-defends-young-city-squad-after-defeat-to-manchester-united-video&media=>
Guardiola defends ‘young’ City squad after defeat to Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/27/guardiola-defends-young-city-squad-after-defeat-to-manchester-united-video>
. 
6) Adaptable Redmond a symbol of Saints’ mentality

In amongst all the criticism of John Stones, Claudio Bravo, Pep Guardiola and 
whoever else people wanted to blame forSouthampton’s goal against Manchester 
City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/manchester-city-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 last weekend, it was easy to forget what a terrifically taken goal it was. 
Nathan Redmond had to have the speed of thought and feet to nip in and 
intercept Stones’s pass – all part of Claude Puel’s plan to press the City 
defence as much as possible to induce just this sort of mistake. Listening to 
Redmond this week, it’s easy to see why the Frenchman’s tenure seems to be 
going well so far. “He [Puel] made it clear he wasn’t going to play with wide 
players,” said Redmond, about his new role up front, “but he also made it clear 
that he’d watched me before and seen me play, so he knew I had the potential to 
play up front … it was either adapt and learn or sit on the sidelines.” The way 
Redmond put it, it seems obvious, but we can all think of a few players whose 
attitude perhaps wouldn’t be quite so constructive, and might have viewed the 
sidelines as preferable to playing somewhere unfavourable. To have so many 
seamless transitions as the Saints, losing managers and players but replacing 
them perfectly every time, requires good planning – but it also requires the 
players already there to buy into what they’re being told. You wouldn’t bet 
against them surprising Chelsea this weekend as they did City last.NM

 * Southampton march on after Boufal sinks Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/southampton-sunderland-efl-cup-match-report>
 * ‘I won’t be going back’ – a Chelsea fan on trouble at West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/chelsea-fans-view-london-stadium-crowd-trouble>
Gino Pozzo’s smooth ownership of Watford hits a bump in the Vicarage Road
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/watford-gino-pozzo-premier-league>
7) Will the EFL Cup give Hull a lift?

The effectiveness of the ‘new manager bounce’ does tend to be lessened when 
the ‘new manager’ isactually the old manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/hull-mike-phelan-permanent-manager>
 who’s been there for a few months but the club just hadn’t bothered to sort 
his contract out. Hull provided a pleasant surprise at the start of the season 
when, with a team that gave ‘hodge-podge’ a bad name, managed to beat the 
defending champions and chivvy out a few respectable results. Alas, since then 
things have gone south, and last week’s defeat to Stoke was their fifth in a 
row as they gently bump their way down the table. Still, theydid beat Bristol 
City in the EFL Cup, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/leeds-rely-on-marco-silvestri-heroics-to-send-norwich-city-crashing-out>
 so could that give them a pep-up for the trip to Watford this weekend? “It has 
been quite gloomy when you’re getting beat week in and week out,” Mike Phelan 
said this week. “But you can see in the dressing room that a win’s a win and it 
does mean a lot.” Alas, that looks like a long shot.NM

 * Phelan buoyed by cup victory over Bristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/leeds-rely-on-marco-silvestri-heroics-to-send-norwich-city-crashing-out>
 * Hull draw Newcastle in EFL Cup quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/manchester-united-west-ham-efl-cup>
8) Bony needs to score against old club to boost his new one

Stoke made a worse startto the season than Swansea, but held their nerve and 
kept their manager. Mark Hughes’ side are now unbeaten in four matches; all is 
not yet rosy but Stoke have definitelyplayed with greater cohesion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/hull-city-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 and drive in those games. As injured players return, the team can start 
looking upwards – but cannot be truly confident of winning more matches than 
they lose until they start scoring more. Wilfried Bony scored on his two 
appearances for Manchester City against Swansea, and scoring against his old 
club again would be an overdue opening to his account for Stoke.PD

9) Middlesbrough must improve their home form


It’s a tough gig, staying in the Premier League. It’s even tougher when you 
can’t seem to win a game at home. This season Middlesbrough have just a single 
point from their four games at the Riverside, jarring rather with their 
previous form: they had the best home record in the Championship in each of the 
last two seasons, winning 31 of their 46 games in that time. What’s perhaps 
more concerning for Aitor Karanka is those four home encounters this term have 
been, with the exception ofthe game against Tottenham, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/middlesbrough-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 entirely winnable, but that single point came on thefirst day of the season 
against Stoke. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/middlesbrough-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 Contrast that with fellow promoted side Burnley, who already have three wins 
at Turf Moor to their name: another three or four and they’ll have a very 
decent chance of survival. “When the players, the crowd and everybody are 
together, I am sure we will win games here,” said Karanka this week, and he’d 
better hope so too. Next up on Saturday: Bournemouth.NM

 * ‘Even my 78-year-old father streams’ – why fans are switching off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/football-fans-stream-sky-bt-sport-live-viewers>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcedee08f96c6fc5772ec49e4ca134c5f8be9b12%2F2_35_2836_1701%2F2836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcedee08f96c6fc5772ec49e4ca134c5f8be9b12%2F2_35_2836_1701%2F2836.jpg>
 Álvaro Negredo puts Middlesbrough ahead against Stoke on the opening day – the 
only time Boro have taken the lead in a home game this season. Photograph: 
Steve Welsh/Getty Images 
10) Koeman faces conundrums in attack and defence


Ronald Koeman started at Everton by addressing the problem that Roberto 
Martínez was apparently never able or inclined to resolve: defensive fragility. 
It seemed at first that the Dutchman had succeeded ininstilling new solidity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/ronald-koeman-everton-manchester-city-pep-guardiola>
, but that gain was lost last week as Everton defended badlyin the defeat at 
Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/burnley-everton-premier-league-match-report>
. They remain particularly vulnerable in the air, which is one reason why 
Michail Antonio may thrive when West Ham visit Goodison Park on Sunday. 
Gallingly for Everton fans, the team’s attacking seems to have deteriorated or 
at least not improved, as Romelu Lukaku relies extensively on Yannick Bolasie 
or Idrissa Gueye for service, rather than the erratic decision-making of Kevin 
Mirallas, Ross Barkley and Gerard Deulofeu. Questions about Koeman’s 
decision-making were raised last weekend when he replaced Gueye with the bland 
Tom Cleverley. Everton and their manager need a performance to restore 
confidence.PD

 * Everton’s McCarthy faces another spell on sidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/evertons-james-mccarthy-faces-another-sideline-spell-with-torn-hamstring>

 * West Ham set to ban 200 supporters after EFL Cup trouble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/west-ham-ban-200-supporters-trouble-chelsea-london-stadium> 