
On the morning of 21 January, after a long night of celebrations to mark his 
swearing-in as president,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will take his seat at the 
Resolute Desk inside the Oval Office, pick up his pen, and launch into day one 
of his administration.


Predicting how he will act that first day is fraught with risk, given the mass 
of colourful and often vague promises the president-elect has made over the 
past 18 months on the campaign trail. Many of his most audacious pledges, 
including his much-vauntedplan to build a wall along the Mexican border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/mexico-border-wall-trump-republican-platform>
 and to scrap Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act, would require the involvement 
of Congress and as such, are likely to be slower burns.

What will President Donald Trump do? Predicting his policy agenda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>
But given the unorthodox nature of Trump’s insurgent assault on the White 
House, and his vow that he will bring change to Washington, he will want to 
provide a spectacular show of strength for the American people right from the 
start. To underline the point, his transition team has been preparing what it 
calls theFirst Day Project 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/26/president-trumps-first-term>. 

It would be in keeping with the tone of Trump’s campaign were he to focus the 
First Day Project on terrorizing some of the must vulnerable and powerless 
people in America: the undocumented immigrants. He has said that “on day one” – 
in his first hour, in fact – he would begin to expel “criminal illegal 
immigrants”.

The plans Trump outlined in a policy speech in September would target at least 
5 million and perhaps as many as 6.5 million people for immediate deportation. 
To achieve this, Trump has said that he would triple the size of US Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement, and set up a deportation taskforce, which aWashington 
Post analysis 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trumps-latest-plan-would-target-at-least-5-million-undocumented-immigrants-for-deportation/2016/09/01/d6f05498-7052-11e6-9705-23e51a2f424d_story.html>
 said would cost between $51.2bn and $66.9bn over five years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
Though it will take time to carry out Trump’s full threat of deporting all 11 
million undocumented immigrants,if it is ever doable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/27/donald-trump-deport-11-million-migrants-is-that-even-possible>
, he could instantly wield his power by slashing two of Obama’s signature 
executive orders. The so-called Daca provision, which gave legal status and 
work permission to millions of young undocumented “Dreamers”, and Dapa, which 
promised to extend those rights to their parents before it was blocked in the 
courts.

Trump might also instruct immigration officials on day one to step up scrutiny 
at the ports over new arrivals from certain countries such as Egypt, Syria and 
Saudi Arabia – a ruse to bypass any constitutional legal challenges to his 
contentious promise toban all Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
 from entering the country. Another eye-catching gambit would be to cancel the 
program to resettle refugees from the Syrian war in the US, which would be a 
thinly veiled stab at his rival Hillary Clinton, who had promised to expand the 
scheme.

An added benefit of many of these first-day actions, from Trump’s perspective, 
is that they would not only show that he means business, they would also strike 
at the heart of the Obama legacy. Expect to see several other key Obama 
initiatives bite the dust on 21 January as Trump has said that “on my first 
day, we’re going to immediately terminate every single unconstitutional 
executive order signed by President Obama”.

One possible target of such slash-and-burn tactics will be Obama’s efforts to 
combat climate change. The most incendiary move would be for Trump to tear up 
on day one theParis climate deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/us-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty>
 that was signed and ratified by Obama without the approval of the US Senate, 
rendering it vulnerable to the newcomer’s axe.

The president-elect has similarly threatened to act swiftly to unpick the 
Clean Power Plan that promotes sustainable energy sources and restricts the 
development of carbon-based energy. He might also revive the idea of the 
Keystone pipeline as a way of poking environmentalists in the eye.

As a further dig at his predecessor, Trump may be tempted to announce on day 
one the expansion of Guantánamo Bay, the US military base on Cuba that Obama 
struggled and failed to close. The optics of such a move would be pleasing to 
the new occupant of the White House, as Obama spent his first day there in 2009 
signing an order to shut the extrajudicial detention center down.

It is likely to take the president-elect more than his first day to initiate 
histhreat 
<http://www.newsmax.com/Headline/Donald-Trump-ISIS-bomb-oil/2015/07/01/id/653148/>
 to “bomb the hell out of Isis”. But Trump will want to stand tough on the 
world stage, and to do so he could issue an order to military generals to 
prepare their own detailed plans on how to crush Islamic state through armed 
intervention.

One final flourish might appeal to the rookie president. An announcement of 
his pick to fill the vacant seat of the ninth US supreme court justice would be 
an excellent way of pleasing his supporters while sending an icy chill down the 
spines of liberals.

Trump has already issued a shortlist of potential choices, drawn exclusively 
from the conservative wing of jurisprudence. Many of the candidates are 
virulently anti-abortion, signalling that the new president really does intend 
to overturn Roe v Wade, the ruling that legalised a woman’s right to 
termination.

One of those on the shortlist, William Pryor, has called Roe v Wade “the worst 
abomination in the history of constitutional law”. If Trump nominates him for 
the supreme court on day one, that would make an impact.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Highlights%20from%20Trump's%20presidential%20victory%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Highlights%20from%20Trump%27s%20presidential%20victory%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights&media=>
Highlights from Trump’s presidential victory speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/trumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights> 