
The case of the Vogue Brasil Paralympics 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/08/25/vogue-brazil-criticised-for-photographs-of-able-bodied-actors-di/>
 photoshoot demonstrates how sometimes the road to hell is not only paved with 
good intentions, but also tarmacked with misfiring empathy. In the shoot, 
able-bodied actors Cleo Pires and Paulo Vilhena, ambassadors for the Brazilian 
Paralympic Committee, are shown with limbs digitally removed. Pires has an arm 
missing while Vilhena has a prosthetic leg. In the vexed ethical domain of 
cultural appropriation, it’s difficult to know how to classify this (Medical 
appropriation? Infirmity appropriation?) so perhaps best not to try.

Then there’s the shoot’s message: “We are all paralympians.” Eh? Why are “we” 
all paralympians – it surely couldn’t be because someone got busy with an 
airbrush? Thus didVogue Brasil manage to pull off the remarkable feat of being 
well-meaning and hopelessly insulting at the same.

Why didn’t they use actual paralympians, or disabled models, in this shoot? 
Weren’t they considered photogenic enough? Was there a fear that genuine 
disability might crack the camera lens, melt the lights, or just generally be 
too much of a “downer”? So much better to draft in a couple of sexy thespians, 
lob off any surplus extremities and joints (“You won’t be needing that today, 
honeybun!”). And after the shoot, everyone gets to go home with a lovely warm 
“inclusive” feeling – perchance to write in their diaries (saintly tears 
splashing the ink): “I was a very good, kind, thoughtful person today and I 
hope everyone noticed.” Instead, the entry should have read: “Today, I 
thoughtlessly diminished and patronised not only paralympians, but also every 
disabled person on the planet.”

The shoot managed to portray disability as some kind of “fashion quirk”, a 
trend even, that, given the right lighting and makeup, the hot and able-bodied 
can pull off – in a “work that infirmity, baby!” kind of way. It implied that 
evoking the harsh complicated reality of disability is just a matter of rubbing 
out the malfunctioning body part with a cute computerised eraser, and perhaps 
adding a prosthesis or two. It propagated the notion that disability has no 
social, emotional or psychological components; it’s a mere physical (and 
visual) peculiarity, and one that can be effortlessly faked for the amusement, 
entertainment, and benefit of the able-bodied world.

This isn’t saying that disability has no place on the pages of a glossy 
magazine, or in the fashion world. It’s fake disability masquerading as empathy 
that has no place in any real-world setting. While ordinary disabled people 
might find such fakery offensive, it’s hard to imagine the reactions of 
paralympian athletes.

These are people whose fitness and expertise led to them representing their 
countries in the most high-profile of global sporting arenas. But never mind 
all that – could they do as good, as photogenic, a job of “looking 
hot-disabled” as an able-bodied person could? Seemingly without malice (it must 
be noted),Vogue Brasil blundered into endorsing the idea that, even in the real 
world, disability is better portrayed, made more palatable and attractive 
(sanitised, if you will) by “normal’ people. However well-intentioned, this 
wasn’t being inclusive, or making a genuine attempt to place themselves into 
the world of the disabled – a world that could only ever be unimaginable to a 
privileged, able-bodied person.

This was about replacing a disabled person with an “upgrade” – some looker 
who’s only pretending. It was saying that disability is too important an issue 
to be left to actual disabled people, who might screw it up by not 
photographing well. There was also the presumption that disabled people would 
be grateful for the solidarity and attention, when I suspect that one commodity 
that disabled people aren’t short of is high-handed condescension. Paralympian 
or otherwise, it would seem that disabled people already have quite enough to 
be getting on with in their lives without the able-bodied wanting a piece of 
the action, too.

This is not a pedigree chum - this is a tyrant
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fvogue-brasil-paralympic-photoshoot-insulting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F929e9c4e8677d0f60392fce2c05ebb6aefd0705e%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pretending%20to%20be%20paralympian%20is%20a%20bizarre%20insult%20%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fvogue-brasil-paralympic-photoshoot-insulting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pretending%20to%20be%20paralympian%20is%20a%20bizarre%20insult%20%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fvogue-brasil-paralympic-photoshoot-insulting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F929e9c4e8677d0f60392fce2c05ebb6aefd0705e%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 A maltese. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Last Friday, it was National Dog Day, but it’s always National Dog Day in our 
house. After years of pleading, I gave in to getting a dog. I’d resisted 
because I thought it would be akin to having another child. I was right.

Toto the maltese is a fur baby that needs walking, entertaining, cosseting and 
the rest. Forget bunging over a bit of Winalot, he has us cooking for him as 
though it were some kind of ongoing upmarket canine dinner party.

I find myself cradling him as though he were the little baby Jesus, which 
looks even creepier than it sounds.

If I dare to go out without him, I’m given the full Cujo evils when I get 
home. I carry him when he refuses to walk, once causing an amused builder to 
shout: “I’m not sure you’re doing that right, love.”

I adore him but look at what I’ve become – a grovelling dog serf, ruled over 
by a small, furry, white tyrant whose breath frankly isn’t the best.

May what happened to me be a stark warning to all parents being ground down by 
their cunning progeny. Dogs really are for life. Your life.

A special beer for laydeez? Cheers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fvogue-brasil-paralympic-photoshoot-insulting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac9c01c368826f34f89ac3563703542a5f9e4b6e%2F0_87_2360_1415%2F2360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pretending%20to%20be%20paralympian%20is%20a%20bizarre%20insult%20%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fvogue-brasil-paralympic-photoshoot-insulting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pretending%20to%20be%20paralympian%20is%20a%20bizarre%20insult%20%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fvogue-brasil-paralympic-photoshoot-insulting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac9c01c368826f34f89ac3563703542a5f9e4b6e%2F0_87_2360_1415%2F2360.jpg>
 Women seem to manage OK with ordinary beer. Photograph: Juergen Hasenkopf / 
Rex Features 
A new beer has come out in Spain aimed specifically at women. It has a lower 
alcohol content, comes in a pretty bottle, and it’s called Woman.

At last! I think I can speak for all women who’ve always really fancied a beer 
but daren’t have one in case it wasn’t specially formulated for our sensitive 
lady taste-buds and delicate feminine tummies.

It’s not as though we can drink any old beer – we aren’t real people like men. 
Now that there’s an actual beer called Woman, we can sit in our pretty floral 
dresses, giggle flirtatiously, and drink our low-alcohol beverage in its 
special bottle that fits perfectly into our feeble little hands. What a relief!

Woman sounds like the answer to every female beer drinker’s prayer. I only 
hope that this isn’t a prank, and there aren’t the same kind of question marks 
that hung over another delicious-sounding lady-beer promised earlier this year. 
The company,The Order of Yoni <http://orderyoni.com>, set up a crowdfunding 
page asking for £118,000 to formulate the beer, Bottled Instinct that mimicked 
the “essence of a vagina”, more specifically, the “vaginal lactic acid 
bacteria” of the Czech model who was hired to front the campaign. Sadly, I just 
checked, and all these months later, the company have only managed to raise 
£1,345, 1% of its target from only 59 backers.

The Dragons’ Den panel are in for a treat if this lady beer trend catches on. 
It’s already proving to be a flexible concept. It could be either a beer that 
mimics a vagina, or one that demonstrates that you’re too weak and girly to 
drink real beer.

Where beer is concerned, at last women have choice.
 