
Prince Harry’s extraordinary statement attacking the “racial undertones” of 
press coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/01/prince-harrys-alleged-romance-gets-big-newspaper-attention>
 of his girlfriendMeghan Markle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/prince-harry-britain-race-royals>
 ends with a plea to newspaper editors to “pause and reflect before any further 
damage is done”. But his chances of succeeding in this are far lower than the 
chances of the fifth in line to the throne ever becoming king.

If Harry believes he has dampened interest in his sex life with his direct 
appeal for public sympathy, he has been badly advised. TheSun reported 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2139093/prince-harry-confirms-he-has-been-dating-suits-actress-meghan-markle-for-months/>
: “IT’S OFFICIAL! Prince Harry confirms he has been dating Suits actress Meghan 
Markle for months”, while even theBBC led 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37908096> on the fact that “Prince Harry has 
confirmed that US actress Meghan Markle is his girlfriend”.

The royal intervention raises important questions about whether the press has 
changed since the death of his mother, Diana, or since communications involving 
his older brother prompted what became the phone-hacking scandal. Harry’s 
statement suggests he is among those who believe the press has changed 
surprisingly little.

Prince Harry attacks press over 'wave of abuse' of girlfriend Meghan Markle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/prince-harry-lambasts-press-over-meghan-markle-coverage>
Recent exuberant newspaper coverage, particularly of Brexit but of more 
besides, has convinced campaigners for victims of press intrusion that 
newspapers once again feel relatively unfettered in their pursuit of stories. 
The Mail’s front page labelling high court judges“enemies of the people” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
, for example, came days after the government launched a consultation on two 
remaining elements of the Leveson inquiry into the phone-hacking scandal. The 
Mail went on to crow that the prime minister hadsupported the freedom of the 
press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/06/labour-will-not-block-article-50-jeremy-corbyn-allies-confirm>
 over the matter.

The Society of Editors moved quickly after Harry’s statement to stress that 
the press took allegations of harassment “very seriously” and insist that Fleet 
Street had cleaned up its act since Diana’s death. It went on to accuse foreign 
newspapers, ungoverned by its own code of conduct, of the worst excesses in the 
current crisis.

However, Markle’s lawyers are understood to believe it is demand from British 
newspapers that is encouraging global news outlets to report royal stories that 
the British press can then follow up – although tabloid sources have always 
denied that such “story laundering” takes place.

Jonathan Coad, a privacy expert and partner at Lewis Silkin who has acted both 
for and against the industry, said: “Making a plea to Fleet Street for privacy 
where the press’s commercial interests are engaged is as likely to succeed as 
making a plea to Vladimir Putin to get out of Ukraine. Unfortunately, tabloid 
journalists look atPrince Harry <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-harry> 
as a butcher looks at a pig: his privacy is laid out on a slab for public 
consumption and turned into profitable copy for the tabloid press.”

Prince Harry, whatever his right to a private life, is a public servant paid 
for by the public purse. If the allegations of harassment and bribes to 
Markle’s former boyfriends are borne out, one of the most surprising things is 
that his statement appears to have come before any attempt to protect the 
privacy of a relatively unknown actor or her anonymous family. Palace 
officials, as they have in the past, have acted as though the typical behaviour 
of celebrities – contacting the media regulator, making the terms of engagement 
clear – is beneath them.

Hours after the prince’s statement, Ipso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso>, the industry regulator set up in the 
wake of Leveson and supported by most of the national press, sent a private 
advisory note including a letter from Markle’s lawyers urging editors to desist.

The response will say more about the relationship between tabloid editors and 
Theresa May, who will ultimately decide on press regulation, than it will about 
the relationship between a prince and an actor.
 