
Prince Charles <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> urged 
governments, individuals and businesses to take greater care of the world’s 
soils as part of an initiative aimed at keeping carbon locked in soil, rather 
than escaping into the atmosphere and causing global warming.

The “4 per 1000” <http://4p1000.org/understand> project is a pledge to reduce 
the amount of carbon leaked from soils by 0.4% a year, which would be enough to 
halt the rise of carbon dioxide levels in the air. Nearly 180 countries have 
signed up to the initiative that was set up by the French government as part of 
its efforts to make theParis agreement on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/obama-paris-climate-deal-ratification>
, signed last year, a success.

At a ceremony this week to celebrate the initiative, the prince said that the 
preservation of farmland, forests and soils were of “absolutely critical 
importance - for, in my experience, the fertility and health of the soil is at 
the heart of everything”. Drawing on his own work as an organic farmer, he 
contrasted organic methods with the “previously conventional” farming systems 
which he called “toxic”.

The 4 per 1000 initiative does not require farmers to adopt organic methods, 
but does encourage more attention to farming techniques, which are currently 
contributing to the erosion of soils around the world.

The prince said this project could “make a remarkable contribution to the 
wellbeing, livelihoods, food security and resilience of farmers, to the health 
of the planet and to addressing climate change”.

He said: “It is clear that doing the right thing by our soils, our forests and 
our peatlands would make a remarkable contribution to the fulfilment of the 
Paris agreement.”

But he challenged governments and businesses to espouse the goals: “At the end 
of the day, will we be able to take the necessary urgent steps - or will there 
be the usual procrastination, argument and denial that have so bedevilled any 
meaningful progress in addressing ever more dangerous climate change?”

The French agriculture minister, Stéphane Le Foll, said the prince’s 
involvement was important because “at the end of the day, ministers change but 
the prince always remains”.

Le Foll added that farming and forestry alone could be huge contributors to 
the reductions in greenhouse gases necessary to halt climate change, and small 
changes to farming methods – such as covering slurry pits, collecting or 
flaring methane emissions from slurry, more precise use of fertiliser, and 
working the soil less intensively - could save tens of millions of tonnes of 
carbon dioxide. Better farming methods could also improve food production, he 
said, showing that “food security and combating climate change are 
complementary”.

The French government plans to hold an event at the forthcoming UN meeting on 
climate next month in Marakech, at which it hopes ministers will sign a formal 
letter of their intention to make good on the 4 per 1000 goal.

Recent research found that using soil to soak up carbon from the atmosphere 
couldtake more than a century to have the effects needed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/soil-carbon-storage-not-the-climate-change-fix-it-was-thought-research-finds>
. However, preserving existing soils and the carbon stored in them could have a
quicker beneficial effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/10/soil-our-best-shot-at-cooling-the-planet-might-be-right-under-our-feet>
, as losing that carbon to the air through poor farming methods adds 
immediately to the stock of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
 