
Oakland, California, has played host to a powerful league of revolutionary 
spirits over the years. The Black Panther Party, Brown Berets and Yellow Peril 
all called the bustling Bay Area city home at some point intheir interwoven 
histories 
<http://venceremos.tumblr.com/post/36892442101/brown-berets-black-panthers-and-yellow-peril>
. And now, in the spirit of radical foremothersAngela Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2014/dec/14/angela-davis-there-is-an-unbroken-line-of-police-violence-in-the-us-that-takes-us-all-the-way-back-to-the-days-of-slavery>
,Grace Reyes 
<http://citedatthecrossroads.net/chst404/2012/03/19/brown-beret-still-alive/>, 
andYuri Kochiyama 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2014/06/02/318072652/japanese-american-activist-and-malcolm-x-ally-dies-at-93>
, comes a pint-sized girl group with every bit of the political passion of 
their predecessors.

The Radical Brownies 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Radical-Brownies/875969742435827>, a social 
justice-oriented version of the Girl Scouts, was set up only a few weeks ago to 
“empower young girls of colour to step into their collective power, brilliance 
and leadership to make the world a more radical place”. The group of 12 girls 
are not affiliated to the Girl Guide movement and there are no badges for 
hostessing. Instead, the members, aged between eight and 12 years old, learn 
about black history, civil rights and social justice; their reward system 
includes a “Black Lives Matter” badge and lessons in sustainable agriculture 
for a “Food Justice” badge. “Radical Beauty,” “Radical Self-Love,” and “LGBT 
Ally” badges are also on the curriculum.

Co-founder Anayvette Martinez says the idea stemmed from her own daughter 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=938215802877887&id=875969742435827>
: “I saw the need for a group that would empower and encourage her to form 
bonds of sisterhood with other girls in her community. I began to imagine what 
a radical young girl’s social justice troop looked like; a group that centred 
and affirmed her experiences as a beautiful and brilliant brown girl against so 
many societal pressures to conform to mainstream ideals of girlhood.”

The group also arrives at a time when non-white girls in the US find their 
identities policed on multiple axes. In schools, they already face 
disproportionate (and stratified) discrimination andare suspended at rates that 
far eclipse those of their white peers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/11/us/school-discipline-to-girls-differs-between-and-within-races.html>
. Studies repeatedly show that suspensions can serve as a gateway inthe 
“school-to-prison pipeline” 
<https://www.aclu.org/racial-justice/what-school-prison-pipeline>, and often 
they are issued for reasons that boil down to the girlsnot being “ladylike” 
enough 
<http://www.naacpldf.org/files/publications/Unlocking%20Opportunity%20for%20African%20American%20Girls_0.pdf>
.

Radical Brownies gives them the opportunity to find comfort outside the 
classroom. They are offered a new vision of girlhood that, for the girls who 
are least likely to see the full range of their complexities captured in media, 
fiction or even textbooks, is distinct and powerful. It reminds them that they 
are not alone – they stand on the shoulders of all those who have dedicated 
their lives to fighting for their rights. In a world that tells girls to shrink 
themselves every day, the knowledge of that history of resistance can inspire 
them to become leaders in their own right.

Being a Radical Brownie would have helped me understand the world around me at 
an age when I first started to have big, burning questions about why things are 
the way they are. Better yet, it would have allowed me to do that alongside 
other young girls asking similar questions, while being taught to respect each 
other’s creativity and quirks. Girl power is real, and I can’t even imagine how 
much more self-assured I would have been during my hilariously awkward teenage 
years if I had been part of something so inspiring in the formative years 
preceding them.

Any space that supports young girls and their infinite contributions to the 
world is a positive thing. As the group states: “In these trying times for our 
communities of colour, with histories of struggle and resilience, this space is 
rare, necessary and should be celebrated.”
 