
In a rare show of international unity, more than 30 countries this week 
declared their plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/21/paris-climate-agreement-poised-to-come-into-force>
 to translate into national laws the Paris agreement on climate change.

As a result, by the end of this year, or soon after, the accord should come 
into effect and become binding under international law.

This is a major step. It will be the first time since 1992 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/mar/11/kyoto-protocol> that a 
global agreement on climate change has been internationally accepted (the Kyoto 
protocol, signed by the White House in 1997, was famously stymied by the 
refusal of the US Congress to ratify it), and the first time in history that 
rich and poor countries have faced the same obligations to tackle global 
warming.

Ratification may seem a small step, given that the agreement was passed by 
every one of the 195 United Nations member states last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations>
. But it is important because it gives full legal standing to the document. 
That makes it harder for any government to row back on the Paris commitments.

The most obvious potentially recalcitrant nation is the US, the world’s second 
biggest emitter of greenhouse gases, where thepresidential contender Donald 
Trump has vowed to unpick the agreement if elected this November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/26/donald-trump-environmental-policy-climate-change-keystone-xl>
. But other countries are also in danger of reneging. Russia was always a 
reluctant member,Nicaragua showed signs of trying to stop the agreement while 
the ink was still wet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/13/climate-change-paris-deal-cop21-obama-administration-congress-republicans-environment>
, andAustralia’s volatile politics on climate change could yet cause a U-turn 
on the part of its government. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/12/what-does-paris-climate-agreement-mean-for-australia>

Paris will enter into force if 55 countries, and enough countries to account 
for 55% of global emissions, ratify its contents. The former target will be met 
if the nations that have publicly agreed to ratify now do so, and the latter 
will soon be met if the EU, as promised, takes on its responsibilities in a 
bloc-wide agreement, expected early next year.

It is also important to recall the history of climate change treaties. The 
failure of the US to ratify, despite presidential approval, and Russia’s 
plodding acceptance, meant that the 1997 Kyoto protocolonly became legal in 2005
 <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2005/feb/16/sciencenews.environment>. 
By then it was largely academic, as the world had moved on to begin 
negotiations on a new global settlement on climate change. The world had also 
moved on in terms of emissions, asChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/paris-climate-deal-where-us-and-china-have-led-others-must-quickly-follow>
 was confirmed as the world’s second biggest emitter – and is now the biggest.

Kyoto placed quantified commitments on all developed countries to reduce their 
greenhouse gas emissions. Paris does not. Although nearly all of the world’s 
countries – including the biggest emitters, developed and developing –submitted 
plans before the Paris conference to cut or curb their emissions 
<http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/indc/Submission%20Pages/submissions.aspx>, 
those plans are not legally binding and will not be even when the accord enters 
into force.

The only legally binding commitment is to limit global warming to no more than 
2C above pre-industrial levels, with an additional “aspiration” to take even 
more drastic action to limit warming to 1.5C, which if adhered to could save 
the world’s low-lying islands from inundation.

Quantified emissions curbs up to 2020 – not legally binding but set out 
publicly – were also agreed in 2009, at themuch-derided Copenhagen conference 
on climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/copenhagen>, and 
those commitments still stand.

More importantly, the geopolitical landscape has been transformed in the 
20-plus years in which the world has been discussing a global response to 
climate change. China, which carried no obligations under Kyoto, is now the 
world’s biggest emitter and soon to be the biggest economy. Developing nations 
are also now the biggest sources of the stock of carbon in the atmosphere, 
outpacing the richer countries responsible for “historic” emissions before the 
1990s.

What should we take from the Paris pact? First, recognise the limitations of 
what can be considered legally binding under international law. While nations 
were willing to agree to limit global warming, they were not willing to take on 
binding targets on reducing emissions, of the kind that were stipulated at 
Kyoto. It is now clear, after more than 20 years of international negotiations, 
and a changing pattern of which nations contribute most to the stock of carbon 
dioxide that is warming the planet, that even supposedly binding agreements do 
not guarantee reductions in emissions.

That depends on countries delivering on their pledges to curb carbon 
production, which in turn depends on their internal politics. No international 
treaty, legally binding or not, can force countries to limit emissions if they 
are not willing to do so.

So, although the Paris agreement is an important step, it will not be enough 
to guarantee that warming will not exceed scientific advice. Following through 
on the goal of limiting climate change will require much more: a reversal of 
the current reliance on fossil fuels in favour of low-carbon forms of energy 
production; businesses to alter their practices so that their activities 
produce less carbon; individuals to alter their behaviour; and finding ways to 
cope with a growing population of people who, rightly, wish to enjoy the fruits 
of modern prosperity without destroying the aspirations of their children to do 
the same.

The Paris agreement acknowledged that climate change is a global problem that 
will require concerted global action. It is not, in itself, a solution to that 
problem. But it provides a way forward that can be built into a solution. If we 
want it.
 