
The BFG review – Mark Rylance towers over Roald Dahl's classic tale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/21/the-bfg-review-mark-rylance-towers-over-roald-dahls-classic-tale>
When Steven Spielberg was casting the role of the Queen’s housemaid in The BFG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-bfg>, he knew who to call. The part 
required an actor who was English to the core and as posh as you like; ideally 
with a metaphorical clatter of hockey sticks thrown in for good measure. He 
told Rebecca Hall: “It’s a small role, but it’s significant – and I 
specifically want you to play it,” which was nice of him and flattering – and 
possibly a little galling as well, in that it suggests the director had a 
preconceived notion of what Hall represents. In this, I suspect, he is not 
alone.

Who, me? Why everyone is talking about Rebecca Hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jun/12/rebecca-hall-interview> 
“Directors assume I’m, like, establishment,” she explains, nose wrinkling, and 
then in the same breath concedes that she understands why. She comes with 
pedigree, brandishing a golden ticket that must be justified at every turn. To 
the innocent film-goer, she is a capable young British actor, equally at home 
in Hollywood blockbusters, gritty dramas and period costume. But to others she 
will always be stage royalty, the daughter of directorPeter Hall  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/feb/12/rsc.theatre>and soprano Maria 
Ewing <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maria_Ewing>; a princess wheeled on to 
attend to the Queen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8127cc2163f6cec580b9c0a8c3ff4c7a80cc74cd%2F0_0_3504_2340%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebecca%20Hall%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20born%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20and%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebecca%20Hall%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20born%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20and%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8127cc2163f6cec580b9c0a8c3ff4c7a80cc74cd%2F0_0_3504_2340%2F3504.jpg>
 Rebecca Hall with Penelope Wilton in The BFG. Photograph: Allstar/Walt Disney 
Pictures 
Today, she is in London on a flying visit, arranging and rearranging her long 
limbs on the couch, like a bird making do with an uncomfortable perch. She 
still owns a flat in the capital, she says, but is renting it out and now lives 
in Brooklyn withactor Morgan Spector <http://gb.imdb.com/name/nm1767528/>, her 
husband of 10 months. She supposes that makes her a native New Yorker, whatever 
that means. She points out that besides, she is half-American on her mother’s 
side and grew up watching the likes ofBarbara Stanwyck 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barbara_Stanwyck>, Bette Davis and Myrna Loy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=weMlsReDzf8>. “Those were the women I wanted 
to grow up to be.” She shrugs. “But I was born in the wrong place and at the 
wrong time.”

Never mind, she is coping fine. She has won a Bafta for her role in Channel 4’s
Red Riding <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/red-riding>, provided the 
soulful linchpin ofVicky Cristina Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/22/rebecca-hall-red-riding> and 
played the superhero’s old flame inIron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/marvel-axed-female-villain-from-iron-man-3-after-fears-of-poor-toy-sales-says-director>
. If her career has confounded those who imagined her adopting a more ironclad, 
purist stance, well, that may be for the best.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbfg-trailer-see-mark-rylance-as-the-big-friendly-giant-in-new-look-at-steven-spielberg-film-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BFG%20trailer%3A%20see%20Mark%20Rylance%20as%20the%20Big%20Friendly%20Giant%20in%20new%20look%20at%20Steven%20Spielberg%20film%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbfg-trailer-see-mark-rylance-as-the-big-friendly-giant-in-new-look-at-steven-spielberg-film-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BFG%20trailer%3A%20see%20Mark%20Rylance%20as%20the%20Big%20Friendly%20Giant%20in%20new%20look%20at%20Steven%20Spielberg%20film%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbfg-trailer-see-mark-rylance-as-the-big-friendly-giant-in-new-look-at-steven-spielberg-film-video&media=>
BFG trailer: see Mark Rylance as the Big Friendly Giant in new look at Steven 
Spielberg film – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/06/bfg-trailer-see-mark-rylance-as-the-big-friendly-giant-in-new-look-at-steven-spielberg-film-video>
“I don’t know how you make a living without a few personal compromises,” she 
says. “You don’t have the opportunity to make the indie film you give a shit 
about without making a few of the bigger ones too.” So she has learned to play 
both sides; to cross her fingers and trust her instincts. “Of course, there is 
no way of knowing if a film is going to be good. I’ve worked on so many films 
where the script is one thing and then, somewhere down the line – on set, 
sometimes – it changes and there’s zero I can do about it. I’m thinking of one 
film in particular, but I had better not say.” It conceivably might be the 
mishandledTranscendence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/transcendence>, in 
which she played the doting wife to a comatose Johnny Depp. It remains a rare 
blot on an otherwise polished CV.

Take, for instance, a blockbuster success such as Iron Man 3. Indirectly, that 
helps kindle a knottier, riskier project such as the upcomingChristine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/christine-review-rebecca-hall-astonishes-in-real-life-horror-story>
, in which she gives what may be her finest screen performance, as the 70s news 
reporter Christine Chubbuck, who found notoriety when she killed herself live 
on TV. And yet Hall insists that The BFG was an easy choice, no compromise at 
all. As a kid, she loved Roald Dahl, and jumped at the chance of watching 
Spielberg at close quarters as he prowled the bowels of the film’s 360-degree 
soundstage like some grey-bearded wizard inside a digital Oz. At one stage, he 
even let her pitch in. She took the camera and filmed a car coming down a hill. 
“So I should really have a co-director credit,” she says ruefully. “Maybe you 
can bring that up with him.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb4c9a17ebde2e5f814e392a3be551ebbe2f468b%2F37_109_2710_1626%2F2710.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebecca%20Hall%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20born%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20and%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebecca%20Hall%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20born%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20and%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb4c9a17ebde2e5f814e392a3be551ebbe2f468b%2F37_109_2710_1626%2F2710.jpg>
 Hall with Javier Bardem in the 2008 film Vicky Cristina Barcelona. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
I’m guessing the BFG soundstage isn’t such a far cry from her childhood 
haunts. Hall was raised in the wings, backstage and in transit. Her father 
founded the Royal Shakespeare Company and then served as director of the 
National Theatre. Her mother was Carmen, Rosina in The Barber of Seville and a 
naked Salome, prostrate at Herod’s feet. “Yeah, it was a very colourful, 
peripatetic childhood. It was shifting a lot. My parents divorced when I was 
five. They were always working all over the world. I was in and out of 
different boarding schools. So it was a lot of different spaces; no definite 
places. It wasn’t always easy. My parents were very loving, but they had busy 
lives and big careers, so it was not without its complications.”

Andrew Anthony meets actor of the moment Rebecca Hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/22/rebecca-hall-red-riding> 
She was head girl at Roedean and was thriving at Cambridge right up until the 
moment she quit – choosing instead to take an acting job with her father. “I 
did As You Like It with my dad. I was 20, 21 and I was playing Rosalind and we 
did it for two years with a break in the middle, 360-something performances. 
And I look back on that now as the best possible training. Rosalind went 
through so many different permutations; it was fascinating.” She laughs. “But 
that’s Shakespeare. That’s great writing. It would have been different if I 
were playing Buttons in panto.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3dbb1136587fc4a38fef1598b57e7257cbec09b%2F0_0_3000_1929%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebecca%20Hall%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20born%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20and%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebecca%20Hall%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20born%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20and%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3dbb1136587fc4a38fef1598b57e7257cbec09b%2F0_0_3000_1929%2F3000.jpg>
 Hall with Morgan Freeman (left) and Cillian Murphy in the 2014 film 
Transcendence. Photograph: Peter Mountain/AP 
Does she bridle at suggestions she owed her career to her father? That her 
success has as much to do with connections as it does with graft and talent? 
Hall shakes her head. “It’s an arrogance to complain about that sort of thing. 
And it’s true. Of course I’ve had connections. Of course I’ve had a charmed 
life in terms of what I want to do.” She mulls it over. “The problem I have is 
that I walk into a room and everyone assumes they know everything about me. At 
a certain point that gets frustrating. But at the same time you’re a complete 
idiot if you try to correct them. I’m not going to walk up and say: ‘Oh, let me 
tell you about my personal sufferings and my tragedies that make me not this 
perfect, entitled luvvy who’s had everything so easy.’ I’m not going to share 
those things with those people.”

The more Hall talks, the more animated she gets. She scrunches her face and 
recrosses her legs. At the age of 34, the actor still carries a hint of 
adolescent gawkiness; the sense that she remains a slight work in progress. And 
I think – paradoxically – this might be the making of her. It softens her edges 
and wins an audience over, whether on-screen or off.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a3ca56579d4aa29370bf79a49fe6c8388ef8325%2F0_156_2008_1046%2F2008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebecca%20Hall%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20born%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20and%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebecca%20Hall%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20born%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20and%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Frebecca-hall-i-was-born-in-the-wrong-place-and-at-the-wrong-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a3ca56579d4aa29370bf79a49fe6c8388ef8325%2F0_156_2008_1046%2F2008.jpg>
 Rebecca with her father, theatre director Peter Hall, in 2010. Photograph: 
Dave M Benett/Getty Images 
By now, she almost appears to be thinking aloud. “It’s difficult to tell, when 
you’ve been brought up in a slightly crazy way, whether you’re more comfortable 
with chaos because that’s what you like, or whether you secretly hate it and 
it’s just what you’re used to. And I still don’t really know. But I think I’m 
getting to the point where stability might be really nice for me. Like I never 
thought I’d get married and I got married quite recently. Shocking. Plus he’s 
an actor, which was also something I swore I’d never, ever do. But it feels 
like I’ve got a root somewhere, which is good.”

Did she ever want to sing, like her mother? Hall blinks in surprise, comes 
screeching to a halt. “Um,” she says. “I did. That’s territory that’s quite 
hard for me. Singing is scary, because of my mum. But singing means a lot to 
me. And when I’m on my own, and no one is listening, pretty much all I do is 
sing. But it’s getting easier; I’m getting there. I’ve got a musician friend in 
New York and occasionally he asks me to go and sing with him.” Another blink. 
“I don’t know why I’m telling this to the press. My God,” she exclaims, “this 
is a terrible idea.”

She can envisage a time when acting takes a backseat, or shuffles up to make 
room for various other pursuits. She won’t sing in public, but she would love 
to direct. Just lately, between jobs, Hall has been working at screenplays. She 
has written a short film, which she plans to shoot soon, and a screenplay that 
needs funding, although she admits that the process is tricky. It is almost as 
if she is beginning afresh; an aspiring film-maker with no track record to 
speak of and nothing to show unless you include that uncredited snippet from a 
Spielberg blockbuster. “The car coming down the hill,” she says with a grin. 
“It’s not Citizen Kane, but at least it’s a start.”

• The BFG <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-bfg> is released in the UK on 
22 July.
 