
The Confederation of African Football has been referred for prosecution in 
Egypt over the sale of its worldwide television rights for the next 12 years at 
a price said to be worth $1bn. The president of Caf, Issa Hayatou, a former 
acting president ofFifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa>, does not 
appear to have been referred for prosecution personally; Caf said initial 
reports that he had were “false”, while insisting the confederation has 
committed no offence in relation to its TV deals.

The Premier League’s likely winners and losers from 2017 Africa Cup of Nations 
| Paul Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/premier-league-winners-losers-2017-africa-cup-of-nations>
The Egyptian Competition Authority made an announcement 
<http://www.eca.org.eg/ECA/News/List.aspx> with a headline that it has referred 
“the president of the Caf”, Hayatou, to the country’s public prosecutor, but in 
its statement said only Caf itself has been referred for potential prosecution, 
allegedly for not putting its TV rights out to a competitive tender.

In June 2015 Caf agreed to sell the worldwide rights to the Africa Cup of 
Nations and Caf Champions League matches, from 2017 through to 2028, to the
French media company Lagardère Sports <http://www.lagardere.com/group-274.html>
, which had also bought the rights for the nine previous years. The $1bn that 
Lagardère will reportedly pay Caf for the worldwide rights to the prestige 
African football tournaments over 12 years is said to be a 10-fold increase on 
the value of the previous nine-year deal.

The ECA, announcing its referral of Caf for prosecution in the runup to the 
Africa Cup of Nations which starts in Gabon on 14 January, claimed Caf renewed 
its relationship with Lagardère without giving other broadcasters a fair 
opportunity to bid. It alleges Caf was “abusing its dominant position” by doing 
the deal, citing five separate sections of Egyptian competition law the ECA 
argues were breached.

The announcement by the authority in Egypt, where Caf has its headquarters, 
follows the failure last year of an Egyptian broadcaster, Presentation, to 
secure from Caf the right to broadcast matches. The company were reported to 
have tried to buy from Lagardère a sub-licence to broadcast matches in the 
Middle East and north-Africa region, but Lagardère sold those regional rights 
to the large, Qatari-owned broadcaster BeIn Sports. After that, Presentation 
reportedly made a bid directly to Caf, said to be $1.2bn, to buy the worldwide 
rights, but Caf had already sold these to Lagardère.

Announcing its action, the ECA said it has used legal powers to terminate 
Caf’s agreement with Lagardère in Egypt, and forced Caf to allow another 
broadcaster as well as BeIn to show this year’s Africa Cup of Nations.

“These orders are legal obligations binding the Caf,” the ECA said, “and 
failure to fully comply may subject the entity to further private damages 
claims from injured parties in addition to heavy criminal fines.”

In a statement, Caf said 
<http://www.cafonline.com/en-US/NewsCenter/News/NewsDetails?id=kWoeq5EmakwJ3hgCUHakWw%3d%3d>
 that the letter it had received from the ECA made no mention of a recommended 
prosecution for Hayatou, Caf president since 1988 and acting Fifa president 
from October 2015,when Sepp Blatter was suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/iss-hayatou-acting-president-fifa-sepp-blatter-suspended>
, toGianni Infantino’s election in February 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/26/gianni-infantino-elected-fifa-president-election>
. Caf also insisted its executive committee had followed correct procedures 
when agreeing the new deal and not breached any competition laws.

“This contract guarantees African football a substantial increase in revenues 
and substantial funding for the development of football on the continent,” it 
said. “Caf wishes to point out that the contract with Lagardère Sports does not 
contravene national or supranational legislation, as established by categorical 
legal opinions in this regard.”

Lagardère Sports also maintained that its 2017-28 contract with Caf was a 
fully legal renewal of its previous 2008-16 deal, and rejected the claims that 
it breaches Egyptian competition law. “Although Lagardère Sports is not the 
subject of the correspondence from the Egyptian competition authorities, any 
allegations that the agreement breaches local Egyptian competition laws are 
wholly unfounded and we have clear and categorical legal advice to that 
effect,” the statement said.

Hayatou, still Fifa’s senior vice-president on its ruling council and 
previously anexecutive committee member for more than 25 years 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/committees/people=26866/index.html> from 1990, 
has not been accused by any legal authorities of involvement in the 
organisation’s recent corruption scandals. In 1995 he received cash from the 
rights company ISL, which paid millions of dollars in bribes to other senior 
Fifa officials.

In 2011, after that payment was reported, Hayatou was reprimanded by the 
International Olympic Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/dec/08/lamine-diack-issa-hayatou-ioc>, 
of which he was also a member, but Fifa took no action. Hayatou argued the 
money was for Caf’s 50th anniversary celebrations, not him personally.
 