
There are, inevitably, mixed feelings about seeing past chairmen and directors 
of the Football Association speakingout now about the need to curb the Premier 
League’s power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/football-association-premier-league-parliamentary-committee-reform>
, given their propensity mostly to do nothing about it when they had the 
chance, in the actual job. That might be unfair to David Triesman, who was 
savaged by the Premier League during his unhappy stint as chairman for daring 
to assert the primacy of the FA, but the reform proposals of David Bernstein 
and Greg Dyke, which they failed to secure, always seemed aimed more at the FA 
itself, and in office they were not noted critics of the Premier League.

The Guardian view on the football association: wrong regulator for the 
beautiful game | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/the-guardian-view-on-the-football-association-wrong-regulator-for-the-beautiful-game>
Dyke, characteristically vocal now, famously told the Guardian in an interview 
while he was the chairman of football’s still-distinguished and historic 
governing body,that he had so much money personally, he “didn’t give a fuck” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/05/greg-dyke-interview-people-keep-saying-well-done-you-got-rid-of-blatter>
. Yet rather than revel in that personal financial independence by taking on 
the billionaire vested interests of the Premier League for the game’s greater 
all-round good, Dyke somehow ended up implementing a redundancy programme at the
FA itself, sacking 100 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/21/greg-dyke-job-cuts-fa-bitter-taste>
, some of whom are still not in work a year on – so presumably still have to 
“give a fuck”.

The busyness of Damian Collins MP, the chair of the culture, media and sport 
committee, drafting yet another backbench bill to reform football – this one a 
vote of no confidence in the FA, which seems a little over the top – is 
meaningless without government support. Collins is a Conservative, so he could 
be doing the difficult job of seeking to persuade his colleagues in government 
that although they have one or two fine national messes of their own to 
salvage, they should make time for football reform as a priority.

Without it, this is more talk, of which there has been a great deal over the 
past 24 years, in which the rehabilitated, seated, moneyed new age of the
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> has been 
accompanied by unease and disillusionment over its hyper-commercialisation and 
inequality. Every parliamentary inquiry since the new Labour government’s 
Football Task Force of 1997 has taken evidence, had a solemn think and reached 
the same conclusions.

Football has wonderful traditions in England, support for the game is 
phenomenal, but the 1992 breakaway of the then Football League First Division 
clubs, so as not to share their pay-TV bonanza with the rest of the game, 
rocket-fuelled the necessary modernisation of the sport with a culture of 
greed. During these discussions the FA’s executives, including some of these 
five who are public reformers now, have resisted that analysis and stood in a 
huddle with the Premier and Football Leagues against the campaigns of 
supporters, assuring governments that all is well.

These five should nevertheless be listened to because they are clearly 
speaking from experience about the inability of the FA to govern the Premier 
League “juggernaut”. The most insightful point in their letter to Collins is 
that even the money the Premier League does now distribute, which is only 
around 6% of the £8bn being reaped by 20 clubs from their latest 2016-19 TV 
bonanza, “is wielded to assert beneficial positions for the Premier League”.

The crumbs for the Football League have regularly been given with an ultimatum 
from the Premier League chief executive, now executive chairman, Richard 
Scudamore, that if the 72 clubs did not accept rules, for example on youth 
development, all the funding would be cut. For all the private grumbling, the 
Football League has meekly fallen into line over the years, rather than lose a 
million pounds here or there for each Championship club.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffa-lacks-power-to-counter-premier-league-says-greg-dyke-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20lacks%20power%20to%20counter%20Premier%20League%2C%20says%20Greg%20Dyke%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffa-lacks-power-to-counter-premier-league-says-greg-dyke-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20lacks%20power%20to%20counter%20Premier%20League%2C%20says%20Greg%20Dyke%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffa-lacks-power-to-counter-premier-league-says-greg-dyke-audio&media=>
FA lacks power to counter Premier League, says Greg Dyke – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/12/fa-lacks-power-to-counter-premier-league-says-greg-dyke-audio>
Scudamore, of course, represents rich clubs now mostly owned by overseas 
investors, who bought them as assets to make money for themselves from the boom 
in the TV rights. His job is to achieve that for them, for the “shareholders”.
Alan Pardew slipped out last week a reflection that the US investors in his 
club, Crystal Palace, “perhaps don’t know a lot about football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/alan-pardew-criticises-crystal-palace-owners>
”, but that is another truth that mostly dare not speak its name and it was 
reported as a faux pas by Pardew.

FA is powerless to counter Premier League’s might, ex-chairmen tell MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/football-association-premier-league-parliamentary-committee-reform>
There were positive results from the Football Task Force; the Premier League 
was pressed into distributing money for the first time to grassroots 
facilities: 5%, via the Football Foundation. The Burns review, a reform 
document of moderate ambition focused on the FA, at least resulted in 
independent chairmen and now two non-executive directors for the FA, which led 
to Triesman, Bernstein and Dyke fulfilling the role.

Over time, these public outcries, combined with increased professionalism of 
clubs, has led to a more rounded, socially responsive approach than the 
unattractive money frenzy of the Premier League’s first few years, which made 
the first fortunes for the selling English owners. Scudamore has also learned 
when facing these regular challenges how to lobby governments about the Premier 
League’s Hollywood‑style TV dominance internationally and demonstrate the 
extensive community work that clubs have developed at home.

The perennial result has been that governments have soon been won over by the 
Premier League’s success story and, rather than seek to curb its excesses, have 
tended to snuggle up for reflected glamour. There is no sign so far that this 
government will be any different, so when Collins’s committee hosts the sports 
minister, Tracey Crouch, on Tuesday perhaps he and his fellow MPs could put her 
through some of the same righteousinterrogation they seem to like dishing out 
to the FA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/damian-collins-mp-parliamentary-privilege-neil-warnock>
.
 