
The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> is dismantling a 
discriminatory surveillance system that was used after 9/11 to keep tabs on 
Arabs and Muslims across the US, in a move that will make it more difficult for 
president-elect Donald Trump to achieve his goal of introducing a Muslim 
registry.


Muslims to march on White House in bid to dismantle discriminatory registry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/american-muslims-march-white-house-nseers>
Thursday’s announcement 
<https://s3.amazonaws.com/public-inspection.federalregister.gov/2016-30885.pdf> 
by the Department of Homeland Security that it is tearing down the remnants of 
the National Security Entry-Exit Registration System (Nseers) marks the most 
audacious attempt yet by Barack Obama to place roadblocks in the way of his 
successor’s declared intentions. A key element of Trump’s bid for the White 
House was his threat to prevent non-citizen Muslims from entering the US and to 
keep them under surveillance once inside the country.

The Nseers program was one of the most contentious – and widely hated – 
elements of the Bush administration’s anti-terror policies in the wake of 9/11. 
More than 80,000 people from 25 listed countries, 24 of which had majority 
Muslim or Arab populations, were forced onto the scheme in which they were 
required to provide fingerprints and a photograph and periodically present 
themselves for in-person interviews with DHS officers.

About 14,000 of those individuals were placed into deportation proceedings. 
Yet not a single individual was found to have any links to terrorist or violent 
activities.

Mohammad Jafar Alam, a member of South Asian social justice group Desis Rising 
Up and Moving (Drum) that was at the forefront of the campaign to dismantle 
Nseers, was one of those who endured Nseers surveillance. He said he knew from 
personal experience what it did to individuals and their families.

“The extreme mental, emotional distress, the financial problems, the pressures 
on a family and the isolation that happens is a punishment not just for one 
person, but everyone involved.”


Joanne Lin, legislative counsel with the ACLU, which was also at the front 
line of opposition to Nseers, said it was a “completely failed counterterrorism 
program. Out of 80,000 men who registered for it, there was not a single 
terrorism conviction, yet it alienated Muslim and South Asian communities 
across the country. So we are very pleased that the Obama administration has 
moved to end it.”

Obama has come under intense lobbying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/american-muslims-march-white-house-nseers>
 in recent days from human rights and Muslim American groups to do something 
about the Nseers system. Though the current president has generally acted 
cautiously in avoiding any impression that he wants to foil Trump’s policies, 
his move to unpick the surveillance scheme is a sign of how opposed he is to 
his successor’s threats to put Muslims under the governmental spotlight.

Nseers was allowed to fall into abeyance in 2011 after DHS and FBI officials 
concluded that it was discriminatory and ineffective. But the framework for the 
registry remained in place until this week, meaning that it could easily and 
quickly have been revived by the incoming Trump administration simply by 
putting majority Muslim countries back onto the list.

Now with the posting of the DHS order dismantling the final remnants of the 
scheme, it will be much more difficult for Trump to implement his avowed intent 
to place Muslims under renewed surveillance. The final order tearing down 
Nseers will be posted on Friday, with immediate effect.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-calls-for-complete-ban-on-muslims-entering-the-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20calls%20for%20complete%20ban%20on%20Muslims%20entering%20the%20US%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-calls-for-complete-ban-on-muslims-entering-the-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20calls%20for%20complete%20ban%20on%20Muslims%20entering%20the%20US%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-calls-for-complete-ban-on-muslims-entering-the-us-video&media=>
During the primaries, Donald Trump called for a complete ban on Muslims 
entering the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/08/donald-trump-calls-for-complete-ban-on-muslims-entering-the-us-video>
. 
Professor Shoba Sivaprasad Wadhia, director of the Center for Immigrants’ 
Rights clinic at the Pennsylvania State University, said that the rescinding of 
the Nseers structure would put a break on Trump’s plans. “At the very least it 
is going to take time. At most it will take a whole lot of time, as it will 
force the Trump administration to introduce a rule change that could be open to 
public comment and legal challenge.”


Wadhia added: “This is the best Christmas present I could have asked for.”

Trump and a Muslim registry: does he want one – and is it even possible?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-muslim-registry-policy-possibility>
The contentious call for a ban on all Muslims 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/12/07/politics/donald-trump-muslim-ban-immigration/> 
entering the US became a cornerstone of Trump’s presidential campaign. He later 
changed that posture to proposing the introduction of “extreme vetting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/16/donald-trump-extreme-vetting-immigrants-video>
” of newcomers with a focus on a number of identified countries deemed a 
terrorism threat.

 Kris Kobach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-kris-kobach-documents-syria-muslims>
, one of the original architects of Nseers who has been advising the Trump 
transition team on immigration and anti-terrorism, proposed last month as his 
no 1 priority for homeland security that he would“update and reintroduce” the 
surveillance program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-kris-kobach-documents-syria-muslims>
.

Gregory Chen, director of advocacy at the American Immigration Lawyers 
Association, said that Nseers had “upended the lives of tens of thousands of 
businessmen, scientists, families and other individuals lawfully present in our 
country. The Obama administration has publicly acknowledged that the program is 
obsolete and unnecessary as a counterterrorism tool.”

• This article was amended on 29 December 2016 to correct a quote from Joanne 
Lin. She said there had not been a single terrorism conviction - not 
prosecution - out of the 80,000 men who were registered on the Nseers program.
 