
Renisha McBride was apparently seeking help after a car accident in Dearborn 
Heights, Michigan, when she knocked on Theodore Wafer’s door early one morning 
last November. He shot her in the face with a 12-gauge shotgun through a locked 
screen door.

Now he’s on trial, and he’s claiming it was self-defense. The prosecution 
rested its case on Wednesday after presenting 20 witnesses over five days of 
testimony, andhis team is now presenting its side to the jury 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20140804/NEWS02/308040114/Theodore-Wafer-Renisha-McBride>
.

Before the trial started, Judge Dana Hathaway denied 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2675199/No-selfies-porch-shooting-victim-trial.html>
 Wafer’s request to show the jury cellphone pictures in which McBride is seen 
posing with guns, marijuana and cash – noting that there could be a million 
reasons why McBride would pose that way and that “nothing in the photographs 
that establishes a reputation for violent or aggressive behavior”. Cheryl 
Carpenter, Wafer’s attorney,told reporters 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/no-selfies-porch-shooting-victim-trial> that 
their defense strategy had been “to argue to the jury that she could have been 
up to no good”. (They now claim that she was with an unknown second person, who 
was trying to break in 
<http://www.mlive.com/news/detroit/index.ssf/2014/07/wafers_attorney_another_person.html>
.)

Fucking punks. Those assholes, they always get away 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/06/24/george-zimmerman-trial-day-one-f-king-punks.html>
.

It’s a common defense strategy – America will readily embrace the narrative of 
the inherent criminality of black kids – and it’s common because these 
shootings are increasingly common.

McBride’s death was preceded by that of a Florida A&M football player, 
Jonathan Ferrell, who wasshot and killed by North Carolina patrolmen after a 
car accident 
<http://www.cnn.com/2013/09/15/justice/north-carolina-police-shooting/>. 
(Voluntary manslaughter charges against the officer, Randall Kerrick, are 
pending.) Before that, Jordan Davis, a 16-year-old African-American teenager, 
wasshot outside of a Florida gas station 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/02/15/michael-dunn-jury/5501117/>
 by a white man who claimed to be distressed by the teen’s loud music. (The 
jury in the trial of the shooter, Michael Dunn,deadlocked on the murder charge 
but convicted him of four counts of attempted murder 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/michael-dunn-verdict-lawyers-plot-next-move-after-jury-deadlocks-on-murder-charge/>
. Prosecutors have promised a retrial.) And just prior to that, in my hometown 
of Milwaukee, a 13-year-old African American boy, Darius Simmons, wasshot and 
killed in front of his mother by a white neighbor 
<http://www.jsonline.com/news/crime/75yearold-man-charged-with-fatally-shooting-boy-13-2i5koou-156471825.html>
, John Spooner, whosaid 
<http://www.jsonline.com/news/crime/opening-statements-in-spooner-trial-turn-on-intent-mental-capacity-b9955359z1-215676871.html>
 that he believed that the child had stolen items from his home. (Spooner was 
convicted and sentenced to life in prison 
<http://www.jsonline.com/news/crime/john-spooner-to-be-sentenced-for-killing-teen-neighbor-b9959131z1-216417501.html>
.) That death was preceded by the shooting death of a 16-year-old 
African-American boy in Florida,Trayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/trayvon-martin>, by a self-appointed 
neighborhood watchmen, George – who whined about those “fucking punks” to a 911 
operator before shooting the unarmed boy. (Zimmerman was eventually acquitted.)

The loud music trial. The hoodie trial. The porch shooting trial. In all of 
them, a familiar narrative surfaces. The accused killers are white, and insist 
that they feared for their lives; the dead are black, and were all unarmed. The 
killing of a black teen is justified first, and only questioned after. It took 
46 days for Zimmerman to be arrested. It took 13 days for Wafer to be arrested. 
Spooner, at least, was arrested on the spot – but it was broad daylight, there 
were multiple witnesses and he calmly admitted what he’d done.

Yeah, I shot him 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/darius-simmons-murder-john-henry-spooner-wis-man-76-guilty-in-fatal-shooting-of-13-year-old-teen-neighbor/>
.

There’s more to the argument that the shooters feared for their lives than 
just that it’s the only plausible defense. There’s a belief by the shooters – 
and a wider acceptance – that, because the people that they supposedly feared 
were black, that their fear is plausible … evenreasonable. 

An MSNBC-commissioned report by the Urban Institute 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/can-women-stand-their-ground> this past spring 
notes that “Among homicides overall (perpetrated by both men and women), [an 
Urban Institute analyst]found 
<http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/904607-Stand-Your-Ground-Laws.pdf> that 11.4% 
of murders of black people committed by white people were found justified, 
compared to 1.2% of black-on-white murders. The disparity is widest in states 
with Stand Your Ground statutes.”

White racial fears are informed by the deeply historical legacy of slavery and 
white supremacy: America has taught its citizens to fear black bodies. For 
instance, the decades of lynching of black men in America –including 14 
year-old Emmett Till in 1955 <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/till/> – were 
allegedly to protect the purity of white women. Black, in our culture, long ago 
became synonymous with wickedness and violence – and we were ultimately 
dehumanized.

We are left with a culture still clinging to that fear and bias. This past 
spring,a study 
<http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2014/03/black-boys-older.aspx> showed 
that black boys are perceived as older and less innocent andanother study 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2013/06/racial_empathy_gap_people_don_t_perceive_pain_in_other_races.html>
 showed that many white people don’t believe black people feel pain in the same 
way as whites. Writing about the latter,Jason Silverstein explained at Slate 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2013/06/racial_empathy_gap_people_don_t_perceive_pain_in_other_races.html>
 that “The researchers concluded that ‘the present work finds that people 
assume that, relative to whites, blacks feel less pain because they have faced 
more hardship.’”

I just shot someone on my front porch. With a shotgun. Banging on my door 
<http://www.freep.com/VideoNetwork/2842306730001/Listen-to-911-call-in-Renisha-McBride-shooting>
.

The vulnerability of black women in this context gets exacerbated: our 
womanhood gets eclipsed by our blackness (depending on the eye of the beholder) 
and our femininity erased. We become perceived as equivalent to men, and 
undeserving of – or without a need for – compassion, protection or help.

Perhaps here we can point to the myths of the strong black women, the “angry 
black woman”, the hypersexed female – or to any of the ways that we deny the 
full humanity of black women. A black woman in distress is more easily seen as 
a threat than a victim, and no one rushes to her defense.

After Marissa Alexander, an African-American woman in Florida, fired a warning 
shot aroundher admittedly abusive husband 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/90595503/Marissa-Alexander-Alleged-Victim-Disposition>
 during an attack, she was immediately arrested, sent to trial,convicted of 
aggravated assault 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/178641/marissa-alexander-now-faces-60-years-prison-firing-warning-shot-self-defense#>
 and sentenced to 20 years despite the fact that nobody was hurt. Prosecutors 
were –and remain 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/07/22/marissa_alexander_denied_new_stand_your_ground_hearing_still_faces_up_to_60_years_in_prison/>
 – unconvinced that her fear for her life was reasonable.

Alexander’s first conviction was overturned by the courts 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/court-overturns-20-year-sentence-woman-fired-warning/story?id=20387742>
: Florida Attorney General Angela Corey is now seeking a 60-year sentence in 
her retrial.The average prison sentence for abusive men who kill their partners 
is two to six years <http://www.umich.edu/~clemency/clemency_mnl/ch1.html#C1>.

The jury seemed incapable of acknowledging the idea black women are vulnerable 
too: instead, we’re criminal. She must have provoked her aggressor, this 
“strong black woman”, and therefore she is complicit.

The multiple efforts of Wafer’s defense attorney 
<http://www.thenewsherald.com/articles/2014/07/29/news/doc53d7d83b183a6458793498.txt>
 to show the jury McBride’s cellphone pictures is just an effort to place her 
in this same narrative: an “angry” black woman, banging on a door, late at 
night in a neighborhood that isn’t hers. She was unarmed and she was shot in 
the face, but the defense wants the jury to consider who was the “real” 
criminal.

The willingness to accept or promote a singular narrative about the black 
experiences in American society is a denial of the multitudes of lives of black 
men and women. Obama,in his remarks 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/07/19/remarks-president-trayvon-martin>
 one week after the Zimmerman verdict, offered this challenge to Americans, 
“[At] least you ask yourself your own questions about, am I wringing as much 
bias out of myself as I can? Am I judging people as much as I can, based on not 
the color of their skin, but the content of their character?”

 Instead, we reconstruct the lives of these dead black kids in defense of 
their killers. We look for some photograph, some musical choice, something that 
allows us to slot them into these preconceived notions of inherent criminality, 
all to say that they weren’t good enough people, and that their killers were 
justified in believing that they were up to no good and deserved to die. And 
then we wait for the next one.
 