
The Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, nestled atop a majestic peak in the 
southernCalifornia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> mountains 
near Los Angeles, hosts many monuments to Reagan’s politics and achievements. 
Statues portray him riding a horse in triumph or genially waving to the tour 
groups waiting to see his museum. An actual Air Force One plane is on permanent 
display. Children play on a concrete barrier freshened up by graffiti of a 
butterfly with pink wings, once a piece of the Berlin Wall.


On Saturday, the library hosted a more bizarre monument to newer conservative 
politics: theReagan National Defense Forum 
<https://www.reaganfoundation.org/programs-events/the-reagan-national-defense-forum/>
, a conference that provided subtle eulogies for the failed movement to stop 
Donald Trump.

'Putting lipstick on a pig': experts on why Obama is lending Trump a hand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/barack-obama-donald-trump-phonecalls-transition>
Once, the national-security wing of the Republican party formed the core of 
the #NeverTrump coalition, issuingopen letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/republicans-donald-trump-warning-letter-bush-reagan>
 that denounced the businessman’s geopolitical recklessness or ignorance. Now 
Trump will be president, and that wing is coming to terms with it. At the 
Reagan library, it appeared most comfortable reframing Trump within familiar 
Republican approaches to foreign affairs, no matter how much rhetorical finesse 
the task required.

Buck McKeon, a former California congressman, had finesse to spare. Outside a 
private conference room, he agreed to an on-camera interview about Trump and 
set to work disputing the premises of each question. Hasn’t Trump shown himself 
to be hostile to free trade, a central aspect of the Reagan catechism?

“I don’t think you pull away from trade,” he said, “but I think he’s setting 
an open stance for negotiation. That’s what a businessman does.”

What about Trump’s seeming penchant for isolationism? “Isolationist?” scoffed 
McKeon, a former chairman of the House armed services committee whom Saudi 
Arabia recentlyhired as a lobbyist 
<http://www.politico.com/tipsheets/politico-influence/2016/11/saudis-add-mckeon-to-lobbying-blitz-217537>
. “He just talked to the president of Taiwan.”

That conversation, a disruption of nearly 40 years of diplomatic protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-taiwan-tsai-ing-wen-phone-call-foreign-policy>
 designed to reassure China, caused no shortage of awkwardness among conference 
attendees. To many in Washington and around the world, it reaffirmed fears that 
Trump will blunder his way into international crisis. No one at the Reagan 
library defended the Trump-Tsai Ing-wen call outright.

But some prominent attendees were content to brush it aside. The South 
Carolina senator Lindsey Graham, whobarely conceals his loathing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/22/donald-trump-reveals-republican-rival-lindsey-grahams-phone-number-on-tv>
 for a man he on Saturday often called simply “Trump”, insisted the US had not 
backed away from the longstanding one-China policy, which does not challenge 
Beijing’s insistence that Taiwan is a breakaway province. Dan Sullivan, a 
Republican senator from Alaska, said the Chinese reaction seemed muted, and 
suggested Congress had a well of support for Taiwan.

Such was the tenor of the conference: reinterpreting Trump to position him 
within the traditional modes of US foreign policy and Republican politics. His 
inconsistencies have given attendees enough to work with. Whereas on the 
campaign trail Trump called Nato “obsolete” and suggested conditioning the 
defense of allies on their ability to pay for it, now even Barack Obama says 
Trumpdoesn’t actually mean it 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-11-14/obama-says-trump-told-him-he-supports-u-s-commitment-to-nato>
.

Yet some of Trump’s departures can’t be spun away. Russia, the bête noire of 
this year’s conference, is chief among them.Dick Cheney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dick-cheney>, the former vice-president, 
called Vladimir Putin, to whom Trump has been warm, “a very dangerous man”. 
Without attempting to reconcile his perspective and Trump’s – “I’m not here 
today to advise Mr Trump,” he said – Cheney urged Trump to “reassert US 
leadership in the world”. Left unanswered was what version of US leadership 
Trump, who is as charmed by the Russians as Reagan was hostile to them, would 
present.

US and UK explore possibility of aid airdrops in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/us-uk-explore-possibility-aid-airdrops-syria-drones>
One Republican official with a national security profile described the affair 
as a coping mechanism. Uncertainty over Trump reigns, yet conservatives face 
the exciting prospect of unified GOP control of the US government. Many hold a 
sincere belief that foreign policy has suffered significantly under Obama and 
want to help fix it, even if it means coming to terms with Trump.

Careerism also plays its role. “When there’s an assistant secretaryship at 
stake, a lot of principles get thrown out,” conceded the official, who asked 
for anonymity.

‘Some course corrections’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Freagan-republicans-defense-foreign-policy-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd3800d8daf2e54488c0c906affd12299d914e9e%2F0_320_4537_2723%2F4537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Republican%20defense%20community%20fills%20Reagan%20shrine%20with%20prayers%20over%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Freagan-republicans-defense-foreign-policy-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Republican%20defense%20community%20fills%20Reagan%20shrine%20with%20prayers%20over%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Freagan-republicans-defense-foreign-policy-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd3800d8daf2e54488c0c906affd12299d914e9e%2F0_320_4537_2723%2F4537.jpg>
 Gen Joseph Dunford said he wanted ‘a consensus on national security’. 
Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Senior military officers, whose relationship to Trump is fixed by the 
constitution, also endeavored to fit Trump into their standard ways of doing 
business.

Asked about Trump’s fixation on the military virtues of unpredictability, the 
chief of staff of the air force, Gen David Goldfein, said that as long as he 
provides Trump with a menu of tactical options, “if there’s an unpredictability 
in that, I’ve done my job”. The chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, the 
marine general Joseph Dunford, met Trump’s transition team on Wednesday and 
said to expect “some course corrections” on military strategy against the 
Islamic State – though Dunford did not address specific Trump suggestions, such 
as killing the families of Isis fighters or stealing oil from Iraq.

Without ever criticising their incoming commander-in-chief, the officers 
tiptoed around the departure from traditional foreign policy that Trump 
represents. Asked what he wanted more than anything else to address global 
threats, Dunford said “a consensus on national security”. Gen Mark Milley, the 
chief of staff of the army, echoed Dunford on a need to re-establish first 
principles.

“We need to be clear. What is America’s role in the world?” Milley said. 

If Trump’s conversation with the Taiwanese president caused the Reagan forum 
attendees to cringe, his selection of Dunford’s fellow marineJim Mattis as 
defense secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/james-mattis-defense-secretary-nuclear-missiles-trump>
 caused them to exhale. Enthusiasm for Mattis echoed from every panelist who 
spoke his name. Speaking for many, Cheney praised the Mattis appointment as a 
critical step to blunting Trump’s excesses.

It fell to some of the foreigners at the conference to raise an alarm about 
Trump, however diplomatically.

Norway’s minister of defense, Ine Eriksen Soreide, presented her country as 
nervous and vulnerable to a resurgent Russia and warned: “You can really not 
take European security for granted.” She implored the American public to see 
Nato as a collection of 27 stalwart friends, rather than a burden, and said the 
alliance needed clarity on how Trump views Russia.

“It is paramount that the new administration comes out with a clear, 
consistent, firm, predictable stance on Russia early,” she said.

James Mattis called for reduction of US stockpile of land-based nuclear 
missiles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/james-mattis-defense-secretary-nuclear-missiles-trump>
Similarly, Ng Eng Hen, Singapore’s minister of defense, warned against 
adopting a hostile posture against China, which is deepening its economic ties 
with south-east Asia at a time when the region sees the US as abandoning the 
field. Containing China is “neither necessary or desirable”, he said, while 
making security the prime feature of the US approach to Asia would leave 
Washington with a “brittle” policy.

‘You trade with your friends’

Of all the prominent US politicians at the conference, Graham seemed to have 
the hardest time coming to terms with Trump.

A traditional Republican defense and trade hawk, his exasperation was often on 
display. Beyond the Taiwan call, China was “licking [its] chops” at the US 
abandonment of the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, he said. US standing 
in Asia was the “big loser of 2016”. He vowed to do “all I can to get the 
Republican party back to where it was: you trade with your friends”.

Graham also raised his voice in objection to the notion Trump advanced that 
the US’s Asian allies were taking advantage of its defense umbrella: “South 
Korea and Japan have paid a lot.” Then he reeled himself in. Trump will have a 
“lot of problems”, he said. “We all have to help him.”

“If you’re unsure what’s going to happen, so am I,” Graham continued, 
addressing US allies. “But we’ll be friends through the process.”
 