
Meat produced from British pigs has been shown to be infected with a livestock 
strain of MRSA, the Guardian can reveal, raising concerns that the UK is on the 
brink of another food scandal.

Tests on a sample of 97 UK-produced pork products from supermarkets show that 
three – sold at Asda and Sainsbury’s – were contaminated with the superbug 
strain which can cause serious health problems.

The Guardian, working with the Bureau of Investigative Journalism (BIJ), has 
also established that a loophole in import regulations is leaving an open door 
for MRSA CC398-infected live pigs from countries such as Denmark, where the 
disease is rife.

What is the superbug LA-MRSA CC398 and why is it spreading on farms?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/18/what-is-the-superbug-la-mrsa-cc398-and-why-is-it-spreading-on-farms>
The findings have serious implications for human health. MRSA CC398 is a 
potentially deadly bacteria which can be resistant to even the strongest 
antibiotics. It is less harmful to humans than the MRSA bug that kills about 
300 people in hospitals in England and Wales each year. But it causes 
unpleasant persistent infections and can seriously harm people with compromised 
immune systems, such as those already suffering other illness.

It is known to have been responsible for at least six deaths in Denmark, 
though that is likely to be the tip of the iceberg. People can contract the 
disease from infected meat, and from infected animals.

The superbug, like other foodborne germs, is killed by thorough cooking - but 
it can be passed on through lapses in hygiene. Workers on pig farms can also 
catch the disease from infected animals and pass it on to other people.

Without action to halt it, the spread of the bug could follow the pattern in 
Denmark, where MRSA CC398 became established over a decade, now afflicts about 
two-thirds of pig farms and is viewed as a major public health crisis, with 
12,000 people believed to have contracted it. Currently, there is no screening 
programme for MRSA CC398 on British farms.

Prof Tim Lang, of the Centre for Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> Policy at City University in 
London, said: “If we don’t have tight infection control and we don’t try to 
control the movement of live animals, infection can spread. The British are up 
in arms about the movement of people, but the EU also has a large movement of 
animals. We need biosecurity, we need to tighten up this livestock movement. 
You may get cheap meat, but in the long term it’s going to add to your public 
health problems.”

Prof Erik Millstone of Sussex University added that the emergence of 
antibiotic-resistant superbugs from agriculture was “a huge threat to human 
health” and that there was a clear risk that MRSA CC398 could spread among 
British livestock herds and to people. He anticipated that the government would 
downplay this risk but warned: “While the [government] tries its customary 
tactics of blaming the victim, it won’t work.”

The tests were carried out by Dr Mark Holmes, director of studies in clinical 
veterinary medicine at Churchill College, Cambridge University, and 
commissioned by the Alliance to Save Our Antibiotics, founded by the Soil 
Association, Compassion in WorldFarming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/farming> and Sustain. Two samples of 
minced pork from Asda and one from Sainsbury’s were found positive.

Last year, tests by the Guardian on 100 samples of pork in UK supermarkets, 
including a mix of imported and UK-bred meat,found nine contained the superbug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/18/mrsa-superbug-in-supermarket-pork-raises-alarm-farming-risks>
. However, all but one of the infected products were of Danish origin, the 
other Irish. That investigation marked the first time MRSA CC398 had been 
publicly found in products in UK supermarkets.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fsuperbugs-la-mrsa-pigs-antibiotics-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434715839458%2FSuperbug-baby-012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20pig%20superbug%20and%20the%20baby%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fsuperbugs-la-mrsa-pigs-antibiotics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20pig%20superbug%20and%20the%20baby%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fsuperbugs-la-mrsa-pigs-antibiotics-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434715839458%2FSuperbug-baby-012.jpg>
 Watch the Guardian’s investigation into how intensive pig farming is 
accelerating an antibiotic crisis. 
Today’s follow-up tests are the first to name supermarkets whose UK-produced 
pork has been contaminated with the superbug. It is not possible to say whether 
these products originally came from imported pigs, or whether UK pig herds have 
been infected through imports. Either way, imports are likely to be the main 
agent spreading the disease, as the UK’s pork production has remained 
relatively free from MRSA CC398 until now, and the main method of spreading the 
disease is from animal-to-animal contact on farms.

At least one regular Danish supplier of imported pigs to the UK was found to 
be contaminated with the drug-resistant bacteria in 2014, the Bureau of 
Investigative Journalism has established. The company –Breeding Centre 
Rønshauge A/S – refused to say how many pigs it had exported to the UK and 
whether they could have been contaminated. But official export figures show 
that the company supplied 41 pigs to the UK in July this year, 65 in 2013 and 
16 in 2012.

But the UK government does not screen for the infection in imported animals, 
citing a low risk of serious illness. The main initial effect is a nasty skin 
infection that is disfiguring, unpleasant and highly infectious, but not fatal.

Emma Rose, from the Alliance to Save Our Antibiotics, said: “It is extremely 
worrying to find LA [livestock-associated]-MRSA in British-produced pork.”

“Scientists are now warning that the extensive MRSA reservoir in animals could 
ultimately lead to a pandemic spread in the human population. LA-MRSA is able 
to cause serious and potentially fatal infections in humans, and as the 
bacteria is resistant to antibiotics, it is extremely difficult to treat. 
What’s more, even more dangerous variations are emerging as the superbug 
evolves.”

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said: 
“Livestock-associated MRSA is not the same as MRSA strains that can cause 
healthcare-associated infections and if meat is handled and prepared properly 
the risk to people is low. Defra and the National Pig Association recommend 
that pigs imported to Britain are screened for LA-MRSA.

“The government is reviewing options for surveillance, which will be 
proportionate to the very low health risk posed by livestock-associated MRSA.”

Asda said: “Our customers can be assured that we are working closely with 
industry groups and farmers to make sure that antibiotics are used responsibly 
in farm animals.” Sainsbury’s told the Guardian that MRSA CC398 was “very 
uncommon” in British pork and that it worked with farmers “to ensure 
antibiotics are used responsibly and are taking advice from leading industry 
experts”.

The rise of the CC398 variant has been linked to the overuse of antibiotics in 
factory farming, where often cramped and dirty conditions allow disease to 
flourish and farmers become dependent on frequent doses of antibiotics.

The threat from imports of live animals has been overlooked, according to 
experts. When animals are imported, they have to undergo screening for a 
variety of other diseases, but screening for MRSA CC398 is purely voluntary. As 
a result, there is no way of knowing how many infected animals may have been 
brought to Britain.

There have been at least two confirmed cases of the disease found at UK pig 
farms, one of them in Northern Ireland and the other in eastern England. 
However, as no systematic tests are carried out on UK farms, it is impossible 
to know how many may harbour the bug.

Defra does not collate statistics on the number of farm animals imported, but 
figures from the Danish government show the UK imported more than 3,000 
breeding pigs from the country in the past six years, including 916 in 2013, 
598 the following year and 283 last year.

In the last three years, the UK food industry has been rocked with revelations 
from the Guardian ofcampylobacter in chicken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/28/supermarket-chickens-contaminated-campylobacter>
, which can cause serious illness, stronger versions of salmonella with greater 
resistance, and of drug-resistant forms of E coli, recently found in one in 
four supermarket chickens, that thwart all but the strongest antibiotics. Most 
of the problems are thought to be down to the pressure towards factory farms 
producing the cheapest possible meat.
 