
Councils were given permission to carry out more than 55,000 days of covert 
surveillance over five years, including spying on people walking dogs, feeding 
pigeons and fly-tipping, the Guardian can reveal.

A mass freedom of information request has found 186 local authorities – 
two-thirds of the 283 that responded – used the government’s Regulation of 
Investigatory Powers Act (Ripa) to gather evidence via secret listening 
devices, cameras and private detectives.

Among the detailed examples provided were Midlothian council using the powers 
to monitor dog barking and Allerdale borough council gathering evidence about 
who was guilty of feeding pigeons.

Wolverhampton used covert surveillance to check on the sale of dangerous toys 
and car clocking; Slough to aid an investigation into an illegal puppy farm; 
and Westminster to crack down on the selling of fireworks to children.

Surveillance has gone too far. The jig is up | Martha Spurrier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/government-surveillance-eu-court-ruling-investigatory-powers-act-private-lives>
Meanwhile, Lancaster city council used the act, in 2012, for “targeted dog 
fouling enforcement” in two hotspots over 11 days.

A spokeswoman pointed out that the law had since changed and Ripa could only 
now be used if criminal activity was suspected. The permissions for tens of 
thousands of days were revealed in a huge freedom of information exercise, 
carried out by the Liberal Democrats. It found that councils then launched 
2,800 separate surveillance operations lasting up to 90 days each.

Critics of the spying legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/apr/17/council-surveillance-abuse> say the 
government said it would only be used when absolutely necessary to protect 
British people from extreme threats.

Brian Paddick, the Lib Dem peer who represents the party on home affairs, 
said: “It is absurd that local authorities are using measures primarily 
intended for combating terrorism for issues as trivial as a dog barking or the 
sale of theatre tickets. Spying on the public should be a last resort not an 
everyday tool.”

He argued that the 2016 Investigatory Powers Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/02/investigatory-powers-bill-snoopers-charter-will-remain-firmly-in-place>
, which will take in Ripa powers alongside a raft of new measures, would 
restrict the ability of local authorities to monitor people’s communications.

But he also said it would give “mass surveillance powers to a huge number of 
government bodies”.

“As with any legislation, there is a significant risk that authorities will 
use powers in a way that parliament never intended,” added Lord Paddick, 
calling for proper oversight to ensure any surveillance is targeted and 
proportionate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbritish-councils-used-investigatory-powers-ripa-to-secretly-spy-on-public%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b5b01d842ec893f09789eec3ed2d804d1d77e49%2F0_266_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20British%20councils%20used%20Ripa%20to%20secretly%20spy%20on%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbritish-councils-used-investigatory-powers-ripa-to-secretly-spy-on-public%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20British%20councils%20used%20Ripa%20to%20secretly%20spy%20on%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbritish-councils-used-investigatory-powers-ripa-to-secretly-spy-on-public%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b5b01d842ec893f09789eec3ed2d804d1d77e49%2F0_266_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Midlothian council used the powers to monitor dog barking. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson for the Guardian 
The freedom of information request also revealed a number of examples of 
councils using Ripa as a way of checking up on benefit claimants. One example 
was checking up on those claiming to be single parents.


Other local authorities drew on the powers to crack down on the distress 
caused by anti-social behaviour.

The London borough of Bromley gave one example in which it considered using a 
CCTV mobile unit to target three households that were causing “harassment, 
alarm and distress”, by holding parties on a communal green with loud music 
blaring out through amplifiers, shouting, screaming, smashing windows and 
riding motorbikes around in circles.

The local authority also detailed the use of Ripa following a complaint about 
the accumulation of rubbish in a rear garden, claiming that the perpetrator was 
a “serial fly tipper”. The council deployed a “covert camera” in the upstairs 
bedroom window of another property, which gathered evidence of what was 
happening.

More recently, it has used the law to monitor the sale of alcohol, tobacco and 
fireworks to people underage, and capture those illegally dumping waste in 
recycling centres.

The deputy leader of the London borough of Bromley said he believed the 
legislation was far too restrictive, arguing that the victims of crime 
understood filming evidence that could aid prosecutions was a “minor 
infringement of the perpetrators so called civil liberties”.

Cllr Colin Smith said: “Council officers deal with complaints day in and day 
out about thoroughly disgusting socially inadequate individuals fly-tipping 
waste and preying on the weaker, more vulnerable members of our society, 
normally the elderly, and this technology is key to bringing their worst 
excesses to heel.”

He said the council kept to the letter of the law to prevent any “so called 
‘spying’ taking place on law-abiding individuals”.


“I’m frankly far more concerned about the rights and civil liberties of the 
victims and wider council tax-paying public, who are currently having to pick 
up the tab, than the small minority criminal element who continue to treat the 
rest of us with open contempt.”

Lincolnshire county council had requested permission for the largest number of 
days – close to 4,000 – with a major 2012 operation to prevent cigarettes and 
alcohol being sold to underage teenagers, and attempts to stop counterfeiting 
at car boot sales and markets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbritish-councils-used-investigatory-powers-ripa-to-secretly-spy-on-public%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F524af975774411e29295d56eca5df68e0b2d7b41%2F0_151_4205_2523%2F4205.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20British%20councils%20used%20Ripa%20to%20secretly%20spy%20on%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbritish-councils-used-investigatory-powers-ripa-to-secretly-spy-on-public%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20British%20councils%20used%20Ripa%20to%20secretly%20spy%20on%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbritish-councils-used-investigatory-powers-ripa-to-secretly-spy-on-public%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F524af975774411e29295d56eca5df68e0b2d7b41%2F0_151_4205_2523%2F4205.jpg>
 Lib Dem peer Brian Paddick warned the powers could be used in a way parliament 
did not intend without proper legislation. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the 
Guardian 
Mark Keal from Lincolnshire Trading Standards said: “Without this evidence it 
is incredibly difficult to get successful prosecutions and get these products 
off the street.”

The council, alongside a number of others, stressed that while they had sought 
permission for a large number of days, the operations usually spanned a much 
shorter period.

The next highest number of days requested was Birmingham, where the acting 
strategic director, Jacqui Kennedy, said the powers had been used to crack down 
on “serious fly-tipping, rogue trader operations and trading standards 
investigations looking at scams and counterfeiting”.

“We only use Ripa when it is proportionate and reasonable and each application 
is agreed and signed off by a judge,” she added, insisting that it had helped 
catch out criminals. “And as the largest local authority in the country we 
frequently top statistics lists that are based solely on raw numbers.”

The Home Office insisted that permissions were only granted for such covert 
surveillance after a rigorous authorisation procedure and independent 
inspection.

A spokesman said: “Ripa powers are an important tool that local authorities 
can use to address the issues that affect many people’s lives, like consumer 
protection, environmental crime and benefit fraud.

“The legislation makes clear that public authorities may use these techniques 
only when it is both necessary and proportionate to do so.

'Extreme surveillance' becomes UK law with barely a whimper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/extreme-surveillance-becomes-uk-law-with-barely-a-whimper>
“Any local authority use of these powers must be independently authorised by a 
magistrate, who is an independent judicial figure.

“The Investigatory Powers Act goes further by ensuring that in future the use 
of these powers will be overseen by the Investigatory Powers Commissioner, who 
will be a serving or former senior judge.”

The act, which has been described as a snooper’s charter by critics, faced 
difficulties after the EU’s highest court ruled that“general and indiscriminate 
retention” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/21/eus-highest-court-delivers-blow-to-uk-snoopers-charter>
 of emails and electronic communications was illegal.

Only targeted interception of traffic and location data in order to combat 
serious crime, including terrorism, is justified, according to a long-awaited 
decision by the European court of justice.

Ironically, the finding came in response to a legal challenge initially 
brought by the Brexit secretary,David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis>, when he was a backbench MP, 
and Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, over the legality of GCHQ’s bulk 
interception of call records and online messages.
 