
Mitt Romney has confirmed he is not Donald Trump’s pick for secretary of 
state, leavingRex Tillerson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rex-tillerson>
, the Exxon Mobil president, as the most likely person to become America’s top 
diplomat.

Russia and conflicts of interest: Rex Tillerson embodies quandaries for Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-quandaries-trump-russia-conflicts-of-interest>
Hours before the grand finale of the protracted selection process, Romney 
announced on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/mittromney/posts/10153988122401121>that he would not 
be part of the Trump administration.

The former Massachusetts governor, who was always an odd choice for Trump’s 
cabinet given the pair’s scatching attacks on one another during the campaign 
season, called it an “honor to have been considered for secretary of state”.

On Twitter Monday night, Trump said 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808469755749339136> that he would 
announce his choice for the crucial cabinet position on Tuesday morning.

Several news reports confirmed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/us/politics/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump.html?action=Click&contentCollection=BreakingNews&contentID=64642541&pgtype=article>
 on Monday night that he would select Rex Tillerson, the president and chief 
executive of Exxon Mobil, whose lack of experience and close ties to Russian 
president Vladmir Putin are raising concerns 
<https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/807962818272235521?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
from senators of both parties.

During the campaign, Romney delivered searing criticism of Trump’s business 
acumen, temperament and personal conduct, calling him at turns a “fraud” and a 
“phony” who would usher in an era of “trickle-down racism”. Trump, in turn, 
said Romney “walked like a penguin” and “choked like a dog,” a reference to the 
former governor’s failure to win the 2012 presidential election.

The acrimony between the two apparently eased after the election, resulting in 
two very public meetings – one over a dinner of frog legs, scallops and lamb 
chops at the Jean-Georges restaurant in Trump International Hotel. (A snapshot 
from the meal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/mitt-romney-praises-donald-trump-dinner-twitter>
captured Trump leaning over his soup with a playful smile while Romney glanced, 
bemused, at the cameras.)

That scene fueled speculation that Trump was only considering Romney only to 
torment him for his disloyalty during the campaign. As of last Friday, Trump 
said Romney was still in the running.

Mitt Romney praises Trump after 'deal with the devil' dinner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/mitt-romney-praises-donald-trump-dinner-twitter>
“It’s not about revenge, it’s about what’s good for the country, and I’m able 
to put this stuff behind us,” Trump said in a television interview on NBC’s 
Today show on Friday.

The president-elect added: “We had some tremendous difficulty together, and 
now I think we’ve come a long way.”

Still, Romney had deeply divided Trump’s circle of advisers. Last month 
Trump’s former campaign manager and advisor Kelly Conway publicly aired her 
disapproval of Romney, even threatening that there would be a backlash from 
voters who feel “betrayed”.

“They feel a bit betrayed that you can get a Romney back in there after 
everything he did,” Conway said on Meet the Press last month. “We don’t even 
know if he voted forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.”
 