
What do the Eden Project <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/eden-project>, the 
British Library <https://www.theguardian.com/books/british-library>, the Neues 
Museum <http://www.smb.museum/museen-und-einrichtungen/neues-museum/home.html> 
in Berlin,Birmingham Selfridges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/sep/01/architecture.shopping>, 
Tate Modern <http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-modern> and the Olympic velodrome
 <http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/the-park/venues/lee-valley-velopark> 
have in common? They are all the exceptional buildings of their years – 
buildings that future historians will see as defining the era but that failed 
to win the Stirling prize, the award that is supposed to spot just such works. 
In most cases those that actually did take the prize will linger in the memory 
very much less.

For, useful as it is at drawing attention to contemporary architecture, the 
prize has a knack for recognising the good-but-not-great, the easier option, 
the thing chosen more for somewhat contingent reasons than architectural skill 
and imagination. It tends to arrive some years late at whatever new thinking 
might be animating the profession. It has the instinct, common to decisions 
made by committees, of favouring everyone’s second favourite.

Individual choices, of course, are the subject of legitimate debate. They were 
not bad decisions to honour theEveryman theatre 
<https://www.architecture.com/stirlingprize/awards2014/northwest/everymantheatrewinsribastirlingprize2014.aspx>
 in Liverpool in 2014, or theSainsbury Laboratory 
<https://www.architecture.com/StirlingPrize/RIBAStirlingPrizeWinners/SainsburyLaboratory(2012).aspx>
 in Cambridge in 2012, but on both occasions the prize jury passed up on 
braver, stronger, richer, more boundary-pushing, heart-stirring and no less 
proficient works, in theHepworth gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hepworth-wakefield> in Wakefield and 
theSaw Swee Hock student centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/16/lse-saw-swee-hock-student-centre-review>
 for the London School of Economics. This kind of preference constitutes, over 
time, a pattern.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c0ee029f8db7a2705c71b9a7bde033cbc5cca3d%2F0_0_1898_1280%2F1898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c0ee029f8db7a2705c71b9a7bde033cbc5cca3d%2F0_0_1898_1280%2F1898.jpg>
 Ruled out… the ‘discreetly daring’ restoration of Liverpool’s art deco 
Philharmonic Hall. Photograph: Don McPhee for the Guardian 
This year the Royal Institute of British Architects 
<https://www.architecture.com/Explore/Home.aspx>’ awards system has excelled 
itself, in failing to give at least two outstanding works the regional awards 
that are necessary to get to the starting line for the Stirling. The 
polychrome, richly ornamentedHouse for Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/10/grayson-perry-a-house-for-essex-stonking-shrine>
 by the architects FAT and the artist Grayson Perry is a tour de force of 
imagination, craft, detail and of three-dimensional creativity, which is surely 
the fundamental attribute of architecture, but it wasn’t enough to win one of12 
awards 
<https://www.architecture.com/RIBA/Contactus/NewsAndPress/PressReleases/2016/EastofEnglandarchitecturewinnersrevealed.aspx>
 given by RIBA East. TheLiverpool Philharmonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/04/liverpool-philharmonic-renovation-newport-street-gallery-gagosian-review>
, a discreetly daring revival of a historic building by Caruso St John, 
couldn’t get pastRIBA North-West 
<https://www.architecture.com/RIBA/Contactus/NewsAndPress/PressReleases/2016/10NorthWestprojectswinRIBARegionalAwardsforarchitecture.aspx>
.

The Stirling prize shortlist is, if not Hamlet without the Prince, Reservoir 
Dogs without Mr Pink and Mr Blonde

I have no idea what muddled thinking, what misdirected good intentions, what 
pettiness, what insecurities go through the heads of the good people who made 
these choices, but they have done a disservice both to their regions and to 
architecture in the country as a whole. It is made worse by some of the works 
that did win regional awards, which are in the ho-hum, all right, 
marks-for-effort, B+, bit-better-than-average category. Particularly striking 
is the preference forHome in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/21/welcome-home-manchesters-25m-arts-centre-finally-opens-its-doors>
 over the Liverpool Philharmonic, Home being a publicly funded arts centre that 
ends up looking like a ponced-up multiplex.

These omissions mean that the Stirling prize shortlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/14/riba-stirling-prize-shortlist-announced-architecture>
 is, if notHamlet without the Prince, Reservoir Dogs without Mr Pink and Mr 
Blonde. Perhaps the House for Essex would have been thought too esoteric 
ultimately to win (though what’s wrong with the esoteric?) and the Philharmonic 
too nuanced (and ditto nuance?), but they would at least have been good 
subjects for debate. Some of those included are interesting, some less so. 
There is no outstandingly obvious winner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92bc06e72bd84c15bbf9fd4cf1c0d6129918219b%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92bc06e72bd84c15bbf9fd4cf1c0d6129918219b%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 The shortlisted Trafalgar Place in Elephant and Castle, London by dRMM. 
Photograph: Alex de Rijke 
The probable frontrunner is Herzog and De Meuron’s Blavatnik School of 
Government <http://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/> in Oxford, whose splendiferous interior 
is funded by many millions from the eponymous billionaire’s aluminium-based 
fortune. It is one of the greatest spaces in the not-too-shabby history of the 
university’s architecture, which could well be enough to win it the prize. The 
exterior is more problematic, hermetic and excluding, a too-honest 
representation of the them-and-us culture in which the future world leaders – 
for now students at the Blavatnik – will probably operate.

Trafalgar Place in Elephant and Castle, London, by dRMM and the developers 
Lend Lease <http://www.elephantandcastle-lendlease.com>, is one of the new-ish 
wave of thoughtful housing schemes, which work within tough constraints to 
achieve such things as a pleasant central garden for the residents. 
Unfortunately it’s part of the redevelopment of the 1970s Heygate estate, whose 
erasure entailed disruption of tenants’ lives, the loss of hundreds of council 
flats and indeed of a pleasant central garden. Although these losses are not 
the architects’ fault, it’s wrong that the opportunity wasn’t taken to 
recognise councils such as the London boroughs of Brent, Camden or Hackney, who 
aremore committed to good housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/10/south-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects>
 than Lend Lease and manage not to incur such devastating side effects.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d958be4c72d9023e17f81b5efcd5baaf01b6a46%2F0_0_5819_3549%2F5819.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d958be4c72d9023e17f81b5efcd5baaf01b6a46%2F0_0_5819_3549%2F5819.jpg>
 City of Glasgow College Riverside Campus, ‘a contender’. Photograph: Keith 
Hunter 
I haven’t visited the Riverside Campus of the City of Glasgow College, but 
images, plans and reports suggest that it is a dignified and well-planned home 
for an institution whose aim is to revive the industrial skills of a city once 
famous for them. Its designers, Michael Laird Architects and Reiach and Hall 
Architects, have made it one of very few projects that connect Glasgow well to 
the Clyde. My main informant, Owen Hatherley in theArchitects’ Journal, 
questions its possibly cliched use of a large central atrium and the quality of 
details achieved by its contractor. Even so, it should be a contender.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb84fc62fee174ac6ef3e0fd8294a0187e541cda%2F0_0_7216_5412%2Fmaster%2F7216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb84fc62fee174ac6ef3e0fd8294a0187e541cda%2F0_0_7216_5412%2Fmaster%2F7216.jpg>
 Loyn and Co’s Outhouse in the Forest of Dean. 
I also haven’t seen the Outhouse 
<https://www.architecture.com/Awards/Awards2016/RegionalAwards/SouthWest/Outhouse.aspx>
 in the Forest of Dean by Loyn and Co, but unless there are some spatial 
miracles to be discovered at first hand I can’t for the life of me see why it 
is on the list. This is not to denigrate the taste and courage of the artistic 
couple who commissioned a striking modern house in a rural area, but it’s hard 
to see much in the architectural concept that wasn’t better done in Mies van 
der Rohe’sTugendhat house <http://www.tugendhat.eu/en/>, in Brno, 
Czechoslovakia, in 1930. The newer house is more sustainable, for sure, but its 
details tend towards the clumsy and unimaginative.

The Weston Library <https://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/weston> in Oxford is by 
Wilkinson Eyre <http://www.wilkinsoneyre.com/practice/profile/overview>, 
winners of the Stirling prize in both 2001 and 2002. A previous architecture 
critic for theObserver compared their version of modernism to the products of 
Pizza Express – decent but predictable – and if this was harsh the elapse of 
15-odd years has not made their work more cutting-edge. The Weston is a 
competent and professionally committed reworking of a historic building, albeit 
with some awkwardness in its spatial arrangements, but without the spark that 
you would hope for in a Stirling prize winner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e70ddc3ec1f0a838ea0a244f7e2234fbdbe7e3f%2F0_0_3328_4992%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e70ddc3ec1f0a838ea0a244f7e2234fbdbe7e3f%2F0_0_3328_4992%2F3328.jpg>
 The ‘competent’ Weston Library in Oxford. Photograph: James Brittain 
This leaves the Newport Street Gallery <http://newportstreetgallery.com/> in 
London, created by Damien Hirst to display to the public his remarkable 
collection of artists other than himself. This is by the same Caruso St John 
who were slighted in Liverpool, and it has some of the same qualities as their 
Philharmonic. It is the editing and renewal of existing buildings – in this 
case former workshops for building theatre sets – with a combination of tact 
and boldness. Sometimes you can hardly tell the new from the old. Sometimes, as 
with some staircases of real beauty, you can’t miss it. The whole is a 
wonderfully judged balance of architecture and art. It may be the creation of a 
multimillionaire artist with his own agenda to pursue, but it has a real and 
generous public spirit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ab98535ff95782387771304a52ebf18208019d%2F1_0_6291_3776%2F6291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RIBA%20Stirling%20prize%3A%20a%20shortlist%20of%20second-bests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Friba-stirling-prize-shortlist-2016-second-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ab98535ff95782387771304a52ebf18208019d%2F1_0_6291_3776%2F6291.jpg>
 The staircase of Caruso St John’s ‘wonderfully judged’ Newport Street Gallery 
in London for Damien Hirst Photograph: Alamy 
Alongside the Stirling’s tendency to pick the second-best goes a habit of 
slowness in recognising the most significant architects. They did this with
David Chipperfield <http://www.davidchipperfield.co.uk/>, Zaha Hadid 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/> and Will Alsop <http://www.all-worldwide.com/>. 
Caruso St John have done particularly badly – they should have won in 2000 with 
their breakthrough project, theNew Art Gallery 
<http://thenewartgallerywalsall.org.uk/> in Walsall, and later their exceptional
Nottingham Contemporary <http://www.nottinghamcontemporary.org/> didn’t make 
the shortlist. This year the Stirling’s jury has the chance to put right those 
wrongs and choose what is, in the end, the best work of architecture in front 
of them.

The winner of the 2106 Stirling prize will be announced on 6 October 
<https://www.architecture.com/Awards/Awards2016/StirlingPrize/Home.aspx>
 