
“I’ve been eating a lot of lamb,” says Thomas Adès . “After what the sheep 
have put me through, I think I’ve earned the right.” The composer is at the 
Salzburg festival, preparing for the world premiere of The Exterminating Angel, 
his opera version ofLuis Buñuel’s great surrealist film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=stwZpwHyvuY>. On the day of their first 
“Schafeprobe” (sheep rehearsal), it seems that the real-life, flesh-and-wool 
ovines are not quite as happy on the opera stage as they are frolicking in 
alpine pastures. Never work with children or animals? This opera has both. Not 
to mention an untameable bear, a disembodied hand, a conductor who flies, and a 
burning cello.

The Exterminating Angel revolves around a grand dinner party that never ends. 
Its guests are trapped. What does it all mean? Well, at the start of the film, 
a caption says: “The best explanation of this film is that, from the standpoint 
of pure reason, there is no explanation.” But that hasn’t stopped every film 
critic since its appearance in 1962 attempting a psychological reading.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DstwZpwHyvuY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DstwZpwHyvuY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DstwZpwHyvuY&media=>
Watch a trailer for Buñuel’s The Exterminating Angel 
<https://youtu.be/stwZpwHyvuY> 
Why don’t the guests leave? There’s nothing physically stopping them: they 
just collectively come to the realisation that they can’t escape. What do the 
bear and the sheep symbolise? Are the film’s socially elite characters, 
marooned in their mansion while people outside protest and party, a metaphor 
for Franco’s Spanish regime, from whom Buñuel was in exile in Mexico when he 
made the film? And what about the ending? Finally free, the survivors go to 
church to mourn the guests who died, only for the congregation to find that the 
church doors are locked, and another pattern of hopeless entrapment looks set 
to repeat itself: it’s a terrifyingly resonant scene, but what does it all mean?

We’ll get to those enigmas, but the first thing I want to ask Adès is why do 
it at all? He says he originally had the idea 16 years ago – “but there were 
problems with the copyright, and thenThe Tempest 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S_0Mr41is4U> got in the way”. He turned 
Shakespeare’s final play into an opera for Covent Garden in 2004, and sees 
connections between it and the world of The Exterminating Angel – and with
Powder Her Face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/03/powder-her-face-review-ades-duchess-argyll>
, his first opera, about the dazzling and grotesque life of the Duchess of 
Argyll, who was engulfed in sexual scandal in the 1960s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthomas-ades-the-exterminating-angel-bunuel-opera-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd80f931d17ca02eaae3fb4f358bb014a396c69ed%2F0_0_5758_3669%2F5758.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rifles%2C%20bears%20and%20Bu%C3%B1uel%3A%20Thomas%20Ad%C3%A8s%20on%20his%20new%20never-ending%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthomas-ades-the-exterminating-angel-bunuel-opera-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rifles%2C%20bears%20and%20Bu%C3%B1uel%3A%20Thomas%20Ad%C3%A8s%20on%20his%20new%20never-ending%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthomas-ades-the-exterminating-angel-bunuel-opera-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd80f931d17ca02eaae3fb4f358bb014a396c69ed%2F0_0_5758_3669%2F5758.jpg>
 ‘This place is the capital of bells!’ … Adès in Salzburg. Photograph: Anne 
Zeuner/Salzburg festival 
“In a sense, this is a child of those two operas,” Adès says. Like the 
shipwrecked characters of The Tempest, the 15 inhabitants of the gilded cage of 
The Exterminating Angel are trapped in a place of magical enchantment and 
dramatic mayhem. Similarly, like the glittering high-society world of Powder 
Her Face, the dinner party guests are denizens of a cosseted but nightmarish 
world of aristocratic pretension. But as Adès composed and rehearsed, “that 
comparison has receded, and this opera is a very different animal. Probably a 
scarier animal.”

A guide to Thomas Adès's music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/oct/01/thomas-ades-contemporary-music-guide>
This opera is the latest and possibly most significant milestone in a career 
that has put Adès at the forefront of classical composers and conductors of his 
generation. Now 45, he has spent the last two-and-a-half decades dealing with 
the expectations that surround any composer touted as the Next Big Thing. And 
he has fulfilled them – by subversion.Adès’s music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/oct/01/thomas-ades-contemporary-music-guide>
 is a reinterpretation of the whole of musical history, or at least those bits 
that mean the most to him, from Couperin to Berlioz, from Beethoven to Gerald 
Barry. That vivid reimagining turns the familiar inside out, resulting in 
something surreally original.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCVG5R6sIobo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCVG5R6sIobo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCVG5R6sIobo&media=>
Thomas Adès’s Violin Concerto – Concentric Paths 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVG5R6sIobo> 
This new opera 
<http://www.salzburgerfestspiele.at/opera/exterminating-angel-2016> is no 
different: it will sound unlike The Tempest and Powder Her Face, and not just 
because of its unusually huge cast of principals, all 15 of whom are on stage 
for the majority of the piece (a jaw-dropping lineup of operatic talent, from 
the youthfulIestyn Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/28/iestyn-davies-countertenor-farinelli-interview>
 andSophie Bevan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/06/young-eno-singers-ready-for-top-roles>
 to vastly experienced vocal royalty such asJohn Tomlinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/sep/10/classicalmusicandopera1> and 
Anne Sofie von Otter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/aug/05/classicalmusicandopera.proms2005>
). But also because of the distinct soundworlds Adès has found for The 
Exterminating Angel, taking in the otherworldly resonances of bells and 
ritualistic Spanish drumming.

These are precisely calculated references, shedding light on Adès’s 
interpretation of Buñuel’s story. For Adès, the essential misinterpretation of 
The Exterminating Angel is that it is surrealistic. It does seem an easy enough 
assumption to arrive at, given that the film is made by the father of cinematic 
surrealism (Buñuel’s razor-blade across the eyeball inUn Chien Andalou, his 
1929 film with Salvador Dalí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/may/26/art.film>, is the defining image 
of early avant-garde cinema). But Adès says: “Actually, it’s completely 
realistic. Once you’ve been working on it, what it means becomes obvious.”

I’m waiting with bated breath. “To me, the question Buñuel is asking isn’t 
‘Why don’t they leave?’ but ‘Why do they want to leave?’ What is it that makes 
any of us want to do anything, change anything, go from one room into another? 
And in the absence of that desire to change or to move, which Buñuel switches 
off in his characters, it’s like the Terminating Angel.” By this, he means that 
the characters reach a terminus, their lives put on hold. “And that can only 
become the Exterminating Angel, an angel of doom and death.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthomas-ades-the-exterminating-angel-bunuel-opera-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c987713efd317812a5a6544ffa0d2c25ef66be8%2F0_0_3568_2764%2F3568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rifles%2C%20bears%20and%20Bu%C3%B1uel%3A%20Thomas%20Ad%C3%A8s%20on%20his%20new%20never-ending%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthomas-ades-the-exterminating-angel-bunuel-opera-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rifles%2C%20bears%20and%20Bu%C3%B1uel%3A%20Thomas%20Ad%C3%A8s%20on%20his%20new%20never-ending%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthomas-ades-the-exterminating-angel-bunuel-opera-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c987713efd317812a5a6544ffa0d2c25ef66be8%2F0_0_3568_2764%2F3568.jpg>
 Silvia Pinal in Luis Buñuel’s 1962 film The Exterminating Angel. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
So what about the bells and drums? Adès describes the former as “an intrusion 
of eternity into everyday time. When bells start to ring, you have to stop what 
you’re doing. You could understand bells as saying, ‘Here we are again – and 
you’ve still done nothing! Nothing has changed!’” That certainly chimes with 
the characters in The Exterminating Angel, fated to their unchanging dining 
room, but the bells are also meant to resonate with Salzburg. “This place is 
the capital of bells!” says the composer. “Every second building has a massive 
bell that goes off all the time. Some of them play whole chunks of Mozart 
arias. And it feels like a place where very little changes.”

The drums, meanwhile, are a nod to Buñuel’s own life. He was born in Calanda 
in Spain, where “they have a drumming festival every year, where everyone in 
the town drums the same simple but unusually long rhythmic pattern. They drum 
without stopping for three days. That’s an experience that disturbs time, 
making it stand still. It’s like an end point to whatever was started by the 
bells.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj8OCuAfIO2g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj8OCuAfIO2g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj8OCuAfIO2g&media=>
An extract from the opera Powder Her Face 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j8OCuAfIO2g> 
With dark humour, Adès says the part he would most like to play in the opera 
is Russell, who seems to embody the story’s prophetic elements. “He passes out 
at the end of act one and spends all of the next act groaning on the sofa. Then 
suddenly he struggles up and says, ‘I am so happy I won’t see the 
extermination.’” And extermination, thinks Adès, really is the name of the 
game. “It’s about the end of the world – it’s very catastrophic. But then it’s 
made by Buñuel, who had seen such catastrophic things in the Spanish civil war, 
the destruction of the whole order.” He pauses. “We don’t get that so often in 
Britain – although it might be happening now.”

Adès’s score does not have the double-bar line that conventionally symbolises 
the conclusion to a piece of music. Instead, it is open-ended, as if we’re all 
doomed to repeat this cycle, over and over. “It never ends,” Adès says. “Isn’t 
that awful? Dreadful, really.”

Now that the sheep rehearsal is out of the way, I ask Adès if they’re having 
bear rehearsals too. They are – but the bear won’t be a real-life animal, 
endangering the cast and the audiences at the festival, but some kind of 
simulacrum. Buñuel used an actual bear. “It climbed the walls,” says Adès. “But 
it wasn’t planned. Buñuel directed that scene with a rifle: if it decided to 
attack someone, he was going to shoot it. The days when you could get away with 
that are no longer with us.” He pauses again. “Alas! Imagine – conducting with 
a rifle.”

 * Thomas Adès conducts four performances of The Exterminating Angel at 
Salzburg festival between 28 July and 8 August 
<http://www.salzburgerfestspiele.at/oper/exterminating-angel-2016>. It will 
come to theRoyal Opera House, London, next spring 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/the-exterminating-angel-by-tom-cairns>  