
Hull City’s already fairly dismal season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/west-ham-united-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
 appears to have taken a turn for the worse after Robert Snodgrass turned down 
their offer of a new three-year contract and made it plain he hopes to leave 
next month.

Several clubs, including Middlesbrough, West Ham, West Bromwich, Sunderland, 
Aston Villa and Newcastle United are monitoring the Scotland winger, who has 
only six months left on his current deal. Celtic would be his preferred 
destination, but Brendan Rodgers does not currently appear interested in 
pursuing him.

Romelu Lukaku to sign new Everton deal but may leave in summer, says agent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/romelu-lukaku-new-everton-contract-leave-agent-mino-raiola>
The 29-year-old has been Hull’s outstanding player this season and offers Mike 
Phelan probably his best hope of avoiding relegation. A lack of player 
recruitment last summer reflected the desire of the Allam family, Hull’s 
owners, to sell the club but Snodgrass is believed to have become disenchanted 
by their ongoing attempts to secure viable buyers.

Although discussions continue with the latest consortium to show an interest 
in Hull, no takeover is thought to be close as the team languish at the bottom 
of the Premier League with only 12 points.

Phelan will not let Snodgrass leave – particularly not to a relegation rival – 
without a fight and it is understood that Hull have an option to trigger an 
automatic one-year extension. However, the former Leeds United and Norwich City 
winger does not seem keen on being taken down that route. It may eventually be 
decided that it is in everyone’s best interests for him to leave, with the 
transfer fee to be reinvested on players.

Football transfer rumours: Anthony Martial or Marcus Rashford to West Ham?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/football-transfer-rumours-anthony-martial-marcus-rashford-west-ham>
It is thought the Snodgrass could cost around £4m – a modest valuation 
influenced partly by his contract situation and partly by the serious knee 
injury that sidelined him for 16 months before his return last spring.

Although Snodgrass has made an excellent recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/hull-robert-snodgrass-arsenal>
 following two operations to repair a dislocated kneecap as well as significant 
ligament and cartilage damage, the surgery was complex and any would-be buyer 
will almost certainly seek specialist advice before any fee is finalised or 
transfer completed.

Quite apart from the quality of his left foot, set piece delivery and regular 
goals, Snodgrass’s versatility has attracted attention, with the right winger 
capable of operating in several positions.
 