
Robert Karlsson's story provides the perfect example of how damaging golfing 
demons can be.

It was the day before the 2012 Open Championship that the Swede withdrew from 
the event, tweeting that: "Have got into some bad habits in my game and routine 
that I need to address." It was an unorthodox explanation.

The blunt reality was that Karlsson's mind was so troubled that he couldn't 
even start a backswing. His thought process was so muddled that something which 
had come naturally since childhood suddenly wouldn't happen at all. What a 
pleasure, then, to see Karlsson back competing for four days and with a smile 
on his face during the Dubai Desert Classic.

"I just couldn't swing the club back. It was total brain-freeze," he explained 
of a problem which took three months to cure.

"I wondered if I would play golf again. It was so weird because I knew how to 
hit shots, it just wasn't happening.

"I wasn't taking the decision on shots behind the ball. So I was trying to 
make that decision over the ball. It was just small things which turned into 
â€˜why am I standing here?' Now I wonder how that could happen but when I was 
in it, it was horrible.

"I just had to break that routine, so much is connected to the routine. You 
create habit which become stronger and stronger, to break them you have to 
create new ones."

Karlsson has won 11 times on the European Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour> and is a past Ryder Cup 
competitor. He was the Order of Merit winner in 2008, has finished in the top 
10 of all four majors and was once ranked number six in the world. He finished 
2013 at an astonishing 276th in that list and has now climbed to number 218. 
His present aim is solely to edge back inside the top 200.

Should Karlsson need inspiration, his fellow Swede Henrik Stenson would 
provide it. Stenson has suffered two career slumps but came roaring back, most 
notably last year when he was Europe's best golfer and the winner of the FedEx 
Cup playoff series in the United States.

"Not just Henrik, I look at all the players who have bounced back," Karlsson 
added. "Paul Casey is another one. Everyone's career is the same, if you play 
for over 20 years you are going to have peaks and troughs. It is more about how 
quickly you can get yourself out of those troughs and how deep they are in the 
first place.

"I have very high standards so I am maybe at six, seven out of 10 just now. I 
have days when it is really good but everything isn't really good at the one 
time. I still get wound up a little bit, that's part of the reason we are out 
there. It shows we are hungry.

"The goal is just to keep building on my game and getting better again because 
I know what my good game is like."

Too many others have forgotten. It would be a wonderful tale if Karlsson uses 
2014 to provide them with a strong reminder.

Makeover for Match Play?

With confirmation imminent that the London Club will host the World Match Play 
Championship later this year, the strong suggestion thatTiger Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> will skip the WGC-Accenture 
equivalent later this month provides a further blow to the organisers of the 
Tucson event. Already, it has been confirmed that Phil Mickelson and Adam Scott 
will not take part in the first WGC tournament of the year.

Woods has hinted before at a lighter schedule, amid concerns about fatigue in 
the latter part of the year. Yet his absence from Dove Mountain, where he 
exited at the first-round stage last year, will be keenly felt. High-profile 
championships such as this should attract the best golfers in the world.

Instead, the course itself is unpopular with many leading players. The 2013 
version was disrupted by snow. There must now be a strong chance, if there 
wasn't before, that the Match Play is moved to an alternative venue in the 
not-too distant future in order to re-establish its prominence. Apart from 
anything else, it is wrong that three from four of these supposedly "world" 
challenges are hosted by the United States.

In a flap over rules

It seems not a week can go by without some form of rules controversy in 
professional golf. During the second round of the Dubai Desert Classic, Thomas 
Bjorn got himself needlessly uptight about a drop taken by his playing partner 
Henrik Stenson; which was both perfectly legal and taken after full 
consultation with a referee. Poor Stenson was virtually the last to know of 
Bjorn's unrest, which didn't reflect well on the Dane.

David Drysdale, meanwhile, immediately called a penalty on himself upon 
realising he had touched a spike mark when brushing away loose grass on a 
green. The two-shot sanction imposed on Drysdale had clear significance given 
the Scot missed the cut by a stroke.

Dyrsdale, who has been plagued by back problems at the start of this year, is 
due some luck when he returns to competitive action in South Africa this week.
 