
Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> has 
appointed a representative of ValueAct Capital to its board after months of 
lobbying by the US activist hedge fund for the company to improve its 
performance.

Bradley Singer, ValueAct chief operating officer, will join the board of the 
Derby-based engineering company immediately as a non-executive director and 
also be a member of its science and technology committee.


ValueAct bought a 5.5% stake in Rolls-Royce last July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/31/rolls-royce-break-up-valueact-capital-stake>
, making it the company’s largest shareholder, and said it wanted to work with 
the company to improve its performance. The San Francisco-based fund increased 
its stake to 10.8% in November as it stepped up pressure for board 
representation.

Rolls-Royce has issued a string of profit warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/neil-woodford-dumps-rolls-royce-stake-profit-warning>
 before and after ValueAct bought its stake andearlier this month cut its 
dividend for the first time in 24 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/17/rolls-royce-ready-to-give-activist-investor-valueact-a-board-seat>
, when it was reported that the company was preparing to appoint a 
representative to its board.

Warren East, who took over as chief executive in July, has said the group is 
bloated and cumbersome, making it too slow to react to market changes. The 
company has also been affected by cuts to defence budgets, falling demand for 
corporate jets in emerging markets and plunging oil prices that have forced 
energy companies to reduce spending.

East has said he is content with Rolls-Royce’s range of businesses, which 
include making marine engines and reactors for nuclear submarines. In 
discussions with the company and shareholders, ValueAct has played down any 
immediate desire to split off those businesses from the core aerospace 
division, the FT reported.

After early reluctance, the Derby-based group became more open to appointing a 
director from ValueAct, whose co-founder, Jeffrey Ubben, has helped engineer 
corporate shakeups such as the departure of former Microsoft chief executive 
Steve Ballmer. ValueAct has pressed for changes at 75 companies since Ubben 
launched the firm in 2000.

But the fund seeks to distinguish itself from aggressive US activists such as 
Carl Icahn and Bill Ackman, who use public campaigns to pressurise boards into 
doing their bidding. ValueAct portrays itself as a low-key, long-term investor 
working more like a private equity firm to improve a company’s performance over 
many years.
 