
Ronald Koeman <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronald-koeman> has 
described Romelu Lukaku’s willingness to sign a new contract at Everton as a 
reflection of the club’s ambition despite uncertainty over the striker’s 
long-term future.

Lukaku’s agent, Mino Raiola, said on Wednesday that the terms of a new deal 
are 99.9% agreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/romelu-lukaku-new-everton-contract-leave-agent-mino-raiola>
 but his client’s position will be reassessed at the end of the season. The 
23-year-old, who has two and a half years remaining on his existing contract, 
is expected to receive improved terms of around £100,000 a week and the new 
deal may not include a break clause. Regardless of the summer, Koeman believes 
the Belgium forward is in keeping with the level of talent Everton want to 
bring to the club.

“It’s a big deal because the club is showing it wants to keep its best players 
and doing everything to do that,” theEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> manager said. “You never know 
what can happen in a year in football but at least it’s an understanding that 
the boy likes to stay.

Romelu Lukaku to sign new Everton deal but may leave in summer – Raiola
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/romelu-lukaku-new-everton-contract-leave-agent-mino-raiola>
“He’s a big part of our future. We know what can happen but that’s football in 
general – players sign new contracts but don’t always stay to the end of it. If 
the new deal is done that is a good thing.”

Everton expect to be active in the January transfer window and Koeman believes 
the Lukaku deal will fit with the club’s long-term aims.

He said: “We spoke about this being a project and it has started but is still 
not finished. It’s a difficult time but I knew that before. I wasn’t expecting 
good news or results every day.

“We know what we need to do to improve. It’s difficult but every job in every 
club in the Premier League is difficult. Everything can change very quickly. I 
see a big difference around the club in what has happened already, it is like 
two years at Southampton.”

Koeman has confirmed the midfielder James McCarthy will be sidelined for two 
to three weeks with the hamstring injury sufferedin the defeat by Liverpool on 
Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. The goalkeeper Maarten Stekelenburg, who was forced out of the derby with a 
dead leg, is a doubt for the Boxing Day game at the champions, Leicester City.

“James has a slight hamstring again and that is bad news because he was doing 
well,” Koeman said. “I am a little bit worried about a lot of these kind of 
injuries for him. It’s a medical question to see what we can do but we want 
more consistency in his game time – that’s most important.”
 