
Ronald Koeman <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronald-koeman> believes 
Everton are better equipped for the January transfer window than last summer 
thanks to Steve Walsh’s work as director of football and his own assessment of 
the squad.

Everton endured a frustrating summer in the transfer market when, despite 
landingIdrissa Gueye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/everton-sign-idrissa-gueye-aston-villa>
,Yannick Bolasie, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/15/yannick-bolasie-signs-everton-crystal-palace>
Ashley Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/everton-sign-ashley-williams-swansea-city>
 and Maarten Stekelenburg, they were unable to secure deals for players such as 
Moussa Sissoko, Lucas Pérez, Kalidou Koulibaly and Manolo Gabbiadini.

Walsh’s late arrival from Leicester City as Everton’s first director of 
football, on 21 July, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/21/everton-appoint-steve-walsh-leicester-city>
 impacted on transfer business, along with Koeman’s desire to assess players at 
his disposal following his move from Southampton. With that task complete, and 
Walsh overhauling Everton’s scouting network, the manager insists the 
objectives for January are clearly defined.

“You need always time to see the qualities in the squad,” said Koeman, whose 
team play at Leicester City on Boxing Day. “You need to learn about the 
characters in the team. You need to see the balance in the team and of course 
my opinion about the team is a little bit different than it was after watching 
clips ofEverton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> from last season 
because I have had time to work with the individual players.

Ronald Koeman says keeping Romelu Lukaku will show Everton’s intent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/ronald-koeman-keeping-romelu-lukaku-everton-intent>
“It’s all about characters, strengths, weaknesses, what the team needs, more 
personalities, more key players. And finally you make your mind up. Of course 
we had more time now for January than we had in the summer. Steve is in for a 
few months, new people in, new scouting. We are better prepared now than it was 
in the summer.”

Napoli’s Gabbiadini remains a potential target for January along with the 
Manchester United pair Morgan Schneiderlin and Memphis Depay. Koeman admits he 
expects Everton will be more active than is usual in January.

He added: “If I compare to Southampton, I like to do more business now in 
January than we did in Southampton. But that’s all about what we need. We will 
lose Gueye to the Africa Cup of Nations. We have along term injury in Bolasie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/everton-yannick-bolasie-surgery-knee>
. We have the physical problems with injuries of James McCarthy and we know 
Gareth Barry cannot play games every two or three days. We have Phil Jagielka 
in a tough period. We have a lot to think about what’s the best 11 and what’s 
the most fresh 11 players.”
 