
Despite forming part of a beaten European team and in a sentiment that will be 
widely shared, Rory McIlroy has suggested a Ryder Cup win for the USA at 
Hazeltine was a positive outcome for the future of the event. The USAsaw off 
Europe by 17 points to 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
, thereby sealing their first success in four attempts and only a second Ryder 
Cup win in nine.

“It is disappointing obviously,” said the world No3, who lost by a hole to 
Patrick Reed in the singles on Sunday. “But I think it’s good for golf. It 
keeps theRyder Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> interesting 
going into France in a couple of years’ time. It just gives us that little, not 
that we need any more incentive, but we’re going to want to get it back on our 
home turf next time.

USA sweep to victory in Ryder Cup as Rory McIlroy and Europe taste defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
“It does hurt. We would definitely like to be feeling what the Americans are 
feeling right now but saying that, they haven’t felt this for a while. It’s 
been eight years since they felt this feeling. They deserve it. They deserve 
their moment. We’ll come back better and stronger in Paris. It’s disappointing 
for us as a team and for me personally, taking on the role to go out and put a 
blue point on the board. I didn’t do my job.

“America came in as the favourites and justifiably so, especially on home 
turf. We came here in front of a tough crowd and we gave it our all. We put up 
a great fight and at the end it just wasn’t enough.”

McIlroy described Darren Clarke’s captaincy, even after the biggest defeat in 
35 years, as “absolutely phenomenal”. The four-time major winner said: “I 
cannot praise him enough for the job he’s done this week. It’s been absolutely 
incredible.

“He’s been first-class all the way through, he involved everyone. The little 
details he got so right. I know he’s put his heart and soul into this for 18 
months. I wish we could have got the win for him but he’s been a fantastic 
captain regardless. I feel very proud to have played under him.”

Davis Love III <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davis-love-iii>, who led the 
USA victory, said the reversal in fortunes owed everything to a united 
attitude. “I’m just proud of these guys,” he said. “They had a lot of pressure 
on them for the last two years.

Patrick Reed and Rory McIlroy’s heavyweight clash is exquisite theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/rory-mcilroy-patrick-reed-heavyweight-hazeltine-ryder-cup>
“Every time we picked a guy there was more and more pressure on the team and 
more and more questions and I’m just proud the way every one of them played. It 
was a great team effort. I’ve never seen a team come together like a family 
like this.

“We had been criticised for years for not coming together. Our team really 
rallied and played, and beat, one of the best teams ever.”

Tiger Woods, one of Love’s vice-captains, refused to differentiate between 
this win and his individual successes. “Whether I was playing or not, I was 
part of a team,” the 14-time major winner said. “I take pride in the work I do 
out there. This is no exception.”
 