
As Rory McIlroy is inevitably highlighted as a leader within Europe’s Ryder 
Cup team and a player the United States identify as a blue chip opponent, it 
will be easy to forget wide-eyed youthfulness. Whereas now McIlroy is a global 
superstar and four-time major champion, there was a time in the not-so distant 
past thatDarren Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-clarke>, 
Europe’s captain, was Northern Ireland’s revered golfing son.

“It’s probably close to 14 years ago when I first met Darren,” McIlroy 
recalls. “I’d be quite sure Darren wouldn’t really recollect the moment another 
star-struck kid stood staring at him but I hung on his every word back then.

Ian Poulter: ‘I’m not giving up the ghost – I still have a couple of Ryder 
Cups in me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/ian-poulter-ryder-cup-darren-clarke>
“This was a multiple European and PGA Tour winner chatting to me, someone who 
had convincingly beaten Tiger Woods in a WGC Match Play Championship. I was 
there to listen and learn. I was taken by how ordinary and approachable he was 
and when he said that golf was a tough business and I must hang in there, 
whatever happened, I came away brimming with confidence and a real desire to 
improve my game.

“I think it’d be safe to say that Darren was a very strong influence on the 
early development and direction of my game. I was lucky to have Darren as a 
sounding board as I developed and I felt extremely honoured when he said: ‘Give 
me a call whenever you fancy a chat.’ It was a particularly special moment in 
my life and career when Darren, Graeme [McDowell] and I appeared at Royal 
Portrush with our major trophies – lots of pride and plenty of banter, too.

“Today, we catch up and chat as often as our schedules allow and I’m really 
looking forward to Darren, with all his knowledge and passion, being at the 
helm of the European team.”

In McIlroy, Clarke has a golfer with a natural love of the team dynamic. The 
27-year-old denies the passing of 2016 without the claiming of a major 
intensifies his own desire to taste moreRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> success.

“Major or not this year, the Ryder Cup is an entirely different animal than 
anything we golfers undertake,” McIlroy says. “Obviously there’s the [world] 
Match Play every year, and perhaps a couple of similar, head-to-head events on 
either tour, but the comparisons pretty much stop there.

“At no time in any event are we reliant on a captain and his support team for 
strategy, geared up in the same kit and battling against the might of the 
Americans. And that’s not to mention the almost fever pitch atmosphere in the 
locker room and the determination of every golfer to play not for himself but 
for his partner and as part of the greater team. Every personal ambition or 
shot at glory pales into insignificance and is given up to putting blue on the 
board.

“In my early years as a professional, I perhaps didn’t fully grasp the 
strength of feeling amongst a Ryder Cup team or how golfers could really throw 
themselves into an event where they were jumping around, hugging and yelling 
when a team-mate’s putts fell. I now get that. I now get that in a very big 
way.”

McIlroy rightly points towards Henrik Stenson’s Open triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/henrik-stenson-phil-mickelson-open>
 and the Olympic gold medal as won by Justin Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/justin-rose-olympic-games-golf-gold-medal-great-britain-rio-2016>
 as causes for European optimism. McIlroy’s three victories of this year have 
been in the scintillating style which defines his career. And yet, putting woes 
have provided a recurring negative, most visibly at the US PGA Championship, 
where after a missed cut McIlroy cut as dejected a figure as at any time in his 
professional life.

“Yes, I’ve been struggling at times this year with consistency on the greens,” 
McIlroy says. “There were times when I couldn’t rely on the putter when it 
mattered butmy win at the Irish Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/22/rory-mcilroy-win-irish-open-golf>
 came after a great par save on the 15th, which then gave me the confidence to 
push hard over the closing holes. Then at the Barclays Championship, I made a 
few tweaks and found a consistency that allowed me to win that week.

Lee Westwood ramps up Ryder Cup pressure with Davis Love III riposte
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/lee-westwood-davis-love-iii-ryder-cup-tour-championship>
“So, in reality, I just have to take any analysis of my putting with a pinch 
of salt. I put the practice hours in and don’t let what’s written about my game 
influence my performance. While I’ve nothing to prove or any point to make on 
the greens, it’s no secret that I’m working with putting coach Phil Kenyon at 
the moment. But, again, this is a process we’re going through to improve my 
putting performance in the longer term, something I can carry forward during my 
career, not just a quick fix to ensure success at the Ryder Cup.”

McIlroy swats aside the notion that the residing of so many European players 
in Florida dilutes the Ryder Cup edge. Rather, he points to the globalisation 
of golf as a “great development”. He regards potential Ryder Cup captaincy of 
his own as far too distant to consider but fully understands his European role.

“We are all expected, as members of a very tight-knit team, to pull our weight 
and offer ideas and insights into the process, pairings and possible outcomes,” 
McIlroy says. “I expect that this year will be no different as Darren and the 
vice-captains engage with players and help us bond. There isn’t room for lone 
wolves in something this important.”

Four years ago at Medinah, a time-reading error by McIlroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/30/rory-mcilroy-late-ryder-cup> 
almost etched his name into golfing history for all the wrong reasons. He 
smiles now when looking back.

“I suppose it hasn’t been a bad four years; a couple more majors, another 
successful European Ryder Cup defence and quite a few wins on both sides of the 
pond,” he says. “What sometimes gets me the most is how bunched up golf has 
become and the amount of talent out there with very little separation in 
ability. Holding the world No1 slot for a sustainable period is an increasingly 
difficult challenge.

“And am I a different Rory? Well, of course. I’d like to think I’m maturing as 
the years move on – I’m a pro 10 years next year – and happy with my life on 
and off the course.Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf>, no matter 
what anyone says, is a work in progress but I’m in it for the long run. I 
intend to be a multiple winner and force to be reckoned with for years to come.”

More immediately, McIlroy will cherish his realliance with a boyhood idol.
 