
The identity of the man looking to halt a Dustin Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dustin-johnson> procession to the FedEx Cup 
and $10m prize is more fascinating than the fact a battle has ensued in the 
first place. Rory McIlroy’s third round of 66 at the Tour Championship, 
combined with an unforeseen late stumble by Johnson, has set up a thrilling 
finale on the outskirts of Atlanta.

McIlroy will claim the FedEx Cup if he wins here and Johnson finishes in a 
share of second or worse. Even a runners-up place for McIlroy may do for the 
aggregate prize if Johnson capitulates entirely over the closing 18 holes. For 
now, Johnson and Kevin Chappell lead the Tour Championship at eight under par 
with McIlroy just two adrift. The element of intrigue was provided by Johnson’s 
double bogey on the 17th hole of his third round, just as he was threatening to 
speed away from the field.

Ian Poulter: ‘I’m not giving up the ghost – I still have a couple of Ryder 
Cups in me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/ian-poulter-ryder-cup-darren-clarke>
“This week it’s all about you limiting your mistakes,” McIlroy said. “I didn’t 
do that the first two days but I did that today. I didn’t have a bogey. You 
don’t need to make many birdies here to feel like you’re working your way 
through the field. Four birdies, no bogeys, that’s going to work around here.

“It gets me closer to what I need to do. I need to go out and play a very 
similar, if not better, round of golf tomorrow to have a chance. I think, first 
and foremost, I just need to try and win this golf tournament, and whatever 
happens after that happens. It would just be great to try to win the Tour 
Championship and if the chips fall my way then so be it.”

A Friday evening range session 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/lee-westwood-davis-love-iii-ryder-cup-tour-championship>
, in which McIlroy ironed out a swing flaw, was key to his subsequent 
performance.

There is a wider issue at play, of course. Discussion of the Ryder Cup, now 
only days away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/ryder-cup-us-europe-darren-clarke-davis-love>
, remains prominent. McIlroy and Johnson will feature as key players on 
opposing teams.

On Friday, the United States captain Davis Love III insisted he was presiding 
over “the best golf team, maybe, ever assembled”. McIlroy wore a broad smile 
when answering: “I think so,” to whether or not that represents locker-room 
wall material for Europe.

McIlroy added: “Look, it’s a great team. They have a lot of very talented 
players in there. They’re obviously quite confident. So you know what, it’s up 
to us to go there and try to upset the odds.”

Johnson’s Saturday 69 was bettered by one by Chappell. Bubba Watson was among 
those to match McIlroy’s 66, the lowest of the day, to catapult himself into a 
share of 14th. Phil Mickelson signed for a 69, demonstrating further 
improvement after opening rounds of 74 and 72.
 