
Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> is confident he 
can overturn a six-shot deficit to Hideki Matsuyama and claim a fourth win of 
the year in the WGC‑HSBC Champions in Shanghai.

The world No3 McIlroy managed just two birdies in an opening 71 at Sheshan 
International on Thursday to trail overnight leader Rikard Karlberg by seven 
shots. And although the four-time major winner carded seven birdies in a second 
round of 66, that was only good enough to reduce his deficit by a single shot 
thanks to a brilliant 65 from Matsuyama.

Florian Fritsch: Other golfers can’t imagine being in the sport and not flying 
| Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/florian-fritsch-golf-fear-of-flying>
Matsuyama, who is a career-high 10th in the world after winning the Japan Open 
a fortnight ago and finishing second in the CIMB Classic last week, had 10 
birdies and four bogeys in an opening 66 and added four more birdies and two 
bogeys in a front nine of 34. The 24-year-old then started the back nine with a 
hat-trick of birdies and picked up further shots on the 14th and 18th to finish 
13 under par, three shots ahead of American Bill Haas and defending champion 
Russell Knox. England’s Richard Bland, Italy’s Francesco Molinari and American 
Daniel Berger were two shots further back, with McIlroy, Paul Casey and Ross 
Fisher on seven under alongside China’s Xinjun Zhang.

McIlroy, who had never finished outside the top six at Sheshan International 
until his share of 11th place last year, told Sky Sports:“I felt like I hit the 
ball very similar the first two days.I was just able to capitalise on some of 
the good drives that I hit today and being able to hole a few more putts makes 
a big difference at the end of the day. I’ve been able to come back from six 
behind with 18 to play, so over 36 holes a lot of things can happen. Hideki’s 
playing very well and will be tough to catch, but from what I saw out there 
today, if I can keep that sort of golf going over the next two days I should 
have a chance.”
 