
Rory McIlroy made a strong start to his 2017 campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/11/10-golfing-hopes-for-2017-tiger-woods-solheim-cup>
 at the BMW SA Open as the world No2 shot a five-under-par 67 at Glendower GC.

He produced seven birdies and two bogeys in his first round since November to 
lie only one shot behind the first-round leaders Trevor Fisher Jr and Keith 
Horne.

After starting with a run of four successive pars McIlroy took advantage of 
perfect conditions to reel off four consecutive birdies from the 14th, with 
further gains coming on the 2nd, 6th – where he almost made a hole-in-one – and 
8th.

“Yeah, it was good,” the four-times major champion told the European Tour’s 
website. “The first competitive round of 2017. I’m quite pleased. I felt like I 
gave myself a lot of chances on our front nine, the back nine. That four under 
could have been probably six or seven but it was a really good way to start.

Related: From Tiger Woods to the Solheim Cup: 10 golfing hopes for the year 
ahead | Ewan Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/11/10-golfing-hopes-for-2017-tiger-woods-solheim-cup>

“It was a bit scrappy in places around the last few holes but five under par 
is a good way to start this tournament. Weather-wise, not much wind, there was 
a score to be had out there. I think 67 I am pleased with but I feel that if we 
get conditions like that for the rest of the week I can definitely go lower.”

McIlroy, playing with new equipment after Nike’s decision to withdraw from the 
golf club business, revealed he had been working hard over the winter break. “I 
had a lot of nice shots, I had some good iron shots,” he said. “I had some 
really good drives on the front nine, the first nine holes, and so that was 
encouraging.

“I made a couple of sloppy swings coming in but that’s something that 
hopefully I can work on and try to eradicate for tomorrow. I holed a few nice 
ones but the ones that I missed I feel a little more speed was needed than 
anything else.

“I’ve been working hard on my putting, I feel like from August last year to 
today it’s come on leaps and bounds and I hope it can only improve.”

The home favourites Fisher Jr and Horne both shot seven birdies against a 
single dropped shots in their rounds of 66, while McIlroy was joined in a share 
of third by the South Africans Thomas Aiken, Dean Burmester and Jbe Kruger and 
England’s Jordan Smith.

The tournament host Ernie Els shot a two-over 74, while the six-times major 
winner Sir Nick Faldo – making a rare competitive appearance at the age of 59 – 
produced a two-under 70.
 