
New youth detention centres are not the answer and will just lock the Northern 
Territory <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> into 
an endless cycle of incarceration, the royal commission has heard.

The royal commission into the protection and detention of children in the NT 
began its second public hearing this week and heard evidence from the former 
head of Queensland corrections Keith Hamburger.

In evidence continuing from Monday, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/four-corners-prompted-inspector-to-toughen-up-report-into-nt-justice-system>
 Hamburger called for an overhaul of the youth justice system, led by 
Aboriginal people and communities, and the introduction of a statutory body for 
corrections.


Four Corners prompted inspector 'to toughen up report' into NT justice system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/four-corners-prompted-inspector-to-toughen-up-report-into-nt-justice-system>
The NT government has earmarked funds for a new youth correctional facility at 
Alice Springs and one in Darwin to replace the controversial and aged Don Dale.

However, Hamburger, who led a comprehensive and highly critical review into 
the corrections department this year, said he did not believe that was the 
answer.

“Whilst there’s no doubt that the current facilities are totally inadequate, I 
don’t think the solution at this point is necessarily, on the evidence 
available, to jump to building two new facilities in those locations,” he said.

“Once we start investing I think it’s in the order of $21m into two new 
facilities, that locks us into that solution for many, many years.”

Hamburger had earlier spoken of his recommendations for a new youth justice 
system, one based on community programs, returning young Aboriginal people to 
traditional lands and therapeutic care, including animal and recreational 
therapy. Facilities would be “cottage style” accommodation with wide 
recreational spaces.

He criticised the current system of incarceration as going completely against 
the purpose of youth justice, telling the hearing yesterdayDon Dale in 
particular was run “like a human storage facility”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/don-dale-run-like-a-human-storage-facility-nt-royal-commission-told>

“I don’t think it’s relevant whether it’s the police or judiciary putting 
people into the centre,” he said. “They’ve missed the point of the underlying 
drivers of this and how we address that.”

He said his report proposed a model that would see the Department of Children 
and Families playing a part in strengthening communities, working in concert 
with families and with appropriate programs in the justice system.

Don Dale run like a 'human storage facility', NT royal commission told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/don-dale-run-like-a-human-storage-facility-nt-royal-commission-told>
He said he wasn’t sure to what extent the department was currently working 
with Aboriginal communities to achieve change and he feared programs would not 
be culturally appropriate or driven.

Hamburger also detailed his recommendation for an inspector general of adult 
and juvenile corrections, with Aboriginal people at the forefront, to act as 
oversight.


“We have a minority white prison population but Aboriginal people are really 
disempowered in the prison system,” he said.

The NT prison population is 85% Indigenous in adult corrections and 96% in 
youth facilities.

He said the corrections area of government was “so risk prone” it was critical 
it never fell into disrepair.

“It always results in human tragedy and massive cost to the taxpayer 
ultimately.”

Less than a week before he was due to complete his report Hamburger hadn’t yet 
decided to include that as part of his recommendations but then he viewed the 
Four Corners episode on Don Dale, which he described as a “catalyst” to call 
for a circuit breaker.


Asked if he had confidence in his desired changes occurring, based on recent 
response and actions by authorities, Hamburger said: “I’m an optimistic person 
and I’m hoping that it will be but looking at the initial responses prepared 
here … it doesn’t give me a lot of confidence that the officers at least are 
thinking down the path we’ve outlined in our report.”
 