

1) Wales’s Tipuric gives Gatland food for thought



Justin Tipuric’s man-of-the-match performance at the Aviva Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/ireland-wales-rugby-world-cup-warm-up-match-report>
 reignited the debate about Wales’s most effective combination. The Osprey 
flanker was playing on the open-side because of an injury to Sam Warburton, the 
national captain for the last four years. Tipuric has the misfortune to be 
shadowing a player who not only wears the armband but who is one of the leading 
players in his position in the game. The Wales head coach Warren Gatland knows 
how he feels having understudied Sean Fitzpatrick on the New Zealand bench 
during his playing days, never once leaving it to win his cap. Wales have the 
option of moving Warburton to the blind-side to accommodate Tipuric, but that 
would mean omitting Dan Lydiate, whose 25 tackles in Dublin helped Wales to 
victory four years after he played a pivotal role in the World Cup 
quarter-final success against Ireland.

Ireland 10-16 Wales | Rugby World Cup warm-up match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/ireland-wales-rugby-world-cup-warm-up-match-report>
Taulupe Faletau’s ball-carrying means he will not be shifted at No8 and with 
Wales playing England and Australia at Twickenham in the World Cup, Saturday’s 
tactics were instructive: it was an away performance, risk minimised in the 
mission for territory. Tipuric eschewed his desire to widen the point of 
attacks and maintain continuity as Wales built a defensive wall the Irish 
struggled to breach, and was Warburtonesque in his timing and strength over the 
ball. It was a mature performance, and while it will likely be followed by a 
return to the bench, he has given Gatland something to mull over, especially if 
Australia opt for David Pocock and Michael Hooper in their back row.Paul Rees


2) Canada could upset the order in Pool D



Pool D may be, ostensibly, the tightest of the pools, but – just like all the 
others bar A – the established order is expected to prevail: imposing Ireland, 
questionable France, Italy, then the minnows Romania and Canada. Canada’s first 
win of the summer, after a miserable Pacific Nations Cup campaign that they 
ended winless, gives them hope of beating not just Romania, but also the flaky 
looking Italians. OK, the Glasgow Warriors team that went down 19-12 to Canada 
in Halifax on Saturday bore only a faint resemblance to the one that stunned 
everyone by winning the Pro12 last season. But they still put out a strong 
side. Tim Swinson, Kieran Low, Mike Blair and Rory Hughes are all capped 
internationals, as is the flanker Simone Favaro, who narrowly missed out on the 
Italian World Cup squad. The veteran Jamie Cudmore, who captained the side 
against Glasgow, led from the front in scoring their opening try and showed 
that his experience will be crucial among a side featuring 18 World Cup 
debutants, as will that of London Welsh’s former London Irish and Leicester 
flanker Richard Thorpe. Though the goal-kicking of Nathan Hirayama is a 
concern, don’t be too surprised if they pick up a first full international win 
of 2015 this autumn.Dan Lucas

3) Off-field turmoil could help Japan bloody some noses

It’s not been a good couple of weeks for Japan. Eddie Jones has announced that 
he’ll be stepping down at the end of the World Cup, prompting criticism from 
some quarters that this will disrupt the team. There have been questions over 
whether or not the proposed Japanese Super Rugby franchise, of whom Jones is 
due to be appointed director, will be able to participate in next year’s 
competition, and there have been fresh doubts over the country’s suitability to 
host the 2019 World Cup, with Australia emerging as a potential replacement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Frugby-world-cup-warm-ups-talking-points-from-the-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F31%2F1441006364116%2Fdef48bf9-cc91-4030-882b-f75826bb698e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%20warm-ups%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Frugby-world-cup-warm-ups-talking-points-from-the-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%20warm-ups%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Frugby-world-cup-warm-ups-talking-points-from-the-weekend-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F31%2F1441006364116%2Fdef48bf9-cc91-4030-882b-f75826bb698e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Japan’s captain Michael Leitch, centre, runs the ball against Uruguay in Tokyo 
on Saturday. Photograph: Kazuhiro Nogi/AFP/Getty Images 
The result of all this turmoil? Back-to-back cohesive, impressive wins over 
Uruguay: 30-8 in Fukuoka, and now 40-0 in Tokyo. The talk from the Brave 
Blossoms’ camp is of drawing strength from the off-field chaos and getting a 
win at the World Cup, with their game with the USA presumably the one they are 
targeting. “It probably makes the team stronger if anything, because in reality 
it’s up to the players to make a difference,” the captain, Michael Leitch, told 
the Japan Times. “The only thing that can make a difference as players in Japan 
is if we win at the World Cup. It doesn’t increase the pressure. It makes you 
work harder.” Japan won’t get out of Pool B, but they are capable of making 
life difficult for their opponents.DL

4) Scotland bely regimented reputation by leaving it late

Vern Cotter, the coach who seemed to have most things pinned down, said he 
won’t finalise his squad of 31 until the 31 August deadline and isn’t even sure 
of the split between backs and forwards. There is also the issue of how many 
“imports” he dare name.Mike Averis

Scotland’s longstanding injuries plague Vern Cotter’s decision making
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/30/scotland-injuries-vern-cotter-world-cup>
5) Uruguay show that the draw needs reform

Uruguay’s opponents in Pool A: the confident hosts England, the physically 
domineering Welsh, Australia – the team that beat New Zealand to Rugby 
Championship glory – and the in-form Pacific Nations Cup winners, Fiji.

Uruguay’s warm-up results: a 70-8 aggregate loss over two matches against 
Japan, whose main strength is off-field chaos. Pablo Lemoine’s team, the 
second-lowest ranked at this World Cup, are back at the tournament for the 
first time in 12 years, but to say the odds are stacked against them picking up 
a third win is like saying that Ellen Ripley would have some difficulty getting 
the Nostromo spaceship home. They play with all the underdog cliches – spirit, 
passion, a never-say-die attitude – but in truth they are woefully ill-equipped 
to prevent an embarrassing rout in probably all four of their matches. There is 
very little for the minnows to gain from this and it calls into question the 
wisdom of the seeding system and the earliness of the draw. Oh, and what of the 
one team ranked below them at the tournament? Namibia, the perennial whipping 
boys (the Wikipedia page for their record at the World Cupis a desperately sad 
read <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Namibia_at_the_Rugby_World_Cup>), get to 
play the All Blacks. Some of these matches should be cancelled on humanitarian 
grounds.DL

Samoa seek to turn a shambles into a barnstormer at Rugby World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/28/samoa-rugby-world-cup-barbarians>
6) Italy in abject disarray

Three weeks out and on the evidence of Saturday in Edinburgh, Italy are close 
to being a shambles. “I don’t know what happened today,” said coach Jacques 
Brunel, who has already decided against signing on for more time in Italy. “We 
need to get our confidence otherwise theRugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-world-cup> will be tough.” MA
 Italy coach Jacques Brunel, left, said his team was short of confidence after 
the 48-7 loss to Scotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/scotland-italy-rugby-world-cup-warm-up-match-report>
 on Saturday. Photograph: Claudio Peri/EPA 
7) Samoa have a lot of work to do

Samoa are coming to the World Cup confident that they can build on a July 
performance in Apia when they gave the All Blacks a run for their money. But
their warm-up against the Barbarians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/29/olympic-stadium-samoa-barbarians-rugby-world-cup>
 highlighted their deficiencies. The dismissal of Kane Thompson could be a 
serious blow if the lock is banned for the start of the season, and they were 
wobbly at the set-piece. One bright spot at the Olympic Stadium was the 
performance of the full-back Tim Nanai-Williams, who looks a terrific prospect 
from broken play. But Scotland will not lose too much sleep if they look at a 
video from the weekend in east London and compare it to their bravura display 
against Italy.Ian Malin
 