
New Zealand v South Africa, Twickenham, Saturday, 4pm

Who will win? New Zealand by 10 points

Why? If this game was being played up on the highveld in Johannesburg, South 
Africa might fancy doing to the All Blacks what Japan did to them. New Zealand, 
though, have too much ammunition behind the scrum to be subdued indefinitely.

Key player? Aaron Smith. Hassle the brilliant All Black scrum-half and the 
Boks might just have a chance. Allow him to fizz his passes away and it will be 
goodnight nurse.Robert Kitson

Who will win? South Africa by seven points (27-20) 

Why? They are not nearly as talented as the All Blacks, but we’re due a shock 
that comes true (as opposed to Scotland). The Springboks will be as resolute in 
defence as France were gaping, and pressure at this level works in mysterious 
ways.

Key player? Bryan Habana – with an interception try to seal the place in the 
final.Eddie Butler

This may be the greatest New Zealand team ever, but that guarantees little | 
Graham Henry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/23/rugby-world-cup-greatest-new-zealand-south-africa>
Who will win? New Zealand, by whatever it takes.

Why? They are the better all-round side and, unlike previous World Cups, look 
equipped for the knock-out stage, not distracted by their No1 world ranking. 
The conditions should favour South Africa, but a sidethat was cut open by Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/19/japan-rugby-world-cup-victory-south-africa-ultimate-triumph-underdog>
 will need more.

Key player? The All Blacks have a piano full of keys. South Africa will need 
their back five forwards to win the breakdown,allowing Fourie du Preez to 
dictate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/17/wales-south-africa-rugby-world-cup>
.Paul Rees

Who will win? South Africa by one point

Why? New Zealand are the better team, obviously, but that’s not the question. 
They haven’t played a serious match since the opening weekend and they’re 
against a team who have been on a mission since the same. Theyare coming off a 
win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/17/new-zealand-dan-carter-richie-mccaw-france>
 of otherworldly brilliance, which exorcised any number of demons, and are 
being hailed as the greatest team who have ever lived. The forecast is for wind 
and rain. All the classic conditions are in place for an upset. And it wouldn’t 
be the first time.

Rugby World Cup 2015 power rankings: New Zealand surge back to summit | Gerard 
Meagher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/23/rugby-world-cup-2015-power-rankings-new-zealand>
Key player? Duane Vermeulen. Not as good a basketball player as Kieran Read 
but hard as nails and, as we saw last weekend, capable of the odd flash of 
subtlety too.Michael Aylwin

Who will win? New Zealand by 15 points (27-12)

Why? From the start of the second half against Tonga, New Zealand have looked 
a different class, something confirmed against an admittedly poor France in the 
quarter-final. Back to front they have the skill levels – plus the patience and 
confidence – to make opponents pay for mistakes. And South Africa will make 
plenty.

Key player? The prop Joe Moody, effectively the third-choice loose head, who 
replaces Wyatt Crockett, who himself replaced the veteran Tony Woodcock.Mike 
Averis

Australia v Argentina, Twickenham, Sunday, 4pm

Who will win? Draw. Argentina to win in extra-time.

Why? This has the potential to be the game of the tournament: two dangerous 
attacking sides with nothing to lose and everything to gain. The Wallabies have 
won three big games on the trot at Twickenham butthe Pumas fear nobody these 
days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/21/argentina-rugby-world-cup-dean-ryan>
.

Key player? Juan Martín Fernández Lobbe. If Argentina can compete effectively 
at the breakdown they have the ability out wide to stretch their opponents.RK

Who will win? Australia by four points (34-30) 

Why? The team that nearly lost to Scotland against the team that seriously 
inconvenienced New Zealand. Argentina are the darlings of the World Cup (after 
Japan), but they are no longer the surprise package. Australia will welcome an 
open game – and a scrummaging one. 

Key player? Sekopi Kepu – to hold the Australian scrum firm on their put-in. EB

 

Who will win? Australia by nine points

Why? They were given a jolt by Scotland last weekend after being showered with 
compliments for the first time in a while and will be ready this weekend. 
Decision-making will be the key for Argentina, particularly if David Pocock is 
in the Wallabies’ back row.

Key player? Pocock for Australia, if fit; the towering Juan Martín Fernández 
Lobbe for the Pumas.PR

Who will win? Australia by five points

Why? At time of writing there are doubts over key players on both sides. The 
outcomes of each will make a difference. Australia are back beneath the radar. 
Meanwhile, we’ve known for some time that Argentina can beat almost anyone, but 
the wins have been peppered – as recently as this summer – with heavy defeats. 
Backing up last weekend’s brilliant win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/ireland-argentina-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 with another this will be a test of maturity. Hope they do it, though.

What the Rugby World Cup means for the Six Nations and Rugby Championship | 
Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/22/the-breakdown-rugby-world-cup-six-nations>
Key player? Stephen Moore. Especially if Agustín Creevy doesn’t make it. 
Australia’s captain is one of the main differences between this team and the 
one that toured these parts a year ago.MAyl

Who will win? Argentina by five points (14-9)

Why? If the Six Nations needs to understand the gulf between it and the Rugby 
Championship then look no further than Argentina. Four seasons have turned a 
limited, pack-and-kick-orientated, side into an all-court outfit, probably 
second only to the All Blacks at this World Cup. Count the tries and look who 
scores them.

Key player? Sorry but there have to be three. Santiago Cordero, Joaquín 
Tuculet and Juan Imhoff, the back three, set alarm bells ringing every time 
they get involved.MAv
 