
South Africa v Wales

Who will win? South Africa by six points

Why? A full-strength Wales squad would have their hands full with a resurgent 
Springbok side; withoutLeigh Halfpenny, Rhys Webb, Jonathan Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/25/wales-injuries-england-graham-henry-rugby-world-cup>
, Scott Williams and Liam Williams, among others, Warren Gatland is running 
short of game-breakers. Wales are braveand resourceful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/15/wales-south-africa-warren-gatland-world-cup-rugby-quarter-final>
 but it is going to require another monumental effort to stop South Africa 
squeezing them at the set piece.

Key player? Fourie du Preez. The tactical heart of South Africa’s team, now 
wearing the captain’s armband. The Boks are harder to ruffle when he starts.
Robert Kitson

Wales prepare to try ‘something different’ and catch South Africa cold | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/15/wales-south-africa-warren-gatland-world-cup-rugby-quarter-final>
Who will win? Wales by two points (28-26)

Why? Because South Africa do not pose the problems – the Australian knots – 
that Wales find hard to undo. South Africa run ferociously and ramrod straight, 
and the Wales defence can handle that, on the (big) proviso their scrum holds 
up.

Key player George North. Can the real Gorgeous George please make his re-entry 
into Test rugby and leave a few tacklers in his wake?Eddie Butler

Who will win? South Africa by a kick or two.

Why? Wales’s injuries behind the scrum have restricted their attacking 
options. South Africa have gone Bok to basics afterlosing to Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
, while bringing in some younger forwards, and it would not be a setback for 
the tournament if they went out – but how much do Wales have left in them?

Key player Fourie du Preez for South Africa, the controller; Jamie Roberts for 
Wales, quiet so far by his standards, no better time to step up.Paul Rees
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsouth-africa-wales--rugby-world-cup-2015-preview-graham-henry-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444930068960%2FKP_545998_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20v%20Wales%3A%20Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%20preview%20with%20Graham%20Henry%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsouth-africa-wales--rugby-world-cup-2015-preview-graham-henry-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20v%20Wales%3A%20Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%20preview%20with%20Graham%20Henry%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsouth-africa-wales--rugby-world-cup-2015-preview-graham-henry-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444930068960%2FKP_545998_crop_640x360.jpg>
Who will win? South Africa by three points

Why? After the worst possible start and for reasons not entirely under their 
coach’s making, South Africa are beginning to fulfil their potential, while 
Wales reel from injury to injury. How much pain can one side take?

Key player Eben Etzebeth, particularly when he’s alongside Lood de Jager. It’s 
amazing that Heyneke Meyer ever thought otherwise.Mike Averis

Who will win? Wales by one

Why? A bloodbath, obviously. Not sure how much longer Wales can go on but 
they’ve got nothing if not balls. South Africa will smash into them again and 
again but their attacking game will need to sharpen up if they are to prevail. 
Wales to have one last defiant stand left in them.

Key player Dan Biggar. In a shootout under pressure, which this might well 
become, you’d trust Biggar ahead of young Handré Pollard.Michael Aylwin

New Zealand v France
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2F2015-rugby-world-cup-guardian-writers-predictions-quarter-finals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42884bb3cf0587ef2d3e8ac4dfeac1867aa6a655%2F24_171_4856_2914%2F4856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%3A%20Guardian%20writers%E2%80%99%20predictions%20for%20the%20quarter-finals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2F2015-rugby-world-cup-guardian-writers-predictions-quarter-finals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%3A%20Guardian%20writers%E2%80%99%20predictions%20for%20the%20quarter-finals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2F2015-rugby-world-cup-guardian-writers-predictions-quarter-finals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42884bb3cf0587ef2d3e8ac4dfeac1867aa6a655%2F24_171_4856_2914%2F4856.jpg>
 New Zealand’s Wyatt Crockett, who could be a key man against France, stretches 
during a training session this week. Photograph: Gabriel Bouys/AFP/Getty Images 
Who will win? New Zealand by 15 points

Why? Because lightning does not strike thrice. France have a strong pack and 
did not show the best of themselves against Ireland but the All Blacks have 
been holding something back, too, and their game-management is smarter these 
days. Without Yoann Huget there is insufficient devil in the French back three 
and New Zealand will not be as easily ambushed asthey were in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/08/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup200714>.

Key player? Dan Carter. He is moving to Paris after this World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/18/dan-carter-will-leave-new-zealand-for-paris-to-become-rugbys-best-paid-player>
 and will want to demonstrate he is worth Racing’s sizeable investment.RK

Who will win? France by 10 points (38-28)

Why? Haven’t a clue. They are French.

Key player Louis Picamoles. Has to have one of his days when the ball finds 
its way to him wherever he goes. And he has to set up others, rather than try 
to smash New Zealand all on his own.EB
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Ffrance-new-zealand-rugby-world-cup-2015-preview-graham-henry-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444931305035%2FKP_546036_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=France%20v%20New%20Zealand%3A%20Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%20preview%20with%20Graham%20Henry%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Ffrance-new-zealand-rugby-world-cup-2015-preview-graham-henry-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=France%20v%20New%20Zealand%3A%20Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%20preview%20with%20Graham%20Henry%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Ffrance-new-zealand-rugby-world-cup-2015-preview-graham-henry-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444931305035%2FKP_546036_crop_640x480.jpg>
Who will win? New Zealand by a try or two.

Why? France won this fixture in 2007 but they were the Six Nations champions 
then, having won the title in three of the four years after the 2003 World Cup. 
They have finished no higher than fourth since 2011, struggling not just 
against the best sides. The All Blacks should have too much individual and 
collective quality. And Wayne Barnes is not refereeing.

Key player Frédéric Michalak for France, needs to take a tactical grip on the 
game; Wyatt Crockett for New Zealand, the scrum being their one area of concern.
PR

Who will win? New Zealand by 14 points

Why? Forget the history. Finally, in the second half against Tonga, the All 
Black machine looked to have shed its ring-rustiness, both backs and forwards 
playing with the precision missing during the pool stages. France are still a 
distance off where they could be.

Key player Wyatt Crockett, who comes in as loosehead to replace a prop with 
118 caps behind him while facing one of the more destructive front rows.MAv

France’s biggest problem here is 2007. Everyone’s talking about it

Who will win? New Zealand by 17

Why? France’s biggest problem here is 2007. Everyone’s talking about it. They 
do have a habit of mugging New Zealand – but only when they catch them by 
surprise. We shouldn’t forget, either, the inordinate hidings that New Zealand 
have given them in between the upsets. The All Blacks are miles from their best 
but they win when they have to.

Key player Brodie Retallick. Last season he was the best player in the world 
by a distance. This season he hasn’t been. Time for him to step up and overcome 
a fairly bland French pairing.MAyl

Ireland v Argentina

Who will win? Argentina by six points

Why? Under normal circumstances Ireland would fancy advancing to their first 
World Cup semi-final. Their list of significant injuries, though, is a worry – 
despite their fans’ wonderful support, it is asking a lot to expect them to 
play as well as they didlast Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/11/argentina-namibia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. Argentina play more expansive rugby under Daniel Hourcade and will ask more 
attacking questions than France did.

Key player? Nicolás Sánchez. The smoothest goalkicker in the tournament. If 
Ireland’s discipline slips even slightly, the Puma fly-half will punish them.RK

Who will win? Argentina by five points (21-16)

Why? Argentina have history against Ireland at the World Cup and have run into 
form at the right time. Ireland cannot be at their best withoutPaul O’Connell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/13/rugby-world-cup-2015-ireland-lose-injured-paul-o-connell-rest-of-tournament>
,Sean O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/13/rugby-world-cup-2015-ireland-sean-o-brien-banned-quarter-final-against-argentina>
 andPeter O’Mahony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/12/ireland-peter-omahony-out-rugby-world-cup-knee-injury>
 – andwith Jonathan Sexton nursing a groin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/14/ireland-jonathan-sexton-fitness-deadline>
 …

Key player Agustín Creevy. Brilliant hooker and captain. One of the stars of 
the tournament.EB

Who will win? Ireland, especially if Jonathan Sexton is fit, by a score or two.

Why? Ireland have developed the knack of winning under Joe Schmidt and while 
they will miss Paul O’Connell, Iain Henderson will step up. Their knowhow 
should be enough in what could be the tie of the round against an Argentina 
team that has flair in attack but misses too many tackles.

Key player Sexton for Ireland, puts them in the right areas; Juan Fernández 
Lobbe for Argentina, a top-drawer flanker who will have to slow down Irish 
possession.PR

Who will win? Ireland by six points

Why? Ireland are without Paul O’Connell, Peter O’Mahony, Sean O’Brien and 
possibly Johnny Sexton, but they were for the second half against France and 
looked by far the better side. There is also much muttering in camp about doing 
it for the fallen captain

Key player Ian Madigan. Even if he plays, Sexton is clearly not 100 per cent, 
so the pressure is once again on the Leinster fly-half.MAv

Who will win? Argentina by three

Why? Ireland lost three key players last weekend and actually improved. That 
can happen in the flux of a match – adversity inspires. Now they must negotiate 
a World Cup quarter-final from the start with a shedload of caps missing. Oh, 
and Argentina are really good. They’ll miss Marcelo Bosch but they have never 
looked more confident.

Key player Agustín Creevy. Seems ridiculous that such a player spent last 
season languishing in and out of the Worcester team in England’s second 
division. If he was off-form then (presumably), he’s not now. Fearsome in the 
tight and loose.MAyl

Australia v Scotland
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faustralia-michael-cheika-sorry-suspended-scotland-rugby-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%E2%80%99s%20Michael%20Cheika%20feels%20sorry%20for%20suspended%20Scotland%20players%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faustralia-michael-cheika-sorry-suspended-scotland-rugby-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%E2%80%99s%20Michael%20Cheika%20feels%20sorry%20for%20suspended%20Scotland%20players%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faustralia-michael-cheika-sorry-suspended-scotland-rugby-video&media=>
 The Australia head coach, Michael Cheika, says he feels sorry for suspended 
Scotland players as the nations meet in the last eight 
Who will win? Australia by 14 points

Why? Australia have already seen off England and Wales, and Scotland, pending 
their appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/15/scotland-appeal-world-cup-bans-jonny-gray-ross-ford>
, are set to be without two of their key forwards because of suspension. The 
pace at which the Wallabies attack will concern Scotland’s defence, not always 
watertightagainst Samoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/scotland-survive-samoa-scare-rugby-world-cup>
. David Pocock and Michael Hooper will also take no prisoners at the breakdown,
as England’s back-row discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
.

Key player Scott Sio. His father gave him his first name after Scotland beat 
Samoa at the 1991 World Cup. If he frustrates WP Nel at scrum-time it could be 
a long afternoon for Scotland in other areas.RK

Who will win? Australia by three points (37-34)

Why? Scotland will rise to the occasion and threaten the biggest upset since 
Japan’s very recent one … and Australia will rally and pinch it late in the 
game.

Key player Ben McCalman. A force of nature against Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/australia-wales-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
, he seems to enjoy the end of games.EB

Australia are looking a class act, happy with plan A, plan B or anything they 
have to improvise on the hoof

Who will win? Australia by a score (of points)

Why? Scotland struggled to contain Samoa and trailed to the USA at the 
interval. Australia’s enemy would be complacency were Michael Cheika not in 
charge. But with Craig Joubert refereeing, the game could be levelled out by a 
confusion of penalties.

Key player Greig Laidlaw for Scotland, an accurate goal-kicker and clever 
scrum-half; David Pocock for Australia, a snaffler supreme.PR

Who will win? Australia by 10 points

Why? Australia are looking a class act, happy with plan A, plan B or anything 
they have to improvise on the hoof. And look at the bench. It’s not without 
reason the bookies have them hot favourites.

Key player Matt Giteau by a nose from Sunday’s other centurion, Stephen Moore. 
What England – or any other side for that matter – wouldn’t give for a 
ball-playing 12 with talent to match his experience.MAv

Who will win? Australia by five

Why? Australia have looked the most impressive in the pool stages. Which is 
another way of saying they beat the hosts by 20 points. They’ve looked less 
comfortable in the games they’ve been expected to win easily. They are expected 
to win this one easily – but Scotland will make them work for it.

Key player Bernard Foley. He’s looking a million dollars at the moment but he 
doesn’t always. David Pocock is Australia’s rock and best player but Foley is 
the barometer for how the team is playing.MAyl
 