
Fixtures

Weds 23 Sep Scotland v Japan, Kingsholm Stadium, 2.30pm BST

Sun 27 Sep Scotland v United States, Elland Road, 2.30pm BST

Sat 3 Oct South Africa v Scotland, St James’ Park, 4.45pm BST

Sat 10 Oct Samoa v Scotland, St James’ Park, 2.30pm BST

Odds to win World Cup

200-1

Coach

Vern Cotter

Captain

Greig Laidlaw
Scotland 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1iPqEGHwZM6KEc46x86O1f7dIJtbA-5bSpulkuv5ddxQ>
Too many coaches and pundits have been burned predicting false dawns for 
Scottish rugby. For a decade the words “brave” and ‚“defeat” too often came 
together. From Frank Hadden through Andy Robinson and Scott Johnson and on to 
the man currently in control, Vern Cotter, early results have lifted the nation 
only for cold reality to follow.

Most recently Cotter, a Kiwi with the ring of success about him after eight 
seasons with the mighty Clermont Auvergne, had a good opening autumn in charge, 
evenrunning New Zealand close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/15/scotland-new-zealand-international-match-report>
, only to limp out of this season’s Six Nations winless. Coming into this World 
Cup, the results of the warm-up matches also have been mixed – two wins (both 
against Italy) and two defeats – and yet there is a feeling abroadthat Scotland 
are beginning to believe in themselvesagain.

The 44,000 at Murrayfield a fortnight ago were positively euphoric at the 48-7 
beating of Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/scotland-italy-rugby-world-cup-warm-up-match-report>
 despite the fact that theAzzurri failed to turn up (even their coach, Jacques 
Brunel, confessed he was bemused). Then a week later,after Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/05/france-scotland-world-cup-warm-up-match-report>
, where a more pragmatic approach to a late penalty most certainly would have 
produced a draw, even the Scottish players were muttering that their Six 
Nations whitewash had been put in perspective. So are Scotland on the march?

In seven World Cups, Scotland have failed to get to the quarter-finals only 
once, in New Zealand four years ago, and the maths suggest they will again get 
to the knockout stages. In Pool B only South Africa, currently third in the 
world, rank above Scotland (10), with the Samoa match, conveniently close to 
the Scottish border at St James’ Park, Newcastle on 10 October, probably the 
decider. Whether Scotland go on to the semi-finals – they have only once 
before; in 1991 when Gavin Hastings could have sent them to the final but 
missed a sitter of a penalty against England at Murrayfield – is another 
matter. With so many new faces in the squad, Cotter’s side could be either the 
big surprise of the tournament or possibly one that backfires. Who knows what 
to expect?

For a start they are heavily dependent on the South African tighthead Willem 
Nel, who qualified so recently that he has had time to play only twice for his 
adopted country, while another newcomer, Josh Strauss, will not be eligible 
until the day after the tournament kicks off. Add a Kiwi flanker, John Hardie, 
also with one cap after arriving in the summer, and the left-field selection of 
the lock Tim Swinson, who did not play in any of the warm-ups and was not even 
part of the extended squad from which Cotter picked his final 31, and you have 
a pack with the potential to go either way.

Will they miss the bulk and nous that is Jim Hamilton, the lock with 63 caps 
in his locker and a nose for knowing where to make himself a nuisance when 
sides want quick ball? And how will the scrum stand up without Euan Murray, 
their most capped prop?

Behind the scrum things are more settled with Scotland having a half‑back 
partnership in the captain, Greig Laidlaw, and the fly-half Finn Russell, that 
continues to grow in understanding and ambition. The arrival of Russell, on the 
back of outstanding European and Pro12 rugby with Glasgow, has also filled a 
void left by his club coach, Gregor Townsend, when he hung up his Test boots 
and No10 shirt 12 years and three World Cups ago.

Rugby World Cup preview No8: Japan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/10/rugby-world-cup-preview-japan>
Outside the 22-year-old Russell, Alex Dunbar has missed out through injury but 
there is real competition for the centre berths between Matt Scott, Mark 
Bennett and Peter Horne while the tussle between Sean Lamont and Tim Visser for 
a possible wing spot ended with both scoring twice in that final Murrayfield 
game and both getting seats on the plane south. With the doctor also signing 
off both Tommy Seymour and Sean Maitland, a natural understudy to the Lion at 
full-back, Stuart Hogg, Cotter got most of the things on his backs wish list.

Rugby’s Scottish nationalists may be less than impressed at Cotter’s 
pick-and-mix selections but the coach himself says he never gave the potential 
for a public backlash, particularly on the selection of Hardie, a second 
thought. After all, the kilted Kiwi is hardly new a recent phenomenon and if 
the imports get Scotland through to the knockout stages then at least 
Murrayfield’s accountants will be pleased. When it comes to arranging tours it 
helps to be box office in the eyes of Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, 
rather than also-rans from outside the world’s top 10.

“I believe in this squad, I do,” said Cotter when he announced his 31. “We are 
prepared to take responsibility for what is coming next.” 

Scotland’s 31-man World Cup Squad 

Props Alasdair Dickinson (Edinburgh), Ryan Grant (Glasgow Warriors), Gordon 
Reid (Glasgow Warriors), Willem Nel (Edinburgh), Jon Welsh (Newcastle Falcons).

Hookers Fraser Brown (Glasgow Warriors), Ross Ford (Edinburgh), Stuart 
McInally (Edinburgh).

Locks Grant Gilchrist (Edinburgh), Jonny Gray (Glasgow Warriors), Richie Gray 
(Castres), Tim Swinson (Glasgow Warriors).

Back-rows David Denton (Edinburgh), John Hardie (unattached), Josh Strauss 
(Glasgow Warriors), Alasdair Strokosch (Perpignan), Ryan Wilson (Glasgow 
Warriors).

Scrum-halves Sam Hidalgo-Clyne (Edinburgh), Greig Laidlaw (Gloucester, capt), 
Henry Pyrgos (Glasgow Warriors).

Fly-halves Finn Russell (Glasgow Warriors), Duncan Weir (Glasgow Warriors).

Centres Mark Bennett (Glasgow Warriors), Peter Horne (Glasgow Warriors), Matt 
Scott (Edinburgh), Richie Vernon (Glasgow Warriors).

Wings Sean Lamont (Glasgow Warriors), Sean Maitland (London Irish), Tommy 
Seymour (Glasgow Warriors), Tim Visser (Harlequins).

Full-backs Stuart Hogg (Glasgow Warriors).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frugby-world-cup-preview-no9-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441959278186%2F816bec94-39ff-4d61-a726-fc714ba618f0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%20preview%20No9%3A%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frugby-world-cup-preview-no9-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%20preview%20No9%3A%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Frugby-world-cup-preview-no9-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441959278186%2F816bec94-39ff-4d61-a726-fc714ba618f0-1020x612.jpeg>
Key player Willem Nel Age 29 Caps 3 Position Tighthead prop Height 6ft Weight 
18 stone 9lbScotland debut v Italy, Turin, 22 Aug 2015 Pts 0 Photograph: 
Russell Cheyne/Reuters  