
Who will win the World Cup?

It really should be New Zealand. Then again, we said that in 1995, 1999 and 
2007. The difference this time is that half-a-dozen rivals also feel they can 
lift the Webb Ellis Cup. This will be no casual coronation. Would you entirely 
bet against England in a World Cup final played at Twickenham? There will be a 
major twist somewhere down the line.Robert Kitson 

France. They’ve been to three finals and it’s about time they won it. Don’t 
know how they’ll do it but neither do they. Presumably it will be via a 
multitude of scrapes and close shaves, and will involve several flirtations 
with disgrace and dismay. In finals past they have looked a little spent but if 
that’s what we expect this time, they will do the opposite.Eddie Butler

England and Australia to contest the final, on the proviso that England win 
the group and avoid a knockout passage involving South Africa and New Zealand. 
The Wallabies are on the up, the only direction they could takegiven the state 
they were in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/dec/04/wallabies-annus-horribilis-not-without-glimmer-of-hope>
 a year ago before Michael Cheika took over, and well-equipped for one-off 
matches. The choice of referee for the final would be interesting. Another 
Frenchman would suit the hosts.Paul Rees

New Zealand but I have a sneaking regard for France, a side with a history 
(and a chance) of upsetting All Black apple carts.Remember 1999 at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/nov/15/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion3>, 
when France scored 33 points without reply,and 2007 in Cardiff and the 
remarkable Thierry Dusautoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/08/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup200714>? 
The Cardiff quarter-final could easily see a rerun of that encounter.Mike Averis

New Zealand. They’ve not been playing well lately and they’re getting on a 
bit. Europe is sending its strongest set of challengers yet. It’s in Europe. 
There are a lot more reasons than usual not to go with the bleedin’ obvious. 
But those names on the All Blacks’ team sheet still look to die for. 
Pressure-wise, it will feel like a walk in the park compared to 2011. And Dan 
Carter has unfinished business.Michael Aylwin

Who is the player to watch?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d0ebdd7e44d3278abb3ede3a51e90f0f97a2bf%2F0_100_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%3A%20Guardian%20writers%E2%80%99%20predictions%20for%20the%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%3A%20Guardian%20writers%E2%80%99%20predictions%20for%20the%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d0ebdd7e44d3278abb3ede3a51e90f0f97a2bf%2F0_100_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Australia flanker David Pocock. Photograph: Dan Mullan/Getty Images 
David Pocock. The Wallaby flanker is that rare animal: a player capable of 
transforming an entire nation’s prospects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/16/unique-david-pocock-pivotal-to-wallabies-rugby-world-cup-assault>
. The startling difference he made to Australia’s momentumagainst New Zealand 
in Sydney last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/live/2015/aug/08/australia-v-new-zealand-rugby-championship-decider>
 was ominous indeed. If he makes a similar impact at the breakdown and around 
the field at this World Cup, England’s life will become infinitely harder.RK

Yoann Huget. The Frenchman is 28 and hardly a newcomer but he seems to have 
embraced the aerial game, an essential aspect of the new age. This involves 
starting airborne routines with kicks – he has played full-back enough to 
manage that – but, just as important, catching the ball on its way back down, 
timing his running jumps to claim it above his head. Once in possession, he’s 
elusive and speedy.EB

It will not be much of a tournament if there is only one! Anthony Watson, 
Jonny May, Nikola Matawalu, Kahn Fotuali’i, Alun Wyn Jones, Jamie Roberts, 
Jonathan Sexton, Sean O’Brien, Stuart Hogg, Wesley Fofana, Yoann Huget, Israel 
Folau, Scott Sio, Willie le Roux, Jesse Kriel, Takudzwa Ngwenya … and most of 
the All Blacks, especially Dan Carter and Richie McCaw, two of the game’s most 
outstanding players through the years whose like is unlikely to be seen again 
for some while.PR

Guilhem Guirado. Who? The France hooker has been around for a while (he made 
his Test debut in 2008) but with Eddy Ben Arous on one side and Rabah Slimani 
the other – not to mention Vincent Debaty, Benjamin Kayser and Uini Atonio 
waiting on the bench – their front row looks like some weapon. Ask England.MAv

Rugby World Cup looms and difference between best and rest has grown | Paul 
Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/17/the-breakdown-rugby-world-cup> 
Gareth Davies. They’ll tell you in Wales they have no chance. No Leigh 
Halfpenny, no Rhys Webb. What are they to do? Well, give the tee to Dan Biggar 
(three-time top points scorer in the Pro12), unleash Liam Williams at full-back 
and see what this boy Davies can do. He’s electric. But for injury he would 
have pushed Webb last season. Not sure yet whether he can boss a game at 
international level but it’s going to be fun finding out.MAyl

How far will England go?

The final. A slight leap of faith, maybe, but as hosts they will be serious 
contenders if they can finish top of their fiendish pool. Much hinges on some 
key men staying fit – George Ford, Chris Robshaw, Jonathan Joseph – and others 
playing the house down – Courtney Lawes, Anthony Watson, Joe Marler – but this 
is a more cohesive group than four years ago. Lifting the trophy, though, may 
be a rose-tinted dream too far.RK

Semi-finals minimum. It’s a slog to get there as Pool A runners-up, a 
cake-walk for the winners, playing as they are, at home. The B road takes them 
to a meeting with the All Blacks in the last four, the A road to one with 
France. How could England possibly lose to France? Don’t know, but see above …EB

As above: to the final. They are perhaps not among the top four sides on paper 
but they are the hosts, they have French referees, who reward legitimate 
scrummaging, in their key pool matches against Wales and Australia and they 
have pace and stealth out wide to complement grunt up front. Twickenham should 
take them to the final day.PR

Semi-finals. Welsh injuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/07/wales-leigh-halfpenny-world-cup-ruled-out>
 improved England’s chances of getting out of the pool stages, possibly as 
group leaders. That would mean a probable quarter-final against Scotland or 
Samoa at Twickenham before an Ireland semi-final, with Joe Schmidt’s side 
having the benefit of a progressive buildup behind them.MAv

Final. If Dylan Hartley  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/29/england-dylan-hartley-world-cup-squad>
could somehow insinuate himself into proceedings, there’s no reason – other 
than the All Blacks – why they shouldn’t win the whole thing. They are far more 
settled than people give them credit for. That pack picks itself and has plenty 
in reserve. They’ve settled on a lively pair of wingers and the most sensible 
solution to the inside-centre conundrum. If George Ford’s goal‑kicking holds up 
under pressure, they look strong. Oh, and bar a knockabout with Uruguay in 
Manchester they will be at Twickenham throughout.MAyl

Who will surprise us?

Everyone, hopefully, but Argentina are a better team than many perceive. No 
longer do they simply rely on their forwards and they beat South Africa 37-25 
in Durban a few weeks ago. Could Scotland do something similar to the 
Springboks in Newcastle on 3 October? Will France beat Ireland? The ripple 
effect, if so, will be significant.RK

The boys of 91: why the first England side in Rugby World Cup final are still 
hurting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/16/boys-of-91-england-rugby-world-cup-final>
Referees. The audience may be confused by a few referrals to neck-roll 
clear‑outs at the breakdown but in general communications between ref, TMO, 
players and crowd are clearer than ever. The World Cup needs a final untainted 
by the refereeing malfunctions of the past (eg2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/nov/23/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion> and
2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/oct/23/rugby-world-cup-all-blacks-france>
).EB

The only major side with the capacity to surprise is France, largely dismal 
since making the 2011 final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/23/rugby-world-cup-richie-mccaw-new-zealand-france>
. It is likely to be an endurance World Cup and there are question marks about 
their stamina but they forged a spirit in adversity in New Zealand that they 
will need again. Scotland have made a quiet entrance but narrow defeats in 
Ireland and France in the warm-ups hint at better times ahead. Their final 
group match against Samoa will mark judgment day.PR

See above. France have a habit of pulling themselves together for World Cups, 
none more so than last time in New Zealand, when a squad at odds with their 
coach turned to player power before beating Englandand Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/15/rugby-world-cup-warburton-wales-france>
 then getting within touching distance of New Zealand in the final. Telling the 
coach he’s out on his ear before the World Cup has even started may not be best 
for in-house harmony but finally Philippe Saint‑André seems to haveLes Bleus 
playing for him. But it could just as easily go wrong.MAv

Scotland. Not the first time, hopes for the Scots have been high. It wouldn’t 
be the first time, either, if they went on to flop. But on the basis that a 
stopped clock tells the right time twice a day, so a pigheaded optimism for 
Scotland’s chances will eventually be rewarded. Samoa have slid beneath them in 
the world rankings, and their pivotal pool games against South Africa and Samoa 
are in Newcastle, which is the closest to home advantage that anyone will enjoy 
at this World Cup, bar England and Wales. Wouldn’t quite rule out their topping 
the pool.MAyl

Most looking forward to?

A tournament that grabs everyone by the lapels. We all like football but six 
weeks of compelling sport that relegates even José Mourinho and Louis van Gaal 
to the “in brief” columns has to be the collective aim. Referees, players, 
coaches and volunteers have a significant role to play, as will ITV’s pundits. 
Bore the pants off their new audience and rugby union will have wasted a 
once-in-a-generation opportunity.RK

France-Ireland. To be World Cup winners, France have to beat Ireland in the 
last round of Pool D matches. To be a World Cup power for the first time, 
Ireland must beat the wacky French. Twickenham, of course, will have its dramas 
but this is Cardiff’s.EB

Rugby World Cup 2015: the big quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/17/rugby-world-cup-2015-big-quiz> 
Matches not decided by the subjectivity of referees. Fiji not being blown off 
the park in the opening quarter at Twickenham. A dash of daring: all the time 
spent in summer camps at altitude and in torture chambers will help stamina but 
what about the rugby? Which is where referees come in: let it flow.PR

Always a joy to watch the islanders, especially when the game has an edge, so 
Tonga versus Argentina at Leicester on 4 October fits the bill nicely. It would 
have been even more atmospheric played at Welford Road rather than across the 
road but the possible prize of going through from Pool C should be enough to 
guarantee two sides knocking sparks off one another.MAv

St James’ Park, Villa Park, Manchester City Stadium. You become very familiar 
with the usual venues in this job. Much as we love them, it will be exciting to 
visit these famous football stadiums, just as it should be for rugby. Can’t 
wait to find out what their Wi-Fi’s like. These are the things that push a 
sports journo’s buttons. If the Wi-Fi’s good, may even have time at the end to 
visit a local hostelry or two.MAyl
 