
Robert Kitson

Player of the tournament

I suspected it might be Australia’s David Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/16/unique-david-pocock-pivotal-to-wallabies-rugby-world-cup-assault>
 and so it has proved. The Wallabies seldom missed a beat when their turnover 
supremo was on the field.

Breakthrough player

So many excellent RWC debutants to choose from – Lood de Jager, Jesse Kriel, 
Nehe Milner-Skudder, Bernard Foley, Iain Henderson, Waisake Naholo – but the 
21-year-old Santiago Cordero was electric on the wing for Argentina.

Sonny Bill Williams receives second Rugby World Cup winner’s medal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/01/sonny-bill-williams-new-zealand-rugby-world-cup>
Best match

No contest. Japan v South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 in Brighton delivered the biggest shock in Test rugby history. It was a 
privilege to be there.

Best try

For sheer synchronicity Foley’s give-and-take with Kurtley Beale to create the 
Wallaby fly-half’ssecond try against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/04/bernard-foley-england-stuart-lancaster-rugby-world-cup-2015-australia>
 was as sharp as any.

Most inspiring moment

The anthems before England v Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/england-wales-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. It made even the tournament’s opening night at Twickenham sound like a garden 
fete.

Biggest disappointment

No contest in this category either. Had England somehow made the latter 
stages, rugby fever in this country would have disappeared off the scale.

Funniest moment

Hard to beat an overexcited Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/15/boris-johnson-knocks-over-10-year-old-boy-during-rugby-game-in-japan>
 taking out the 10-year-old Toki Sekiguchi during a game of street rugby in 
Tokyo.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fmoment-boris-johnson-japan-knocks-over-boy-in-rugby-match-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moment%20Boris%20Johnson%20knocks%20over%20boy%20in%20rugby%20match%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fmoment-boris-johnson-japan-knocks-over-boy-in-rugby-match-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moment%20Boris%20Johnson%20knocks%20over%20boy%20in%20rugby%20match%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fmoment-boris-johnson-japan-knocks-over-boy-in-rugby-match-video&media=>
Boris Johnson knocks over 10-year-old during rugby game in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/15/boris-johnson-knocks-over-10-year-old-boy-during-rugby-game-in-japan>
. Photograph: Issei Kato 
One thing I would change for 2019

A fairer, more equitable fixture schedule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/29/rugby-world-cup-schedule-unfair>
 for every nation is a must. The sport is now too intense to play two Tests in 
five days and squad rotation favours the bigger teams.

Andy Bull

Player of the tournament

David Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/30/australia-flanker-david-pocock-sport-politics>
. 57 tackles, 40 carries, 17 turnovers and three tries, all in only five 
matches. Sorely missed whenAustralia almost lost to Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/australia-scotland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, seriously influential in their wins against England, Wales, and Argentina.

Breakthrough player

Gareth Davies, called into Wales’ first XV for the first time when Rhys Webb 
was injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/24/wales-rhys-webb-eight-months-out-foot-surgery>
, then scored five tries in five matches. Lood de Jager runs a very close 
second.

Best match

Of the ones I was there for, Scotland v Australia. Eight tries, but rarely 
more than one point between the teams for the final 40 minutes, all building up 
to that excruciating finish.

Best try

Vereniki Goneva for Fiji against Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/wales-fiji-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. Three men, two crazy passes and a full-tilt sprint from their 22 all the way 
to the Welsh try-line, with seven defenders beaten on the way.

Most inspiring moment

Japan beating South Africa. Certainly one of the greatest upsets in the 
history of the sport and it may yet turn out to be one of the most influential 
too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78a4c26ea3734c58e752ef759d9c2ac2c4fecbb%2F0_286_5060_3037%2F5060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78a4c26ea3734c58e752ef759d9c2ac2c4fecbb%2F0_286_5060_3037%2F5060.jpg>
 The crowd celebrate a Japanese try during the win over South Africa. 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Biggest disappointment

Most disappointed for Wales, who came so close despite all those injuries. 
Most disappointedin England, who spent four years talking about the tournament 
thenturned up for about 80 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/04/england-depart-rugby-world-cup-five-things-2015>
 of it.

Funniest moment

Michael Cheika’s press conferences. I’ve never met anyone more intolerant of 
the games journalists play. By the end, you had to be a brave man to ask a 
leading or loaded question.

One thing I would change for 2019

World Rugby has to stop stacking the odds against the teams from lower tiers. 
No more scheduling short turnarounds between matches against top teams.

Mike Averis

Player of the tournament

David Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/02/disappointed-david-pocock-well-cop-it-on-the-chin-thats-how-it-ends>
. More than any other he shaped the tournament’s style, proving that speed and 
skill matter more than bulk and brawn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F1%2F1446397927875%2F4107ca15-671e-40c6-b6b7-b978f69a5c9a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F1%2F1446397927875%2F4107ca15-671e-40c6-b6b7-b978f69a5c9a-1020x612.jpeg>
 David Pocock, centre, scored a try in the final and is almost universally 
recognised as the player of the tournament. Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
Breakthrough player

Nehe Milner-Skudder. He might not have reinvented the side step but the New 
Zealand wing made it popular again.

Best match

Thank god for Japan. After England’s drab opening night victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/18/england-fiji-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
, Eddie Jones’ side lifted the tournament with their thrilling defeat of the 
Springboks.

Best try

Julian Savea’s second in the hat-trick against France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/17/new-zealand-france-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, although all three should be taken together. The first for precision, the 
second for power in bumping off three big challenges and the third for 
straight-line speed.

Most inspiring moment

Watching Jacques Burger score twice and Namibia get close to their first World 
Cup win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/29/tonga-namibia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 at Exeter against Tonga and their sensational wing Telusa Veainu.

Biggest disappointment

England don’t need a review board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/19/stuart-lancaster-review-england-panel-rugby-world-cup>
 to reveal mistakes in mindset and selection. League and union are different. 
One can learn from the other but that’s all.

Funniest moment

It will be a while before the aficionados/Shed heads of Teague’s Bar opposite 
Kingsholm watch a couple of Argentinians big enough to grace the second row 
tango outside their front door.

One thing I would change for 2019

Get the refs to stand up to their TMOs. The standard of refereeing was fine, 
but a few more should tell the man in their ear (politely) where to go.

Owen Gibson

Player of the tournament

David Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/25/david-pocock-australia-back-row-argentina>
. Despite failing at the last, he did more than anyone to propel Australia to 
the final with his predatory work at the breakdown and calming onfield 
presence. And besides, given his off-the-field activism, has there ever been a 
more Guardian friendly rugby player?

Breakthrough player

Nehe Milner-Skudder. A superb try in the final  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
capped off a fine tournament for the 24-year-old. Was put under pressure under 
the high ballin the semi-final versus South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/24/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 but came through the fire and should be a fixture for years to come.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85157b262a455ac0afec7fd36a3f57ab1097a7b9%2F0_223_2535_1521%2F2535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85157b262a455ac0afec7fd36a3f57ab1097a7b9%2F0_223_2535_1521%2F2535.jpg>
 New Zealand’s Nehe Milner-Skudder smiles after scoring a a try in final 
against Australia. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
Best match

All four quarter-finals were gripping in their own ways, particularly New 
Zealand’s demolition of France and Australia’s last-ditch victory over 
Scotland. But for sheer jaw dropping sporting drama had to be Japan’s shock 
pool stage win over South Africa.

Best try

At times the All Blacks seemed to be staging their own contest and the way 
they play seemed to be distilled into thatJulian Savea try against France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/17/new-zealand-france-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. Ben Smith to Aaron Smith to Brodie Retallick and then a direct run from Savea 
during which three French defenders seemed to simply bounce off him.

Most inspiring moment

That call from Japan’s Michael Leitch to go for the try against the Springboks 
rather than kicking for the draw. When Karne Hesketh eventually went over the 
line, sparking mass hysteria it was not only one of the great sporting shocks 
but was a victory for bravery and sheer collective will.

Japan beat South Africa in greatest Rugby World Cup shock ever – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/sep/19/japan-beat-south-africa-in-greatest-rugby-world-cup-shock-ever-in-pictures>
Biggest disappointment

Has to be England. All that money, all that planning, all that rhetoric 
counted for nothing when Stuart Lancaster seemed to suffer from a paralysis of 
decision making and the much vaunted culture seemed to stultify rather than 
inspire. A flatly depressing missed opportunity.

Funniest moment

More tragi-comic than funny but for anyone not from Scotland, Craig Joubert’s 
dash from the pitch at full time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/craig-joubert-scapegoat-world-rugby-scotland-australia-quarter-final>
 held a certain comedic value. As for World Rugby’s Brett Gospersuggesting it 
was because he needed the toilet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/19/rugby-world-cup-referee-craig-joubert-scotland-australia-quarter-final>
, that was just taking the…

One thing I would change for 2019

Some blatant injustices in disciplinary charges and scheduling for some of the 
tier two nations threatened to undermine all their impressive progress on the 
pitch. Also, referees should be allowed to consult TMO if they deem it 
necessary at any time in exceptional circumstances (such as, for example, the 
last minute of a World Cup quarter-final).

Michael Aylwin

Player of the tournament

David Pocock. Some people are on a mission in life. They achieve greatness, 
save the planet, resolve global poverty and dominate the breakdown. Pocock has 
taken the latter discipline to new heights.

Breakthrough player

Gareth Davies. The try-scoring chart of this World Cup is dominated by wings 
who made the semi-finals – and this guy, who scored five while answering 
Wales’s crisis call for a new scrum-half.

Best match

Ireland v Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/ireland-argentina-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. On the assumption that at least one of my colleagues has gone for South 
Africa-Japan, let’s lob this in for variety. Sheer brilliance from an underdog 
– this tournament summed up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F610017c8c2d3bb343004a91b27e5b1ebd9788035%2F0_77_3477_2086%2F3477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F610017c8c2d3bb343004a91b27e5b1ebd9788035%2F0_77_3477_2086%2F3477.jpg>
 Juan Imhoff of Argentina scores his team’s fourth try against Ireland. 
Photograph: Matt Lewis/Getty Images 
Best try

Vereniki Goneva for Fiji against Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/wales-fiji-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. This dazzling try from their own 22 brought Fiji to within four points of 
Wales in a game they might have won with a smidgeon of reasonableness from the 
referee.

Most inspiring moment

Karne Hesketh’s try for Japan against South Africa. The media centre at 
Twickenham nearly gave way to the euphoria at the images beamed over from 
Brighton. Wizened hacks and former internationals leapt about like children. 
Anything seemed possible.

Biggest disappointment

The officiating, on the field and off. No one really believes in a conscious 
conspiracy, but the instinctive bias against the lesser teams of referees and 
citing officers is too consistent and obvious to be an accident.

Funniest moment 

Jamie Cudmore’s eavesdropping on the French 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/france-canada-rugby-world-cup-report>
. To see a front-five forward renowned for his aggression indulge in something 
so cheeky was a reminder that, when all the blood and thunder is done, this is 
just a game

One thing I would change for 2019

Ban the bans. And those banning. All bar two (Michael Hooper’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/06/michael-hooper-banned-australia-rugby-world-cup-wales>
 and Manasa Saulo’s) were disgraceful injustices and a wrecking ball to World 
Rugby’s reputation. Ruined the World Cup for honest players.

Paul Rees

Player of the tournament

Daniel Carter. Simply the best. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/30/dan-carter-new-zealand-rugby-world-cup>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ef97d495195480ec2f8e06490fd906d93083395%2F0_100_1936_1162%2F1936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20World%20Cup%202015%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20give%20their%20verdicts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frugby-world-cup-2015-guardian-verdicts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ef97d495195480ec2f8e06490fd906d93083395%2F0_100_1936_1162%2F1936.jpg>
 New Zealand’s Dan Carter celebrates after the final whistle in the final. 
Photograph: BPI/Rex Shutterstock 
Breakthrough player

Gareth Davies. Had not started a match for Wales for a year before the World 
Cup, but his five tries took his side to the verge of the last four.

Best match

South Africa v Japan. The biggest shock in World Cup history set the tone for 
the next six weeks.

Best try

Nehe Milner-Skudder’s for New Zealand in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
 showed why they are a class apart, power, pace, precision.

Most inspiring moment

The rapturous reception received by the Japan squad on their return home was 
proof of how the game has grown since the first World Cup.

Rugby World Cup 2015: five reasons New Zealand won the Webb Ellis Cup | Paul 
Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/01/rugby-world-cup-2015-five-reasons-new-zealand-won>
Biggest disappointment

World Rugby’s precipitous statement on referee Craig Joubert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/craig-joubert-scapegoat-world-rugby-scotland-australia-quarter-final>
 after his late penalty against Scotland; it was not his decision that was at 
fault but the governing body’s rules and regulations.

Funniest moment

The French-speaking Canada captain Jamie Cudmore eavesdropping as the France 
forwards went into a huddle during the group match in Milton Keynes.

One thing I would change for 2019

Given the growing competitiveness of the tier two nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/01/rugby-world-cup-coaching-tier-two-nations>
, it should be a week longer to ensure full recovery time for all players.
 