
The Argentinian contingent among the great and the good at Kingsholm were 
pretty long in the face and not without reason. By the time the half-time 
sandwiches were ready last Friday, not only wereGeorgia within five points of 
the Pumas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/sep/25/argentina-georgia-rugby-world-cup-2015-live>
, but they were also giving their scrum something of a going over.

After 40 minutes, the Argentina scrum, traditionally the weapon of choice, had 
not won a ball. In fact, they were penalised at each of the first three set 
pieces. For a side which reckons the scrum to be something of an art form, 
being undone at the push and shove was almost unspeakable.

Marcos Ayerza of Leicester, considered by many to be the best loosehead 
around, was whistled once by JP Doyle while Tetaz Chaparro twice finished nose 
down in the Gloucester turf. Add the complete shutdown of Argentina’s only 
attempted lineout drive and things were looking bleak for a team with a history 
of using their forwards to spring World Cup surprises.

Then everything changed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/argentina-georgia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. Argentina seemed to throw a switch and suddenly they were six second-half 
tries to the good. Backs, not forwards, were running things and the sea change 
in Argentinian rugby signalled whenthey gave the All Blacks the hurry-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/new-zealand-argentina-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 for an hour was confirmed. Three hours after the final whistle their fans were 
still celebrating – Kingsholm is unused to seeing men dancing the tango 
together – and if Sunday’s game against Tonga at Leicester follows the same 
script, no one will want to draw the Pumas in the quarter-finals.

Argentina and Santiago Cordero stretch the legs in canter past Georgia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/argentina-georgia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
Why the change? Probably a mixture of coach and competition.

The captain, Agustín Creevy, has few doubts, laying plenty of credit at the 
door of their coach for the last two years, Daniel Hourcade, a man who had only 
a brief playing career but cut his international coaching teeth on sevens. It 
shows.

“I think we showed what Daniel Hourcade told us during the week [before the 
game] and I think we have done a good job,” said Creevy, who until recently 
played his rugby at Worcester. “We played well and had fun and that is the 
reason we got so many points.”

Hourcade saw the Georgia win as a reward for hard work on the training pitch. 
“You enjoy it when you want something and you get it. This team always tries to 
do what it has done in training and we did that against Georgia. We’ve improved 
getting quick ball to let us get opportunities and it’s now bearing fruit.”

But it is also pretty obvious that Argentina, and particularly players such as 
fly-half Nicolás Sánchez, are also benefiting from being increasingly exposed 
to competition against three of the sides regularly at the top of the 
international pecking order, with more to come as Argentina is currently 
forming its own Super Rugby franchise.

This season they beat South Africa in Durban to lift themselves out of the 
base of the Rugby Championship – the southern hemisphere’s Six Nations – and 
many of those like Creevy, who have made their livings in Europe, are going 
home to play in Super Rugby – Australia, South Africa and New Zealand’s 
Champions Cup.

Latest to join is Juan Martín Hernández, currently playing his third World Cup 
– hemissed 2011 with injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/aug/10/argentina-hernandez-rugby-world-cup>
 and will miss the Tonga game as well with a damaged hamstring – who, after 12 
years in Europe, says the move is a no-brainer.

“I didn’t even have to think about it” said the man nicknamed El Mago (The 
Magician) aftervirtuoso displays at the 2007 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/08/rugbyunion.rugbyworldcup20073>. 
“I was convinced that I wanted to be part of what is coming. Since the offer 
arrived, I haven’t even thought about it, I had no doubts.”

And after last week in Gloucester there is little doubt that the Pumas will 
take their new all-court game – physical up front, of course, but ambition in 
the backs as well – with them. ”Our team will play the way it knows” said 
Hernández. “This tournament, which is new for us, will help the team to mature 
and build confidence. We’ll come up against a higher intensity, with games home 
and away, much more than in the Rugby Championship, and it will be great to see 
how far it can take Argentine players.”

Heavens knows what to expect at 2019 in Japan.
 