
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> has written 
to the Guardian to deny he ever claimed that Downing Street did his bidding, as 
an attempt by his US film and television group to acquire Sky is due to be 
formally notified to ministers.

The media mogul, who is chairman of 21st Century Fox, wrote: “I have made it a 
principle all my life never to ask for anything from any prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/19/rupert-murdoch-i-have-never-asked-for-anything-from-any-prime-minister>
.”


In a rare move to write directly to a newspaper, Murdoch disputed a quote 
attributed to him in the Guardian and elsewhere in which he reportedly said:
“When I go into Downing Street, they do what I say; when I go to Brussels, they 
take no notice.” 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/comment/comment/anthony-hilton-stay-or-go-the-lack-of-solid-facts-means-it-s-all-a-leap-of-faith-a3189151.html>


Rupert Murdoch: ‘I have never asked for anything from any prime minister’ | 
Letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/19/rupert-murdoch-i-have-never-asked-for-anything-from-any-prime-minister>
In his response, Murdoch added: “There is much fake news published about me, 
but let me make clear that I have never uttered those words.”


The quote was originally reported in the Evening Standard by Anthony Hilton 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/comment/comment/anthony-hilton-stay-or-go-the-lack-of-solid-facts-means-it-s-all-a-leap-of-faith-a3189151.html>
, who wrote in February: “I once asked Rupert Murdoch why he was so opposed to 
the European Union. ‘That’s easy,’ he replied. ‘When I go into Downing Street 
they do what I say; when I go to Brussels they take no notice.’”


When asked by the Guardian, Hilton said: “I stand by my story.” He said 
Murdoch made the remarks in a conversation in the early 1980s, when Hilton was 
city editor of the Times. Hilton, now a columnist for the Evening Standard, has 
referred to the anecdote several times over the years without either a denial 
or a complaint from his former boss, until now.

The denial from Murdoch comes at a highly sensitive moment for his business 
interests, with Fox’s proposed £11.2bn takeover of the 61% of Sky he does not 
already own expected to be notified to the UK government for approval.

The culture secretary, Karen Bradley, has 10 working days from being notified 
to tell Ofcom whether a public interest investigation into the proposed 
takeover should be launched.

The former Labour leader Ed Miliband and former business secretary Vince Cable 
have called for the takeover to be blocked and referred to the regulator.

A previous attempt by a Murdoch company to acquire the remaining part of Sky 
was withdrawn in the summer of 2011 at the height of the phone-hacking scandal, 
which was exposed by the Guardian and led to the closure of the News of the 
World.

However, Fox, the company bidding on this occasion, does not own the 
newspapers; they are published by a separate business, News Corporation. The 
newspapers were hived off in the wake of the hacking scandal.

 During the Leveson inquiry, Murdoch made a similar statement about his 
political influence, saying “I’ve never asked a prime minister for anything in 
my life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/apr/25/rupert-murdoch-prime-minister>” 
during a day of testimony in April 2012.

However, that was contradicted by John Major, the former Conservative prime 
minister, who told theinquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> shortly after Murdoch gave 
evidence that while the media mogul “never asked for anything directly from me 
… he was not averse to pressing for policy changes”.


In particular, Major described one meeting in the run-up to the 1997 general 
election in which Murdoch “made it clear that he disliked my European policies, 
which he wished me to change. If not, his papers could not and would not 
support the Conservative government. So far as I recall he made no mention of 
editorial independence but referred to all his papers as ‘we’.”

Major added: “Both Mr Murdoch and I kept our word. I made no change in policy 
and Mr Murdoch’s titles did indeed oppose the Conservative party. It came as no 
surprise to me when soon after our meeting the Sun newspaper announced its 
support for Labour.”


The ultimatum, Major said, was delivered at a private meeting three months 
before that election, which resulted in the Tories losing heavily to Labour.

Harold Evans, the former editor of the Times, has also said that a private 
meeting between Murdoch and the then prime ministerMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> over lunch at Chequers, 
the official country residence, led to a “coup that transformed the 
relationship between British politics and journalism”.

 Evans suggested that a deal was brokered at that meeting in which Murdoch 
offered his papers’ support to Thatcher in return for approval for his purchase 
of the Times and Sunday Times in 1981. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/28/how-margaret-thatcher-and-rupert-murdoch-made-secret-deal>

Hilton, while working at the Times, saw a lot of the paper’s proprietor, with 
dinner in Murdoch’s Green Park flat and conversations in his office in Gray’s 
Inn Road. The conversations were between owner and employee, not part of a 
formal interview, so there is unlikely to have been any verbatim note or 
witnesses.

 Hilton used the comment in his February column as part of a wider discussion 
about the nature of the relationship between corporate power and government. 
That column concludes with an observation about Murdoch’s comments: “That was 
some years ago but things have not changed that much.”
 