
Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> is not expected to offer 
Sky News as a regulatory pawn to secure an £11.2bn takeover of Britain’s 
largest pay-TV broadcaster.

Under a previous acquisition attempt in 2011, Murdoch struck a deal to spin 
off the loss-making Sky News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/03/jeremy-hunt-news-corp-sky-news> 
in a bid to appease concerns raised by Ofcom, the media industry watchdog. 
However, it is understood that Fox believes that the industry landscape has 
changed significantly since then and that there should be less concern over the 
impact of a deal on the diversity of viewpoints across the media.

Murdoch’s stance emerged as a group of Sky shareholders called for “robust” 
safeguards to protect the broadcaster’s “future probity” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/murdoch-deal-sky-shareholders--ofcom-fox>
 if Fox takes full control of the business. Alongside its call for safeguards, 
the Local Authority Pension Fund Forum, an association of 71 funds that control 
about 0.7% of Sky, also called for Ofcom to scrutinise the deal. Fox, which 
already owns 39% of Sky, is seeking to buy the remaining 61%.

Referring to the phone-hacking scandal that derailed the previous Murdoch bid 
for Sky, the LAPFF said: “Any recommendation by the board in favour would have 
to be based on an appropriate premium as well as safeguards for future probity 
given the past track records of the businesses controlled by the Murdochs.

“Further clarity may also be needed so that public shareholders have full 
confidence that proposals are not being unduly influenced by the well-known 
relationships between Sky and 21st Century Fox.”

Sky takeover deal – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/the-sky-takeover-deal-all-you-need-to-know>
If Fox tables a formal bid for Sky, the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, has 
10 working days to decide whether to ask Ofcom to investigate the deal.“The 
role of Ofcom would be helpful in bringing its expert scrutiny on a deal that 
will have a broader impact on the future of the broadcasting and print media 
marketplace in the UK, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/12/pressure-grows-to-refer-rupert-murdochs-sky-bid-to-ofcom>
” said Kieran Quinn, chairman of LAPFF.


Five years ago, the Murdoch vehicle bidding for Sky was the now defunct News 
Corporation <https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation>, then the 
parent of Fox. Ofcom determined that News Corporation’s control of media – 
which at the time included the Times, Sunday Times, Sun and now-closed News of 
the World – would give Murdoch too much influence over news in the UK combined 
with full ownership of Sky.


Fox also believes that structural changes within the Murdoch empire since 2011 
will benefit its bid. Following the phone-hacking scandal and the abandonment 
of the News Corporation bid, Murdoch split his media group in two by putting 
his publishing assets into a new company, News Corp, and putting the TV and 
Hollywood studio assets into Fox.


Fox believes this move to create two separate companies means there is not the 
same issue of media concentration as six years ago. In addition, the digital 
revolution has seen huge growth from Murdoch’s traditional publishing rivals, 
coupled with the rise of newer players such as Google and Facebook as 
distributors of news and new arrivals such as Huffington Post, BuzzFeed, 
Mashable and Vice Media.

The Guardian view on Rupert Murdoch’s Sky bid: the fox is in the henhouse 
again | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/the-guardian-view-on-rupert-murdochs-sky-bid-the-fox-is-in-the-henhouse-again>
However, given that the Murdoch family will be the ultimate owner of both 
newspaper and TV assets in the UK,Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> could still raise concerns if it is 
asked to investigate. Ofcom’s public-interest test report into the 2011 bid 
states that the regulator has “wide discretion” in assessing the issue of media 
plurality.

Sky and Fox declined to comment. 
 