
Russia and the UN have said they hope a new ceasefire can be announced within 
hours for the Syrian city of Aleppo,where fighting left up to 19 dead on Tuesday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/maternity-hospital-aleppo-deadly-blast-syria>
 amid frantic diplomatic efforts to restore a countrywide truce agreement and 
prevent the total collapse of peace negotiations.

Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, held talks with the UN envoy, 
Staffan de Mistura, who had flown to Moscow after crisis meetings in Geneva 
with John Kerry, the US secretary of state, and the Saudi and Jordanian foreign 
ministers.


UN demands protection for war zone hospitals after 'epidemic of attacks'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/03/un-demands-protection-for-war-zone-hospitals-after-epidemic-of-attacks>
Britain and France called for an urgent meeting of the UN security council to 
discuss next steps for dealing with an upsurge in violence that has killed 279 
people in 12 days. Last week the US and Russia brokered agreements to restore 
the truce in Latakia and near Damascus but not inAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>.

“I am hoping that in the near future, maybe even in the next few hours, such a 
decision will be announced,” Lavrov told reporters. Echoing this, de Mistura 
said the truce must be “brought back on track”. If that happened, he said, the 
stalled Geneva peace talks could resume.

“What the Syrians want to hear is no bombs, no rockets, no shelling, no aerial 
bombing any more and no canisters, so they can start believing in what we are 
trying to do with them,” the UN envoy said.


Syrian state media reported that rebel fire on a hospital killed three women, 
and another 11 people were killed in rebel attacks on other government-held 
neighbourhoods. The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said rebel 
bombardments had killed 19 people and hit a hospital.

All sides have accused each other of truce violations. The observatory said 
279 civilians have been killed by bombardments in Aleppo since 22 April, 155 of 
them in opposition-held areas and 124 in government-held districts.

De Mistura said the US and Russian militaries, which run the Geneva taskforce 
monitoring the “cessation of hostilities” deal that began on 27 February, would 
create a new permanent monitoring centre with UN facilities and logistics 
support.

He said it would be more efficient in terms of day-to-day exchange of 
information, assessments and responses, with the two sides sitting at the same 
table and looking at the same maps to ensure that “any violations are nipped in 
the bud”. Previously the taskforce relied on coordination between a US base in 
Jordan and a Russian one inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

Aleppo hospital hit as city faces humanitarian catastrophe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/maternity-hospital-aleppo-deadly-blast-syria>
Syrian opposition supporters have launched a drive to draw attention to the 
city’s plight using the Twitter hashtag #AleppoIsBurning.

Syrians working with US, British and EU-funded projects – on governance, 
civilian livelihood and grassroots organising – said they doubted whether their 
work had any meaning.


Dozens of Syrians said in an open letter 
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/forms/d/1T2os1UUdmgG0Qmair_VQ0WuvnfS9aLRY-4SOmcQqDRk/viewform?c=0&w=1&fbzx=1708130932771470536>
 to Kerry and EU foreign ministers that it was “outrageous” that Aleppo had 
been left out of the fighting freeze agreed last week between the US and Russia.

“As Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and the Assad regime’s 
aggression continue to escalate … it has become eminently clear that without 
immediate action by the US and its allies, including a complete cessation of 
hostilities throughout Syria and a meaningful political process, our efforts 
may be lost as the situation on the ground becomes irreversible,” they wrote.


They said extremists would be decisively empowered and the refugee crisis 
would spiral out of control as Moscow and Damascus targeted civilians including 
doctors, nurses, civil defence workers and children.

“If an end to Russian and regime aggression is not realised immediately, the 
conflict will burn on,” they said. “The only winners in such a scenario are the 
Assad regime and terrorist organisations, as the real bodies that can create 
the ‘inclusive, peaceful, and pluralistic Syria’ that our programmes have 
worked so hard to support will have been brutally decimated.”

 