

 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/search/search-7.1213540?tag_location=Russia&article=true>
Russia has claimed it warned Britain of the consequences of the “unjust and 
highly dangerous” Iraq war, asSir John Chilcot published his report into the 
2003 invasion after a seven-year delay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-crushing-verdict-tony-blair-iraq-war>
.

Soon after the inquiry’s findings were released on Wednesday, the Russian 
embassy 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/search/search-7.1213540?tag_organisation=Russian%20Embassy&article=true>
 in London tweeted a graphic with the text “Keep Calm but I Told You So”. It 
also wrote: “#Chilcot inquiry: No real WMD inBaghdad 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/search/search-7.1213540?tag_location=Baghdad&article=true>
, unjust & highly dangerous war. The entire region on the receiving end.”
Russian Embassy, UK (@RussianEmbassy) 
#Chilcot <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Chilcot?src=hash> inquiry: No real WMD 
in Baghdad, unjust & highly dangerous war. The entire region on the receiving 
end.pic.twitter.com/UoL09xfqqQ <https://t.co/UoL09xfqqQ>
 <https://twitter.com/RussianEmbassy/status/750643372948348928> July 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RussianEmbassy/status/750643372948348928> 
The message is consistent with Russian opposition to the 2003 invasion, the 
Nato intervention in Libya in 2011 and Moscow’s continued backing for Syria’s 
president, Bashar al-Assad.

Franz Klintsevich, first deputy chairman of the defence and security committee 
in the upper house of Russia’s parliament, said the UK should apologise to the 
Iraqi people, pay compensation and prosecute the officials who decided on the 
invasion.

In Iran, widely seen as the greatest beneficiary of the US-led invasion, there 
was no official comment and the media paid scant attention to the report. The 
exception was Press TV, an English-language state broadcaster, which provided 
live coverage of Tony Blair’s press conference.


In Tehran, Hassan Rouhani, Iran’s president, pledged that his country would 
stand by the Iraqi government in a phone call to the prime minister, Haidar 
al-Abadi. He expressed his condolences for the recent terrorist attacks that 
have killed 250 people in Baghdad. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme 
leader, also failed to mention Chilcot.

Chilcot report live: Blair expresses 'sorrow and apology' but mounts lengthy 
defence of Iraq war strategy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-live-inquiry-war-iraq>
The pan-Arab newspaper al-Sharq al-Awsat was one of few Arabic media outlets 
to devote extensive coverage to the story, and focused on criticism of Blair.

Elsewhere in the Muslim and Arab world, the far bigger stories of the day were 
the start of theEid al-Fitr <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eid-al-fitr> 
holiday at the end of Ramadan, and the aftermath of Monday’s suicidebombing 
attack on the tomb of the Prophet Muhammad in Medina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/04/saudi-arabia-bombings-jeddah-medina-prophets-mosque-qatif>
– assumed to be the work of Islamic State.


Also making headlines was the announcement by the Syrian army  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/syrian-army-declares-72-hour-ceasefire-amid-eid-al-fitr-festival>
of a 72-hour ceasefire to mark Eid al-Fitr.

Tony Blair: 'I express more sorrow, regret and apology than you can ever 
believe'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/tony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry>
Iraqi media were dominated by the mounting death toll in the Karrada bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/24/iraq-car-bomb-baghdad-sunni-shia>
. Another story was about Abadi accepting the resignation of his interior 
minister in the wake of the carnage.

Al-Jazeera Arabic, the popular Qatar-based satellite TV broadcaster, paid 
little attention to Chilcot’s findings, although the story was covered 
extensively on al-Jazeera English. al-Arabiya, its Saudi-owned Arabic-language 
rival, played down the story. BBC Arabic followed it closely.

“Iraq as a country has become a battlefield for regional and international 
powers, and this is one of the most critical consequences of the invasion,” 
Iraqi political analyst Hadi al-Isami told al-Jazeera, saying Chilcot would do 
nothing to assuage the country’s plight.

In Israel, there was no official reaction to the report, but comments on 
social media suggested thatTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> “should think twice about 
visiting”, a possible reference to the recent summoning of former Israeli 
foreign minister Tzipi Livni for questioning by British police about alleged 
war crimes committed during the 2008-2009 Gaza war.

 