
Ryanair <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair> has moved into direct 
competition with tour operators by selling bonded package holidays alongside 
its flights.

The Irish airline claimed it would “transform the market” as it launched 
Ryanair Holidays online 
<https://holidays.ryanair.com/gb/?utm_source=ryanair&utm_medium=header>, 
claiming to undercut competitors by offering rooms at 330,000 hotels across 
Europe with the cheapest flight seats. However, the move comes more than five 
years after rivals EasyJet launched a similar service.

Kenny Jacobs, Ryanair’s chief marketing officer, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/02/ryanair-new-face-hopes-social-media-help-change-take-off>
 said that “consumers have been paying too much for package holidays for 
years”, adding that the company would forgo standard commission rates to drive 
sales.

Many Ryanair flights could be free in a decade, says its chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/ryanair-flights-free-michael-oleary-airports>
He told a press conference in London: “If you’re looking at a package holiday 
on Ryanair Holidays you will see that typically our customers will save at 
least €40 on every single seat that they’re booking.

“If you take those flight savings that you make versus any other airline and 
apply those to a package holiday, a mum, dad and two kids will save at least 
10% on a package holiday.”

Ryanair Holidays has been launched in the UK, Ireland and Germany, with other 
countries to follow next year.

Jacobs said: “We are also willing to invest our part of the commission to 
drive conversion of this and it’s a market which has a huge amount of 
commission, so we’re confident this will be the best value for European 
consumers in the market.”

Ryanair had already been selling hotel rooms and car hire online but not as 
packages, potentially leaving customers at risk. The holidays will now be fully 
Atol-bonded, protecting consumers if an operator goes bust. Rival airline 
EasyJet launched its own EasyJet Holidays site back in 2011, and expanded it 
across Europe in 2014.

The new Ryanair venture will work in a partnership with Spanish tour operator 
Logitravel and accommodation provider World2Meet, offering 3- to 5-star hotels 
throughout the Mediterranean and European cities.


Ryanair has been seeking to remould itself from an airline to a broader 
digital business. As well as package holidays, Ryanair is also considering 
offering events tickets, restaurant bookings and other travel-related services 
in the future.


As it cuts fares further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/ryanair-boss-michael-oleary-says-air-fares-fall-brexit>
 this year, an increasing proportion of Ryanair’s revenues are expected to come 
from ancillary streams, using data on its customers registered on MyRyanair. 
Last week, chief executive Michael O’Leary said he hada vision of “free air 
fares” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/ryanair-flights-free-michael-oleary-airports>
 in future, with profits made from growing other purchases from captive 
customers.
 