
1) The 2018 Ryder Cup course will be different from Hazeltine 

Ryder Cup 2016: USA sweep to victory as Rory McIlroy and Europe taste defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
It is Ryder Cup convention for the home team to preside over a setup of their 
choosing. In that regard, the USA can claim “job done” in Minnesota. 
Afterwards, though,Justin Rose <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/justin-rose> 
criticised it heavily, which tells us things will be very different in two 
years’ time.

“I thought the setup was incredibly weak,” said Rose of the singles. “I 
thought it was very much a pro-am feel in terms of the pin placements. They 
were all middle of the green.

“I don’t quite understand that to be honest with you, [we are] world-class 
players and we want to showcase our skills. We want to be tested. For example, 
the water holes out there, all the pins were as far away from the water as 
possible.

“The pin on 17 was an absolute joke. It’s a nine iron into the middle of the 
green and you stiff it. So with a match on the line, you kind of feel like you 
want to have something; you want a player to step up a little bit more than 
they have to.

“Even 18, if you hit a good drive down there, you’ve got a wedge into the 
green, and if you hit a wedge to the middle of the green, you’re within 12ft of 
the pin. So I just felt coming down the stretch, it was a little soft.”

The PGA of America’s top man, Kerry Haigh, hails from Yorkshire, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fryder-cup-review-usa-wildcards-right-rory-mcilroy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80a64e64b3dd9e19c978a15c6009959c6c81fef6%2F0_298_5367_3221%2F5367.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%20review%3A%20USA%20get%20wildcards%20right%20and%20is%20McIlroy%20the%20new%20Poulter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fryder-cup-review-usa-wildcards-right-rory-mcilroy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%20review%3A%20USA%20get%20wildcards%20right%20and%20is%20McIlroy%20the%20new%20Poulter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fryder-cup-review-usa-wildcards-right-rory-mcilroy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80a64e64b3dd9e19c978a15c6009959c6c81fef6%2F0_298_5367_3221%2F5367.jpg>
 Justin Rose was unimpressed by the pin positions on the final day. Photograph: 
David Cannon/Getty Images 
2) The Tiger/Phil dynamic lingers on

Phil Mickelson’s prominence in the American Ryder Cup team has been justified 
by their success this year. There is an undercurrent, though, of historic 
indifference between Mickelson andTiger Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> which resurfaced when the 
14-time major winner joined Davis Love III’s contingent as a vice-captain. As 
Mickelson controls all before him, is Woods playing his own game?

When asked on Sunday evening whether or not captaincy appeals, Woods was 
reluctant to answer. That he did eventually, and positively, raises the 
suspicion that he either really is planning a post-competitive career or he 
rather enjoys making Mickelson sweat.

“Seeing what our captain went through? That’s hard,” said Woods. “Yeah, I 
would love to do it. I would be honoured to do it in the future, if asked. But 
from the player standpoint of it, I like playing. I love these guys. I love 
being out there, in the fight with these guys. I was just in the fight a 
different way and had to do my role and had to my job in a different way, and 
it was pretty cool.”

3) Danny Willett has to reset his goals 

Danny Willett defends brother’s comments on American Ryder Cup fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/danny-willett-ryder-cup-brother-american-fans>
When you have won the Masters, the world is your oyster. And yet, Danny Willett
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-willett> will harbour frustration as 
to what happened in the immediate aftermath.

“Shit,” was the Yorkshireman’s immediate reply when asked to assess his maiden 
Ryder Cup experience. “Really shit,” was the expanded answer. In black and 
white, this looks crass; in context, of both his brother’s needless jibes and 
Willett’s own smiling face, it was perfectly acceptable. He went on to defend 
his brother’s comments on Twitter, saying that he was, in fact,“correct” to 
criticise American golf fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/danny-willett-ryder-cup-brother-american-fans>
.

Willett is a brilliant player. He has struggled to cope with the status he 
created with Augusta glory. Hopefully thisRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> offers a line in the sand.

4) Rory McIlroy is the new Ian Poulter 

Europe has a new on-course leader. McIlroy’s performances in the Ryder Cup 
were stellar enough before his embodiment of the team. Still only 27, and 
perhaps charged by a partisan Hazeltine crowd, McIlroy took on a role that was 
completely disconnected from the time he labelled the Ryder Cup an 
“exhibition”. The Northern Irishman was a force of nature, to his team’s 
benefit but also to the point where he became emotionally exhausted.

“Well, Poults wasn’t playing this time so we needed someone on the course to 
be doing what he does,” McIlroy admitted. “I took it upon myself to take on 
that role. I tried my best at it. I learned from the best; I’ve played with 
Poults a few times before, and it’s always fun and hopefully he’s back on the 
team in a couple of years in Paris and we can do this all over again”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fryder-cup-review-usa-wildcards-right-rory-mcilroy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4d12f4654ca3ce2ffd48593bf71ac43c8667267%2F389_506_3595_2157%2F3595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%20review%3A%20USA%20get%20wildcards%20right%20and%20is%20McIlroy%20the%20new%20Poulter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fryder-cup-review-usa-wildcards-right-rory-mcilroy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%20review%3A%20USA%20get%20wildcards%20right%20and%20is%20McIlroy%20the%20new%20Poulter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fryder-cup-review-usa-wildcards-right-rory-mcilroy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4d12f4654ca3ce2ffd48593bf71ac43c8667267%2F389_506_3595_2157%2F3595.jpg>
 Rory McIlroy can be the Europe team’s new cheerleader. Photograph: ddp 
USA/REX/Shutterstock 
Rory McIlroy: Ryder Cup defeat hurts but USA win is good for golf
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/rory-mcilroy-ryder-cup-usa> 
5) Wildcards aren’t an exact science

The standard criticism of Darren Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-clarke> will be that his captains 
picks were costly, on account of Lee Westwood’s poor performance. By contrast, 
the fact Ryan Moore sealed USA’s victory will suggest they had a perfect system.
In truth, the wildcard process should be identical for both sides. It should 
also be done within the same timeframe. For those who criticise Westwood’s 
involvement, there is the antidote of Thomas Pieters’s brilliance. But if we 
assume Pieters was a sensible pick, then picking Russell Knox over Westwood 
would have taken the European rookie count to seven. That would not only have 
been a stick to whack Clarke with but an historical admission of defeat. The 
captain probably erred on the side of caution, but it would be tough to argue 
that it was that which contributed to the team’s loss against a vastly superior 
USA contingent.
 