
Europe

Captain: Darren Clarke (Northern Ireland)

Vice-captains: Thomas Bjorn (Denmark), Padraig Harrington (Republic of 
Ireland), Paul Lawrie (Scotland), Ian Poulter (England), Sam Torrance (Scotland)

Rafa Cabrera Bello (Spain)

Age 32

World ranking 30

Ryder Cup appearances debut

Ryder Cup record 0-0-0

PGA Tour wins 0

European Tour wins 2

Major wins 0

A native of Gran Canaria, this Ryder Cup rookie recorded his maiden European 
Tour victory at the 2009 Austrian Open courtesy of a record-equalling final 
round of 60, while his biggest win came at the Dubai Desert Classic in 2012. 
Has not won a tournament since but made the team courtesy of five top-five 
finishes this year, which helped elevate him to seventh in the rankings. 
Cabrera Bello has played in all four majors, recording two top-25 finishes in 
14 attempts. Could continue a long tradition of successful SpanishRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> pairings with his more experienced 
compatriot Sergio García.Barry Glendenning

Davis Love III: If USA keep losing, people are going to quit watching the 
Ryder Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/davis-love-united-sates-ryder-cup-hazeltine>
Matthew Fitzpatrick (England)

Age 22

World ranking 44

Ryder Cup appearances debut

Ryder Cup record 0-0-0

PGA Tour wins 0

European Tour wins 2

Major wins 0

The ninth and final qualifier to earn his place through automatic 
qualification on the points list, Fitzpatrick is one of six rookies Clarke 
hopes will bring a “mixture of consistency and success” to the party. The 
22-year-old from Sheffield turned professional after the 2014 US Open and 
immediately won his 2015 European Tour card. He went on to win that year’s 
British Masters at Woburn and followed up with the Nordea Masters in Sweden 
last June. Before that, he had finished a highly commendable tied-seventh in 
only his second Masters.BG
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb035afa3ca82ac310e6438a42452bfd0b740f375%2F89_245_4023_2413%2F4023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb035afa3ca82ac310e6438a42452bfd0b740f375%2F89_245_4023_2413%2F4023.jpg>
 The 22-year-old Matthew Fitzpatrick is one of six rookies in Europe’s team. 
Photograph: ddp USA/Rex/Shutterstock 
Sergio García (Spain)

Age 36

World ranking 12

Ryder Cup appearances 1999, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2012, 2014

Ryder Cup record 18-9-5

PGA Tour wins 9

European Tour wins 11

Major wins 0

One of Europe’s most experienced players, the Spaniard has notched up twice as 
many points for Europe as he has lost in seven Ryder Cups. García has had a 
quiet season, with a third-place at the Open de España and top-five finishes at 
the US Open and the Open among the highlights. García has complained about the 
barracking he receives when playing in the US, saying “it doesn’t feel like 
golf”. In the wake of the recent literary endeavours of Danny Willett’s 
brother, any hopes that Team USA’s fans might button it are likely to prove 
comically forlorn.BG

Sport picture of the day: Rory McIlroy gears up for Ryder Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/sep/29/sport-picture-of-the-day-rory-mcilroy-gears-up-for-ryder-cup>
Rory McIlroy (Northern Ireland)

Age 27

World ranking 3

Ryder Cup appearances 2010, 2012, 2014

Ryder Cup record 6-4-4

PGA Tour wins 13

European Tour wins 13

Major wins US Open (2011), Open Championship (2014), PGA Championship (2012, 
2014)

With only one win – the Irish Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/22/rory-mcilroy-win-irish-open-golf>
 – on either side of the Atlantic to his name this year before his timely 
victories in last weekend’sTour Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/rory-mcilroy-fedex-cup-tour-championship-ryder-cup>
 and theDeutsche Bank Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/rory-mcilroy-deutsche-bank-championship-boston-ryder-cup-golf>
 earlier this month, McIlroy’s awful putting was a major source of concern for 
Europe. The 27-year-old’s recent wins came on the back of his decision to 
employ the putting guru Phil Kenyon, a move that seems to have sorted out his 
problem. Having relocated his mojo, he looks far more likely to play the role 
of lynchpin than liability in Hazeltine.BG
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd00d193686cb382eb0d9a9827d5c9cbe3385312d%2F1300_1191_3419_2052%2F3419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd00d193686cb382eb0d9a9827d5c9cbe3385312d%2F1300_1191_3419_2052%2F3419.jpg>
 Rory McIlroy’s play on the greens has improved notably since employing the 
putting guru Phil Kenyon. Photograph: Ramsey Cardy/Sportsfile via Getty Images 
Justin Rose (England)

Age 36

World ranking 11

Ryder Cup appearances 2008, 2012, 2014

Ryder Cup record 9-3-2

PGA Tour wins 7

European Tour wins 9

Major wins US Open (2013)

One of the stars at Gleneagles in 2014, Rose remained undefeated and won four 
points out of five as Europe demolished the USA by five points. He has not 
enjoyed the best of seasons, but clearly savoured every minute of hisvictory in 
the Olympic tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/justin-rose-olympic-games-golf-gold-medal-great-britain-rio-2016>
. The rowdy atmosphere on a Rio Olympic Games course packed with spectators 
unfamiliar with the protocols of golf-watching ought to serve as ideal 
preparation for the antics of some of the Ryder Cup’s American patrons.BG

Henrik Stenson (Sweden)

Age 40

World ranking 5

Ryder Cup appearances 2006, 2008, 2014

Ryder Cup record 5-4-2

PGA Tour wins 5

European Tour wins 11

Major wins Open Championship (2016)

Stenson goes into his fourth Ryder Cup after a fine summer in which he won the 
BMW International Open in Germany beforetriumphing over Phil Mickelson at the 
Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/henrik-stenson-phil-mickelson-open>
 on a final day of astonishingly golf from the two leaders. The 40-year-old 
from Gothenburg followed up with the silver medal at the Olympics, before 
withdrawing from The Barclays with a slight meniscus tear in his right knee. 
For now, Stenson will soldier on in the hope a troublesome joint that has 
required surgery in the past will not give him any problems.BG
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6b55c454712c12062521c1c30279a4a8217ad67%2F17_142_4364_2618%2F4364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6b55c454712c12062521c1c30279a4a8217ad67%2F17_142_4364_2618%2F4364.jpg>
 Henrik Stenson has been in excellent form all summer, though he has had some 
injury niggles. Photograph: ddp USA/Rex/Shutterstock 
Andy Sullivan (England)

Age 29

World ranking 50

Ryder Cup appearances debut

Ryder Cup record 0-0-0

PGA Tour wins 0

European Tour wins 3

Major wins 0

A former shelf-stacker nicknamed the Smiling Assassin, Sullivan won all three 
of his European Tour titles in 2015 but has had a quieter time of it this year. 
The 29-year-old from Nuneaton finished tied-12th at the Open in July and 
arrested a run of three consecutive missed cuts by finishing tied-20th in this 
month’s Italian Open.BG

Ryder Cup 2016: Europe’s togetherness is more organic, claims Rory McIlroy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/ryder-cup-2016-europe-rory-mcilroy-usa-jack-nicklaus>
Danny Willett (England)

Age 28

World ranking 10

Ryder Cup appearances debut

Ryder Cup record 0-0-0

PGA Tour wins 1

European Tour wins 5

Major wins Masters (2016)

Not many rookies tee off in the Ryder Cup as the Masters champion but this is 
the situation in which Willett will find himself following hisheroics at 
Augusta in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-masterrs-2016-jordan-spieth-lee-westood>
. His experience in Georgia should serve him well, whilesecond place in the 
Italian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/italian-open-franceso-molinari-danny-willett>
 will have allayed fears about the indifferent performances that followed his 
major win and victory at the Dubai Desert Classic. “I feel I’ve achieved a good 
bit in golf and can draw on those experiences, go there and put some points on 
the board,” he says of Hazeltine.BG
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a94c3d8c24706e56376a1ecafb5cbf107a4d9f2%2F0_186_4006_2404%2F4006.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a94c3d8c24706e56376a1ecafb5cbf107a4d9f2%2F0_186_4006_2404%2F4006.jpg>
 Danny Willett has already savoured one stunning triumph on US soil this year, 
his Masters triumph in April. Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images 
Chris Wood (England)

Age 28

World ranking 32

Ryder Cup appearances debut

Ryder Cup record 0-0-0

PGA Tour wins 0

European Tour wins 3

Major wins 0

In a gamble that paid off, the 28-year-old from Bristol pulled out of the Open 
suffering from a neck injury in an attempt to keep his hopes of automatic 
qualification alive despite being told he was unlikely to receive a wildcard. 
Wood finished a comfortable fourth in the rankings in spite of missing most of 
July but has recently insisted his problems are behind him. Four top-10 
finishes helped secure his berth for Hazeltine, the pick being his win at the
BMW PGA Championship at the end of May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/chris-wood-danny-willett-pga-championship-wentworth>
. Questions remain over his fitness and form.BG

The captain’s picks

Lee Westwood (England)

Age 43

World ranking 46

Ryder Cup appearances 1997, 1999, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, 2014

Ryder Cup record 20-15-6

PGA Tour wins 2

European Tour wins 23

Major wins 0

While his close friendship with Clarke could have led to accusations of 
cronyism as far as his selection was concerned, Westwood’s vast Ryder Cup 
experience could prove invaluable in a team with six rookies. He will make his 
10th consecutive appearance in the competition and he needs two points to equal 
Nick Faldo’s record as Europe’s top scorer on 25. “I would have liked to have 
played my way on but obviously I was very relieved and thrilled at the same 
time to get the pick,” said Westwood, who has had only two top-10 finishes this 
season.BG

Martin Kaymer (Germany)

Age 31

World ranking 48

Ryder Cup appearances 2010, 2012, 2014

Ryder Cup record 4-3-3

PGA Tour wins 3

European Tour wins 11

Major wins PGA Championship (2010), US Open (2014)

The man who holed the winning putt to close out the Miracle at Medinah four 
years ago, Kaymer has been selected as much for what he brings to the “team 
room and the dynamics of everything involved” as he does to the course, 
according to his captain. Kaymer has not won a tournament since the US Open in 
2014 but has recorded six top-10 finishes in 18 starts on the European Tour 
this season. Decent form since April may have got Clarke’s antennae twitching, 
while his experience, proven coolness under pressure and record of never having 
finished on a losing team undoubtedly helped too.BG

Thomas Pieters (Belgium)

Age 24

World ranking 42

Ryder Cup appearances debut

Ryder Cup record 0-0-0

PGA Tour wins 0

European Tour wins 3

Major wins 0

Standing 6ft 5in in his socks, the lanky 24-year-old from Antwerp makes his 
Ryder Cup bow three years after turning professional. Few players are in better 
form: a fourth-place finish at the Olympics was followed by a runner-up spot at 
the Czech Masters and victory at the Made In Denmark, which earned him Clarke’s 
final wildcard slot at the expense of Scotland’s Russell Knox. “I have not seen 
a young player with as much talent since Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy,” said 
Clarke after backtracking on his pledge not to pick a rookie.BG
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ef64fe0390e598de38067b81c30173d4009a7b9%2F0_456_4749_2850%2F4749.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ef64fe0390e598de38067b81c30173d4009a7b9%2F0_456_4749_2850%2F4749.jpg>
 Thomas Pieters’ talent has been compared to that of Tiger Woods and Rory 
McIlroy by Darren Clarke. Photograph: Andrew Redington/Getty Images 
USA

Captain: Davis Love III

Vice-captains: Tom Lehman, Jim Furyk, Steve Stricker, Tiger Woods, Bubba 
Watson.

Dustin Johnson

Age 32

World ranking 2

Ryder Cup appearances 2

Ryder Cup record 4–3–0

PGA Tour wins 12

European Tour wins 0

Major wins US Open (2016)

Johnson is hoping it is third time lucky after two consecutive Ryder Cup 
defeats for the South Carolina native. The good news for USA is that the world 
No2 saves his best for the big occasions and 2016 seems to be going his way. 
Afterwinning his first major at the US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/dustin-johnson-first-major-us-open>
 in June, Johnsonwon the BMW Championship on 11 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/dustin-johnson-bmw-championship-win-fedex-cup>
. Johnson has already stated his reluctance to pair with Phil Mickelson as he 
feels he plays better without him. “I love Phil and we’re great friends,” 
Johnson said, “but we have a lot more fun when we’re playing against each 
other, not as partners.”Luis Echegaray
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F637c6a59cecf138945798f1771ec8358bad37cfc%2F0_271_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F637c6a59cecf138945798f1771ec8358bad37cfc%2F0_271_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Dustin Johnson’s flair for the big occasion could serve the USA well. 
Photograph: Tannen Maury/EPA 
Jordan Spieth

Age 23

World ranking 4

Ryder Cup appearances 1

Ryder Cup record 2–1–1

PGA Tour wins 8

European Tour wins 0

Major wins Masters (2015), US Open (2015)

Despite ending up on the losing team, Spieth was one of the best things to 
come out of 2014’s Ryder Cup but the Texan does not care about the past as he 
looks for vindication at Hazeltine. “You want something you don’t have,” he 
said. “That’s a trophy that I’ve watched the other side of, and it hurt. It was 
tough at the closing ceremony.”LE

Phil Mickelson

Age 46

World ranking 15

Ryder Cup appearances 10

Ryder Cup record 16–19–6

PGA Tour wins 42

European Tour wins 9

Major wins Masters (2004, 2006, 2010), PGA Championship (2005), the Open (2013)

The oldest playing member of the USA team has seen it all. No other American 
has played in more Ryder Cups and his presence is invaluable. Despite his 
longevity and experience against Europe, he has been part of only two winning 
USA teams – 1999 and 2008. They will hope the five-times major champion can not 
only perform but lead younger talent to victory.LE

Patrick Reed

Age 26

World ranking 8

Ryder Cup appearances 1

Ryder Cup record 3–0–1

PGA Tour wins 5

European Tour wins 1

Major wins 0

Reed has been in only one Ryder Cup but it was an eventful one to say the 
least. He was America’s best player in 2014 when he ended with a 3-0-1 record 
but European fans may remember him as the man who shushed them after a big 
putt. Reed is known for having a short fuse and his temper has caused him to 
say the wrong thing. If he is able to keep his cool, he could be one of USA’s 
biggest weapons.LE

Jimmy Walker

Age 37

World ranking 16

Ryder Cup appearances 1

Ryder Cup record 1–1–3

PGA Tour wins 6

European Tour wins 0

Major wins PGA Championship (2016)

Was extremely impressive as he won the PGA Championship last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/jimmy-walker-jason-day-us-pga>, 
his first major. The 37-year-old has been working with Julie Elion, a sports 
psychologist, who has helped him tremendously with the mental side of his game. 
For Elion, the key was to help Walker relax and find his inner confidence. 
“He’s got a lot of cockiness in some ways,” Elion said. “He’s subtle about it 
but he knows who he is.”LE

Brooks Koepka

Age 26

World ranking 22

Ryder Cup appearances debut

Ryder Cup record 0-0-0

PGA Tour wins 1

European Tour wins 1

Major wins 0

One of two rookies in the US team, Koepka took an unusual route to the top 
table, starting out in European challenger events while his peers stayed in the 
US. It paid off, and his fourth place at the US Open 2014 marked him out as a 
potential star. Won his first and only PGA Tour event in Scottsdale in 2015 and 
missed this year’s Open with an ankle injury but should be fit for Hazeltine. 
His captain is a big fan. Hits the ball a long way, and could be a good pairing 
with Dustin Johnson.Tim Hill
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadb5446ccc8b3eb157afe7b3c7952917778ddcc1%2F0_144_3094_1856%2F3094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadb5446ccc8b3eb157afe7b3c7952917778ddcc1%2F0_144_3094_1856%2F3094.jpg>
 Brooks Koepka is one of two rookies in the US team. Photograph: Rob 
Schumacher/USA Today Sports 
Brandt Snedeker

Age 35

World ranking 23

Ryder Cup appearances 1

Ryder Cup record 1-2-0

PGA Tour wins 8

European Tour wins 0

Major wins 0

The Nashville-born Snedeker started the year with top-three finishes in his 
first three tournaments but wasn’t a definite for the team until a third place 
at the Wyndham in August. His previous Ryder Cup, in 2012, was a serious 
disappointment: he lost to Paul Lawrie in the singles as Europe charged to 
victory on that crazy final day at Medinah. Looks to be rejuvenated after 
dropping well down the rankings in 2014. Has a reputation as an excellent 
putter.TH

Zach Johnson

Age 40

World ranking 28

Ryder Cup appearances 4

Ryder Cup record 6-6-2

PGA Tour wins 12

European Tour wins 2

Major wins Masters (2007), the Open (2015)

In a team short on major winners, Johnson’s experience under pressure is a 
welcome addition and, at 40, he is a solid cog in the machine. His 6-6-2 Ryder 
Cup record over four tournaments is excellent but he has yet to finish on a 
winning team. Has a reputation as a grinder and makes few mistakes, though 
lacks the explosiveness of some of his younger team-mates. Should have plenty 
of fans in attendance from his home state of Iowa.TH
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40a63e64c4b1eeb4bd732074f7e76ac4f8ca2a81%2F322_169_2864_1718%2F2864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40a63e64c4b1eeb4bd732074f7e76ac4f8ca2a81%2F322_169_2864_1718%2F2864.jpg>
 Zach Johnson has a fine personal Ryder Cup record but has yet to taste victory 
in the tournament. Photograph: Jamie Squire/Getty Images 
The captain’s picks

JB Holmes

Age 34

World ranking 21

Ryder Cup appearances 1

Ryder Cup record 2-0-1

PGA Tour wins 4

European Tour wins 0

Major wins 0

Ranks second in the US PGA’s drive distance, which could come in handy on the 
long Hazeltine course. Played in USA’s victory over Europe in 2008, where he 
finished with a 2-0-1 record, and is coming off a fourth-place finish at the 
BMW Championship at Lake Forest. “JB is so steady, easy to pair, has a lot of 
experience, is consistent and been on a winning Ryder Cup team in the past,” 
said Love when he announced his picks. They are as good a reason as any for his 
selection.TH

Ryder Cup 2016: Tiger Woods forgets he is not in the team at USA photocall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/tiger-woods-ryder-cup-hazeltine> 
Rickie Fowler 

Age 27

World ranking 9

Ryder Cup appearances 2

Ryder Cup record 0-3-5

PGA Tour wins 3

European Tour wins 2

Major wins 0

Made the cut as one of four wildcard picks, which, considering he has never 
won a Ryder Cup match, is a vote of confidence from the captain. Fowler is 
charismatic and marketable, and a favourite with American fans, but he’s short 
on outright championship wins – he has only three titles to his name since 
turning pro in 2010. He does have eight top-10 finishes in 23 starts this 
season, and in 2014 finished in the top five in all four majors. Fearless style 
could be a match-winner.TH

Matt Kuchar

Age 38

World ranking 17

Ryder Cup appearances 3

Ryder Cup record 4-5-2

PGA Tour wins 7

European Tour wins 0

Major wins 0

Solid and steady, Kuchar will not set hearts racing but his record in the 
Ryder Cup is good. Has experience, which probably landed him the nod over Bubba 
Watson. He won bronze at the Olympics behind Justin Rose and Henrik Stenson, 
and has earned a reputation on the PGA Tour as a consistent performer, with 76 
top-10 finishes in the past decade. Has seven PGA Tour wins, although his last 
one was in 2014. Has finished in the Masters top 10 three times.TH
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ac86c6073947286af15a1aecd7602694d50bca%2F0_141_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ac86c6073947286af15a1aecd7602694d50bca%2F0_141_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Matt Kuchar won bronze in the Olympics and has 76 top-10 finishes to his name 
in the past decade. Photograph: Erik S. Lesser/EPA 
Ryan Moore

Age 33

World ranking 31

Ryder Cup appearances debut

Ryder Cup record 0-0-0

PGA Tour wins 5

European Tour wins 0

Major wins 0

The man in form, Moore’s late-season hot streak earned him the final captain’s 
pick over Watson. At 33, he is no greenhorn. Has won five PGA titles and has 
put together the best year of his career. His second-place finish to McIlroy at 
the Tour Championship at East Lake seemed to swing the balance for Love. Won 
the John Deere Classic in August and has had three top-10 finishes in the FedEx 
Cup play-offs. Stocky of build and no stranger to natty attire, the bearded 
Moore represented the US as an amateur in the Walker and Palmer cups.TH
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bfb4e4596032c68429c7435171ad67bef4fd537%2F0_112_5153_3092%2F5153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%202016%3A%20player-by-player%20guide%20to%20Europe%20and%20USA%20teams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bfb4e4596032c68429c7435171ad67bef4fd537%2F0_112_5153_3092%2F5153.jpg>
 Phil Mickelson and Rickie Fowler assess the course during practice at 
Hazeltine. Photograph: Streeter Lecka/Getty Images  