
The topic which dominated post-Ryder Cup media duties for the European team 
had nothing to do with the concession of the trophy for the first time since 
2008. Rather, the level of hostility those visitors to Hazeltine encountered 
from a frenzied home crowd created a narrative which will flow into 2018 and 
Paris. The reserved French may tone matters down.

If event buildup was overshadowed by the rantings of PJ Willett, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/danny-willett-ryder-cup-brother-american-fans>
 the problem thereafter was that too many spectators conformed to stereotype.
Danny Willett, the Masters champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-masterrs-2016-jordan-spieth-lee-westood>
 and golfer at the centre of such noise, posted on Twitter early on Monday 
morning to insist “some American fans” had proven his brother “in fact 
correct”. When Willett eventually takes up full-time playing residence on the 
PGA Tour, the reaction towards him will be interesting. “I meant every word 
about being sorry for what was written but unfortunately people made it tough 
to stick by that,” he said.

Darren Clarke urges Europe to resist alarm over Ryder Cup defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/europe-ryder-cup-defeat-darren-clarke>
It was to the credit of the USA team and their backroom staff that they spent 
so much time trying to douse over‑the‑top antics from behind the ropes. The PGA 
of America, in an unprecedented move, issued a statement before Sunday’s 
singles play got under way. TheRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> organisers insisted: “Our security 
staff will continue to enforce a zero‑tolerance policy, removing from the 
course any fans who are disruptive in any way, including the use of vulgar or 
profane language directed at the players.”

Darren Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-clarke>, Europe’s 
captain, referenced a Sunday incident with McIlroy, right. “He was about to 
take a swing to hit it and some guy shouted in the middle of his backswing,” 
Clarke said. “The whole crowd turned on the guy and pointed who he was out to 
security. That guy was swiftly ejected. And that was all done by the American 
fans.”

Such evictions were visible to a level not seen before in tournament or Ryder 
Cup golf. The fact this were necessary is the issue and raises questions as to 
how the Ryder Cup will evolve as a spectator experience, not least when back in 
the USA.

“We wouldn’t encourage any sort of retaliation,” said Rory McIlroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy>, looking ahead to France. 
“That’s just not who we are. That’s not what we do. We’ll be making that clear.

“We want to play this tournament in the manner in which it should be played. 
And between us, the 12 players and vice-captains and captains on this team and 
between the 12 players on the US team, it was played in the manner in which it 
should have been played.

“We have no problems with anyone on either team, and really, it’s just a very 
small minority; 95% of the people out there, the American gallery are 
absolutely fantastic, they really are.

“We play week-in, week-out on the PGA Tour and they couldn’t be nicer to us. 
They are welcoming. They greet us like we are one of their own.

“This week, at times, it went a little bit too far. But you know, that’s to be 
expected. When you are teeing off at 7.35 in the morning and you’re seeing 
people on the first tee with a beer in their hand and matches aren’t finishing 
until 4.30-5 in the afternoon, I know I would be done at that point, I don’t 
know what I would be saying.”

McIlroy added: “A couple of people out there crossed the line but we’ll take 
it on the chin. We’ll move on and we’ll definitely not encourage anything like 
that to happen in France next time around.”

The particular issues are obvious: calling out on a player’s backswing; 
willing a putt to miss or ball to fly into a water hazard; and, to a lesser 
extent, wild cheering when woe does befall an opposition competitor. Boorish 
behaviour is boorish behaviour, regardless of sport or scene.

Ryder Cup review: USA get wildcards right and is McIlroy the new Poulter?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/03/ryder-cup-review-usa-wildcards-right-rory-mcilroy>
Here’s the rub; perhaps golf cannot have it all ways. Maybe in the quest to 
attract a younger audience, golf has to loosen some of its historic parameters. 
Cricket has done this, the booming music which forms a backdrop to T20 matches 
now accepted as part of the scene. Even within golf, the most popular regular 
stop on the PGA Tour is in Phoenix, where crowd engagement is to the level of 
an on-course party. Some 80,000 turn out for each of the tournament’s four days.

“They are here to have a good time,” McIlroy said in response to the 
suggestion that alcohol should be banned or more strongly regulated. “I don’t 
know how you could police that or limit that in any way. Telling people they 
can’t drink until 11am in the morning? They are just going to go and buy six 
beers. You can’t do anything about that. People are here to have a good time.”

How to balance that with disruption, as beamed across the globe, is a 
conversation that will rumble on until Europe and the USA meet again.
 