
A good motto helps give anyone a sense of focus. Model Sam Rollinson has a 
pretty good maxim to see her through a career that includes walking in 63 shows 
during one season of fashion week and shooting global campaigns for labels such 
as Balenciaga or Burberry. “I just think,” Rollinson says, “keep calm, it’s 
only fashion.”

She believes the ability not to worry is vital for model success. “That and a 
thick skin, because ultimately it’s out of your hands whether you get a job or 
not. It’s all about how you look and there’s not much you can do about that.”

Rollinson thinks her Zen attitude to the business comes from what most 
commentators fret about with fashion: starting very, very young. She was 
spotted aged just 13 while she was at The Clothes Show Live in her home town of 
Doncaster. “I wasn’t really interested in fashion, but my mum dragged me along 
and someone just came up and scouted me. I went down to London with my family 
to find out what the crack was and then signed up.”

Her agency – Select <http://www.selectmodel.com/>, the management company that 
had previously nurtured Stella Tennant and Jamie Dornan – sent her out to test 
shoots and small jobs to get a feel for the life. “I didn’t enjoy it 
instantly,” she says. “I was 14 and on shoots with loads of adults; I was shy 
and didn’t know what to say to anyone. I mean, being 14, 15, is an awkward time 
for anyone, so it’s weird going through that as a model. But I got used to it 
and it was good to have the opportunity to do that, I think Select were really 
good at working with me. If I’d been scouted at 18 and gone straight into 
catwalk work, it would have completely overwhelmed me.”

It was shooting the 2010 Burberry <https://uk.burberry.com/> campaign with 
Rosie Huntington-Whiteley and actor Douglas Booth that convinced Rollinson she 
had a future in fashion. “I was 15 when I did that and I loved it. The catering 
was amazing and that’s when I met my best friend, Charlotte Wiggins.”

Three years later – A-levels completed (“So that if it all goes tits up I can 
go to university if I want to”) – she moved to London where she shares a flat 
with fellow models Wiggins and Eve Delf. “I’m the messiest. When I get home 
from a trip, I just open my case and everything flies out. It’s hard to 
concentrate on tidying up when you’ve been working in New York for a week. You 
don’t want to go home and wash your knickers. It’s not very exciting.”

Rollinson and her flatmates are part of a new gang of British models, along 
with Lara Mullen and Matilda Lowther, who chum around together not only through 
fashion week – during which Rollinson has walked for everyone from Chanel and 
Prada to Celine – but also at Benicassim, Glastonbury and beyond, having “a 
right laugh”. Follow her onInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> or Twitter if you want to 
see for yourself. Rollinson is smart and funny at social media. “I think it’s 
good for people to understand that models are normal girls. I like that they 
know I’m more than just a doll.”

She gets to go to some pretty good parties, judging by Instagram. “You can’t 
complain,” she agrees. “Me and Charlotte get dressed by designers –Chanel 
<http://www.chanel.com/en_GB/> and Saint Laurent <http://www.ysl.com/gb> are my 
favourites, stuff I don’t have in my wardrobe but I’m allowed to borrow – and 
go to these posh dos with free champagne.”

Though modelling is still fresh, Rollinson is level-headed enough to know it 
won’t last for ever. “Models move on, they have side projects which become more 
than that. I don’t know what else I want to do yet, but there’s lots of time to 
work that out. I don’t know if I’ll move into styling or maybe work at a 
modelling agency. Perhaps, in 10 years’ time, I’ll pop back and do the odd show 
– come on as a blast from the past.” And she laughs at the thought of her 
modelling career being over. After all, it’s only fashion. Keep calm.

instagram: @samrollinson <https://instagram.com/samrollinson/> twitter: 
@SamRollinson <https://twitter.com/samrollinson>
 