
Expectations that the internet would automatically unlock equality and 
democracy in developing nations may have been utopian but the web can still be 
a powerful accelerator of change if combined with traditional pillars of 
development such as a favourable business climate and good governance.

This was the conclusion drawn by a group of World Bank experts who examined 
the potential and limitations of the internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/13/internet-not-conquered-digital-divide-rich-poor-world-bank-report>
 in a recent report,Digital Dividends 
<http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2016/01/13/090224b08405ea05/2_0/Rendered/PDF/World0developm0000digital0dividends.pdf>
.

Can democracy spread at the push of a button? | Stephen Abbott Pugh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/feb/24/can-democracy-spread-data-monitor-governments-africa>
“I don’t think we should be disappointed. I think the hype was too much. We’ll 
get lots of the benefits but it will not take five years, but 50 years,” said 
Deepak Mishra, one of the co-authors of the report.

Because the internet first emerged and took hold in developed countries, where 
governments were already quite accountable and education was relatively 
widespread, it was heralded as an accelerator of growth and creator of jobs.

“There was this optimism that the same would happen in developing countries 
but some developing countries did not have … the same levels of education, they 
did not have regulations that create competition and allow entry of new 
businesses, they did not have such accountable governments, so it needs more 
work,” said Mishra.

“The internet is an amplifier,” says Uwe Deichmann, another co-author. 

“If you have a willing government, the internet can make it more efficient and 
improve service delivery in all areas. What we haven’t seen so much is the 
internet managing to make unwilling governments more accountable,” he said.

Perhaps surprisingly, the spread of the internet has coincided with a decline 
in what might be termed pure democracy. But while tech is clearly not a 
guarantor of fair elections, there is some correlation between tech-friendly 
societies and credible polls, says Mishra.
The spread of democracy 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/democracy-spread/giv-271678ZowXKyAyv0R>
“If you look today, there are more democracies in the world … but the number 
of elections that are free and fair has actually declined. So [countries] are 
becoming nominal democracies … The elections are more sham, but if you look at 
the countries that are using tech in normal day-to-day life, they tend to have 
more credible elections,” he said.

Both autocratic and democratic governments often embrace new technology, just 
for very different reasons. There is, of course, an economic imperative to be 
online.

“The autocratic regimes are using [the internet] more to control citizens and 
increase surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/datablog/2012/apr/16/internet-censorship-country-list>
, while democratic countries are using it more to empower citizens. It’s the 
same tech but it can have a completely different effect, depending on the 
accountability of the government,” Deichmann said.

Governments know they cannot ignore the web because that would isolate them 
from the global information economy. As a result, some have become more 
sophisticated in calibrating their control.

Despite these efforts, the world is likely to still experience a turbulent 
period because of the spread of information via the internet, Mishra says.


“We think in the next few years, we will have more Arab springs because people 
have access to information and they are not seeing the changes, because the 
politicians are unwilling to give citizens political space to become more 
empowered,” he said, adding this would continue until a new equilibrium was 
reached with politicians becoming reconciled to the digital age.

Another issue is that millions of people are still living outside the grid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/22/secret-formula-bridging-digital-divide-1-for-2-alliance-for-affordable-internet-access>
.
Access to ICT 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/technology-access/giv-27167Zz99kRzGTEFT>
While the number of internet users has more than tripled over a decade – from 
1 billion in 2005 to an estimated 3.2 billion at the end of 2015 – billions 
more remain shut out: some 4 billion people do not have any internet access, 
nearly 2 billion do not own a mobile phone, and almost half a billion live 
outside areas with a mobile signal.


With nearly one fifth of the world’s population unable to read and write 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/01/13/digital-technologies-huge-development-potential-remains-out-of-sight-for-the-four-billion-who-lack-internet-access>
, it is clear that the spread of digital technology alone will not be enough to 
bridge the global knowledge divide.

In developed economies, the internet can bring formerly marginalised groups in 
from the cold. But this can only happen if pre-existing biases – such as lack 
of education and low income – are eradicated. For the most vulnerable, the net 
can actually increase isolation by replicating real-world exclusion.

When online voting was used in a ballot on municipal budget proposals in 
Brazil’s Rio Grande do Sul state, voter turnout increased by eight percentage 
points, but there were biases, the World Bank report showed.

Democrats v autocrats in Africa: is there a winning formula? – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/feb/25/democrats-autocrats-africa-winning-formula-uganda-podcast>
“With the ability to vote over the internet, there is higher participation 
certainly but that participation is very strongly biased to those who are 
already better off, more educated, more connected and richer,” said Deichmann, 
noting this can be overturned if the authorities invest in education for the 
most marginalised.

Despite the limitations, technology can and has delivered real gains: nearly 
900 million Indians have been issued withdigital IDs 
<http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2016-01-14/news/69765565_1_world-bank-group-aadhaar-identification-system>
 in the past five years. This has enabled them to open bank accounts, as well 
as allowing the government to monitor attendance of civil servants and identify 
recipients of subsidies, the report said. In Nigeria, the advent of e-IDs led 
to the unmasking of 62,000 “ghost workers 
<http://www.chronicle.co.zw/nigeria-to-probe-civil-servants-over-salary-scam/>
”, ultimately saving the state $1bn annually.


For Deichmann, the real tech revolution will be piecemeal: “You have to start 
small – start with connectivity, and simple services that are not controversial 
for governments, like SMS reminders to take medicine … things that governments 
cannot object to, and then you gradually build up and once you have 
connectivity generally and build this new generation that is used to doing 
things online … You will gradually be able to push governments more and more.”


For those hoping for a digital quick-fix to decades of corruption, unfair rule 
and exploitation in Africa, he is clear: “We really have to fix the 
institutions before we can leverage the technology.”
 