
Sammy Lee has left his role as England’s assistant manager, although his 
departure is not the result of the Football Association taking any action 
against him following the recent court finding that Lee was involved in 
transfer irregularities and lied in court.The FA released a statement 
<http://www.thefa.com/news/2016/dec/06/sammy-lee-left-role-assistant-manager> 
in which it made clear that Lee was leaving with “the FA’s best wishes” as part 
of thenew England manager, Gareth Southgate, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/gareth-southgate-confirmed-new-england-manager-football-contract>
 assembling his own coaching support staff. In the statement, Southgate praised 
Lee’s work and said he had “great respect” for him.

Gareth Southgate: ‘I want to give England a team that they’re proud of’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/gareth-southgate-confirmed-new-england-manager-football-contract>
Last month the court of appeal upheld a 2014 judgment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/england-sammy-lee-bolton-transfer-deal-appeal-court>
 in the high court that while he was the manager at Bolton Wanderers in 2007, 
Lee was involved in the poaching of the midfielder Gavin McCann from McCann’s 
agent, Tony McGill. His honour Judge Waksman QC had ruled in the high court 
that he found Lee’s claim in evidence that he met SEM, the agency that poached 
the player, earlier than was the case in reality, “false” and “unreliable”.

Of that meeting, which Lee and the then Bolton general manager, Frank 
McParland, had said in evidence took place in a Liverpool restaurant, Waksman 
said in a subsequent ruling on costs: “The events attested to by the Bolton 
witnesses concerning these meetings simply did not happen. True, I did not use 
the word ‘dishonesty’ [in his original judgment] but plainly if their evidence 
on this issue was false they must have known it to be so.”

The FA took no action against Lee, McParland, the SEM agents or anybody else 
whose conduct or evidence was criticised in the 2014 judgment. In July, after 
the FAappointed Sam Allardyce as the England manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/sam-allardyce-appointed-new-england-manager-fa-confirm>
, the governing body appointed Lee, who worked with Allardyce for years at 
Bolton, as his assistant.

When the court of appeal upheld all of Waksman’s findings against Lee, Bolton 
and SEM, and reversed the judge’s decision not to award McGill damages, the FA 
did not comment and again took no action. A spokesman said that this was 
because of legal proceedings being still ongoing, although, in fact, the only 
issue that has been referred back to Waksman is the amount of money McGill 
should be compensated.

When it was revealed in September that Allardyce had been covertly filmed by 
the Daily Telegraph, the FAparted company with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
 the same day, despite, as the FA’s strategy director, Robert Sullivan, later 
told a parliamentary inquiry, Allardyce not having broken any rules and having 
not, as widely reported, advised the undercover reporters how to “get around”
regulations on third-party ownership of players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/sammy-lee-sam-allardyce-fa-england-double-standards>
.

“I have great respect for Sammy,” Southgate said in the FA’s statement. “He is 
somebody who I worked with as a player and his personality and professionalism 
were excellent throughout my period as interim manager. I felt it was important 
for me to bring in my own support team and Sammy fully respected that.”

Lee said: “I should like to place on record my sincere thanks to the FA for 
the opportunity they gave me to work with the national team. It has been a 
great honour.”

The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> said that further 
appointments to Southgate’s backroom staff will be announced in due course.
 