
US Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders is on the warpath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/aug/23/bernie-sanders-campaign-evolution-in-pictures>
 against private prison contractors. “Corporations should not be allowed to 
make a profit by building more jails and keeping more Americans behind bars,” 
he wrote onFacebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/berniesanders/posts/875971435791195> in August. The 
following month he introduced a bill in the Senate, the justice is not for sale 
act, which would block the federal government from collaborating with these 
private firms.

Action urged on 'mistreatment' of Northern Territory's child offenders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/08/action-urged-on-mistreatment-of-northern-territorys-child-offenders>
“We cannot fix our criminal justice system if corporations are allowed to 
profit from mass incarceration,” Sandersargued 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/09/17/bernie_sanders_declares_war_on_the_prison_industrial_complex_with_major_new_bill/>
.

America imprisons more people 
<http://www.naacp.org/pages/criminal-justice-fact-sheet> than any other country 
in the world. 2.3 million are currently in prison, a500% increase 
<http://www.sentencingproject.org/template/page.cfm?id=107> over the last 30 
years. African-Americans and Hispanics are disproportionality represented and 
private companies arereaping the rewards 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mojo/2013/09/private-prisons-occupancy-quota-cca-crime>
.

The major corporations involved, CCA and Geo Group, have had minimum occupancy 
requirements signed into their contracts in many states’ facilities. Serious 
prison and immigration reform is not in their interests. But Sanders is 
determined toeradicate 
<http://www.sanders.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/sanders-house-leaders-introduce-bill-to-ban-private-prisons>
 a business model that guarantees huge numbers of prisoners and immigrants 
remain little more than dollar signs.

The industry has deep pockets and well-placed connections. Two leading 
presidential candidates, RepublicanMarco Rubio 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2015/04/28/how-for-profit-prisons-have-become-the-biggest-lobby-no-one-is-talking-about/>
 and DemocratHillary Clinton 
<https://theintercept.com/2015/07/23/private-prison-lobbyists-raising-cash-hillary-clinton/%25C2%25A0%25E2%2580%25A6>
, are close to lobbyists for CCA and Geo. Without taking financial incentives 
out of the justice equation, it’s impossible to imagine meaningful reform and 
serious reduction for the most vulnerable locked up every night.

Australians should look at the prisons debate in America with envy. Although 
its incarceration rates are far lower – except for Indigenous men, where the 
rate per capita isworse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/01/indigenous-incarceration-rates-are-a-national-shame>
 than during apartheid South Africa – the public discussion around the issue is 
poor and predictable.

Neither the Liberal government nor Labor opposition talk about it. The closest 
we came was under Kevin Rudd whopledged 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/stopping-the-boats-is-bad-for-business-20130802-2r4vy.html>
 (and failed) in 2007 to return immigration detention to public ownership when 
he took government.

Today, British multinational Serco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/10/serco-australian-immigration-detention-centres-contract-christmas-island>
 runs all the mainland detention centres while off-shore sites are managed by
Transfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/31/transfield-named-coalitions-preferred-tenderer-for-manus-and-nauru-centres>
. Growing numbers of states are seduced by the false allure of outsourcing 
their prisons to overseas corporations. This message is propagated by some 
sections of the media.

And in New Zealand, a Serco-run prison in Mt Eden is under investigation in 
relation toallegations of mismanagement 
<http://www.radionz.co.nz/news/political/284294/serco-let-off-$270k-in-fines-minister>
. A majority of New Zealanders now want Serco kicked out of the country despite 
prime minister John Keydefending 
<http://www.3news.co.nz/nznews/voters-want-serco-gone--poll-2015092117#axzz3n8b83Aj9>
 the company. The private sector had a role to play heargued 
<http://www.3news.co.nz/nznews/voters-want-serco-gone--poll-2015092117>, 
because otherwise the public service would be “fat and happy, and that wouldn’t 
deliver the services Kiwis want”.

Both conservative and some progressive politicians continue to falsely argue 
that outsourced facilities improve “efficiency” yet evidence fromAustralia 
<http://rightnow.org.au/topics/asylum-seekers/private-prisons-in-australia-our-20-year-trial/>
 and theUS 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/08/magazine/the-shame-of-americas-family-detention-camps.html>
 shows that workers rights, pay and benefits, let alone decent healthcare, food 
and conditions for inmates, often deteriorates when a private firm runs a 
facility. There’s no incentive to improve conditions when these benefits will 
negatively harm the bottom line.

Serco is failing, but is kept afloat thanks to Australia's refugee policy | 
Antony Loewenstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/11/serco-is-failing-but-is-maintained-afloat-thanks-to-australias-refugee-policy>
This is why the Bernie Sanders message 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/bernie-sanders-private-prisons-bill_55fad97be4b0fde8b0cd3545>
 of ending secret connections between prison corporations and the state within 
three years is a challenge to the Australian political and media class.

Divestment campaigns in firms profiting from detention or prisons are growing 
<https://xborderoperationalmatters.wordpress.com/2015/08/19/hesta-divest-afr/> 
locally and globally. It’s time for serious public debate, as isoccurring 
<http://www.laht.com/article.asp?ArticleId=2397216&CategoryId=36641> in the US, 
on the benefits of rehabilitation and community service over imprisonment. 
Where is the Australian Bernie Sanders?
 