
Turki al-Faisal is a remarkably modest man for a senior Saudi prince, always 
insisting that he speaks for no-one but himself and certainly not the ruling 
family. But the kingdom’s former intelligence chief and ambassador to 
Washington has a habit of making waves when he appears in public.

Last weekend, he was one of several VIPs who attended a conference of the 
Iranian opposition movement, the National Council of Resistance Iran (NCRI), 
near Paris. Turkiaccused 
<http://gulfnews.com/news/mena/iran/saudi-prince-in-push-for-iran-regime-change-at-paris-opposition-conference-1.1859664>
 the Islamic Republic of destabilising the Middle East and “spreading chaos”. 
He even said that he hoped to see the fall of the regime - in the familiar 
phrase of the Arab spring uprisings.

On a positive note, Turki did point to the long friendship and cooperation 
between Arabs and Persians, praising cultural achievements and religious 
commonalities and arguing that current tensions were an exception. But he also 
attacked what he called the “Khomeini cancer” - strong words for such an 
exquisitely polite man to use about the architect of the 1979 revolution, who 
is still officially revered inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>.

Relations between Riyadh and Tehran have seen ups and downs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2015/oct/23/iran-and-saudi-arabia-ramp-up-hostile-rhetoric-to-new-levels>
 since that watershed year. Nowadays they are opposing sides of the many 
conflicts of the region - from Syria and Lebanon to Iraq, Bahrain and Yemen. 
They also diverge on the ever sensitive issue of Palestine and Israel. The 
Saudis have plenty of money and a long-standing though changing alliance with 
the US, but nothing to match Iran’s ally, Hezbollah, which plays a key role 
fighting in support of Bashar al-Assad.


Strategic and economic rivalry between these neighbours - feeding through into 
sharp differences over oil exports - is intertwined with an ugly sectarian 
discourse that plumbs the depths of Sunni-Shia hostility and intolerance.

Relations hit a new low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2016/mar/02/nimr-al-nimr-street-tehran-signpost-for-troubled-iran-saudi-ties>
 in January when the Saudis executed Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr, a renowned Shia 
cleric in the kingdom’s eastern province. Iranian mobs stormed the Saudi 
embassy in Tehran and consulate in Mashhad, triggering a rupture in diplomatic 
relations and a propaganda war that has continued ever since.

Iran often accuses the Saudis of supporting Isis - or Daesh as it is 
universally known. And it was predictably quick to lash out at Turki’s 
comments: “The Saudis are resorting to well-known terrorists ... as they have 
also done in Iraq, Yemen and Syria,” said a foreign ministry official. “They 
use terrorism....to further their aims against Islamic countries.” The 
Revolutionary Guard echoed the complaints.

Tehran’s position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/12/iran-protest-mek> is 
that the NCRI, also known as the People’s Mujahideen, is a terrorist 
organisation. The EU, US and other western countries no longer take that view. 
Until 2003 the group was based in Iraq, and was supported and used by Saddam 
Hussein as means of pressuring Iran. It played a key role in exposing Iran’s 
undeclared nuclear activities. It enjoys no visible support inside Iran and is 
often described as “cult-like”.

Turki attracted attention on another controversial subject recently when he 
shared a platform 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/in-rare-appearance-saudi-prince-ex-netanyahu-adviser-spar-over-peace/>
 with a retired Israeli general and argued for a two-state solution and 
Palestinian independence - while sharing concerns about Iran’s nuclear 
capabilities in the wake of last year’s international agreement. Iran condemns 
Israel as an “illegitimate” regime and supports the Islamists of Hamas and 
Islamic Jihad, which advocate resistance to occupation and are at odds with the 
PLO.


Whatever Turki’s official standing he still runs the prestigious King Faisal 
Centre for Research and Islamic Studies 
<http://www.kff.com/en/King-Faisal-Center-for-Research-Islamic-Studies> in 
Riyadh. Last Sunday’s speech was closely covered by Saudi-owned media - 
ensuring that his words reached a large audience. And one of the several 
western PR companies 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/04/20/saudi-government-has-vast-network-of-pr-lobby-firms-in-u-s/>
 working for the Saudis took the trouble to distribute reports of the event to 
journalists in case they had missed it or its significance.

Messages like Turki’s are the headlines of geopolitical competition at a tense 
time. But there are consequences for ordinary people. In May Iran announced 
that it would not allow its nationals to travel toSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> for the Hajj this September 
after the breakdown of talks overshadowed by the deaths of 464 Iranians in a 
stampede in Mecca last year. That was surely evidence, if it were needed, that 
even as they abuse each other, both governments are failing to serve their own 
citizens.

 