
Saudi Arabia has never liked the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>, but the spat with Ban 
Ki-moon over the child casualties of the war in Yemen this week marks a new low.

It was extraordinary to hear the secretary-general admit publicly on Thursday 
thathe had had his arm twisted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/saudi-arabia-united-nations-blacklist-yemen-ban-ki-moon>
 to change tack in the wake of anger from Riyadh.

The row began 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/rights-groups-condemn-removal-of-saudi-arabia-from-un-blacklist>
 when the UN published a report about global violations of children’s rights 
and listed the Saudi-led military coalition’s actions in Yemen, where it is 
backing the restoration of the legitimate president and fighting Houthi rebels.

It is a controversial war that reflects regional tensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/the-guardian-view-on-yemens-war-a-year-of-living-shamefully>
, especially with Iran. And Saudi Arabia has both powerful friends and many 
enemies. It has also been in assertive mood under King Salman – with key 
policies run by his ambitious son Mohammed, the deputy crown prince.


The UN report 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-rights-un-saudi-yemen-idUSKCN0YO2RK> 
released last week attacked both coalition and rebel forces for a “very large 
number of violations” including attacks on schools and hospitals, but said the 
coalition was responsible for 60% of the child deaths and injuries in Yemen 
last year.

So there was outrage on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/rights-groups-condemn-removal-of-saudi-arabia-from-un-blacklist>
 when the UN said it had removed the coalition from its annual child rights 
blacklist pending a joint review by the world body and the coalition of those 
deaths and injuries.

Rights groups condemn removal of Saudi Arabia from UN blacklist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/rights-groups-condemn-removal-of-saudi-arabia-from-un-blacklist>
Human rights groups protested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/rights-groups-condemn-removal-of-saudi-arabia-from-un-blacklist>
, complaining of a “shocking flip-flop”, “blatant pandering” and a “moral 
failure.” All agreed that the credibility of the UN had been damaged. Anonymous 
diplomats complained of bullying, threats and blackmail.


Ban then said publicly  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-yemen-security-saudi-un-idUSKCN0YV1UQ>that 
there had been “unacceptable” and “undue” pressure. He did not specifically say 
the Saudis had threatened to cut off funding but clearly implied that they had: 
“Children already at risk in Palestine, South Sudan, Syria, Yemen and so many 
other places would fall further into despair,” he told reporters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fsaudi-arabia-row-ban-ki-moon-new-low-un-relationship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06657003d565179410b783039845ec558240661f%2F153_127_1501_901%2F1501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saudi%20Arabia's%20row%20with%20Ban%20Ki-moon%20over%20Yemen%20marks%20new%20low%20in%20UN%20relationship&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fsaudi-arabia-row-ban-ki-moon-new-low-un-relationship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saudi%20Arabia%27s%20row%20with%20Ban%20Ki-moon%20over%20Yemen%20marks%20new%20low%20in%20UN%20relationship&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fsaudi-arabia-row-ban-ki-moon-new-low-un-relationship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06657003d565179410b783039845ec558240661f%2F153_127_1501_901%2F1501.jpg>
 Ban Ki-moon has faced criticism over the removal of Saudi Arabia from the 
blacklist. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Saudi allies, including Jordan, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Kuwait and 
Qatar – all coalition members – protested too. Still, the kingdom’s ambassador 
to the UN denied making any threats, which reportedly included leaving the UN 
altogether. Saudi sources said they suspected the US of leaking damaging 
details of private diplomatic exchanges.


The Saudi military insists that reports by human rights organisations of 
civilian deaths caused by coalition air strikes are based on inadequate 
investigation. It has said the same about allegations about the use of cluster 
bombs supplied by the UK, but its own promised investigation has not yet been 
forthcoming.


Yet overall, Saudis are not only unrepentant but angry. Social media in the 
kingdom has been overloaded with complaints that western rights watchdogs are 
failing to apply the same rigorous standards to their own governments and armed 
forces, or to Russia and Israel, never mind to Syria – where far more civilians 
have been killed than inYemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>.


“We know that the hospital at Kunduz [in Afghanistan] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/29/kunduz-hospital-attack-msf-us-military-charges>
 was attacked by the US and that thousands are being killed by the Russian air 
force in Syria, where the Iranian revolutionary guards are deployed,” fumed one 
Saudi analyst. “That’s what is ridiculous. This is about double standards, not 
about a powerful country paying to silence its critics.”


Saudi Arabian allies pressured UN chief to issue blacklist reversal, sources 
say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/saudi-arabia-united-nations-blacklist-yemen-ban-ki-moon>
Back in 2013 the late King Abdullah caused a stir when he declined to take up 
a non-permanent seat on the UN security council – in protest at the failure of 
international policy towards Bashar al-Assad, whom the Saudis want to 
overthrow. Now the UN is being lambasted as a “terrorist organisation”.

Defiant Twitter users have posted pictures of Saudi soldiers hugging Yemeni 
children; people being hanged from cranes in Ahwaz, where Iran’s Arab minority 
lives, and an anxious-looking Ban sitting on a pile of corpses in Syria and 
expressing his “concern”.

It remains to be seen whether the promised joint review of child casualties 
will produce a different result, but this very public row has been damaging. 
“This is part of an emerging trend in terms of the way the Saudis approach 
their foreign policies,” said Peter Salisbury, a Chatham House expert on the 
Gulf.

“This isn’t the first time they have applied pressure to the UN to limit 
criticism of their actions, especially in Yemen. The problem is that rather 
than improving their image it has only reinforced the idea that they use the 
bully pulpit of their money to get what they want.

“In the long run it’s hard to see how that won’t lead to pushback from some UN 
member states and the public in countries like Britain and the US that have 
defended their alliance with the Saudis – when it comes to such an emotive 
issue as the protection of children in war.”
 