
The government’s pollinator strategy aims to encourage everyone to do their 
bit to help bees and other pollinators. Urging us to cut the grass less will 
allow clovers and dandelions (both excellent bee food) to flourish, and leaving 
piles of leaves and logs could provide nesting sites for hibernating insects.

The advice won’t prove popular with pristine gardeners, or council maintenance 
contractors paid per lawn mowed, but it would increase urgently-needed forage 
and habitat in our towns and cities, as will creating wildflower meadows on 
public land. Yet creating pollinator-friendly cities full of year-round nectar 
and pollen-rich flowers and shrubs in all available green space from roofs to 
window boxes and road verges means a shift in our thinking about what flowers 
are: no longer beautiful, fragrant objects for our pleasure but instead vital 
food for pollinators.

But encouraging people to help replace the 97% of wildflower-rich grasslands 
lost in the UK since the second world war will never be enough. In the 
countryside, paying farmers attractive subsidies to maintain hedgerows and 
strips of wildlife-friendly ground around arable fields and banning the use of 
pollinator-harming pesticides is the only way forward. In urban areas, more 
bee-friendly trees, such as hazels and pussy willows, whose catkins provide 
early pollen, should be planted in our streets, parks and on the roofs of many 
new developments, as a condition of planning, to create pollinator-friendly 
corridors.

If Defra was really serious about saving pollinators it would be greening its 
Smith Square roof to provide abundant forage for all pollinators, rather than 
sticking honeybees hives on it.
 