
Two topical new dramas exploring the refugee and asylum-seeker experience in 
Australia and new documentaries putting racism and poverty under the spotlight 
headline SBS’s TV offering for 2017.

After facing some criticism for drifting away from its multicultural charter, 
the channel’s new schedule appears to put a renewed focus on providing diverse 
and unique content viewers won’t find on commercial channels.

Along with a second series of the controversial documentary Struggle Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/18/queensland-premier-tries-to-block-struggle-street-being-filmed-in-brisbane>
, a new program hosted by Ray Martin, I’m Not Racist, But…, will use hidden 
cameras to reveal the worst of Australian attitudes towards those of non-Anglo 
background.

SBS defends Vice partnership after charter fears and objections to Murdoch’s 
stake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/06/sbs-defends-vice-partnership-after-charter-fears-and-objections-to-murdochs-stake>
Former SBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> newsreader Indira Naidoo is 
returning to the network as host of a local version of BBC format Filthy Rich 
and Homeless, which takes a wealthy family and puts it on the street to 
experience homelessness.

Roy & HG’s Greig Pickhaver is hosting Hidden History of our Suburbs, a series 
which reveals the country’s immigrant past in the suburbs. Another show The 
Mosque will delve into the importance of the mosque in the Australian community.

The rich slate of local content was unveiled on Tuesday before the switch was 
flicked on SBS Viceland, a new channel consisting of content from SBS2 as well 
as programs from the global youth brand Vice. Popular shows from SBS2 like The 
Feed and the Chinese dating show If You Are the One are moving to SBS Viceland. 
SBS2, which launched as a youth channel three years ago, was turned off on 
Tuesday at 4pm.

The managing director of SBS, Michael Ebeid, said the partnership between SBS 
and US media brand Vice was perfect for the network’s multicultural channel 
with its commitment to diversity.

Behind the titles are some provocative, informative and serious programs
Michael Ebeid, SBS managing director 
“I think it’s a great fit,” he told Guardian Australia. “It will help us 
engage with a demographic that doesn’t traditionally engage with SBS. If you 
look at the provocative titles alone you are going to say ‘what the hell’ but 
they are there to attract a difficult-to-reach audience and behind the titles 
are some provocative, informative and serious programs.”

“If you ask people in their 20s and 30s they know Vice and it’s a great brand. 
If you look at the Vice charter it’s all about helping young people to 
understand the world that they live in, understand the cultures around the 
world. That’s what we do.”

The cheeky titles which have everyone talking are Weediquette (about the 
culture of marijuana), F*ck, That’s Delicious (a rapper who travels the world 
in search of great food) and Balls Deep ( living with an unfamiliar culture).


As well as a second series of The Family Law SBS is offering two new local 
dramas next year, a strong haul for a network with a relatively small budget 
for local content.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsbs-unveils-refugee-and-asylum-seeker-dramas-for-2017-as-viceland-launches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6401753ae7cdcca595fc4dfbe3915a4ee9eb1fd3%2F15_287_5110_3067%2F5110.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SBS%20unveils%20refugee%20and%20asylum-seeker%20dramas%20for%202017%20as%20Viceland%20launches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsbs-unveils-refugee-and-asylum-seeker-dramas-for-2017-as-viceland-launches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SBS%20unveils%20refugee%20and%20asylum-seeker%20dramas%20for%202017%20as%20Viceland%20launches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsbs-unveils-refugee-and-asylum-seeker-dramas-for-2017-as-viceland-launches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6401753ae7cdcca595fc4dfbe3915a4ee9eb1fd3%2F15_287_5110_3067%2F5110.jpg>
 TV show The Feed has moved from SBS2 to SBS Viceland. Photograph: SBS 
Sunshine is about South Sudanese refugees living in Melbourne and the drama 
centres on a young basketball player accused of assault.

Safe Harbour is a psychological thriller about the crossover between a group 
of asylum seekers trying to get to Australia and local holidaymakers on a boat.


SBS has four channels: SBS, SBS Viceland, The Food Network and NITV, plus a 
catch-up TV platform SBS on Demand.


NITV has a new local production Family Rules, a reality show about an 
Indigenous family as well as its first animated children’s TV show featuring 
Indigenous actors Miranda Tapsell, Deborah Mailman, Ningali Lawford and Aaron 
Fa’aoso.


Viceland’s international president, Jay Rosenstock, out from New York for the 
launch, said the content for the Australian edition of Viceland would be no 
different to that shown in the US and Canada or in the UK, all which launched 
channels this year.


“We really produce with an eye to taking the content globally,” Rosenstock 
told Guardian Australia. “We look at it with the same creative eye as we do for 
the US and the UK.


“I came out of Discovery where we produced a lot out of the US and sent it 
around the world. Our Viceland content model is kind of Discovery on steroids. 
We produce it all around the world and send it all around the world. Our youth 
focus gives us broader brand permission to create content in different places.”


The international dramas to screen next year include a new series of Fargo, 
Vikings and Knightfall.
 