
A battered orange pickup truck stands on the stately stone terrace of London’s 
Somerset House, parked askew like a getaway car hastily abandoned. Behind it 
stretches a shanty village of shawarma-sellers and juice-squeezers, backgammon 
players and shisha smokers, along with a barber sharpening his cutthroat razor 
with alarming enthusiasm.


Bohemians, Bauhaus and bionauts: the utopian dreams that became architectural 
nightmares
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/25/bohemians-bauhaus-bionauts-utopia>
Swapping the Mediterranean for the Thames, this waterfront slice of Beirut 
street life is theLebanese contribution 
<http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/lebanon> to the inaugural London 
Design Biennale, a sprawling show of work from 37 countries, curated around the 
theme Utopia by Design, in a nod to the 500th anniversary ofThomas More’s text 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/16/utopias-past-present-thomas-more-terry-eagleton>
.


“Utopia for me is found on the streets,” says architect Annabel Karim Kassar 
<http://www.annabelkassar.com/>, designer of swanky boutique hotels across the 
Arab world, who has exchanged her usual luxury materials for odds and ends 
scavenged from the skip. “It’s this relaxed attitude of cooperation and 
community that comes from people socialising outside, where the city’s streets 
become workshops of designing and making.”

The scene is a far cry from the usual stuff on show at the London Design 
festival <http://www.londondesignfestival.com/>, an annual commercial bonanza 
where big brands descend on the capital to peddle their latest additions to the 
world of expensive furnishings. Sir John Sorrell, the 71-year-old design 
champion who began the LDF 13 years ago, thought it was time for something new. 
“The world is increasingly recognising the power of design to bring about 
social change and economic growth,” he says, repeating a message he has spread 
on countless UKTI trade missions around the globe. “But I now understand why 
biennales happen every two years. We’ve tried to do this in one.”

In places, the haste shows. The exhibition suffers from a common biennale 
syndrome, comprising an incoherent ragbag of bits and bobs with no sense of 
quality control or overarching curatorial idea. There is some wheat, but you 
have to wade through a good deal of chaff to find it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a8873edcdbb16a16143c29793f5a332663b5b8d%2F0_0_1413_1000%2F1413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sci-fi%20socialism%20and%20Soviet%20snowmobiles%3A%20the%20best%20of%20the%20London%20Design%20Biennale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sci-fi%20socialism%20and%20Soviet%20snowmobiles%3A%20the%20best%20of%20the%20London%20Design%20Biennale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a8873edcdbb16a16143c29793f5a332663b5b8d%2F0_0_1413_1000%2F1413.jpg>
 An archive picture of Chile’s Cybersyn Operations-Room. Photograph: 
Gui-Bonsiepe/London Design Biennale 
Curated by Christopher Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/25/bohemians-bauhaus-bionauts-utopia>
, former editor of Modern Painters and Icon magazine, the most compelling 
exhibits have a journalistic bent, picking on moments in a country’s history 
that highlight unusual periods of optimism or change, when design (of a sort) 
played centre stage. TheChilean room 
<http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/chile> tells one of the most 
intriguing stories, focusing on a bold utopian project in the 1970s when 
Salvador Allende’s socialist government dreamed up a precursor to modern-day 
“smart city” technology. TheCybersyn system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2003/sep/08/sciencenews.chile> – which 
came complete with a sci-fi operations room (partly recreated here), equipped 
with Star Trek-style control pad chairs – would enable ministers to view 
economic information in real time through a national network of Telex machines, 
and give Chilean workers access to decision-making in a form of electronic 
industrial democracy.

“It was the total opposite of how smart city ideas are being used now to track 
and control citizens,” says co-curator Andrés Briceño Gutiérrez. “It was a 
utopian project to empower the Chilean people and predict how global 
fluctuations would affect the country’s economy.” The unlikely brainchild of 
British maverick cyberneticistStafford Beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/sep/04/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
and German industrial designerGui Bonsiepe <http://www.guibonsiepe.com/>, the 
system only lasted 14 months, before Pinochet’s military coup put a halt to the 
dream.

Russia’s exhibition <http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/russia> is 
equally eye-opening, providing a window on to an era of remarkable Soviet 
innovation, never before exhibited. Featuring Moscow metro train carriages, 
modular kitchens and even an experimental snowmobile, the exhibition showcases 
the recently rediscovered archive of the All-Union Soviet Institute of 
Technical Aesthetics (VNIITE), an organisation that brought together designers, 
sociologists, philosophers and art historians, working together at the 
forefront of design theory and research.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4846ea56625490fb7aa4c54e5c62276c999caa8%2F0_181_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sci-fi%20socialism%20and%20Soviet%20snowmobiles%3A%20the%20best%20of%20the%20London%20Design%20Biennale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sci-fi%20socialism%20and%20Soviet%20snowmobiles%3A%20the%20best%20of%20the%20London%20Design%20Biennale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4846ea56625490fb7aa4c54e5c62276c999caa8%2F0_181_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 An experimental Soviet taxi, as featured in the Russian exhibit. Photograph: 
London Design Biennale 
“Soviet designers were idealists who hoped to create perfect material 
environments,” says Alexandra Sankova, director of theMoscow Design Museum 
<http://www.moscowdesignmuseum.ru/en/>, responsible for the show. But their 
ideas were so utopian that it often proved beyond the capabilities of modern 
industry: many of these pioneering ideas (shown in a rather low-budget 
Soviet-era display of back-lit photographs) would never leave the drawing board.

Sweet artist: the Willy Wonka of lost Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/06/interview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial>
A more dreamlike utopian speculation comes from the Japanese 
<http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/japan> contribution to the 
biennale, one of the most poetic and playful exhibits. Designed as an inviting 
cabinet of curiosities in a big perspex vitrine, it features such wondrously 
weird inventions as a set ofglass spoons to measure time 
<http://www.mabataki.com/en-works/spoon-to-measure-time/>, each punctured with 
a little hole like an egg-timer, and a set of two-tone pencils to draw 
horizons, with blue and green leads sandwiched to enable the perfect 
reproduction of the line where land meets sky.

They are all the work of Yasuhiro Suzuki <http://www.mabataki.com/en/>, whose 
surreal descriptions and charming line drawings in the accompanying leaflet 
only add to its fairytale quality. Why aglass gun-shaped eyedropper 
<http://www.mabataki.com/en-works/eye-dropper/>, you might ask? Because “your 
hand shakes in hesitation applying eyedrops, like when you point a gun at 
yourself”. And a golf ball whose pits are modelled on the craters of the moon? 
Because, in Suzuki’s world, “golf balls are small satellites launched by 
golfers. They wax and wane as they fly through the air.”

Like souvenirs from an alternative universe, these objects reflect Suzuki’s 
take on utopia – “another place that isn’t here”. He says he wants visitors to 
“take back a sense of rediscovery regarding familiar things”, and it works. You 
leave his exhibition with an invigorated, sideways view of the world and a skip 
in your step. It’s the tonic you need after trudging through rooms that range 
from bemusing to banal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022276f42c4ca2faa4bf5fe64197b562f1dd4851%2F0_0_5315_3543%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sci-fi%20socialism%20and%20Soviet%20snowmobiles%3A%20the%20best%20of%20the%20London%20Design%20Biennale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sci-fi%20socialism%20and%20Soviet%20snowmobiles%3A%20the%20best%20of%20the%20London%20Design%20Biennale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022276f42c4ca2faa4bf5fe64197b562f1dd4851%2F0_0_5315_3543%2F5315.jpg>
 ‘If in doubt, wrap your space with string’ ... India’s installation from the 
India Design Forum. Photograph: Ed Reeve 
Turkey <http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/turkey> asks you to put 
a wish in a capsule and watch it whizz around a tube.Saudi Arabia 
<http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/saudi-arabia> has installed a 
vending machine of blue plastic balls, in a strained metaphor for water 
scarcity.Tunisia <http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/tunisia> has 
wound some string between burnt plastic stakes, whileSpain 
<http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/spain> invites you to walk 
through a tunnel of more coloured twine. If in doubt, wrap your space with 
string, appears to be the general thinking.

If you don’t get tangled in these tedious webs, there are other highlights to 
be found. The contribution from theUnited Arab Emirates 
<http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/united-arab-emirates> looks at 
the historic “al faraj” irrigation system in the Gulf, a network of manmade 
channels that brought water from the mountainous aquifers to villages in the 
desert valleys. As rabid development continues apace across the region and life 
retreats to the air-conditioned indoors, a series of models shows how these 
water channels could be revived and adapted for modern needs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34db0965c92939aa24c3f1656d46e62991c929dc%2F0_0_5962_3578%2F5962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sci-fi%20socialism%20and%20Soviet%20snowmobiles%3A%20the%20best%20of%20the%20London%20Design%20Biennale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sci-fi%20socialism%20and%20Soviet%20snowmobiles%3A%20the%20best%20of%20the%20London%20Design%20Biennale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flondon-design-biennale-review-utopia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34db0965c92939aa24c3f1656d46e62991c929dc%2F0_0_5962_3578%2F5962.jpg>
 An animal-shaped pod by South African designer Porky Hefer. Photograph: London 
Design Biennale 
The Cuban offering <http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/cuba> 
focuses on a timely topic, too, looking at the recent introduction of WiFi 
hotspots to urban public spaces, although the proposed intervention – a modular 
system of clunky plastic boxes for people to sit in and use the internet – 
isn’t the most elegant solution imaginable. And when you’re sick of looking at 
design, you can retreat to one of South African designerPorky Hefer 
<http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/countries/south-africa>’s dangling 
animal-shaped pods and rock yourself to sleep.

The jumbled format might make you long for a properly curated exhibition, 
rather than a motley Eurovision-style lineup, but the best bits remind you of 
the power of critical, speculative, truly utopian design. It can be a potent 
way to imagine other worlds, as More described his own work, “a fiction whereby 
the truth, as if smeared with honey, might a little more pleasantly slide into 
men’s minds”.


 * London Design Biennale <http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/> is at 
Somerset House, London, 7-27 September.  