Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DClc9neubEYI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DClc9neubEYI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DClc9neubEYI&media=>
 A honeybee who has found a good source of nectar or pollen performs a waggle 
dance to tell her nestmates where she has foraged. Here she repeatedly 
communicates that the profitable food location is at approximately 750m from 
the hive and about 270 degrees from the sun's azimuth 
Honeybees fly much longer distances in the summer than in the spring and 
autumn to find good sources of food, a new study has found.

Researchers at Sussex University spent two years decoding the "waggle dance" 
of thousands of honeybees, a form of communication by which the bees tell their 
nestmates where to go to get the best source of food to bring back to the hive.


By measuring the angle of the dance in relation to the sun and the length of 
time the bee waggled its abdomen while moving in a figure of eight pattern, 
researchers have been able to map the distance and location where bees forage 
from month to month.

With a one second waggle equating to a foraging distance of 750 metres, the 
bees dance language revealed that the area they covered in search of food is 
approximately 22 times greater in the summer (July and August) than in spring 
(March) and six times greater in summer than in the autumn (October). In the 
summer the area they cover is 15.2km sq, compared to 0.8km in spring and 5.1km 
in the autumn.

Honeybees will not waste valuable time and energy travelling to find food if 
they don’t need to, so the researchers say the results,published in the journal 
PlOS One 
<http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0093495>, 
show that the summer is the most challenging season for bees to collect the 
nectar and pollen from flowers.

 “There is an abundance of flowers in the spring from crocuses and dandelions 
to blossoming fruit trees. And in the autumn there is an abundance of flowering 
ivy. But it is harder for them to locate good patches of flowers in the summer 
because agricultural intensification means there are fewer wildflowers in the 
countryside for bees,” said Frances Ratnieks, professor of apiculture at Sussex 
University, who supervised the study.

Honeybees face many challenges including increasing lack of forage because of 
modern farming practices.

The researcher say the results can be used to focus efforts to help bees 
better. “The bees are telling us where they are foraging so we can now 
understand how best to help them by planting more flowers for them in the 
summer,” said Ratnieks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyELA7pvNUQI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyELA7pvNUQI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyELA7pvNUQI&media=>
 This video describes the research project Waggle dance distances as 
integrative indicators of seasonal foraging challenges carried out by Margaret 
Couvillon, Roger Schürch and Francis Ratnieks at the Laboratory of Apiculture & 
Social Insects (LASI) in the School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex 

Honeybees may also have to forage further in the summer because they have more 
mouths to feed when the colony expands to 50,000 bees and there is more 
competition for food from other insects and pollinators including bumblebees.

The glass-fronted observation hives are located at the university campus 
surrounded by the South Downs countryside and a few kilometres from the city 
parks and gardens of nearby Brighton and Hove.

The waggle dance clearly show that the bees are heading to the downs in the 
summer and researchers are currently examining which flowers they are feeding 
there.

The honeybee dance language was first decoded by Austrian scientist Karl von 
Frisch who was awarded a Nobel prize in 1973 for the discovery.

Ratnieks said its work will benefit other pollinators, such as bumblebees.

“Mapping the waggle dance will allow us to help other species, because where 
honeybees find good food, we have already found a plethora of other pollinating 
insects feeding there,” said Ratnieks. “So we can improve forage for all these 
insects.”

The Sussex research comes as the the IUCN's latest "red list" of threatened 
species update warns that 24% of Europe’s 68 bumblebee speciesare threatened 
with extinction <http://www.iucn.org/?uNewsID=14612>. According to the Status 
and Trends of European Pollinators, loss of habitat and wildflowers due to 
modern farming practices and urban development, plus changes in temperature 
from climate change, are the main threats to the species.
 