
6.42pm GMT 

That’s that. Thanks for your company. Enjoy your Saturday evenings. Cheers, 
James.

6.41pm GMT 

Full-time: Scotland 0-20 England

Peep, peep! The Calcutta Cup is England’s and Stuart Lancaster’s men record 
their first victory of this year’s competition.

6.40pm GMT 

79 mins: England’s scrum sets up one final attack. But it’s scrappy and 
Scotland have the ball.

6.39pm GMT 

78 mins: A clean sheet will be satisfying for England as they prepare for two 
home games with Ireland and Wales. Brian Moore dishes out the man-of-the-match 
award to the second half’s sole try scorer, Mike Brown.

6.38pm GMT 

77 mins: Home fans find their voice. There can only be one reason: a streaker. 
“An idiot,” parps the BBC commentator. Refusal to show streakers on TV these 
days prompts the surreal sight and sound of Murrayfield’s home contingent 
sounding excited as England prepare to score. But they don’t, conceding a 
penalty in the process. It sounds like the streaker has been nabbed.

6.36pm GMT 

76 mins: Scotland find space on the right, deep in their own half, but they 
succeed in no more than throwing the ball into touch.

6.35pm GMT 

75 mins: Cusiter kicks clear from deep inside his territory and England have 
the line-out. They launch another attack from a central position, spinning it 
wide right via Billy Twelvetrees. Eventually Scotland tackle England out into 
touch. Henry Thomas now comes on for Dan Cole.

6.33pm GMT 

74 mins: Farrell kicks into the corner, with more points beckoning. Home 
supporters boo as ‘Swing Low’ gets an airing. England’s line-out is messy, 
though, and they do well to regain possession. Danny Care now heads off and Lee 
Dickson comes on.

6.32pm GMT 

73 mins: Penalty to England.

6.32pm GMT 

72 mins: England are strong against a tough Scottish scrum and they get the 
put-in at the next one. Matt Scott is replaced by Duncan Taylor for Scotland

6.30pm GMT 

70 mins: Ch-ch-ch-changes … England: Tom Youngs on for Dylan Hartley, Billy 
Vunipola off and Ben Morgan on. Scotland: Jonny Gray on for Jim Hamilton, while 
Murray Lowe takes his leave. I missed who took his spot.
 Jonny May making a break. A key man in this second half. Photograph: David 
Rogers/Getty Images 
Updated at 6.31pm GMT

6.28pm GMT 

69 mins: England repeat the trick. Kick to touch, line-out in to Lawes. 
England roll right and they’re two metres out … but then England turn it over. 
Scotland scrum, right on their line.

6.27pm GMT 

68 mins: England again opt for touch and they win the line-out. They drive 
towards the line, three metres out, but it’s another penalty. There could be 
penalty try trouble for Scotland here …

6.25pm GMT 

67 mins: … a long ball is spun left – where England have pinpointed their 
attacks in the last 15 minutes. It comes in to Lawes and through another phase, 
Scotland are deemed offside. Penalty England.

6.25pm GMT 

66 mins: England are looking the stronger team, much as the 20-0 scoreline 
would suggest. Mako Vunipola and Lawes make punishing charges, before the busy 
May looks to make another cut through. Scotland are on him this time, but 
another phase beckons …

6.23pm GMT 

65 mins: Brown sends a teasing ball behind Scottish lines down the left line, 
but it rolls agonisingly dead. Good territory gain, nonetheless.

6.23pm GMT 

64 mins: Scotland ball now on halfway. They look to launch an attack through 
Dunbar, but England are tough in the tackle … up to 10 phases now and Scotland 
are still on halfway. Johnnie Beattie finally makes some headway, but England 
stay strong. Changes: Scotland – Max Evans on for Tommy Seymour. Greig Laidlaw 
off, Chris Cusiter on. For England, Mako Vunipola takes Joe Marler’s place in 
the front row.

6.20pm GMT 

63 mins: An England change: Dave Attwood on for Joe Launchbury – who 
definitely has ditched those L-plates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/07/england-joe-launchbury-scotland-six-nations>
.

6.19pm GMT 

62 mins: Dunbar returns to the pitch post-sin-bin, with his team seven points 
worse off – and 10 minutes further on.

6.18pm GMT 

62 mins: Good BBC stat: 23 tackles missed by Scotland, compared to England’s 
eight.

6.18pm GMT 

61 mins: England are dominant. May’s toes tip around two tacklers and he’s 
clear. Mike Brown, fresh from his try, gets the ball on that same left 
touchline and looks to feed inside towards Chris Robshaw. A Scottish hand 
blocks … forward, so it’s going to be an England ball.

6.16pm GMT 

Conversion (Farrell) Scotland 0-20 England

60 mins: This one is done, surely?

6.15pm GMT 

Try (Brown) Scotland 0-18 England

59 mins: England have made little use of their man advantage – Dunbar will be 
back dreckly. This looks better, though, and it’s Jack Nowell out by the left 
touchline. He drives through a tackle and offloads to the touchline-hogging 
Mike Brown, and he scampers in, almost right under the posts.
 Mike Brown runs through to score England's second try. Photograph: David 
Rogers/Getty Images 
Updated at 6.30pm GMT

6.12pm GMT 

57 mins: When the ball comes back to Brown shortly after, he breaks the gain 
line into Scottish territory. A great break. Owen Farrell then kicks to touch 
and Scotland will have a line-out by their own 22.
 Billy Twelvetrees of England clings on to Ryan Wilson. Photograph: David 
Rogers/Getty Images 
Updated at 6.13pm GMT

6.11pm GMT 

55 mins: Scotland’s lineout is ugly and Courtney Lawes wins the ball for 
England. But the scrappy nature of the game continues and England turn the ball 
over. Scotland kick deep and May is sent right back to his own try-line, from 
where he spreads the ball and England can clear. But Scotland now have the ball 
in England’s half … a chip kick from Laidlaw is disappointing, needlessly 
kicking to Mike Brown, who takes a fair catch and he boots very long.

6.09pm GMT 

54 mins: England’s lineout is scruffy, but they retain the ball. Not for long, 
and Scotland win a penalty and the chance to clear their lines. A waste from 
England, without doubt.

6.08pm GMT 

53 mins: Scotland, a man down on this Murrayfield quagmire, are right up 
against it. England are pushed back after a spill, but the hosts then get a 
hand in the ruck and it’s another England penalty. They kick to touch for a 
second successive time. That’s Scotland’s 12th penalty conceded (five by the 
visitors).

6.06pm GMT 

Sin bin (Dunbar) Scotland 0-13 England

52 mins: Another brilliant dash from May pierces the Scotland back-line after 
England were returned possession on the halfway line. A try looks on the cards 
but last-gasp tackling denies him. Illegally, mind, and Alex Dunbar is shown a 
yellow card.

Updated at 6.18pm GMT

6.05pm GMT 

Missed penalty (Farrell) Scotland 0-13 England

51 mins: Farrell doesn’t look comfortable with his footing and the kick is 
poor. Another chance missed.

6.04pm GMT 

49 mins: The scrum is deemed to be collapsed by Scotland and England have a 
penalty, central to the posts and very kickable for Farrell.
 Owen Farrell makes a break. Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images 
Updated at 6.09pm GMT

6.03pm GMT 

48 mins: The ball is spun right … and then in heads left, to Jonny May, who 
cuts inside and darts deliciously past two tacklers. He’s brought down by the 
22. In the second phase, a Scottish hand gets on the ball, but knocks on. 
England ball.

Updated at 6.03pm GMT

6.01pm GMT 

47 mins: Eventually, it’s a penalty to England. Owen Farrell kicks to touch 
inside the Scotland half, taking the steam out of Scotland’s early push 
post-interval.

6.00pm GMT 

46 mins: Courtney Lawes and Ryan Wilson – I think – get a quick summons to the 
referee. A quick chat, and it’s another scrum and put-in to England.

5.59pm GMT 

45 mins: A scrum for England in their own half is messy … and then the 
handbags get an airing.

5.57pm GMT 

43 mins: Apologies for the delay. We’ve just hand a quick handover on the MBM 
– it’s James Dart here with you for the second half. Scotland with early 
territorial dominance here.

5.42pm GMT 

Half time: Scotland 0-13 England

It’s not been one of the great sporting weekends of 2014. Back in a few.
 England's Luther Burrell scores. Photograph: Scott Heppell/AP 
Updated at 5.59pm GMT

5.41pm GMT 

40 min Farrell dances through a terrible defence and offloads to Burrell 
running a good support line once again. He gets to within a metre of the line 
and the support piles in. The defence does too though and it’s held up! Half 
time.

5.40pm GMT 

39 min Farrell kicks a poor penalty just 20m up front. Launchbury peels from 
the back and passes to Care, who looks to grubber it into the 22 but it’s 
blocked off. Lamont clears and England have a lineout inside the Scotland half.

It’s been an event-free match, but this is a good point:
George Magner (@GeorgeMagner) 
@DanLucas86 <https://twitter.com/DanLucas86> Chris Fusaro's had a good debut 
for Scotland- he and David Denton the most prominent players in blue right now-
#6nations <https://twitter.com/search?q=%236nations&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/GeorgeMagner/statuses/432204275964334081> February 8, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/GeorgeMagner/statuses/432204275964334081> 
5.38pm GMT 

37 min Now Brown does well to take a high kick in the air, and Weir tackles 
him before he’s even caught the ball, let alone landed. Penalty, and Weir has 
earned the opprobrium of the away fans.

5.37pm GMT 

36 min Weir does well to spin out of two tackles on the England 10m line. 
Laidlaw looks to snipe but then when it comes back to Weir he puts a poor kick 
up into the 22 and Nowell calls the mark.

5.35pm GMT 

35 min Nowell concedes a penalty just inside his own half for holding on. 
Laidlaw will kick from tight to the line.

5.34pm GMT 

34 min Quick lineout from Scotland and quick thinking from Weir. He puts a 
deep cross-kick in for Lamont to chase, knowing it’ll hold up in the mud. It 
does, but not enough and England have a lineout on their own 22.

5.33pm GMT 

33 min England are keeping it tight and carrying well once again. Scotland’s 
defence looks very fragile when that happens. Oh I say that, but now Burrell 
knocks on.

5.31pm GMT 

31 min Going back to the try, Burrell did beat his man in a one-on-one tackle. 
It was a poor miss by the defender, but Burrell has steamrolled many an 
opponent this season.

5.30pm GMT 

30 min Vunipola takes a high ball on the touchline very well but is tackled 
into touch.

5.28pm GMT 

Penalty (Farrell) Scotland 0-13 England

Easy it was.

5.28pm GMT 

28 min The lineout is overthrown and England go out to the left, where May 
steps inside. England get the penalty as Scotland go off their feet at the 
ruck. Farrell stabs the ball through but there’s nothing on, so back we go for 
what should be an easy three points under the posts, 10m out.

5.26pm GMT 

27 min After a couple of minutes of nothing, Care finds touch inside the 
Scotland 22 on the right.

5.25pm GMT 

25 min Denton takes at the back of the scrum and carries well again. A couple 
of phases and Denton has it on the left and again it’s a good carry from the 
impressive number 8. Stuart Hogg then knocks the ball over the top for a 
lineout to England just outside their own 22.

5.23pm GMT 

24 min That was a disgusting mess. Scotland get the penalty but no idea why. 
There’s no purchase on the ground and it ends with just a bunch of bodies 
flopped everywhere.

5.22pm GMT 

23 min A scrum on this pitch could take some time.

5.21pm GMT 

21 min Here come England again, carrying well down the left and consistently 
breaking the gainline. It comes inside for Twelvetrees and he steps, but then 
Farrell’s pass is too firm for Burrell, who knocks on as he looked to go 
through.
 England fans before the game. All we say is don't judge other English people 
for it. Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 5.23pm GMT

5.20pm GMT 

Missed penalty (Farrell)

It’s firmly struck but drifts to the left.

5.19pm GMT 

19 min England’s backs get a rare glimpse of the ball. Brown is tackled and 
Lamont boots it out of the ruck from the England side. It’ll be another shot at 
goal for Farrell from about 38m on the right.

5.18pm GMT 

18 min Seymour dances through a gap in midfield to cross the 10m line. Weir 
then puts a poor kick into the arms of May, who kicks into the Scotland 22 and 
Weir’s return kick goes into touch still inside his own half.

5.17pm GMT 

Missed penalty (Laidlaw)

Hmm that was gettable. It hits the post though.

5.16pm GMT 

17 min From the kick off May immediately concedes a penlaty. 15m in from the 
right, 30m out, and Laidlaw will kick at goal again.

5.16pm GMT 

Conversion (Farrell) Scotland 0-10 England

From just to the right of the posts Farrell strikes this one much more cleanly.

5.15pm GMT 

Try! (Burrell) Scotland 0-8 England

Robshaw takes the lineout and here comes the maul. It goes down but Nowell’s 
dummy run sells the defence and Burrell takes it, bursting through and 
stretching over. Two tries in two for the Saints man.

5.14pm GMT 

13 min England get a penalty at a maul between halfway and then Scottish 10m 
line. Farrell kicks to touch inside the 22, another good kick from hand. This 
match is going to come down to whichever team is physically stronger, and 
that’s England.

5.12pm GMT 

12 min Mistake by Farrell but it’s passed back to Twelvetrees who clears well. 
Both sides are playing the conditions, which is a polite euphemism for the 
standard of the start of this match.
 England's Billy Vunipola is tackled by Scotland's Ryan Grant. Photograph: 
Dave Thompson/PA 
Updated at 5.22pm GMT

5.11pm GMT 

11 min Weir and Care exchange kicks. Laidlaw then sends one up, which Hogg 
takes unchallenged only to be driven back a couple of metres in the tackle.

5.09pm GMT 

Missed penalty (Laidlaw)

Catches the wind and goes across the face of goal.

5.09pm GMT 

9 min Penalty to Scotland against Hartley for coming in at the side of a ruck. 
It’s on Scotland’s right-hand touchline, about 30m out.

5.08pm GMT 

7 min Good take and carry from a high ball by Denton. It’s very slow and 
stodgy, so Weir fires a good low kick across field. The pitch is so bad that 
the ball nearly holds up on the floor for the chasing Seymour.

5.06pm GMT 

Drop goal (Care) Scotland 0-3 England

Wood takes the lineout ball but the maul is going nowhere. Care takes it at 
the back, steps out the way and fires it over under no pressure.

5.05pm GMT 

5 min Twelvetrees knocks on as he looks to step on the Scotland 10m line. 
Scotland clear as advantage is called over and Brown carries it back up towards 
halfway. After two phases Moray Low fails to roll away and Farrell, tight to 
the touchline, prods it up to the 22.

5.04pm GMT 

Missed penalty (Farrell)

Oh dear. Faz’s back foot gives way on the disgraceful pitch and he hooks it 
wide.

5.03pm GMT 

3 min Free kick to England and it’s hoisted high by Farrell. Good chase from 
Vunipola who taps back and Denton is penalised for offside. Penalty to England 
in front of the posts, 35m out.

5.02pm GMT 

2 min Farrell pokes one over the top and it bounces up for Hogg, who takes 
well. He kicks to Nowell, who passes inside to Farrell. The number 10 is 
carried into touch.

5.01pm GMT 

1 min Scotland kick off to what sounds like a great atmosphere in Edinburgh. 
Care clears and Denton charges through a tackle. It’s passed back to Weir, who 
looks to cross kick but puts it out on the full. England lineout just inside 
their own half and Lawes takes it.

4.59pm GMT 

Another prediction

“Evening Dan,” begins Simon McMahon. “Close? Scotland by 40. Want some of my 
whisky?”

Yes. It sounds fantastic.

4.54pm GMT 

The players are entering the pitch

Yes entering. As in sinking into. England are getting heavily booed.
 The Calcutta Cup stands on a rare section of grass on the Murrayfield pitch. 
Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
Updated at 5.21pm GMT

4.53pm GMT 

Great news

It’s absolutely peeing it down there. This does not bode well at all. The 
worm-infested pitch is already looking like the kind of amateur’s field I 
played on in my school days and will almost certainly end up being a disgusting 
mud bath within the first ten minutes.

4.48pm GMT 

Adam Park, who was so, so close to nailing the Ireland v Wales score with his 
prediction, goes with one I can get behind for this match.
Adam Park (@adammpark) 
@DanLucas86 <https://twitter.com/DanLucas86> ok got the wind in my sails now. 
England to bounce back from last week, though conditions are bad. 2 tries in 
it, 15 - 6.
 <https://twitter.com/adammpark/statuses/432193259876536321> February 8, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/adammpark/statuses/432193259876536321> 
4.39pm GMT 

Right, well the Ireland v Wales game was deeply disappointing; a technically 
excellent snoozefest. Does England v Scotland fill you with confidence of 
something more enthralling, urgent and engaging? No, me neither. But then it 
couldn’t be worse, could it?

11.40am GMT 

Team news

Scotland : 15-Stuart Hogg, 14-Tommy Seymour, 13-Alex Dunbar, 12-Matt Scott, 
11-Sean Lamont, 10-Duncan Weir, 9-Greig Laidlaw; 1-Ryan Grant, 2-Ross Ford, 
3-Moray Low, 4-Tim Swinson, 5-Jim Hamilton, 6-Ryan Wilson, 7-Chris Fusaro, 8- 
David Denton

Replacements: 16-Scott Lawson, 17-Alasdair Dickinson, 18-Geoff Cross, 19-Jonny 
Gray, 20-Johnnie Beattie, 21-Chris Cusiter, 22-Duncan Taylor, 23-Max Evans

England : 15-Mike Brown, 14-Jack Nowell, 13-Luther Burrell, 12-Billy 
Twelvetrees, 11-Jonny May, 10-Owen Farrell, 9-Danny Care;-; 1-Joe Marler. 
2-Dylan Hartley, 3-Dan Cole, 4-Joe Launchbury, 5-Courtney Lawes, 6-Tom Wood, 
7-Chris Robshaw (captain), 8-Billy Vunipola

Replacements: 16-Tom Youngs, 17-Mako Vunipola, 18-Henry Thomas, 19-Dave 
Attwood, 20-Ben Morgan, 21-Lee Dickson 22-Brad Barritt, 23-Alex Goode.

11.38am GMT 

Preamble

Afternoon folks. Welcome to part two of what could be one of the great 
sporting weekends of 2014. We’ve just had Ireland v Wales, where [insert what 
happened here as I’m writing this earlier this morning, you know, to save 
time]. Now we have the old/auld rivalry renewed, the Calcutta Cup match between 
Scotland and England.

The Scots are looking for a much-improved performance from last weekend, when 
they were honest and solid but lacked penetration and got beaten up at the 
lineout and breakdown. They have a potentially decent back line with several 
talented players and if – and this is a big if, given it’s yet to happen – they 
click then there’s the potential for them to do real damage.

For that to happen though they’ll have to deal with England’s ball carriers. 
Courtney Lawes and Billy Vunipola were outstanding for England in Paris, and 
England’s defeat was largely self-inflicted. Regardless of what he says, Stuart 
Lancaster c*cked the substitutions up, especially when he took Dylan Hartley 
off on the hour as he seems to do in every match. For all Tom Youngs’ 
ball-carrying ability, he can neither hook nor throw and is a liability in the 
set piece as we saw in the lead-up to France’s winning try. Lancaster says 
there is no science to his substitutions, but they are beginning to feel 
prescribed.

England should win this, but Murrayfield is a nasty place to go and try to 
win. Expect this to be close.

5.07pm GMT 

Dan will be here shortly.

Updated at 9.22am GMT
 