
Scott Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> 
says he doesn’t intend to ask his predecessor Joe Hockey whether he entered an 
agreement with the Western Australian government in the Bell Group controversy 
that would have cost the federal government hundreds of millions.


The treasurer told reporters in Canberra on Wednesday that he wouldn’t seek 
particulars from Hockey, who is now Australia’s ambassador in Washington, 
because he didn’t believe there were questions to answer.

“I don’t think there is any issue. The case was prosecuted successfully, the 
Australian Taxation Office prosecuted the case,” Morrison told reporters.

Senate votes down 15% backpacker tax after passing ABCC bill – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/30/malcolm-tunbull-george-brandis-bill-shorten-nick-xenophon-building-watchdog-politics-live>
“The proof is in the pudding. The case was prosecuted and won. It was 
prosecuted by the ATO. I think the government’s actions speak louder than 
others’ words.”

The Senate on Tuesday night set up an inquiry into the Bell Group controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/george-brandis-to-face-inquiry-into-actions-over-bell-group-scandal>
. The new inquiry will call two government ministers, the attorney general, 
George Brandis, and the finance minister, Mathias Cormann, to give evidence.

The investigation will examine conflicting accounts over whether or not there 
was a deal between the federal and West Australian governments in 2015 – when 
Hockey was treasurer – which would have cost the Australian Taxation Office 
$300m.

As well as examining “the nature and scope of any agreement reached by the 
commonwealth and Western Australian governments in relation to the distribution 
of proceeds” of the Bell Group liquidation, the new inquiry will also examine 
the attorney general’s actions in relation to the former solicitor general, 
Justin Gleeson.

The terms of the motion passed by the Senate require the committee to examine 
“any direction or instruction given by the attorney general to the solicitor 
general, either directly or through his office or department, in relation to 
the conduct of litigation concerning the proceeds”.

Four questions George Brandis's statement to parliament did not answer | 
Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/four-questions-george-brandiss-statement-to-parliament-did-not-answer>
The committee will also explore whether there is any connection between the 
Bell case and a controversial direction to the solicitor general issued by 
Brandis subsequently.

The legal services direction curtailed Gleeson’s capacity to provide 
independent advice, prompting a spectacular public blow-up between Australia’s 
first and second law officers,which culminated in Gleeson quitting his post. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/solicitor-general-justin-gleeson-quits-over-broken-relationship--george-brandis>

The controversy was kicked off by a report in the West Australian last Friday 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/wa/a/33318001/1-billion-bell-group-bombshell/#page1>
 that alleged Brandis instructed Gleeson not to run a particular argument in 
the high court when a creditor of the collapsed Bell Group, which is associated 
with the controversial businessman Alan Bond, and its liquidator, challenged 
the constitutionality of a Western Australian law to take control of the 
group’s $1.8bn.

Hockey, thus far, has declined to comment.
 