
The treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, has dismissed 
claims of an eventual $7bn yearly budget boost from Labor’s negative gearing 
package as “a unicorn”, implicitly casting doubt on estimates by the 
independent parliamentary budget office.

Morrison conducted a media blitz on Thursday, a day after a National Press 
Club address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/17/four-things-we-learnt-from-scott-morrisons-first-speech-to-the-national-press-club>
 in which he called for curbs on new spending but also left the door open to 
some changes to negative gearing in the Coalition’s yet-to-be-decided tax 
package.

Labor has promised to target negative gearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/labor-promises-to-cut-negative-gearing-and-capital-gains-tax-concessions>
, which allows people to use their net losses on investment properties as tax 
deductions against their other income.

Labor promises to cut negative gearing and capital gains tax concessions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/labor-promises-to-cut-negative-gearing-and-capital-gains-tax-concessions>
The opposition says the parliamentary budget office has found its policy to 
restrict the practice to new homes only, and halve the capital gains tax 
discount, would improve the budget by $31.1bn over a decade. However, just 
$565m of this would occur in the current four-year budget period because houses 
currently owned would be spared from the impact.

Labor’s shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said on Thursday that the costings – 
which the party did not release – indicated the “structural reform” would 
deliver $7bn to the budget bottom line in 2025-26 and “this will continue to 
grow”.

In an interview with the ABC’s AM program, Morrison said he had criticised the 
Labor policy because he thought it would “penalise ordinary mum and dad 
investors who will get crowded out of their negative gearing opportunities by 
those on high incomes”.

When the presenter, Michael Brissenden, said the policy was projected to save 
$7bn a year after 10 years, Morrison replied: “That’s a unicorn.”

The treasurer preferred to focus on the four-year budget period. “I’ve heard 
this ‘over 10 years’ and ‘over 15 years’ and all the rest of it,” he said. “It 
raises $565m after you’ve taken in the costs of implementing it and that does 
not cover one month’s interest bill.”

Morrison continued the mythical creature theme when disputing the $100bn 
estimate of the total budget boost over 10 years from Labor’s savings and 
revenue measures, including changes to superannuation and multinational tax 
arrangements, increases to tobacco tax and the abolition of the Coalition’s 
emissions reduction fund.

“They are selling a unicorn to the Australian people – higher taxes for higher 
spending,” he said.


Four things we learnt from Scott Morrison's first speech to the National Press 
Club | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/17/four-things-we-learnt-from-scott-morrisons-first-speech-to-the-national-press-club>
Bowen said the savings from the negative gearing and capital gains package, 
beginning in July 2017, would start slowly because his party had made “the 
prudent choice not to change the rules for current property investments”.

He said Morrison and the Liberal party should “stop the attacks on the 
parliamentary budget office” – an entity that Malcolm Turnbull hadcalled for in 
his budget reply speech 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;db=CHAMBER;id=chamber%2Fhansardr%2F2009-05-14%2F0177;query=Id%3A%22chamber%2Fhansardr%2F2009-05-14%2F0000%22>
 when he was the opposition leader in 2009.

At the time, Turnbull said an independent body modelled on the American 
congressional budget office “would contribute greatly to a better-informed 
debate about fiscal policy alternatives and the consequences of different 
choices and trade-offs”.

Bowen said: “There is no more independent, credible and professional costings 
agency in Australia ... Now, apparently, they’re producing ‘unicorns’.”

The shadow assistant treasurer, Andrew Leigh, mocked the treasurer’s comments 
in a press release titled: “Labor applauds Morrison’s strong anti-unicorn 
trafficking stance.”

Leigh said the “hard line on mythical creatures” was “entirely consistent with 
this Liberal government’s fantasy approach to budgeting”.

Apart from his ABC interview, Morrison also spoke to the Nine Network’s Today 
program, the Seven Network’s Sunrise program and 2GB radio’s breakfast show.

He sought to defend the government’s handling of the goods and services tax 
issue, saying the changes were ruled out after months of debate because
modelling showed the policy “didn’t stack up” economically 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/treasurys-gst-modelling-shows-rise-to-15-would-not-improve-growth>
.

Morrison said pressing ahead with an increase to the GST was not “some litmus 
test of tax testosterone” and the government would not “put some hairy-chested 
reform in because we’re looking for some medal”.

He had a challenging exchange with the conservative broadcaster Alan Jones 
<http://www.2gb.com/article/alan-jones-scott-morrison-8>, who accused the 
treasurer of loading up his National Press Club speech with “cliches and 
slogans”.

Turnbull says Labor's negative gearing plan harms 'average' earners as GST 
ruled out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/turnbull-says-labors-negative-gearing-plan-harms-average-earners-as-gst-ruled-out>
Jones opened by asking: “Forgive me for asking a simple question ... what on 
earth was it about? You said absolutely nothing.”

Morrison replied that the speech was “about the fact that our economy is 
strong at the moment and Australia is the best place in the world to be at the 
moment in these very difficult global economic times”.

“The way to ensure that continues is to keep spending under control and keep 
taxes low; that’s the way forward,” Morrison said.

“I’m not going to try to sell the Australian public a unicorn, Alan, and say 
that there’s really easy solutions here. You’ve just got to keep going at it, 
day in, day out, and that’s what we’re doing.”

Jones complained that Morrison had been treasurer for five months and “and we 
still don’t know what you’re doing on expenditure, we still don’t know what 
you’re doing on tax”.

Morrison countered that the broadcaster “mustn’t have read the Myefo statement 
last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/myefo-scott-morrison-says-budget-has-blown-out-by-26bn-in-four-years>
 where we announced billions of savings”, including awelfare debt crackdown 
measure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/16/myefo-government-defends-welfare-fraud-savings-in-economic-outlook>
 that he thought Jones would like.
 