
The legislation on asylum seekers that immigration minister Scott Morrison 
pushed through the Senate last week, granting him evenwider powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/05/senate-gives-scott-morrison-unchecked-control-over-asylum-seekers-lives>
, is not the only area in which he is seeking to extend and concentrate his 
influence over the lives of vulnerable people.

The Australian Citizenship and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2014 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Bills_LEGislation/Bills_Search_Results/Result?bId=r5181>
 is yet another attempt by Morrison to give himself and his department massive, 
largely unchecked power to control individuals’ futures. Most of the affected 
aren’t asylum seekers but may include citizens undergoing drug rehabilitation 
or suffering from a mental illness. They face being potentially blocked or 
losing Australian citizenship. The billoutlines 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22legislation%2Fems%2Fr5181_ems_9af0a8b7-ba3c-4913-9f98-0bd13f772fc1%22>
 the various ways in which the minister can deny, block or rescind citizenship 
for any individual, former asylum seeker or not, who he believes obtained this 
privilege dishonestly.

The bill aims to change the definition of Australian citizenship. The minister 
already has the power to sever visas but this goes further to potentially 
affect thousands of Australian citizens who are living productive lives today. 
Morrison’smoves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/08/the-argument-is-over-morrisons-amendments-show-he-has-no-genuine-concern-for-asylum-seekers>
 against asylum seekers aim to drop the established norms of natural justice. 
The citizenship bill continues this appalling trend where the minister and his 
department are deemed more knowledgable than independent oversight. It’s a 
change that must be rejected though the public response has so far been almost 
non-existent.

The bill aims to grant the minister powers to determine an individual’s “good 
character”. The Department of Immigration and Border Protection explains in its
submission 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Legal_and_Constitutional_Affairs/Australian_Citizenship/Submissions>
 to a Senate committee why the government believes the law should change: “As 
an elected member of parliament and minister of the Crown, the minister has the 
privilege of representing the Australian community and has gained a particular 
insight into the community standards and values.”

These “values” may be news to the thousands of asylum seekers languishing in 
horrific conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/05/-sp-nauru-scarcest-commodity-freedom-refugees-residents>
 on Nauru and Manus Island, forced to suffer months and years of detention for 
the “crime” of legally arriving by boat.

Another section of the submission demands “setting aside” decisions of the 
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) “concerning character and identity if it 
would be in the public interest to do so.” The idea that a minister, Morrison 
or somebody else from any political party, is better placed to decide on 
character is an absurd proposition that denies recent history of a mostly 
successful process. The AAT isn’t a perfect body, but for the immigration 
department to state that its position is null and void shows contempt for any 
independent review. This obsession with centralising power guarantees secrecy 
and grave errors.

Despite the government claiming that it would only ignore the AAT in cases 
where decisions fall outside community expectations and standards, the Law 
Council of Australia opposes the proposal, saying it “undermines the 
independent review process which is provided by the AAT.”

The Law Council’s submission 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=cebb7f41-76a2-462a-8bb9-5d4221e9db75&subId=301723>
 is concise and powerful. It praises the AAT as “generally designed to promote 
good decision-making and provide individuals affected by adverse decisions with 
a relatively straight-forward, inexpensive mechanism by which to seek review.” 
This echoes Morrison’s aim to restrict the ability of individuals to challenge 
rejection by his department.

The Law Council also condemns the proposal that the department could make 
decisions on citizenship “in the public interest.” It argues that such a term 
“should be defined and limited to decisions affecting the Australian economy, 
affecting Australia’s relations with other countries, concerning national 
security or concerning major political controversies.”

Another disturbing section of the bill revolves around granting the minister 
the right to determine “fraud” or “misrepresentation” of an Australian citizen, 
including children, and then potentially revoking that person’s papers. 
Crucially, as the Law Council details, “this is regardless of whether the 
person was convicted of an offence in relation to the fraud or 
misrepresentation.” Australia would be a country where a minister determines 
guilt “outside of any criminal proceedings.” The presumption of innocence is 
trashed in this bill.

Melbourne-based Carina Ford <http://www.carinafordlawyers.com/>, an accredited 
immigration law specialist who works in this area, says that the bill revolves 
around a belief that, “the executive thinks that they’re in a better position 
to make decisions than tribunals.”

“I have concerns with a minister having the power to overrule AAT tribunal 
decisions. Australia has a system of separation of powers and it’s problematic 
when a minister can overrule it. This government has been doing that in terms 
of citizenship and character. We should have faith in our tribunals, they are 
able to make the right decisions.”

Ford argues that the Abbott government’s platform of securing Australia’s 
borders partly explain this bill. She worries that unjust decisions are 
assured. These are “draconian powers if somebody has provided a fraudulent 
document. It will be very difficult to get citizenship, even if it may have 
been 10-15 years ago for a person who has been paying tax and living safely 
here. A decision made when you’re 18 may come and bite you when you’re 28.”

Morrison’s thirst for power follows a global trend. In Britain the current 
issues of immigration and citizenship are inexorably tied to the rise of Ukip 
and prime minister David Cameron’s quest totoughen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/28/david-cameron-under-fire-migrants-plan>
 his country’s stance against European citizens. Across Europe the rhetoric 
against immigrants isgrowing 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/david-cameron/10725947/David-Cameron-facing-calls-to-expel-jobless-EU-migrants.html>
, fuelling public insecurity about jobs and the economy. The Cameron government 
has made obtaining citizenshipmuch harder 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/pa/article-2840260/More-migrants-given-UK-citizenship.html>
.

In America, the power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/16/ghost-town-detainees-inside-the-us-immigration-detention-system>
 of the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement is staggering, affecting the 
options of millions of current and future citizens. Scapegoating for simply 
being immigrants isroutine 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/opinions/2014/12/obama-executive-actionimmigrationundocumentedimmigrants.html>
 and lacks any serious accountability mechanism.

Morrison’s push to grant himself even larger influence should be resisted for 
the simple reason that his department proudly avoidsscrutiny 
<http://insidestory.org.au/the-abbott-governments-war-on-transparency>. The 
Abbott government, so fond of excluding critics in its Team Australia campaign, 
should not be trusted to decide the “good character” of vulnerable citizens.
 