
Some sort of order was restored to world rugby when Japan discovered that 
inflicting two dollops of embarrassment on the old order in five days was just 
beyond them. Three tries in 13 second-half minutes sank their hopes and a 
couple more, when the game was already lost, inflicted almost unnecessary 
cruelty.

Australia v Fiji: Rugby World Cup 2015 – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/sep/23/australia-v-fiji-rugby-world-cup-2015-live>
In the game and only five points down at half-time, Japan lost their 
inspiration and try-scoring No8, Amanaki Lelei Mafi, five minutes later. That 
was probably the point when not only Scotland but Samoa and South Africa, too, 
began to breathe more easily.

Had Japan gone on to repeat their win against South Africa last Saturday, two 
of the three would have been contemplating packing their bags before the 
quarter-finals. As it is, Pool B is wide open again and Scotland even had time 
to rest their key players before their four-day turn-around and the game 
against the USA.

“I said we wouldn’t make it an excuse, so I won’t,” said the Japan coach, 
Eddie Jones, when asked about the miserly turnaround time. However, the 
Australian then went on to suggest a minimum six days between games.

“Scotland were just too good for us in that second half. They scored 33 points 
to our zero, but we’re not using that [fatigue] as an excuse. We had to be 
better than we were today. We have to accept it and suck it up. As you can see 
we play a high energy game, we need early ball and we weren’t great at the 
breakdown.”

For a master of the barbed compliment Jones was straightforwardly polite about 
Scotland, although he doubted if South Africa would make life easy for Vern 
Cotter’s side. He added: “I was really impressed with Scotland and their 
ability to stick in the game. There were times when I thought we really had 
them but they regathered well.”

Just in case Scotland had not being paying attention to the events of the past 
week, Kingsholm ran snippets from last Saturday’s events in Brighton to show 
them what to expect. Fourteen minutes into the game they got a taste of the 
real thing when the full-back Ayumu Goromaru floated a penalty into the 
Gloucester corner – rather than into the in-goal area as Scotland’s full-back, 
Stuart Hogg, was keen to suggest.

Japan then went through one of those clever, all-bits-moving lineout drills 
designed by Steve Borthwick, the former England captain, and Mafi bundled his 
way over conveniently close to the post.

Against that Greig Laidlaw – the Scotland captain and hometown favourite with 
Gloucester fans in the Shed – was piling on the points following a glut of 
Japanese errors. The formula was simple: Laidlaw would hoist a high ball, 
Japan, more often than not their captain, Michael Leitch, would fumble into 
conceding a penalty and Scotland’s captain would kick the points.

He got to 12 points by half-time as Japan followed a near-perfect performance 
in Brighton with something more shoddy. It could have been worse had the Scots 
taken advantage of the wing Kotaro Matsushima’s 10 minutes in the sin-bin for 
something spotted by the referee John Lacey, but which did not register too 
highly on rugby’s Richter scale of sins.

Matsushima left and returned with the score at 12-7 and the game drifting past 
the 30-minute mark when Jones had forecast that Japanese fitness would begin to 
make a difference. Instead Mafi left on a stretcher and Japanese legs and luck 
started to run out. First Mafi, a player who two years ago was playing second 
division university rugby and has only five top league games to his name, left 
on a stretcher and the dam broke.

Scotland and Tommy Seymour were denied either side of half-time by spectacular 
tackles from Goromaru and the combined efforts of the pack, but then quick 
hands and a remarkable recovery from John Hardie, who passed backwards as he 
was being hustled into touch, but still managed to be on hand for the scoring 
pass, made amends.

Eight minutes later Mark Bennett made the most of a searing break from Hogg 
before Seymour intercepted from 80 metres to run behind the Japan posts. At 
31-10 the game was over but Bennett then turned what was left of the Japanese 
defence inside-out before Finn Russell stepped from outside to in.

With Laidlaw converting four of the tries to take 20 points from the game, 
Scotland were home and dry, their coach insisting that, while the win was not 
convincing, nothing done by Japan in Brighton had changed the Scottish 
preparations.

Cotter said: “We’ve been watching for the last two and a half months and we 
weren’t surprised by their tenacity. Did we change? No, they just reinforced 
what we thought. We’re happy to get a win, happy to get those second-half tries 
and happy to get started. Watching everyone else play has been a little 
nerve-racking for the players.”

Referee J Lacey (Ire) Att 14,354
 