
The Scottish charity Social Bite, which has attracted celebrity support from 
the Oscar winners George Clooney and Leonardo DiCaprio, has announced plans to 
build a row of low-cost, eco-friendly homes to help end thevicious cycle of 
homelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/06/homelessness-rough-sleepers-interviews-westminster-london>
.

The social enterprise, which runs a chain of sandwich shops across Scotland 
that train and employ homeless staff, is planning to construct 10 purpose-built 
houses in Granton, in the north ofEdinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh>, in partnership with the council.

About 20 residents will stay in the supervised “village” environment – with 
access to counselling, addiction therapy and budgeting advice – for up to a 
year before moving on to more permanent accommodation.

Social Bite’s founder, Josh Littlejohn, said that, since starting the 
enterprise more than four years ago, he had come to realise that providing job 
opportunities only met one of homeless people’s multiple needs.

By providing an alternative to the “isolating” bed and breakfast accommodation 
on offer, which can cost Edinburgh city council up to £17,155 a person 
annually, the Social Bite Village will offer a more structured way for people 
to reintegrate into residential living, as well as saving the taxpayer money.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fscottish-homelessness-charity-social-bite-village-low-cost-eco-homes-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6d973243b3a46f4c2ce8e5f25bb885d1e3d83df%2F0_89_4580_2748%2F4580.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scottish%20homelessness%20charity%20plans%20village%20of%20low-cost%20eco%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fscottish-homelessness-charity-social-bite-village-low-cost-eco-homes-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scottish%20homelessness%20charity%20plans%20village%20of%20low-cost%20eco%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fscottish-homelessness-charity-social-bite-village-low-cost-eco-homes-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6d973243b3a46f4c2ce8e5f25bb885d1e3d83df%2F0_89_4580_2748%2F4580.jpg>
 Leonardo DiCaprio at Social Bite’s restaurant Home in Edinburgh this month. 
Photograph: Jeff Holmes/Getty Images 
Littlejohn said: “The Social Bite Village plan hopes to create a full-circle 
solution to the issue of homelessness – from housing to support to employment. 
I’m not for a minute saying that Social Bite alone will eradicate homelessness 
or anywhere close to that. But we can create a blueprint.”

The homes, which will cost about £30,000 each to construct, are based on the 
highly insulated modular NestHouse developed by the designer Jonathan Avery and 
his Linlithgow-based company Tiny HouseScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. Each energy-efficient dwelling will 
contain two bedrooms, a lounge area and a small kitchen, as well as a 
wood-burning fire.

Construction is scheduled to begin in early 2017, with the first residents 
moving in by the summer, with Social Bite also aiming to provide them with 
employment in the company’s other businesses.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-visits-homeless-charity-in-edinburgh-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20visits%20homeless%20charity%20in%20Edinburgh%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-visits-homeless-charity-in-edinburgh-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20visits%20homeless%20charity%20in%20Edinburgh%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-visits-homeless-charity-in-edinburgh-video&media=>
Leonardo DiCaprio visits homeless charity in Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/17/leonardo-dicaprio-visits-homeless-charity-in-edinburgh-video>
Founded in 2012, the Social Bite sandwich chain operates a “suspended” coffee 
and food programme – where customers can pay for a hot drink or food for a 
homeless person to have later. A quarter of its workforce were once homeless.

The company recently teamed up with the Edinburgh restaurant Maison Bleue to 
open a new venue, Home, which last weekhosted DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/17/leonardo-dicaprio-has-lunch-with-fan-in-edinburgh>
.

In 2015, George Clooney accepted a similar invitation to visit the social 
enterprise, where he avoided the more traditionally Scottish haggis sandwich 
filling in favour of an avocado, pesto and pepper wrap.

A number of Scottish business leaders are backing the Social Bite Village and 
will take part in a CEO sleep-out on 15 December in Edinburgh to kickstart ta 
campaign to raise the £500,000 needed to set up the project.

Donations can be made at www.justgiving.com/fundraising/socialbitevillage 
<http://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/socialbitevillage>.
 