
Ministers should scrap strict immigration rules that risk disqualifying EU 
citizens such as stay-at-home parents and students from securing permanent 
residency in the UK if they have not taken out private health insurance, 
according to a backbench Tory MP.


Sarah Wollaston <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sarah-wollaston>, the MP 
for Totnes, said she would be supporting a petition that calls for the removal 
of the little-known requirement, after several EU citizens applied to the Home 
Office post-Brexit and discovered they should have obtained health insurance 
when not working.

Spanish UK resident fears insurance loophole will force her to leave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/30/spanish-uk-resident-fears-insurance-loophole-will-force-her-to-leave>
The MP said a new “simple, efficient and rapid” immigration registration 
process for the 3 million EU citizens in the UK was needed as soon as possible 
to end the “bureaucratic nightmare” they faced.

She added it was “completely unacceptable” that EU citizens living in the UK 
were being left in limbo, and said their situation, and that of Britons inEurope
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, should be the “number one 
priority” in Brexit negotiations after Theresa May triggers article 50.

The petition backed by Wollaston was launched by the EU citizen Claudia Holmes 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/172343> and has so far been signed by 
more than 5,000 people. It also calls for an automatic right to remain for all 
spouses and civil partners of Britons and of UK servicemen and women.

 The petition calls for the removal of “comprehensive sickness insurance as 
permanent residency requirement for EU/European Economic Area students, 
homemakers, carers, retired, and disabled people or applicants self-sufficient 
through other income, including their non-EEA spouses/civil partners”.

EU citizens are currently entitled to live in the UK under European law, but 
once the UK leaves Europe, almost all rights apart from the right to own 
property or a business, which are protected under international law, will need 
to be reasserted.


The Home Office has repeatedly said since the referendum that the status of EU 
citizens living in the UK has not changed, and Theresa May says she is keen to 
clarify their long-term residency rights at the same time as negotiating with 
the EU over the rights of UK citizens living in the other 27 member states.

Despite that, the Home Office has been inundated with applications for 
permanent residency from EU citizens who fear that their rights may otherwise 
be eroded. The latest figures available show that more than 100,000 cases are 
currently being processed.

Wollaston said the Home Office needed to come up with a new system for 
handling applications. “They need to have something that is very quick, 
efficient and low cost. It is completely untenable that [the current permanent 
residency process for non-EU citizens] could be the process that would be in 
place for EU citizens.

“It has to be something simple, rapid in place and that’s before you get to 
the morality of it. There are real people being caught up in this. It is 
totally unacceptable. This is something they are not in any way to blame for 
and it is up to politicians to put themselves in people’s shoes and see the 
anxiety it is causing and do something about it.”

She said one of her constituents, a British man who did not want to be named, 
had discovered that his EU wife of 30 years had been told by the Home Office 
that she was in the country unlawfully because she had never been in full-time 
employment.

He was told by the Home Office that his wife, originally from the Netherlands, 
would have to leave the country and apply for permission to live in the UK from 
abroad even though she has spent the past 30 years in the UK, bringing up their 
children, studying and working freelance.

Wollaston said no one expected the man’s wife to be kicked out of the country, 
but thousands of EU citizens panicked into applying for permanent residency 
were being made to feel like second-class citizens.

About 30% of the current applications for permanent residency are failing and 
the Guardian has already uncovered several instances of EU citizens married to 
Britons who are being failed for simple bureaucratic reasons.

Earlier this week, the Guardian reported that the Dutch-born software 
developer Monique Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/dutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years>
, who has been in the country for 24 years, had been told to make preparations 
to leave the UK because her application process failed after she included a 
solicitor-certified copy of her Dutch passport with her paperwork instead of an 
original.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fscrap-insurance-rule-stay-at-home-parents-eu-tory-mp-sarah-wollaston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e6e2a691b02eb03205476cb5b54ecb24777c5c%2F950_535_1786_1072%2F1786.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scrap%20insurance%20rule%20for%20stay-at-home%20parents%20from%20EU%2C%20says%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fscrap-insurance-rule-stay-at-home-parents-eu-tory-mp-sarah-wollaston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scrap%20insurance%20rule%20for%20stay-at-home%20parents%20from%20EU%2C%20says%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fscrap-insurance-rule-stay-at-home-parents-eu-tory-mp-sarah-wollaston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e6e2a691b02eb03205476cb5b54ecb24777c5c%2F950_535_1786_1072%2F1786.jpg>
 Monique Hawkins. Photograph: Handout 
Others have since contacted the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/german-neuroscientist-told-to-leave-uk-residency-application-rejected-monique-hawkins>
 to report that they also received rejection and “prepare to leave” letters.

The Italian Francesca Gernone, a partner in an architectural practice in 
London who has been in the UK for 22 years, had her application for permanent 
residency rejected two weeks ago. “I have received the exact same [prepare to 
leave] letter from the Home Office. They have obviously not changed the 
offensive phrasing from their letter yet,” she said.
 