
For Sebastian Coe, it’s been a while since he had much good news to talk 
about. In his role as IAAF president, there has been nothing but a litany of
corruption claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/sebastian-coe-iaaf-qatar-brown-envelopes-athletics>
, doping cover-ups,bruising battles with Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/17/sebastian-coe-iaaf-russia-weak-spot-decision>
 and damaging allegations that threaten his own credibility.

But now, hanging up one of his many hats and enjoying the appreciation of the 
first gathering of British Olympic sports since their Rio success, Lord Coe is 
on surer ground. After the former sports minister Hugh Robertson waselected to 
succeed him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/hugh-robertson-boa-chairman-sebastian-coe>
 as British Olympic Association chairman, Coe cuts a substantially more relaxed 
figure than he did 12 months ago at the height of the crisis that brought 
athletics to a new low. Standing down after four years in which the BOA has 
been put back on an even keel financially, cut costs and shed extraneous 
responsibilities to focus on its core mission and come home from Rio with a 
record haul of medals, Coe says it is the right time to hand the baton on to 
another former Tory MP.

Sir Hugh Robertson to replace Sebastian Coe as BOA chairman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/hugh-robertson-boa-chairman-sebastian-coe>
“I’m not a great believer in hanging around interminably,” he said of his 
decision to leave the BOA after four years as chair. “I also recognised that 
what we did in those four years would probably define the organisation for a 
long time to come.”When he agreed to chair the BOA, Coe was still basking in 
the glory of his role as London 2012 chairman and pondering a run at the 
presidency of the International Association ofAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations. “I probably would 
not have done this under normal circumstances. It’s just that this was an 
organisation I pretty much owed everything to,” he says of his decision to take 
on the role.

He credits the BOA with enabling his gold medal in Moscow in 1980 in the face 
of a boycott and opposition from Margaret Thatcher to the British team going. 
“A large part of my life was defined by Moscow. I owed them something, I really 
did,” he says.

Following the expansionist tenure of his predecessor, Lord Moynihan, Coe says 
that there was “chronic fragility” in the balance sheet when he arrived.

“We also had to break the feast to famine type cycle. I’m delighted that this 
is the first quad we’ve come out of where we’ve actually got some money in the 
bank,” he says. “It was a combination of cutting costs but also, I like to 
think, if I have any skill it’s hiring the right people.”

Coe pared back the BOA’s role, returning it to a focused mission as the 
organisation responsible for delivering British athletes to the Games in peak 
condition. He also hired Bill Sweeney, a former Puma executive, as chief 
executive, who signed a string of sponsors that have eased its financial woes. 
Relations with UK Sport, the funding agency that dispenses national lottery and 
exchequer cash to Olympic sports and helped fuel Team GB’s best haul in more 
than a century in Rio, were also restored to harmony after a spate of turf 
wars. On the debate that has bubbled away since Rio on whether the no 
compromise principles that underpinned that Olympic success have somehow gone 
too far, Coe is unequivocal.

“The elite legacy is powerful. I was in Doha to pick up the national Olympic 
committee of the year award and everyone wanted 30 seconds of our time to ask 
how on earth we do this,” he says.

If the legacy for elite sport secured by London 2012 is clear, the picture at 
the grassroots is much more mixed. Coe, like many great former athletes, falls 
back on his instinctive belief that there is a link between top-level success 
and grassroots growth. “It’s not a straightforward linear equation but I will 
always instinctively feel that Chris Hoy and Victoria Pendleton are responsible 
for one million more cyclists from 2008 to 2012.

“It won’t work in every sport. But how many more girls are now joining hockey 
clubs? I don’t need the numbers to know that is what is happening. I just speak 
to people in my own local.”

He accepts that inactivity and childhood obesity remain one of the country’s 
biggest failing but continues to maintain that the £9bn investment in the 
London Olympics did help. “The worst you can probably say about it is that we 
stemmed the flow. We were haemorrhaging.” Which is quite a long way from 
inspire a generation but perhaps more realistic.

Coe also wants to set the record straight on another topical legacy issue – the
unhappy story of the Olympic Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/sadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry>
, with its spiralling costs and hitherto problematic marriage of football and 
athletics.

“There is a little bit of retrofitting history here. You could not get in the 
door of the clubs because no one thought we were going to win this. We went to 
the clubs. West Ham were in receivership, Tottenham just didn’t want to open 
the door,” he says. “The commitment we made was a commitment we made across 
four organisations when we took that bid to Singapore and it needed to 
be honoured.”

IAAF finds no evidence Sebastian Coe knew of alleged Qatar ‘brown envelopes’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/sebastian-coe-iaaf-qatar-brown-envelopes-athletics>
Despite the bonhomie around the BOA’s offices, it is impossible to avoid 
returning to Coe’s other role as IAAF president. Ask about continuing 
investigations into payments made by the son of now disgraced former president 
Lamine Diack to Coe’sformer right-hand man Nick Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/22/iaaf-nick-davies-steps-down-leaked-email-sebastian-coe>
 and he says he just does not know, arguing the IAAF’s independent ethics 
committee is operating as exactly that.

Likewise, the recent French reports that appeared to confirm a 2014 Guardian 
story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/10/questions-for-iaaf-presidents-son-over-5m-request-to-doha-amid-2017-bid>
 that Diack’s son, Papa Massata, requested millions of dollars in payments from 
a Qatar investment company. “We have a French prosecution that is still 
underway. We’re still awaiting the outcome of the CAS [court of arbitration for 
sport] discussions of last week and we’ve still got an ethics board review,” 
Coe says.

“I have always been very clear about this. If any evidence comes to light that 
shows that any of these bids have in any way been manipulated then the answer 
is that of course we will look at them.”

But whatever pain there may yet be to come in the shark-infested waters of 
international sports politics, at home Coe can reflect on a discreet four-year 
turnaround job. The proof, he says, was in the Rio medal haul.

“I just hope that going forward, when the public expenditure rounds are 
settled and the decisions are made, that we just ponder on one thing: we are 
the best in the world at this,” he says. “There is nobody that does it better, 
there is nobody that does it with more meticulous planning. We are the envy of 
the world and you don’t cede that ground easily.”
 