
The Australian Press Council has cleared a second contentious Bill Leak 
cartoon from charges of offensiveness, ruling that his depiction of starving 
Indians trying to eat solar panels with chutney did not breach standards.

Two months ago the council also chose not to sanction Leak, that time for his 
Don Dale correctional centre cartoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/06/press-council-declines-to-sanction-the-australian-for-bill-leak-cartoon>
 that depicted an Aboriginal father holding a beer can and telling a police 
officer he could not remember his son’s name.

In December last year Leak’s solar panels cartoon sparked accusations of racism
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/14/australian-newspaper-cartoon-depicting-indians-eating-solar-panels-attacked-racist>
 for its portrayal of Indians and complaints were made to the press council.

Titled “Aid a La Mode” it was Leak’s response to the 2015 UN climate change 
conference in Paris at which it was decided to send solar panels to India.

SMH cartoon criticised as antisemitic found to breach press council standards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/19/smh-cartoon-criticised-as-antisemitic-found-to-breach-press-council-standards>
Several people in traditional Indian clothing were depicted trying to eat 
solar panels from a box marked with United Nations logos saying “It’s no good 
you can’t eat them” and another saying “Hang on, let me try them with a bit of 
mango chutney”.

An associate professor of sociology at Macquarie University Amanda Wise said 
it was “unequivocally racist” because it drew on very base stereotypes of third 
world, underdeveloped people.

Almost a year later the council has completed its adjudication and ruled that 
the cartoon did not breach its standards of practice and was an example of 
“drawing on exaggeration and absurdity to make its point”.

“While some readers may have found the cartoon offensive, the council does not 
consider that the publication failed to take reasonable steps to avoid causing 
substantial offence, distress or prejudice,” the adjudication published on 
Monday said. Accordingly the council concludes that its standards of practice 
were not breached.”


The judgment in the Don Dale case – the cartoon was published on 4 August 
after the Four Corners expose – was much swifter because it did not go to a 
full adjudication but was settled by mediation.
The Australian (@australian) 
Racist? I'll tell you what's racist, writes Bill Leak. https://t.co/y9WKNY7tPC 
<https://t.co/y9WKNY7tPC> pic.twitter.com/0gpijlss5O <https://t.co/0gpijlss5O>
 <https://twitter.com/australian/status/676862634705072128> December 15, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/australian/status/676862634705072128> 
In the Aboriginal father case the council said its decision was in the 
interests of a “free and vigorous press” and that publishing two balancing 
opinion pieces on Indigenous issues in the News Corp daily broadsheet was a 
more appropriate response.

In the solar panels case the Australian told the press council that it 
disagreed that the cartoon’s depiction of Indians was substantially offensive 
or distressing.

Australian newspaper cartoon depicting Indians eating solar panels attacked as 
racist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/14/australian-newspaper-cartoon-depicting-indians-eating-solar-panels-attacked-racist>
“It did not in any way denigrate the intellectual capacity of Indian people, 
nor their capacity to manage modern life,” the council adjudication said. 
“Instead, the cartoon denigrates the UN by ridiculing its decision to provide 
solar panels at the expense of more appropriate aid. It is not an attack on 
Indians for being poor or uneducated, but an attack on those advocating what 
the cartoonist considered to be useless aid.

“The publication also said that while the carton may have been offensive to 
some people, it was nevertheless in the public interest for the cartoon to be 
published in the wake of the Paris conference.”

In a separate development, Leak and the Australian are being investigated by 
the Human Rights Commission for breaching section 18C of the Racial 
Discrimination Act for the Don Dale cartoon.

Leak has said he was “bewildered” to be accused of racism as he believes he 
has always been “colour blind” 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-20/bill-leak-’singled-out’-for-racial-discrimination-investigation/7952590>
.

The Australian has published dozens of articles, including supportive comments 
from John Howard and Malcolm Turnbull 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/john-howard-slams-bill-leak-18c-cartoon-inquiry/news-story/8ceb9077df1bbece93c52576121dcdad>
 defending Leak and calling for 18C to be abolished.
 