
I wouldn’t normally look to the old-fashioned television soap opera for 
restrained treatment of delicate and serious issues – I’d be more likely to 
find gold dust by dragging my beard across a beach.

Soaps are so adept at drawing epic tragedy out of the mundane that even the 
mere act of popping out to the shops for some cereal can turn into a fatal love 
tryst, complete with amnesia, drowning, resurrection, and everything 
spontaneously combusting, including the cereal.

It’s been impressive, therefore, to see Home and Away 
<http://au.tv.yahoo.com/plus7/home-and-away/-/watch/27152584/Home-and-Away-Thu-16-Apr-episode-6175/>
 (Seven) not only explore the 100th anniversary of Gallipoli, but also manage a 
critique of how teenagers engage with a “legend” they feel is no longer 
relevant to them.

A school trip to the Australian War Memorial set things in motion for the 
Summer Bay gang. While the evergreen Alf (Ray Meagher) went from exhibit to 
exhibit visibly affected by his own memories of serving in Vietnam, the pupils 
of Summer Bay High school wandered round typically unimpressed, yawning at the 
glut of dates and old photographs, occasionally pausing to say something 
offensive just as Alf walked round a corner.

Seriously kids, whenever you’re about to mutter something disrespectful about 
the Anzacs, just know that Alf is going to emerge from behind a cannon. You 
would have thought they’d twig after the first two or three times: the man’s a 
moth to the candle of insensitivity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fselfies-at-australian-war-memorial-anzac-summer-bay-high%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dd63a1c144fea9abda1bb38f348eeadf5508da8%2F84_93_2182_1309%2F2182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Selfies%20at%20the%20Australian%20War%20Memorial%3F%20Shame%20on%20you%2C%20Summer%20Bay%20High&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fselfies-at-australian-war-memorial-anzac-summer-bay-high%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Selfies%20at%20the%20Australian%20War%20Memorial%3F%20Shame%20on%20you%2C%20Summer%20Bay%20High&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fselfies-at-australian-war-memorial-anzac-summer-bay-high%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dd63a1c144fea9abda1bb38f348eeadf5508da8%2F84_93_2182_1309%2F2182.jpg>
 Alf and a Summer Bay High student share a sombre moment at the Australian War 
Memorial. Photograph: Channel Seven 
Arguably the most accurate reflection of how we now engage with the past came 
as the students sat on the steps of the memorial, having a good moan about how 
boring it all was, before pausing to take a selfie. A somewhat two-dimensional 
take on Gen Y perhaps, but a uncharacteristically realistic moment for Home and 
Away.

Deadline Gallipoli: Sam Worthington on why his Anzac drama is different
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/18/deadline-gallipoli-sam-worthington-on-why-his-anzac-drama-is-different>
That a soap is exploring the ethics of commemoration is worth at least some 
praise, especially when we’re probably not far off seeing Anzac burgers in 
fast-food chains or Digger-themed selfie sticks that allow you to take mid-puke 
photographs of yourself throwing up all that “commemorating” you’ve been doing.

Home and Away’s solution to the teenage apathy was simple: give the 
disrespectful little runts a good talking to, send them back into the memorial 
a second time, then lay down a soulful pop track as, simultaneously, they all 
realise “what it’s really about”. The teachers even took their smartphones away 
and chucked them in a replica trench. Could a similar approach make the #QandA 
hashtag more bearable?

OK, so the students’ journey towards a greater cultural awareness was a little 
contrived, but what else do you expect from a soap opera? A lot less, to be 
honest.

TV returns to normal

Last week saw the final episode of Gogglebox 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/gogglebox/extra/season-1/episode-9-highlights>
(Ten), television’s own version of a selfie. Now you’ll have to suffer the 
worst of TV without the meta-buffer of other people being there to tell you 
it’s awful as you’re watching it. You might have to do something mad like 
decide it’s awful for yourself and switch off. Alternatively, get a mate to 
broadcast themselves on Periscope while they hurl abuse at their television and 
noisily eat another packet of Doritos.
 