
All of the Democratic and Democratic-aligned members of the Senate 
intelligence committee have hinted that significant information about Russian 
interference in the US presidential election remains secret and ought to be 
declassified.


The eight senators, including the incoming ranking member Mark Warner of 
Virginia, wrote to Barack Obama to request he declassify relevant intelligence 
on the election. They did not directly accuse the Russian government or 
President-elect Donald Trump, a Republican, of wrongdoing in the letter.

“We believe there is additional information concerning the Russian government 
and the US election that should be declassified and released to the public. We 
are conveying specifics through classified channels,” wrote Warner and his 
colleagues Ron Wyden of Oregon, Martin Heinrich of New Mexico, Mazie Hirono of 
Hawaii, Barbara Mikulski of Maryland and independent Angus King of Maine.

Jack Reed of Rhode Island, an honorary and non-voting member of the committee 
due to his seat as ranking member of the Senate armed services committee, also 
signed the letter, which was dated Tuesday and publicly released on Wednesday. 
No Republican joined the declassification call.

The outgoing ranking Democrat, Dianne Feinstein of California, signed the 
classified version of the letter sent to Obama.

Neither the terse letter nor discussions with sources on Capitol Hill detailed 
the particular intelligence concerning the Russians, its strength or its impact 
on the outcome of the election. Thus far, no credible evidence of vote fraud or 
electoral malfeasance exists, despite anevidence-free claim from Trump himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-scam-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton>
.


A spokesman for Wyden, Keith Chu, said the senator believed the intelligence 
needed to be declassified “immediately”, as it was in the “national interest 
that the American public should see it”.

It is understood this is the first declassification request by eight senators 
in at least twelve years.

On 7 October, the US director of national intelligence and the secretary of 
homeland security took the rare step of directly accusing Russia’s 
“senior-most” officials of ordering the breach of the Democratic National 
Committee’s digital networks. Director James Clapper and Secretary Jeh Johnson 
accused the Russians of attempting to “interfere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
” in the US election, something the Obama administration had previously 
suggested but did not allege publicly.

Putin applauds Trump win and hails new era of positive ties with US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/putin-applauds-trump-win-and-hails-new-era-of-positive-ties-with-us>
The FBI has acknowledged investigating such interference, but has reportedly 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/01/us/politics/fbi-russia-election-donald-trump.html?_r=0>
 not established any link to Trump or his campaign. Two US officials have told 
the Guardian that the FBI was reluctant to sign off on Clapper and Johnson’s 
public allegation.

Yet Harry Reid, the outgoing Democratic Senate leader, asserted 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/30/top-dems-to-fbi-spill-on-trump-s-russia-ties.html>
 without evidence in October that the FBI director, James Comey, “possess[es] 
explosive information about close ties and coordination between Donald Trump, 
his top advisers, and the Russian government”.

Unusually for any presidential nominee, and particularly for a Republican, 
Trump has exhibited a warmth toward the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, that 
has prompted a widespread expectation Trump will tilt US foreign policy toward 
Russia. Trump and Putin spoke soon after Trump’s electoral victory in a phone 
callheralded by the Kremlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/vladimir-putin-donald-trump-phone-call>
.

There was no immediate comment from the White House or Clapper’s office as to 
whether Obama would order the declassification or whether the intelligence 
agencies even support such a move.
 