
The Turnbull government’s push to rewrite the Senate voting system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/malcolm-turnbull-moves-to-overhaul-senate-voting-system-before-election>
 is likely to withstand a potential high court challenge, constitutional 
lawyers have said.

The South Australian Family First senator, Bob Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bob-day>, raised the prospect of a 
constitutional challenge against what he saw as the government writing a “death 
warrant” for micro-parties in the house of review.

Senate voting explainer: what could change when Australians go to the polls?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/23/senate-voting-explainer-what-could-change-when-australians-go-to-the-polls>
Day said the provisions – opposed by Labor – would result in a large number of 
votes being “exhausted” if a person’s top choices did not get elected.

He told the ABC this could breach the constitutional requirement 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/coaca430/xx7.html> that 
senators be directly chosen by the people of the state voting as one electorate.

The election analyst Malcolm Mackerras, who has been talking to Day and 
several other crossbench senators about the issue, said he believed the 
proposed new law “poured contempt on the constitution”.

The government argues the changes will empower voters to choose their own 
preference flows when using the simple “above the line” section of Senate 
ballot papers, but Mackerras said people who took up the comprehensive option 
of “below the line” voting would still be required to mark all candidates’ 
squares in the order of preference.

“That’s designed to intimidate people into voting above the line and it’s also 
particularly designed to stop people messing about with the order the parties 
have [for their own candidates],” Mackerras said.

“That establishes a ‘party list’ system. This is a proposal for a party-list 
system. Under a party-list system people do not directly choose their senators.”

But the constitutional lawyers George Williams and Anne Twomey said the bill 
was likely to withstand high court scrutiny.


Labor to oppose Turnbull's move to overhaul Senate voting system before 
election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/malcolm-turnbull-moves-to-overhaul-senate-voting-system-before-election>
Williams said a previous attempt to strike down the above-the-line voting 
system had not succeeded, although it was heard by a single judge.

“This is an arguable position here, but it is not one that is likely to 
succeed,” said Williams, who is the Anthony Mason professor of law at the 
University of New South Wales.


“The high court has been consistent on a range of issues in saying parliament 
has flexibility in designing the electoral system and it would be quite 
surprising to see the high court deny the parliament the power in this instance.

“We’re not dealing here with what might be described as radical proposals that 
go beyond the sort of models well known to Australia.”

Twomey, a professor of constitutional law at the University of Sydney, said 
Day was focusing on the prospect of votes being exhausted when people voted 
above the line. She said voters retained the option of voting below the line.

“There is an argument that can be made but I don’t think it is likely to 
succeed,” Twomey said. “I think in the end it is one where people should be 
able to genuinely make a choice and if it’s your choice [that] you don’t want 
your vote to proceed to cause the election of people you don’t want elected, 
it’s a legitimate choice.

“You can stand there and fill in 100 numbers or you can choose to vote above 
the line; it’s your choice.”

The arguments hinge on section 7 of the constitution, which says the Senate 
“shall be composed of senators for each state, directly chosen by the people of 
the state, voting, until the parliament otherwise provides, as one electorate”.

In 1984 an independent Senate candidate brought a challenge against changes 
made earlier that year in relation to “above the line” voting, arguing the laws 
discriminated against candidates who were not part of established parties or 
groups.


Crossbench senators seething at being 'dumped' in deal to curb micro-parties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/22/crossbench-senators-seething-at-being-dumped-in-deal-to-curb-micro-parties>
The single judge who heard the injunction request, Chief Justice Harry Gibbs, 
saidsection 7 required the Senate be elected by democratic methods 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/HCA/1984/75.html> but it was not for 
the court to intervene so long as what was enacted was consistent with 
representative democracy.

Gibbs said it was right electors at a Senate election must vote for individual 
candidates, but it was not right to say the constitution forbade the use of a 
system which enabled the elector to vote for the individual candidates by 
reference to a group or ticket.

Labor resolved at its caucus meeting on Tuesday to oppose the government’s 
legislation, in line with the shadow cabinet decision the previous night, 
despite past divisions about Senate voting reform.

Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, said the legislation was “designed to purge 
the parliament, not just for now but, if possible, forever, of all minor 
parties”.

But the Coalition has the numbers to get the legislation through the Senate. 
The Greens and the independent senator Nick Xenophon support the changes, 
saying it will give voters the choice of where their preferences flow.
 