
British multinational Serco is in trouble. After years as the favoured 
outsourcer for public services in Britain and countless countries around the 
world, thelatest figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/10/serco-profits-warning-shares-crash>
 show a financial crash of unprecedented proportions. The firm announced it is 
writing down its business value by nearly AU $3bn with no dividend for 
shareholders and a plea for an injection of a billion more dollars. This is a 
“bitter pill”, according to its chief executive Rupert Soames.

Revealingly, the corporation admitted that without its Australian detention 
network, its profit would have been even worse. In other words, imprisoning 
asylum seekers in poor conditions for extended periods of time in remote 
locations is good for business. Serco won the contract to manage all of 
Australia’s mainland facilities and Christmas Island in 2009 – I was part of a 
team thatfirst published 
<https://newmatilda.com/2011/11/09/exclusive-our-contract-serco> the contract 
between Serco and Canberra in 2011 – and the profits have soared ever since.

From a $370m contract in 2009 to well over $1bn today, surging refugee boats 
have been invaluable to Serco’sbottom line 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/stopping-the-boats-is-bad-for-business-20130802-2r4vy.html>
. Serco has benefitted from an opaque reporting process and desperate federal 
politicians and bureaucrats who needed corporate help with an immigration 
system that ran out of control when asylum seekers started arriving in large 
numbers from Sri Lanka, Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan and beyond. Neither the 
government nor Serco could handle the influx, and both detainees and guards 
suffered.

During the writing of my book Profits of Doom <http://profitsofdoombook.com/>, 
I spoke to a senior Serco manager who told me how his superiors gamed the 
system to increase income. Staff are reduced to “keep profits high” and 
managers are routinely moved from the most difficult centres such as Darwin and 
Christmas Island because they’re told that “if they get abatements [fines from 
Canberra], they’ll be fired’’.

Another senior Serco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup> source 
recently told me that his company had planned to turn the Australian centres 
into less prison-like environments. A spike in boats ruined that dream, he 
lamented.

It’s a sign of the times that a company like Serco, with murky financial 
statements 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/what-is-serco-hiding-20130507-2j4pv.html> 
masking its true economic shape, is continually rewarded for failure with new 
and larger contracts. Just this week, the Australian government announced a “
cop on the beat 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/immigration/detention-centre-team-to-watch-the-watchers/story-fn9hm1gu-1227118750435>
” system within the immigration department to strengthen oversight. This is 
little more than window dressing after years of Serco and government 
obfuscation over assessing self-harm inside detention, profit margins, guard 
misbehaviour and a culture of secrecy that pervades everything the firm does in 
Australia and Britain (I recently witnessed this whenvisiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/25/lowest-cost-matters-most-in-britains-immigration-detention-centres>
 the notorious Yarl’s Wood facility in England).

Vulture capitalism has become the ideology of our age, with Serco just a 
symptom of wider economic failure. Outsourcing remains hugely appealing, with 
Mitie now becoming the UK Home Office’slargest provider 
<http://www.corporatewatch.org/news/2014/sep/01/care-custody-mities-detention-centre-contracts>
 of immigration detention. A clean-skin, without the troubles of G4S and Serco, 
proves that it’ll take more than a Serco collapse to arrest three decades of 
privatised failure.

Privatisation doesn’t deliver better and cheaper services for our society, or 
evenshareholder democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/09/tide-turning-against-privatisation>
. The public knows it. It’s time to empower individuals who want to wrest power 
from the corporations and return it to the people.
 