
1
Buy an off-the-shoulder top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/may/05/off-should-tops-10-of-the-best-summer-womenswear>


Or better still, get out the one you bought last summer and have not worn. 
Because these tops still have cachet. We’ve got over calling themBardot tops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/27/how-to-wear-the-bardot-the-summers-most-unexpectedly-flattering-trend>
 now (bit of a stretch, wasn’t it?), but their usefulness has given them 
longevity. Bare shoulders say summer and don’t make grownups panic about their 
upper arms. Ditto the so-called cold-shoulder tops that are also everywhere. If 
naked shoulders feels too louche for an air-conditioned office, note that 
slinging a cashmere sweater over your shoulders likeJeremy Irons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/jeremy-irons-have-natural-tendency-benign-dictator-batman-v-superman>
 is totally acceptable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwinter-wardrobe-style-hack-summer-fashion-good-weather%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff53f33ab196a0cf5ec55c9beeb85ff781eb4dfb3%2F0_0_3280_4875%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20summer%20style%20hacks%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwinter-wardrobe-style-hack-summer-fashion-good-weather%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20summer%20style%20hacks%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwinter-wardrobe-style-hack-summer-fashion-good-weather%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff53f33ab196a0cf5ec55c9beeb85ff781eb4dfb3%2F0_0_3280_4875%2F3280.jpg>
 Keep cool with Chloé … off the shoulder for SS16.
 Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
2
Roll up your sleeves


It’s quite Jackie O on the Cape, isn’t it? If you get it right, it can be. 
Most women can’t pull off a kaftan top outside of a brochure featuring sand 
dunes, beach huts and blond children. But most women have arelaxed shirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/aug/18/summer-blouses-10-best-in-pictures>
 that they can summer up. Denim is good; pale blue is good; white works. 
Unbutton it down to the breastbone, wear jewellery and get the rolling right. 
Below or on the elbow is a little beta, above the elbow and you’re comfortably 
in Jackie O territory.

How to wear black and not look boring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/dec/10/how-to-wear-black-and-not-look-boring>
3
Try not to wear black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/dec/10/how-to-wear-black-and-not-look-boring>


It rarely looks like a sun-ready look. But if you do, go for it and wear a big 
and upbeat earring. No apologies for the fashion singular, a lot of the hack is 
in the way you sell it to yourself.

4
Work the margins


Make everything about your outfit incrementally more summery. Wear your hair 
loose, wear sunglasses, turn up a trouser hem and, most importantly,ditch the 
socks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/16/should-i-go-without-socks>
. Even wearing white tennis trainers or Vans without socks is a move towards 
summer.

5
Take a hard look at last summer’s shoes


Do you have a pair of leather gladiator sandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/apr/11/fifty-best-flat-sandals-in-pictures>
? They’ll work for another summer, won’t they? Sorry, no. Absolutely not. Ditto 
the flip-flops that you think are so functional and anodyne they couldn’t 
possibly offend. Hate to be the wardrobe Cassandra here, but flip-flops are 
style suicide. The good news is that sliders are hot, and available on every 
high street and corrugated retail park in the land. Wear with breezy jogging 
bottoms, cropped trousers or a long skirt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwinter-wardrobe-style-hack-summer-fashion-good-weather%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F964ad6388c440768f33dd8b991423e0c384243c0%2F0_0_915_914%2F915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20summer%20style%20hacks%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwinter-wardrobe-style-hack-summer-fashion-good-weather%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20summer%20style%20hacks%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwinter-wardrobe-style-hack-summer-fashion-good-weather%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F964ad6388c440768f33dd8b991423e0c384243c0%2F0_0_915_914%2F915.jpg>
 Out with flip-flops, in with sliders … Fenty x Puma with Rihanna. Photograph: 
Instagram 
6
Log on to & Other Stories


And buy a below-the-knee skirt. The website has the best selection of midi 
skirts in the land – printed, pleated, plain or structured. Not too many to 
confuse, but enough for everyone to find something they like.

7
Mess about with camisoles and slip dresses


They are summery and light and semaphore that you got the sunshine memo. You 
probably have something like this in your wardrobe. Wear a T-shirt under a slip 
dress – looks right and swerves the wholebra-on-display issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/18/peekaboo-how-underwear-as-outerwear-went-haute>
. Or for those brave enough to stand up to this summer ambush and laugh in its 
meteorological face: wear a camisole over a shirt. It’s called summer layering 
andit is seriously happening 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/fall-2016-ready-to-wear/marques-almeida/slideshow/collection#1>
.
 