
Seymour Papert, who has died aged 88, had a profound impact on education, and 
pioneered the use of computers as an aid to learning. Papert’s visionary 
research put robot turtles into tens of thousands of schools. He also 
co-authored the Logo programming language, and was involved with the One Laptop 
Per Child (OLPC) project, which delivered education-oriented laptops to 
children across the less-developed world. Decades of working with the toy 
companyLego <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> on Lego/Logo, which 
linked the world of Lego construction with the world of Logo programming, led 
to the launch in 1998 of the Lego Mindstorms range of robotics toys, which was 
named to honour Papert’s most influential book, Mindstorms: Children, 
Computers, and Powerful Ideas (1980).

The influence went both ways. Scratch <https://scratch.mit.edu/>, the leading 
programming environment for children, is based on enabling children to snap 
together encapsulations of computer code on their screens in much the same way 
as they would snap Lego bricks together in the physical world.

Son of Betty and Jack Papert, Seymour was born in Pretoria, South Africa, 
where his father was an entomologist. He took a BA in philosophy before earning 
PhDs in mathematics at the University of the Witwatersrand in 1952 and then at 
Cambridge University in 1959. What changed his life was his next position, at 
the University of Geneva, where he spent four years researching mathematics and 
children’s education under the psychologistJean Piaget 
<http://www.simplypsychology.org/piaget.html>, whose work revolutionised 
education.

Child’s play had been considered largely inconsequential, but Piaget saw that 
it was an essential part of a child’s cognitive development. Children were 
“learning by doing”. Today’s educational toy industry started from there.

Papert understood that mathematics was abstract and theoretical, and that was 
how it was taught to children. That was why most of them did not understand it. 
The answer, he thought, was to give children a physical way to think of 
mathematical ideas. The floor turtle – originally developed in the late 1940s 
by William Grey Walter – was a start, and Papert created a Logo turtle that 
could be controlled from a computer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F143620419&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F143620419>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F143620419&media=>
 Video: How the collaboration between Seymour Papert and Lego began. 
A floor turtle obeys simple instructions that tell it to go forward, stop, 
reverse, turn by a certain angle, and so on. When it moves, its built-in pen 
draws a line.A turtle can draw complex patterns 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/07/Turtle_draw.jpg> by 
following simple instructions, while sets of instructions form subroutines that 
can be infinitely repeated. Of course, the Logo language could do the same 
things with a dot of light on a computer screen. However, floor turtles were 
easier for small children to grasp, and they also enabled discussion, 
experimentation and group learning.

Piaget developed a theory of education, which he called constructivism. Papert 
had his own version, which he called constructionism. This was not so much 
“learning by doing” as “learning by making”. Papert said: “Learning is most 
effective when part of an activity the learner experiences as constructing a 
meaningful product.” He could therefore be considered the father of today’s 
“maker” movement as well.

As always, chance played a part. In 1960, Papert attended a cybernetics 
conference in London where he met ProfessorMarvin Minsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/03/marvin-minsky-obituary>, 
co-founder of the artificial intelligence group at MIT, the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Papert moved to MIT in 1963 and, with Minsky, 
co-authored Perceptrons (1969), an important book on developing artificial 
intelligence through neural networks. The two of them were so close they could 
finish each other’s sentences.

Papert, Minsky and Nicholas Negroponte were the three original faculty members 
when Negroponte founded the MIT Media Lab in 1985. After that, Papert worked on 
numerous Media Lab projects, including Negroponte’s OLPC, and Mitchel Resnick’s 
Scratch. The Media Lab’s playful style of learning was and still is based on 
Papert’s ideas, and Resnick’s group is called Lifelong Kindergarten.

Papert became involved with Lego in 1984, after the company’s owner, Kjeld 
Kirk Kristiansen, saw him on a Danish TV programme 
<http://dailypapert.com/it-all-starts-with-seymour-papert/> talking about 
turtles and learning through play. He said: “We have to get in contact with 
him.” What he did not know was that Papert and Resnick were already working on 
ways to connect Lego bricks to computers.

Negroponte said that “Kjeld and Seymour really hit it off”, and the two 
organisations started a close association that lasted for more than 30 years. 
The company sponsored what is now called theLego 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> Papert chair at MIT, which 
Papert occupied from 1989 until 1996, when he handed the reins to Resnick.

As electronics became smaller, lighter and cheaper, Papert and Resnick 
envisioned an “intelligent brick”, so devices would no longer need to be 
attached to computers. In about 1990, they started showing Kristiansen 
prototypes, which MIT researchers had already tested with children. A later 
design was commercialised and launched as Lego Mindstorms, initiating today’s 
wide range of products.

Papert was softly spoken and retained a slight South African accent, and his 
views on equality were strongly held. While at university, he had been an 
activist in the anti-apartheid movement, and metNelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/05/nelson-mandela-obituary>. When 
he moved to the UK, he became something of a revolutionary socialist, and 
contributed to the magazineSocialist Review <http://socialistreview.org.uk/>.

After becoming an emeritus professor and semi-retiring from MIT, Papert moved 
to Maine, where he set up the Learning Barn and a Learning Lab to educate and 
inspire troubled teenagers. On that and other projects, Papert worked with his 
fourth wife, the Russian scholar and authorSuzanne Massie 
<http://www.suzannemassie.com/>.

In 2006, while attending a conference on mathematical instruction in Hanoi, 
Papert was hit by a motorcycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2007/jan/03/latenewsseymo>. He 
suffered serious brain injuries, and fell into a coma. It took him several 
years to recover.

He is survived by Suzanne, whom he married in 1992; by his daughter, Artemis, 
from his second marriage, to Androula Henriques, which ended in divorce; by 
three stepchildren Robert, Susanna and Elizabeth; and by his brother, Alan, and 
sister, Joan.

• Seymour Aubrey Papert, computer scientist, born 29 February 1928; died 31 
July 2016
 