
For Chelsea fans, or indeed anyone with an interest in the high-rev methods of 
Antonio Conte, there was a slightly alarming moment as thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> international break 
arrived at the start of October. Conte announced he would be going to Italy to 
rest. He was already exhausted. OK, then. Just the 31 league games, two 
domestic cups, one transfer window and 10-15 miles of febrile touchline sprints 
left to go this season. What could possibly go wrong from here?

It is understandable Conte should have arrived in west London less than 
refreshed given his summer at Euro 2016, the burdens of starting a major job 
and his own full-body absorption in the process: the hair-tearing grief at 
every setback, the tendency to celebrate each high with uncontained, 
eye-popping joy, haring about like a man who has just struck oil beneath his 
patio decking or made the first ever recorded discovery of chocolate ice cream.

In reality Conte is simply a manager who works best coiled tight and always on 
the edge. In this respect he looks a pretty good fit for a Premier League 
season where top spot has changed hands nine times and where the ability to 
cajole a cohesive whole out of a new-ish group of players while simultaneously 
sliding down the banisters and performing complex calculus on an abacus is 
likely to decide the destiny of an open title race.

With just under a third of the season gone four points separate the top five 
teams, all of whom have a reasonable chance of going on to win it. Beyond this 
the league is unusually interesting in a tactical sense, with a shared attempt 
at the top to marry technical players and positional fluidity with a 
full-throttle physicality that feels quite English in its unquestioning 
intensity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fantonio-conte-pleased-as-chelsea-make-it-six-wins-in-a-row-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antonio%20Conte%20pleased%20as%20Chelsea%20make%20it%20six%20wins%20in%20a%20row%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fantonio-conte-pleased-as-chelsea-make-it-six-wins-in-a-row-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antonio%20Conte%20pleased%20as%20Chelsea%20make%20it%20six%20wins%20in%20a%20row%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fantonio-conte-pleased-as-chelsea-make-it-six-wins-in-a-row-video&media=>
Antonio Conte pleased as Chelsea make it six wins in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/20/antonio-conte-pleased-as-chelsea-make-it-six-wins-in-a-row-video>
As Conte nipped off for a lie-down at the start of October there was a view in 
these pages that any team finishing ahead of Liverpool at the end of the season 
would do so “bloodied and blistered and breathless”. Six weeks on the latest 
club to take up the slack at the front of the peloton are Chelsea, to whom the 
same reasoning might now be applied.Chelsea’s current run of six league wins 
without conceding a goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/antonio-conte-hails-sixth-successive-clean-sheet-chelsea>
 has its roots in Conte’s bold shift of shape in September. The early attempts 
at a 4-2-4 had already begun to elide into a 4-3-3.Defeat by Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 brought some soul-searching and a more profound change to 3-4-3, with Cesc 
Fàbregas discarded and the roles of three key players clarified with thrilling 
results.

At which point, enter David Luiz, defensive giant. Yes, that David Luiz, a 
player who has had a peculiar double-life, damned by his own relentlessly 
trumpeted mistakes and at the same time rewarded with ever more extravagant 
playing contracts. During the last World Cup in Brazil there was an airline 
advert that featured a zanily grinning David Luiz in full pilot’s outfit 
proudly inviting you to board his waiting jet, arguably the least reassuring 
passenger safety message ever devised.

And yet he has been key to Chelsea’s recent stability, not just as a deep 
playmaker at the heart of that three but as the aggressive, spirited defensive 
leader he has always been in between the odd horrific performance. Aged 29 now, 
the only major club football medal to escape the world’s most expensive 
defender across European three countries is - so far - a Premier League title 
medal. Which is fairly steady going for a man routinely dismissed as a flake 
and a saboteur.

Further upfield Eden Hazard has been liberated by the 3-4-3, allowed to 
operate in forward gear by a manager who has accepted his lack of cover rather 
than simply fuming at it like a disappointed stepdad. In 12 league games Hazard 
has made 52 successful dribbles, compared with 89 the whole of last season. He 
should pass his total of 36 shots in the whole of 2015-16 against Tottenham on 
Saturday. Against that Hazard has made just four tackles. ButChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> are top, and their best player 
has rediscovered his lateral spring, the ability to take the ball and turn in a 
single movement.

David Luiz holds back to ensure Chelsea’s defence stays unbreached | Michael 
Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/20/david-luiz-holds-back-chelsea-defence-unbreached>
Victor Moses, high-class wing-back, has been the most obvious gain. Moses is 
also the epitome of a common trait among the insurgent Conte-Klopp-Guardiola 
managerial type, the ability to make good use of the things that they find, 
recycling some talented but dormant part into a key component. Like James 
Milner’s fine turn at left-back, or Guardiola’s tweaking of key creative 
midfielders, Moses has been Conte’s own Womble-player, an itinerant winger and 
No10 across five English clubs before the age of 25 but now in the best period 
of his career as a powerful and utterly committed right wing-back.

The sudden surge of eviscerating form, sparked by a decisive switch of shape, 
is nothing new in a Conte team. There are parallels with his first season at 
Juventus in 2011-12, where 14 of his first 27 Serie A matches were drawn but 
Juve ended up winning the title unbeaten in the league. Conte had been 
desperate to fit the thrillingly energetic Arturo Vidal into his team. In late 
September Vidal finally made the starting XI, Juve ran through Milan in Turin, 
a new 4-3-3 shape was up and running and Conte was on his way to a hat-trick of 
titles.

As with Juve that year the lack of European football looks a significant 
advantage for Chelsea. There is an idea that the major plus here is to do with 
fatigue or injury, but managers talk instead of simply having those extra two 
days to plan and drill their players. Such is the way of the modern coach. In 
contract with the old Alex Ferguson-era idea of momentum, winning teams rolling 
on with the same system, combinations ever-more grooved under pressure, it is 
the interventionist, hands-in-the-cake-mix tendencies of the modern breed that 
stand out.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/21/premier-league-10-talking-points-crystal-palace-arsenal-west-ham>
Conte is obsessed with the fitness and physicality of his players, talking 
constantly with his medical staff, brooding over sprockets and hinges like an 
F1 pit boss, shifting his team on reports of twinges and twangs. Similarly the 
hands-on nature of Jurgen Klopp’s coaching has been noted, the tendency to 
physically haul players around the training pitch, something Ron Greenwood 
could be seen doing at West Ham in the 1970s.

Klopp’s Liverpool experienced their first little gulp this weekend, as 
Southampton set out to defend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/southampton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 against a slightly depleted team. Like a batsman who comes out and hits a 
flurry of fours, then has to change gear as the field drops back, Klopp will 
now look to adjust, to pick up the ones and twos, to hold Liverpool’s attacking 
fire for the right moment.

No doubt the same process of reeling in and counter-adjustment will hit 
Chelsea in the coming weeks as opposition managers find a way to get behind the 
wing-backs or to harry David Luiz as Middlesbrough did on Sunday. Chelsea’s 
next two opponents are Tottenham and Manchester City. This evolving team may 
find life less comfortable against similar high-intensity machines, fellow 
hard-pressers. But a year on from the last days of José they can at least be 
sure they will not fail for want of sheer, thrilling focus.
 