
It was, said Nick Clegg, “something you’d expect to see in Putin’s Russia, 
rather than a Sheffield suburb”. Council contractors and police had descended 
on a particularly desirable street in his Hallam constituency under the cover 
of darkness, “dragged” people out of bed to move their cars and detained 
peaceful protesters – “all to chop down eight trees”,he wrote 
<http://www.thestar.co.uk/news/nick-clegg-sheffield-tree-arrests-like-something-from-putin-s-russia-1-8258128>
 in a local paper.

So far five people have been arrested in relation to a long-running and 
increasingly bitter battle over the fate of Sheffield’s trees, including a 
70-year old emeritus professor and a 71-year-old retired teacher, both women. 
On Thursday two men will become the first of the city’s tree protesters to 
appear in court, charged under trade union legislation, following a protest on 
2 November.

Seeing the wood for the trees in Sheffield | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/28/seeing-the-wood-for-the-trees-in-sheffield>
One of them, the author and university lecturer Simon Crump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/sep/02/not-booker-neverland-simon-crump>
, 56, a local Green party member, said he was arrested for protecting a 
100-year-old London plane tree on Marden Road in Nether Edge. He said he was 
locked in a cell for eight hours and that he would have been released sooner 
but, he claimed, officers could not find the offence he had allegedly committed 
on the police computer. “It was quite Kafkaesque. I was being imprisoned 
because they couldn’t work out what to charge me with,” said Crump.

He was subsequently charged under Section 241 of the Trade Union and Labour 
Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1992/52/section/241>, which criminalises 
anyone who persistently stops someone from carrying out lawful work – in this 
case tree surgeons contracted by Amey, an outsourcing company, to chop down 
trees under a controversial contract with the city council.

Crump has vowed to plead not guilty at Sheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> magistrates court on Thursday, along 
with the self-described tree campaigner Calvin Payne. “The way I see it, our 
case has implications for the right to peaceful protest against anything,” said 
Crump.

The fight for Sheffield’s trees has its roots in a 25-year private finance 
initiative (PFI) deal signed by the Labour-run council in 2012, which Amey 
pledged would “see Sheffield’s roads transformed from some of the worst in the 
country to the best in the country within the first five years”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsheffield-trees-dispute-scenes-putin-russia-nick-clegg-arrests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5586310114cca09f5039c44e4c64b792092949e7%2F0_93_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheffield%20trees%20dispute%20prompts%20'scenes%20you'd%20expect%20in%20Putin's%20Russia'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsheffield-trees-dispute-scenes-putin-russia-nick-clegg-arrests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheffield%20trees%20dispute%20prompts%20%27scenes%20you%27d%20expect%20in%20Putin%27s%20Russia%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsheffield-trees-dispute-scenes-putin-russia-nick-clegg-arrests%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5586310114cca09f5039c44e4c64b792092949e7%2F0_93_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Nick Clegg speaks with members of the public after the tree felling in 
Rustlings Road, Sheffield. Photograph: Danny Lawson/PA 
The council says many of the trees are diseased and that their roots have 
ruined pavements, making them impassible for wheelchair users and buggies.

But the Save Sheffield’s Trees group argues that Amey works without proper 
consultation and is motivated by profit rather than any desire to protect the 
trees. “If they blitz the city’s trees in the first five years of their 25-year 
contract, they can spend the next 20 years with much lower maintenance costs,”
the group argues <http://www.savesheffieldtrees.org.uk/background/>.

They have formed a sort of arboreal neighbourhood watch scheme to keep tabs on 
any tree that is suddenly adorned with a “felling notice” by Amey, scrambling a 
protest group as soon as the men with chainsaws turn up.


When contacted by the Guardian on Monday, Amey passed the request on to the 
council, whichpreviously said of Amey’s work 
<https://www.sheffield.gov.uk/in-your-area/report_request/trees.html>: “If a 
tree is damaging or obstructing we will make all reasonable practical attempts 
to try and retain this tree in situ by applying one or more of over 20 
sensitive engineering solutions. If these cannot be applied then the tree will 
be replaced. All trees that are removed as part of this project will be 
replaced on a one-for-one basis.”

A dawn raid, dissenters silenced: is this a war on trees? | Patrick Barkham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/dawn-raid-war-on-trees-sheffield>
But the protesters are not convinced. It is a scrap that threatens the Labour 
party’s future in the city, according to Jim Lafferty, the chair of the 
Sheffield Central constituency Labour party. On Friday he wrote to Julie Dore, 
the council leader, warning her that many local party members had quit over the 
tree dispute and that many council seats could be lost.

“This is not synthetic outrage by a privileged minority of politically 
motivated opponents of the Labour party, unaffected by the harsh realities of 
Tory-imposed cuts. Neither is it a desperate attempt by an environmental lobby 
to block the essential road improvement schemes being carried out across the 
city,” wrote Lafferty. “This is a rejection by the grassroots membership of the 
party.”

So far 4,000 trees have been felled, the campaigners claim, with a further 
36,000 still standing — most of which are not under threat, the council insists.

The biggest fight so far has been over eight lime trees which have shaded the 
well-heeled residents of Rustlings Road opposite Endcliffe Park for more than 
100 years. As referenced in Clegg’s piece in the Sheffield Star, a team from 
Amey turned up at 5am two weeks ago to warn car owners that they should move 
their vehicles if they did not want them to be crushed by breakfast.

Freda Brayshaw, a retired French teacher, was having none of it. Though warned 
by police not to approach the trees, she stepped over a barrier of tape and 
moved towards one trunk. The response was swift: for the first time in her 71 
years she found herself under arrest and was put into a police car, along with 
her friend Jenny Hockey, a professor emeritus of sociology at Sheffield 
University, and a man.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsheffield-trees-dispute-scenes-putin-russia-nick-clegg-arrests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90093b3e0c9756cef02921ade43a8467d31ca49%2F0_4_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheffield%20trees%20dispute%20prompts%20'scenes%20you'd%20expect%20in%20Putin's%20Russia'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsheffield-trees-dispute-scenes-putin-russia-nick-clegg-arrests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheffield%20trees%20dispute%20prompts%20%27scenes%20you%27d%20expect%20in%20Putin%27s%20Russia%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsheffield-trees-dispute-scenes-putin-russia-nick-clegg-arrests%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90093b3e0c9756cef02921ade43a8467d31ca49%2F0_4_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Jenny Hockey, left, and Freda Brayshaw. Photograph: Danny Lawson/PA 
Currently awaiting a court summons, Brayshaw insists she has no regrets, 
despite spending eight very cold hours in a police cell. “I am passionate about 
Sheffield’s trees. This is a very polluted city,” she said. “They are doing a 
job for free: you can work out the value of these trees in terms of flood 
defences and countering air pollution. That is why we decided to take 
non-violent direct action to try to save them.”

Save Sheffield’s Trees claim that PFI contracts are bad for democracy because 
private companies are not subject to freedom of information laws, “so there’s 
no scrutiny and no accountability”. Many residents, including Clegg, have tried 
and failed to get hold of an unredacted version of Amey’s PFI contract with 
Sheffield city council. “We’ve tried so many times that the council has now 
deemed our requests to be ‘vexatious’,” claimed Crump.

At the weekend the council finally issued a statement on the Rustlings Road 
situation.

“We would like to offer an apology to the people of Sheffield who were 
affected by the way in which we took the trees down on Thursday of last week, 
and particularly those living on Rustlings Road, who will also receive an 
apology in the post. We are sorry for the disruption and distress caused by the 
work starting at 5am,” Bryan Lodge, cabinet member for environment at Sheffield 
city council, said in a statement.

“As we continue to carry out work as part of the largest investment there has 
ever been in the city’s street trees, and to protect the city’s 36,000 street 
trees for generations to come, it is important that we take necessary measures 
to ensure that we protect the safety of our workforce, and the public. But we 
know we got it wrong last week with the way the work was started. We have 
listened and are sorry for the mistakes that we made.”
 