
Residents of South Yorkshire will not get to vote for a mayor this summer 
after thehigh court ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/22/sheffield-city-regions-bid-to-absorb-chesterfield-faces-legal-setback>
 they had not been not properly consulted on whether the county could annex 
part of Derbyshire.

The mayoral elections are being postponed until 2018 so that the Sheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> city region (SCR) can consult the 
public on whether Chesterfield in Derbyshire should join the combined 
authority, along with Bassetlaw in Nottinghamshire.


Momentum is building behind calls for the SCR proposal to be scrapped in 
favour of a whole-Yorkshire deal. With more than 5 million residents, the four 
counties ofYorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> have a 
bigger population than Scotland and a GDP double that of Wales.


Caroline Flint, the Labour MP for the Don Valley, said a Yorkshire-wide deal 
should be explored. “It’s disappointing that the deal has fallen through but 
maybe there is an opportunity to reflect on whether there is another way 
forward,” she said.

“Maybe there is a regional way to bring the whole of Yorkshire and the Humber 
together because if we were given the powers through devolution I think we 
could do a great job. With 5 million people it would be amazing the things we 
could do. There is nothing stronger than the Yorkshire brand – it’s one of the 
best things we have to promote our region.”

In October 2015 the Sheffield city region became the second combined authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/01/sheffield-area-expected-become-second-northern-powerhouse>
 to sign a devolution deal with the then chancellor, George Osborne, as part of 
his dream to build a “northern powerhouse” to rival London and the south-east.


Under the terms of the agreement, South Yorkshire was to elect its own mayor 
this May, along with Greater Manchester, Tees Valley, the West Midlands, the 
west of England and the Liverpool city region.

The former sports minister Richard Caborn and the Barnsley council leader, 
Stephen Houghton, had been expected to contest the Labour nomination for South 
Yorkshire mayor.


After the SCR officially postponed the mayoral elections on Thursday, Ros 
Jones, the mayor of Doncaster, and Houghton issued a joint statement saying 
they owed it to residents to “work with colleagues to explore this new 
Yorkshire-wide option, to ensure we give all potential devolution solutions 
proper consideration so that residents can be fully informed when being asked 
to participate in consultation over the summer months”.


Conservative MPs and councillors in Yorkshire have long favoured a 
whole-Yorkshire deal, reasoning that their party would then have a better shot 
at winning a mayoral election. The idea has been strongly resisted, 
particularly by Labour leaders in West Yorkshire, who caused David Cameron to 
once remark: “We just thought people in Yorkshire hated everyone else; we 
didn’t realise they hated each other so much.”


In September last year the five Labour leaders of West Yorkshire’s councils – 
Leeds, Bradford, Wakefield, Calderdale and Kirklees – reluctantly agreed to 
follow Greater Manchester’s lead and accept the imposition of an elected mayor 
in return for more power. Their proposed Leeds city region would have included 
cooperation with York, Selby, Craven and Harrogate in North Yorkshire.


But the deal was stymied by Tories including Kevin Hollinrake, the MP for 
Thirsk and Malton, who told the Guardian last year that when he was councillor 
he had lobbied Osborne and the then local government minister, Greg Clark, to 
reject the West Yorkshire deal. He denied his objections were politically 
motivated, saying he thought the proposed geography was “very counterproductive 
and ill-thought-out” and would put his rural constituency at a disadvantage.

“The reason I was concerned is that the West Yorkshire deal encompassed York 
and Harrogate, and as a representative for a rural North Yorkshire seat it 
would cause significant problems to have the key towns and city within our 
economy included and us left outside,” he said.

Hollinrake and other Conservatives prefer the idea of a Greater Yorkshire 
devolution deal. “It’s in the economic best interests of my region. This isn’t 
political. According to our calculations, if there were a mayor of Greater 
Yorkshire it’s very evenly balanced as to whether they are Labour or 
Conservative or indeed independent,” he said.

He said he thought Alan Johnson, the Labour MP for Kingston upon Hull West and 
Hessle, or William Hague, the Conservative former foreign secretary who 
represented Richmond in North Yorkshire for 26 years until 2015, could do a 
good job as mayor.
 