
It’s an understatement to say that Sheku Kanneh-Mason has had a busy few 
months. In May, the 17-year-old cellist was crowned BBC Young Musician. Only a 
few days later, he was back at school, revising for his summer exams at Trinity 
College Catholic school, a state secondary in Nottingham, while also preparing 
for his Royal Festival Hall concerto debut.

But when I meet him he’s a picture of relaxation. Maybe it’s because he and 
his family –he has six siblings <http://www.kannehmasons.com/>, all as musical 
as Sheku – have just returned from a week in Snowdonia, maybe it’s because his 
natural demeanour is so disarmingly modest, or perhaps he’s been listening to 
the Bob Marley he loves. Sheku exudes a maturity and calmness that’s rare in a 
classical soloist of any age.

Not that he neglected his cello when he was in Wales; he played it for an hour 
a day. Sheku has had this cello, made by the luthier Frank White, since 
childhood. It’s the cello that he’s closest to, but he says: “I think, in the 
Royal Festival Hall, I’ll use theAmati <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amati>.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6GJgOXBi2U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6GJgOXBi2U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6GJgOXBi2U&media=>
On 4 September, he’s playing Haydn’s C major concerto with the Chineke! 
Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/02/chi-chi-nwanoku-classical-music-living-colour-black-orchestra-chineke-foundation>
, Chi-chi Nwanoku’s groundbreaking ensemble of black and minority ethnic 
musicians, whose concert opens the Southbank Centre’s 2016-17 season. “It’s 
such a big hall to fill. The Amati has got a lot of sound production, it’ll be 
nice to use it again.” The Amati was loaned to him for the Shostakovich 
concerto at the BBC competition, but it wasn’t the instrument wot won it.To 
watch the performance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q6GJgOXBi2U> is to 
witness a totally unselfconscious identity between the player and the music he 
loves. Shostakovich is Sheku’s favourite composer, and his playing radiates the 
strength of his relationship with this music.

With Chineke!, he’s revisiting a Haydn concerto 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nAqJzNw4ZLU> that he performed at 13 with a 
local orchestra in Nottingham. You can watch the performance on hisfather’s 
YouTube channel <https://www.youtube.com/user/Darkwoodnew>. While a lot has 
changed since then – his cello chops have improved, of course, and he is no 
longer dwarfed by the instrument – already, he communicates his complete 
absorption in the music, and, as well as pulling off the concerto’s flights of 
virtuosic fancy with bewildering ease. There are moments when the 13-year-old 
is flying with wild imagination, especially in the final movement’s joyously 
extrovert contrasts.

Chi-chi Nwanoku: 'I want black musicians to walk on to the stage and know they 
belong'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/02/chi-chi-nwanoku-classical-music-living-colour-black-orchestra-chineke-foundation>
One of the differences in his performance with Chineke! will be the cadenza he 
has composed for Haydn’s first movement, the moment in most concertos when the 
soloist gets to silence the orchestra. He hasn’t written it down yet, but the 
music is fully formed in his head. “It’s not a show-off piece of virtuosity for 
its own sake, it’s still in the style of the concerto, hopefully. It’s just 
that the cadenza that’s published in my edition of the piece – well, it’s good 
... [but] I just thought it would be good to write my own.”

The Chineke! concert is not only important to Sheku because it offers the 
opportunity to play a concerto he has known for years and to debut as a 
composing performer, but because of the orchestra itself. “Chineke! is a really 
inspiring project. I rarely go to a concert and see that kind of diversity in 
the orchestra. Or in the audience. Having the orchestra will definitely change 
the culture. It’s so important we’re celebrating music by black composers, too, 
like the piece byChevalier de Saint-Georges 
<http://www.notablebiographies.com/supp/Supplement-Mi-So/Chevalier-de-Saint-George-Joseph-Boulogne.html>
 we’re playing in September.”

Sheku’s journey to fully fledged concerto soloist has not come easy for the 
family. His parents have had to give everything to their children’s musical 
educations – each playing more than one instrument, requiring expensive 
one-to-one lessons on even more expensive instruments – as they progressed with 
incredible speed through the grade system of musical exams, and on to junior 
and senior conservatoires in London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fsheku-kanneh-mason-classical-music-isnt-elitist-the-problem-is-its-expensive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20224cf650894a004093af98810926dc6eba1208%2F89_207_3945_2367%2F3945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheku%20Kanneh-Mason%3A%20'Classical%20music%20isn't%20elitist%20%E2%80%93%20the%20problem%20is%20it's%20expensive'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fsheku-kanneh-mason-classical-music-isnt-elitist-the-problem-is-its-expensive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheku%20Kanneh-Mason%3A%20%27Classical%20music%20isn%27t%20elitist%20%E2%80%93%20the%20problem%20is%20it%27s%20expensive%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fsheku-kanneh-mason-classical-music-isnt-elitist-the-problem-is-its-expensive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20224cf650894a004093af98810926dc6eba1208%2F89_207_3945_2367%2F3945.jpg>
 Kanneh-Mason performing at the BBC Young Musician 2016 final. Photograph: Mark 
Allan/BBC/Mark Allan 
Although Sheku and his siblings have had the good fortune of supportive 
musical cultures in their schools, the family’s ongoing achievement has 
happened in spite of – not thanks to – council and government support for music 
education. It’s the only time in our conversation that Sheku’s voice raises 
above a dulcet mezzo-forte. “Classical music is not elitist. The music itself 
is accessible to everyone. The real problem is the fact that it’s expensive and 
there is so little help from councils and the government.”

Sheku is clear that governments, local and national, need to put their money 
where their mouths are, and back up hollow talk about the importance of the 
arts in schools with funding. And there’s more: “Within the education system, 
music is not valued enough for what it can do,” says Sheku. “The dedication 
that it takes to learn an instrument is transferable to school work. That’s 
what I’ve found: if you have the focus to do two hours’ practice a day, you’re 
going to have the focus to study for your exams. It’s just as simple as that.”

Not that his life is all hard work: there’s Bob Marley to listen to, football 
to play – the only time I sense any gentle competition between the siblings is 
when Sheku suggests he might be a better footballer than his elder brother,
violinist Braimah <http://www.kannehmasons.com/biogs/braimah-kanneh-mason/>, 
because he has played more, “but he’s taller and faster and stronger, so he’s 
better in that sense”.

It’s clear that, at 17, Sheku’s star isn’t just shining for him and his 
siblings. As much as they are inspiring young people, he and his family also 
represent a challenge that government, music education providers and arts 
councils across the country need to take up. They need to be listened to, both 
for the music they make, and what they say.

• Sheku Kanneh-Mason performs Haydn’s C major cello concerto at the Royal 
Festival Hall, London on 4 September with Chineke! Orchestra 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/chineke-orchestra-96321>.
 