
Alison Benjamin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alisonbenjamin>: Where’s 
the enjoyment in seeing magnificent creatures behind bars?

Whether the parents of the four-year-old or inadequate safety standards were 
to blame, the real problem is thatthis gorilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/31/cincinnati-zoo-gorilla-boy-police-family-investigation>
, like all zoo animals, was living in captivity, incarcerated in a small 
enclosure supposedly for our entertainment and education.

I know most children find days out at the zoo an amazing experience, where 
they can get up close to animals large and small from far-flung places that 
they may have only seen in picture books or on TV.

But they are a relic of the Victorian age, before David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough> documentaries and 
nature programmes such asSpringwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/springwatch> brought animals into our 
front room in all their glory, in real time and living in the wild. The reality 
is not always pretty or cute, but these shows are educational – unlike gawking 
at animals that are often pacing up and down in their cages in boredom or 
frustration or sitting in a corner, lonely and depressed. I was shocked to 
learn a few years ago that zoos were prescribing Prozac to some of the animals. 
Zoos are sad places for animals. As an animal lover, I don’t understand why 
anyone finds enjoyment in seeing magnificent creatures such as tigers or lions 
behind bars.

Even with those that look as though they might be having fun – the monkeys and 
penguins – just think how much more exciting it would be to see them swinging 
in the jungle, rather than in a cage, or hunting on the ice caps instead of 
being thrown fish at feeding time.

And it’s not as if you can touch the animals – that’s deemed too dangerous. 
You can’t get that close to most of them, not even by squashing your face 
against the glass of an enclosure, certainly not as close as those television 
cameras.

As for the conservation argument, surely the human race should be working 
harder to preserve animals’ natural environments rather than shipping them off 
to zoos to breed (often unsuccessfully) while continuing to destroy their 
habitat in the name of progress.

So if it’s about a fun day out for the kids, where they can learn about 
animals and eat ice-cream, why not take them to a natural history museum 
followed by a trip to the movies to see an amazing 3D film about the bugs in 
the Borneo forest or the underwater world of theGreat Barrier Reef 
<http://www.imdb.com/list/ls070871257/>?

When I was a child, watching animals doing tricks at a circus was acceptable. 
Now, in response to growing popular concern about the cruelty of using animals 
in entertainment, many countries ban using animals in circus acts, and 
animal-free circuses are becoming more common. I hope it’s only a matter of 
time before, in the same spirit, we reimagine zoos.

Toby Moses <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tobymoses>: For those who 
can’t afford a safari, a reputable zoo is the best alternative


It’s important to start by acknowledging that zoos are far from an ideal home 
for most animals. If it were as simple as a choice between an animal living 
wild or living in captivity, then the zoo would be as much of an anachronism as 
lions jumping through flaming hoops in a circus tent. But that is not the 
choice we face. No reputable zoo would now snatch an animal from the wild to 
display for public amusement – and certainly no zoo I would wish to defend.

The modern zoo should act as a place for the preservation of endangered 
species, a safe house for rescued animals snatched from their habitat by those 
with malicious intent, and a breeding ground for those that can safely be kept 
in captivity to help spread a sense of wonder about the natural world to those 
who would otherwise not have the chance to see anything more interesting than a 
local labrador.

And this latter point is key. Where else would someone brought up in an inner 
city get to see a gorilla, a tiger or even a meerkat? While a safari in the 
plains of the Serengeti may be preferable, the vast majority will never be able 
to afford such an exotic holiday.

Animal experts may bemoan our anthropomorphising the natural world, but it is 
important to acknowledge the importance of this in helping to protect species 
that may otherwise be lost to us. One need only look at the relative 
difficulties of building a campaign to protect the rights ofbattery hens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/19/-sp-inside-the-battery-hen-shed> 
– still providing most of our eggs – and the polar bear. One is a bloodthirsty 
killer, the other a harmless hen – yet the public relate far more to the 
cuddly, white oversized teddy bear. Public opinion matters, and letting 
children get up close with a real-life Baloo or King Louie will do as much to 
foster a sense of conservationism as any Rudyard Kipling story.

Then there is the part zoos play in preserving endangered species – I for one 
would rather the northern white rhino lived in a San Diego Zoothan ceased to 
exist entirely 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/chris-morrow/bringing-northern-white-rhinos_b_9163630.html>
.

To ignore the part zoos have to play here would be dishonest, and to pretend 
that there is any practical source of funds to support this vital work other 
than paying guests is disingenuous. When government and taxation won’t even pay 
up to support the poorest in society, it seems unlikely they’ll fork out for 
the protection of theblack-footed ferret 
<https://www.worldwildlife.org/species/directory?direction=desc&sort=extinction_status>
. If not you, through your taxes – then the zoo?
 