
I have two laptops: one started with Windows 7 and the other with Windows 8. 
I’ve upgraded the second machine toWindows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10> and left the first on 
Windows 7. Microsoft keeps telling me to upgrade before 29 July as it 
“qualifies” but I don’t want to lose my Windows 7.


If/when I master Windows 10, can I use my copy of Windows 10 to upgrade my 
Windows 7 laptop, or can I store a copy of Windows 10 on my Windows 7 laptop 
until required? I don’t want to pay £100 (?) for a retail copy ofWindows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> 10. John G

If you are ever likely to want Windows 10 on any PC, then you should upgrade 
it before 29 July. This is true even if you don’t intend to use Windows 10 for 
a few years, if ever.


The key point is that each qualified PC has to register the Windows 10 upgrade 
online on Microsoft’s activation server by 29 July. The activation, not the 
code, is what makes the Windows 10 upgrade free. If you were to use exactly the 
same code on exactly the same PC a few days later, the activation would not be 
free.

The online activation procedure means you can’t usefully save Windows 10 
upgrade code, or transfer an upgrade from a different laptop. (In fact, 
pre-installed copies of Windows are locked to a specific device, and can’t 
legally be moved to a different device.)

Windows 10’s online activation procedure creates a hash code based on your 
PC’s hardware, mainly the motherboard and processor. Microsoft stores this code 
for future reference. After that, you can upgrade to Windows 10 then roll back 
to Windows 7 as often as you like.

Windows 7 was launched in 2009 and will be supported until 2020, so you can 
keep using it until then. However, if you think you might want to use Windows 
10 before 2020, or you plan to keep using your current PC through 2020 and 
beyond, then you should take the free upgrade while it’s available. The PC 
manufacturers, who are Microsoft’s real customers, would much rather sell you a 
new PC running Windows 10 than have Microsoft upgrade your old one.

Rolling back Windows 10

When Microsoft upgrades a PC to Windows 10, it keeps a copy of the previous 
version – Windows.old – on your hard drive for 30 days. This makes it very easy 
to roll back to Windows 7 or 8.1.

To do this, go to Settings, select Update & Security, and then Recovery. This 
will give you the option to “Go back to Windows 7” or “Go back to Windows 8.1”.

The process is quick and easy, and I’ve done it a few times with no errors. 
However, you should obviously make a back-up of your whole hard drive, and any 
important data, before doing an operating system upgrade. There is always the 
risk that something will go wrong. If the worst comes to the worst, you may 
need to re-install Windows 7 from your back-up and do the upgrade again.

If you have created any new files in Windows 10, these will be retained after 
the roll-back. But, obviously, if you have installed any Windows 10 apps, they 
will disappear.

Preparing for the upgrade

I’ve already published an answer on this topic, so I don’t need to go through 
it again. Just see:How should I prepare my PC for the upgrade to Windows 10? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/may/05/how-should-i-prepare-my-pc-for-the-upgrade-to-windows-10>

Briefly, it’s best to uninstall any software you no longer use or want. For 
best results, also uninstall any third-party anti-virus software and firewalls. 
Some anti-virus software publishers have new versions for Windows 10, and you 
can reinstall your AV software once the upgrade is complete.

As I also mentioned, you may avoid some problems if you also detach any large 
peripherals, such as printers, scanners and projectors. (Mice and monitors 
appear to be OK.) Windows 10 will spend some time trying to find drivers for 
peripherals, and it doesn’t always do the best job. Being smart, you can 
download new drivers directly from the manufacturers’ website and re-install 
your peripherals later.

Yes, I know, hundreds of millions of people have done Windows 10 upgrades with 
no preparation and no problems at all. However, even if 99% of the upgrades 
worked perfectly, that would still leave 3.5 million people with problems. It’s 
worth making a small effort to avoid becoming one of them.

Anniversary edition

Windows 10 is “software as a service 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_as_a_service>” (SaaS), installed and 
continuously updated from the cloud, and it’s free for the life of the device. 
In other words, Windows 10 remains free of charge until your PC dies, or you 
recycle it. Of course, if you buy a new Windows PC, that will come with a new 
copy of Windows 10 pre-installed, for which the manufacturer will usually have 
paid Microsoft a fee.

SaaS means there will never be a Service Pack 1 for Windows 10, and there will 
never be a Windows 11. Instead, Microsoft will keep upgrading Windows 10 on a 
regular basis.

None the less, there will still be new versions of Windows 10, which will 
probably arrive twice a year. These “milestone” versions provide a clean 
refresh that gets most PCs onto the same code base. So far, there have been 
two: the launch edition, and theWindows 10 Fall Update 
<https://blogs.windows.com/windowsexperience/2015/11/12/first-major-update-for-windows-10-available-today/>
, aka version 1511, which appeared in November.

In a better world, you would now be able to install the third version of 
Windows 10, aka Redstone 1, which Microsoft is calling theAnniversary Update 
<https://blogs.windows.com/windowsexperience/2016/06/29/windows-10-anniversary-update-available-august-2/>
. This is being beta tested at the moment, but unfortunately, it won’t appear 
until 2 August. So, if you upgrade to Windows 10 towards the end of next week, 
you’ll find your “new” code is out of date the following Tuesday.

The problem is that you have to do the Windows 10 upgrade while it’s free, but 
it may not be worth spending a lot of time on problems that may have been fixed 
in the Anniversary Update.

What’s new

The Anniversary Update includes lots of bug-fixes plus improvements 
<https://blogs.windows.com/windowsexperience/2016/03/30/windows-10-anniversary-update-brings-new-experiences-and-developer-opportunity/>
 to Windows Hello’s biometric authentication, Windows Ink for the wider use of 
styluses, Cortana access without unlocking your PC, extension support in the 
Edge browser, Linux command-line integration (a Ubuntu-based Bash shell running 
on a “Linux Subsystem for Windows”), and features for Android and Apple iPod 
users.

There will also be a free DirectX 12 game: Forza Motorsport 6: Apex 
<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/store/apps/forza-motorsport-6-apex-beta/9nblggh3shm7>
. Forza is popular on Xbox games consoles, and anXbox One controller is the 
recommended input for PC users 
<http://www.forzamotorsport.net/en-us/news/fm6_apex_beta_announce>. (The new 
Play Anywhere games bought for Xbox will be playable on Windows 10 PCs, and 
vice versa.)

Another useful feature is Active Hours 
<http://www.ghacks.net/2016/04/08/windows-10-active-hours/>, which you can set 
via the Windows Update page in Update & Security. Windows 10 will not attempt 
to install updates and restart during the times you set as Active Hours.

Of course, not everybody wants a more secure, more powerful, more usable 
operating system with a voice-controlled AI assistant and thousands of new 
apps, even if it’s free. But Windows 10 is improving at a rapid pace, and it’s 
worth keeping the option open.

Have you got a question? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com

 