
You know what’s better than rolling out of bed at 11am on to a fluffy pillow 
of pancakes? Doing so with a martini glass in hand – because nothing says 
welcome to the weekend like a completely unnecessary drink.

Boozing before noon is a kind of two fingers to adult responsibility and, in 
the spirit of the modern age, where grown men and women huntPokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> and stay up all night 
readingHarry Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter>, it is 
increasingly socially acceptable. Once upon a time, only grimy pubs catering to 
those coming off the night shift served alcohol while most of us were still 
putting the kettle on for a cuppa. But, with the unstoppable rise of brunch, 
you can now go to a fancy restaurant, drink as much as you like over breakfast, 
and even post a picture of yourself doing so online without shame.

When brunch first arrived in Britain, it was a novelty just to be able to 
order a fry-up after 10am – but it was never going to be long before we wanted 
in on the mimosa action we saw Carrie, Samantha et al enjoying on the small 
screen. “Bottomless brunches”, including all the booze you can drink, have long 
been de rigueur in the US, where waffles and a couple of cocktails have become 
a Mother’s Day tradition. But in the UK, where “a couple” is not a recognised 
serving of alcohol, we’ve not only embraced the idea, but made it our own.

Scotland’s licensing laws prohibit such “irresponsible promotions” 
<http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2007/04/13093458/6>, but in England you can 
get brunch with unlimited amounts of “fizz” for £20 atBrace & Browns 
<http://www.braceandbrowns.co.uk/> in Bristol; two courses plus prosecco, 
bloody marys and mimosas atPanam <http://www.panambarliverpool.co.uk/> in 
Liverpool for £35; and unlimited amounts of just about anything you like, from 
cider to house red, for £30 at the ominously named “Prosexy bottomless brunch 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/whats-on/food-drink-news/restaurant-swansea-offering-bottomless-brunch-11589485>
” in Newport. London offers the discerning morning boozer everything from 
Korean-spiced bloody marys to Peruvian bellinis made with Andean purple corn.

There has always been something self-consciously decadent about brunch. The 
first person to coin the term, Guy Beringer, writing in 1895,claimed 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=qpDO0iGiyegC&pg=PA8&lpg=PA8&dq=%E2%80%9Cby+eliminating+the+need+to+get+up+early+on+Sunday%E2%80%9D+brunch+makes+%E2%80%9Clife+brighter+for+Saturday-night+carousers%E2%80%9D&source=bl&ots=mdOpzRjUCn&sig=UpLXrGxrvwb9MfkBYOjDTJ9hdeU&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjBzryC6aLOAhVYOMAKHcZXCykQ6AEIJTAC#v=onepage&q=%E2%80%9Cby%20eliminating%20the%20need%20to%20get%20up%20early%20on%20Sunday%E2%80%9D%20brunch%20makes%20%E2%80%9Clife%20brighter%20for%20Saturday-night%20carousers%E2%80%9D&f=false>
 that “by eliminating the need to get up early on Sunday”, brunch makes “life 
brighter for Saturday-night carousers” – but concern is growing that its 
popularity is encouraging overindulgence. Tom Smith, the director of campaigns 
at Alcohol Concern, says: “Trends such as bottomless brunches mean it’s harder 
for people to keep track of what they’re consuming, especially when starting to 
drink earlier in the day.

“Government guidelines advise that both men and women shouldn’t consume more 
than 2-3 units of alcohol a day,” he adds – that’s two smallish glasses of 
prosecco. A reasonable amount at breakfast time, certainly, but hardly 
bottomless.

The other problem is, of course, that the old adage about drinking on an empty 
stomach is true – it really does get you drunk faster, which is hardly ideal 
unless you’ve got nothing to do for the rest of the day but go back to bed. The 
solution? Eat more pancakes. Which is advice I think we can all get behind.
 