
I retired from office life some years ago, but I am about to start working 
from home, for a lawyer. I have an iPhone and an iPad, but need to purchase a 
laptop to carry out several tasks. These include: adding to a database which 
has been set up using Excel; booking flights and hotel accommodation; sending 
and receiving emails; producing invoices and flyers, and using Skype.

The lawyer has an Apple MacBook Pro 13.

I was thinking of purchasing a Windows laptop and using either Google Sheets 
etc or office.com – which are all free – or purchasing Microsoft Office 2010 
and storing the work in Dropbox, OneDrive or Google Drive.

Would this work, as we would both be using different systems, ie a MacBook and 
a Windows laptop? Estelle

I recommend buying a desktop PC, rather than a laptop, for working from home. 
Desktop PCs are muchbetter for your health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2013/jun/20/using-laptops-tablets-physical-pains>
. They let you to use a better keyboard, a bigger screen, and a mouse. Also, 
they usually give you more power for your money, they are easier to repair and 
upgrade, and they last longer.

If you don’t have space for a desktop PC, I recommend using your laptop on a 
riser (which could just be a stack of books), with anergonomic USB keyboard 
<http://thewirecutter.com/reviews/comfortable-ergo-keyboard/> and mouse.

PC or Mac?

There are three main things to consider. First, your computer must run all the 
software you need to do the job. Second, it helps if you already know how to 
use the operating system. Third, can you afford it?

In the first place, it looks as though you will be using Microsoft Office, 
perhaps with Publisher for producing flyers. Microsoft Office runs on both PCs 
and Macs, so you can certainly work together. Technically, the Windows versions 
of Outlook – used for email, contacts and shared calendars – and Excel are more 
powerful than the Mac versions, but if you both use Macs, you’ll be at the same 
level. The main drawback is that Microsoft doesn’t offer Publisher for the Mac, 
but you can probably use the open sourceScribus <https://www.scribus.net/> 
instead.

As for the operating system, I assume you’re already familiar with Windows XP 
and possibly Vista. You will therefore have to spend some time learning a new 
operating system, whether that’s Windows 10 or macOS (formerly Mac OS X). If 
you already know how to use Windows 7, you can still buy business laptops 
running Windows 7 Pro. This will be supported until 2020, though you will have 
to move to Windows 10 eventually.

Thirdly, Apple’s prices are a barrier for many buyers. The cheapest Windows 10 
laptops cost around £130, which compares with £749 for the cheapest MacBook 
Air. But Apple also charges more for phones and tablets, and you already own 
both an iPhone and an iPad. If you were willing to pay for these, perhaps you’d 
be willing to pay Apple’s PC prices as well.

If so, then my first budget choice would be a 21.5in iMac 
<http://www.apple.com/uk/imac/specs/> (£899), preferably with an upgrade to 
16GB of memory (£160). It’s not so much a desktop as a laptop on a stick, but 
it gives you the ergonomic advantages of a big screen and a separate keyboard 
and mouse.

If you must have a laptop, the cheapest MacBook Pro 
<http://www.apple.com/uk/shop/buy-mac/macbook-pro?product=MD101B/A&step=config> 
costs the same (£899), but its 13.3in screen is obviously smaller than the 
iMac’s 21.5in screen. For an extra £100, you could buy the newer, smarter
MacBook Pro with Retina <http://www.apple.com/uk/shop/buy-mac/macbook-pro> 
screen (£999). This has a resolution of 2560 x1600 instead of 1280 x 800 pixels.

These are Apple’s entry-level prices. However, a Retina MacBook Pro (£999) 
with 16GB of memory and Apple Care (£199) comes out at £1,358, which is serious 
money.

Windows options

Today’s cheapest Windows 10 laptops include the Lenovo Ideapad 100s 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/lenovo-ideapad-100s-laptop-intel-atom-2gb-ram-32gb-11-/p2301065>
 and theHP Stream 11 
<http://www.argos.co.uk/static/Product/partNumber/4135892.htm>, which cost 
pennies less than £130. These may do what you want, but I’d still recommend 
against them. They have small (11.6in) screens, limited memories (2GB) and 
small, slow 32GB eMMC storage chips.

You should really aim for a laptop with a bigger screen, 4GB or more memory, 
and either a hard drive or a larger SSD (solid-state drive).

Going up to a 15.6in screen still gives you plenty of cheap choices. For 
example, you could get an Ideapad 100s with 4GB of memory and a 500GB hard 
drive for£199.99 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/laptops/laptops/lenovo-ideapad-100-15-6-laptop-black-10138724-pdt.html>
, or with 8GB and a 1TB hard drive for£249.95 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/lenovo-ideapad-100-laptop-intel-pentium-8gb-ram-1tb-15-6-black/p2461547>
. Better still, John Lewis is selling the same 8GB laptop with a faster Intel 
Core i3-5005U processor for£289.95 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/lenovo-ideapad-100-laptop-intel-core-i3-8gb-ram-1tb-15-6-black/p2461515>
. John Lewis includes a two-year guarantee, so if it fails after that, you’d 
just buy a new PC.

Alternatives include the Asus X540 (from £229 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/laptops/laptops/asus-x540-15-6-laptop-silver-10141450-pdt.html>
, was £399.99) and X553SA (£289.95 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/asus-x553sa-laptop-intel-pentium-8gb-ram-1tb-15-6-/p2513655?colour=Black>
), and various models of the Acer Aspire ES1-531 (from£229.99 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/laptops/laptops/acer-aspire-es1-531-15-6-laptop-black-10137570-pdt.html>
). They’re all much of a muchness, so drop by a local store and see if there’s 
one you fancy. Obviously, these laptops are nothing like as well made as the 
MacBooks at three or four times the price, but they only need to be robust 
enough to survive your home environment. Also, while they don’t have very good 
keyboards (the Ideapad 100s’ isn’t too bad), I’m assuming you’ll use them with 
an external keyboard and mouse.

You can buy better Windows laptops if you are willing to spend more: examples 
include theAsus Zenbook X305 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/asus-zenbook-ux305-ultrabook-intel-core-m3-8gb-ram-128gb-ssd-13-3-black/p2511621>
 (£579.95) and theLenovo Yoga 500 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/laptops/laptops/lenovo-yoga-500-14-2-in-1-white-10137561-pdt.html>
 (£549.99) or700 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/lenovo-yoga-700-convertible-laptop-intel-core-i7-8gb-ram-128gb-ssd-14-full-hd-touch-screen/p2459058?colour=Clementine%20Orange>
 (£749.95). But these are getting close to MacBook price territory....

If you would prefer a laptop running Windows 7 Pro, have a look at the Dell 
Vostro 3558 <http://www.dell.com/uk/business/p/vostro-15-3558-laptop/pd>. 
(Vostro is Dell’s range for small office/home office users.) This is a solid 
laptop with a decent keyboard for £229 plus delivery plus VAT (currently 
£274.80 at Dell UK), or £269 if you swap the 500GB hard drive for a 128GB SSD. 
Which I would. Either way, the big attraction is that you can add three years 
of next-business-day on-site support for only £91. (Yes, they come to your 
house. They’ve been to mine.)

Debenhams is retailing the Vostro 3558 at £286 
<http://www.debenhamsplus.com/DE_dell_Notebook_10109516/version.asp>, but that 
comes with the standard one-year warranty.

Go for Office 365

To minimise problems, you should aim to use the same version of Microsoft 
Office as your employer, so talk him or her into signing up forMicrosoft Office 
365 Business <https://products.office.com/en-gb/business/office-365-business>. 
This provides the Office suite (including OneNote and Publisher) running on 
your PC or Mac, the online, smartphone and tablet versions, 1TB of cloud 
storage per user, plus email and telephone support for £7 per person per month, 
plus VAT. That’s less than the hourly wage for most UK adults, and lawyers can 
charge from £150 to £850 or more per hour.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 