
Those damn moralists! What a mess they’re making. Can’t we throw a few hundred 
kids and their families into unending detention on remote tropical islands 
without bourgeoisie do-gooders and their churchy mates making trouble back 
home? Can’t they just all shut up?


Michael Pezzullo, chief of the immigration department, was demanding 
Australians put aside their qualms, allow his department to work in secret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/feb/08/malcolm-turnbull-backs-away-from-a-gst-increase-politics-live?page=with:block-56b7dd5ae4b0e8061a3d20b7>
 so that every child can be returned to those mouldy tents on Nauru lest 
Australia be overrun by refugees.


His gung-ho rhetoric shocked many. But Pezzullo was not saying anything new. 
The immigration department has been giving that advice to every government 
since Malcolm Fraser dealt withthe first boatload of refugees to make its way 
to this country under its own steam 
<http://www.nma.gov.au/online_features/defining_moments/your_defining_moments/vietnamese_refugees_boat_arrival>
.


Imprison every one of them, the department insisted. Put them somewhere 
lawyers and journalists can’t reach them. Punish them for daring to come here 
without permission. Send a message to the world that Australia’s borders are 
uniquely impregnable.


#LetThemStay: share your stories if you are joining protests around Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/2016/feb/04/let-them-stay-share-your-stories-if-you-are-joining-protests-around-australia>
That was Pezzullo’s message on Monday to Senate estimates. When his department 
later issued a transcript of his statement 
<https://www.border.gov.au/about/news-media/speeches-presentations/secretary-opening-statement-08022016>
, these words were picked out in bold: “The path is shut, with no exceptions.”


Fraser resisted. Paul Keating caved 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2011-11-11/obrien-the-founding-father-of-australias-indefinite-mandat/3658804>
. So mandatory detention began. But it didn’t work. As waves of refugees kept 
coming, Immigration’s advice became tougher and tougher. The department’s dream 
was always to sell politicians a fate so brutal for refugees the boats would 
stop.


John Howard pushed boats back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/19/did-howard-solution-stop-boats>. 
That worked. He also imprisoned refugees on Nauru. But in the end he had to 
face the fact that the world was not going to take them off our hands. The last 
of them – by this time cracking under the strain - were brought to Australia.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fin-the-pledge-of-the-premiers-a-sign-that-australia-has-had-enough-of-cruelty-without-mercy-to-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb630e8134d039fd835d3381ba75dd75f5c45b83%2F0_228_2527_1516%2F2527.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Signs%20at%20last%20that%20Australia%20has%20tired%20of%20cruelty%20without%20mercy%20to%20refugees%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fin-the-pledge-of-the-premiers-a-sign-that-australia-has-had-enough-of-cruelty-without-mercy-to-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Signs%20at%20last%20that%20Australia%20has%20tired%20of%20cruelty%20without%20mercy%20to%20refugees%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fin-the-pledge-of-the-premiers-a-sign-that-australia-has-had-enough-of-cruelty-without-mercy-to-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb630e8134d039fd835d3381ba75dd75f5c45b83%2F0_228_2527_1516%2F2527.jpg>
 Michael Pezzullo giving evidence to Senate estimates.When his department later 
issued a transcript of his statement 
<https://www.border.gov.au/about/news-media/speeches-presentations/secretary-opening-statement-08022016>
, it emphasised his message to refugees: ‘The path is shut, with no 
exceptions.’ Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
That reality is once again staring us in the face. We can’t empty the islands. 
“All that can be done is being done,” Pezzullo told estimates. “I speak of 
quiet diplomacy in relation to developing options for possible third-country 
resettlement and the quiet persuasion of those not owed protection to go home.”


No one wants these people. New Zealand offered to take some as it did the last 
time. We refused because it might be a backdoor way into Australia. Otherwise, 
the world reckons these 1,500 or so people are our problem.


But something is happening here. Australians are starting to pay attention. 
Ever since that first boat arrived in Darwin in 1976 most of us have shared the 
fears and backed the tough responses that have brought us to this point: punish 
or we will be overwhelmed. Most of us still do.


But the thought of little children being returned to Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> with no prospect of release is 
beginning to trouble us. What the doctors have been saying for two or three 
years now can’t be dismissed. Ditto the verdicts of the Human Rights 
Commission, the UN and the churches.


The story is gathering momentum.


That the ABC confused the cases of two children abused in the camps is most 
regrettable. But it’s no answer for Pezzullo to claim the child was older than 
five and assaulted – “skin-to-skin contact” – rather than raped by another 
inmate.


The paediatrician Karen Zwi who risked jail by speaking to the ABC is not 
backing away from her allegation that this was rape and the child of about 15 
suffered serious mental health problems as a result. Yet Pezzullo – and the 
government he serves – are making it clear he will eventually be sent back to 
the camp where he was attacked.


No exceptions. That’s the policy that’s what’s starting to grate with 
Australians. We have shown for years we’re not much troubled by the cruelty of 
the systems we’ve put in place to deter refugees. But absolute cruelty, cruelty 
without mercy is something we’re starting to find hard to hack.


Nauru, Manus ruling no blank cheque as court signals limits to detention | Ben 
Doherty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/03/nauru-manus-ruling-no-blank-cheque-as-court-signals-limits-to-detention>
So the premiers are offering to look after the kids otherwise bound for Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/07/act-signals-it-will-follow-daniel-andrews-lead-and-accept-asylum-seekers>
. This may look to some like a sentimental gesture. But it is remarkable. This 
is the first time since that boat slid into Darwin that the leaders of 
mainstream parties have stood up for boatpeople. The first time.


Malcolm Turnbull must have been bitterly disappointed by the high court’s 
decision last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/03/high-court-upholds-australias-right-to-detain-asylum-seekers-offshore>
. What a deft way that might have been to close the camps while blaming the 
lawyers, the constitution and the judges.


But they baulked and the politicians are going to have to do the work. They 
know that it’s going to have to be done. We can’t have wide open borders. But 
despite the historic hopes of the immigration department, we can’t absolutely 
close them either.


It’s going to take beginning a dialogue with the country in other than 
apocalyptic terms, opening the detention system to scrutiny, and respecting 
rather than mocking the moral qualms of Australians. It’s unbelievably messy 
but things may be moving at last.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftheres-no-hope-theres-nothing-heartbreaking-drawings-by-children-in-australias-immigration-detention-centres-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F3%2F1454477939447%2FKP_1669324_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='There's%20no%20hope%2C%20there's%20nothing'%3A%20drawings%20by%20children%20in%20immigration%20detention%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftheres-no-hope-theres-nothing-heartbreaking-drawings-by-children-in-australias-immigration-detention-centres-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27There%27s%20no%20hope%2C%20there%27s%20nothing%27%3A%20drawings%20by%20children%20in%20immigration%20detention%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftheres-no-hope-theres-nothing-heartbreaking-drawings-by-children-in-australias-immigration-detention-centres-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F3%2F1454477939447%2FKP_1669324_crop_640x480.jpg>
Drawings by some of the children in Australia’s immigration detention centres 
include tearful self-portraits and depict longing for absent parents and pleas 
for help. Dr Karen Zwi, a paediatrician who has spoken out on the children’s 
behalf despite running the risk of jail time, says: ‘These kids feel to me like 
they’ve been through a mincing machine – they’ve had one traumatic event after 
another 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/feb/03/theres-no-hope-theres-nothing-heartbreaking-drawings-by-children-in-australias-immigration-detention-centres-video> 