
It’s not often Margaret Thatcher is quoted in support of structural feminist 
arguments for fairness. She wasn’t actually talking about women when she said 
“there is no liberty without economic liberty”.


 But when it comes to explaining gender inequality in Australia, the words, at 
least, are right. Two alarming reports that have surfaced in the past fortnight 
expose the economic bedrock on which the material disadvantage of Australian 
women is perpetuated.

 The first? Last week we learned that single women on average pay can’t afford 
to live alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/04/apartment-rent-in-sydney-and-melbourne-beyond-reach-of-many-women>
 in Sydney or in most Melbourne suburbs, the two most populous cities in 
Australia.

Apartment rent in Sydney and Melbourne beyond reach of many women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/04/apartment-rent-in-sydney-and-melbourne-beyond-reach-of-many-women>
The second? That the industry that educates children in early childhood – and 
which in Australia just happens to be 95% female – employs workers“on such low 
pay that they can not start a family, travel, or successfully apply for a 
mortgage”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/07/childcare-employee-pay-too-low-to-be-able-to-start-family-union-says>

These workers are not alone. Australian law has obliged employers to pay women 
and men equally for the same work since 1969 
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/content/pdf/sex_discrim/equal_pay.pdf>
, yet the disparities in what we pay industries dominated by female workers 
compared to those employing male ones exposes how deeply the gendered 
structural inequalities remain.

Nareen Young wrote in 2013 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-10-16/young-gender-pay-gap/5026096> that 
“women’s work has never been seen as meritorious or valuable as men’s”. It’s 
now 2016, and the traditionally female-dominated professions of care work, 
community work, healthcare, human services, education, retail, food services 
and accommodation work pay less than male dominated fields of construction, 
engineering, mining and finance.

 Some people insist that the pay disparity results from a somewhat incredible 
worldwide coincidence that statistically significant numbers of women pursue 
work with low pay. Gendered stereotypes excuse the poor pay of female-dominated 
industries on the fanciful basis that women don’t seek work for money so much 
as for the happy, positive feelings aroused by underpaid industrial servitude. 
Evidence, alas, demonstrates that devaluing stereotypes follow women into the 
workplace – because once women enter an industry, the pay drops.

Equal rights to education and opportunity remain gestures towards equality and 
not outcomes whilewomen continue to earn less 
<https://www.wgea.gov.au/sites/default/files/Gender_Pay_Gap_Factsheet.pdf>, and 
retire with less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/05/low-paid-women-have-42-less-super-than-men-on-same-income-data-shows>
. This confluence of circumstances denies women the means to live 
independently, almost 90 years after Virginia Woolf wrote A Room of One’s Own. 
And it encourages economic dependencies that can compromise gender equality in 
debilitating – and dangerous – ways.

The ongoing underpayment of early childhood educators illustrates two 
simultaneous disadvantages felt by Australian women. Arguments against raising 
pay in this industry to thecomparable standard enjoyed by men with similar 
qualifications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/04/dog-groomers-make-more-per-hour-than-women-who-educate-children>
, such as construction workers or plasterers, are made by the private childcare 
operators who complain of limitations on profit opportunities in an industry 
wherewages account for two-thirds of operating costs 
<https://www.crikey.com.au/2014/04/28/childs-play-is-there-a-sustainable-business-in-kids-care/>
.

 But this argument itself is proof of the structural inequity that overburdens 
Australian women –yes, women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/a-childcare-announcement-is-sexist-must-be-opposite-day>
 – with responsibility for integrating their working lives – the hours they can 
work and the kind of jobs they can commit to doing – around care obligations. 
Running childcare as profit-making businesses restricts the service to those 
who can meet its costs, denying the community universal gains of the better 
education for all children.

It also impacts women’s productivity. In nations with childcare that’s 
affordable, well-organised and supported by the state,such as France and the 
the Scandinavian nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/21/france-population-europe-fertility-rate>
, the female workforce participation rate is higher, and incidentally, so is 
the birth rate. According to the Grattan Institute, increasing the female 
workforce participation rate by a mere6 percentage points is enough to add 
$25bn of value 
<https://www.acci.asn.au/news/women-s-participation-helps-businesses-and-economy-thrive>
 to Australia’s GDP.

There are few working Australian women unfamiliar with the “juggle struggle” 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/Opinion/Childlessness-the-revolution-we-had-to-have/2005/05/08/1115491042240.html 
http://www.theage.com.au/news/Opinion/Childlessness-the-revolution-we-had-to-have/2005/05/08/1115491042240.html>
 of managing their jobs with family responsibilities – the term itself has been 
a feature of the national discourse for more than a decade.

The 'tampon tax' is not a marginal issue - it's the force of structural sexism 
at work | Gabrielle Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/the-tampon-tax-is-not-a-marginal-issue-its-the-force-of-structural-sexism-at-work>
But as we try to unpick the social threads that facilitate female 
vulnerability to family violence, we have to recognise that these restrictions 
on women’s economic liberty – low pay, lack of housing options and care 
obligations – coalesce into situations that structurally diminish women’s 
social status and oblige women into vulnerable living situations.

The University of Wisconsin revealed in research from 2012 that women who are 
financially dependent on their partners are more likely to be abused by them, 
that they’re less likely to leave these abusers, and even “the degree of 
women’s economic dependence on an abuser is associated with the severity of the 
abuse they suffer 
<http://fyi.uwex.edu/financialseries/files/2012/02/Financial-Capability-and-Domestic-Violence.pdf>
”. Economic abuse and enforced poverty is, of course, a form of controlling 
cruelty in itself.

 It’s necessary for feminism to promote the ascendancy of women to equal 
positions of power and influence as enjoyed by men – but electing Margaret 
Thatcher prime minister hardly ended gender inequality in Britain. The only 
meaningful redress is comprehensive structural change to create material 
parity. This is what will allow women to enjoy the same independence as men.

 And right now, we don’t have it. Single working women on average wages in 
Sydney and most of Melbourne cannot afford to live alone. Men can. Does that 
look anything like fairness to you?

 * This article was amended on 12 October 2016 to correctly attribute the 
figures regarding the boost to the economy of increasing female workforce 
participation rates to the Grattan Institute.
 