
Sometimes, the sum of dumb decisions can equal a great one.

For at least a decade, the Corporation of London tried to erase or partly 
erase a group of buildings known as theSmithfield General Market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/23/smithfield-market-public-inquiry-redevelopment-rowan-moore>
 and replace it with commercial development. Part of their motive was to raise 
enough money to cover their liabilities for maintaining underground railway 
tunnels that passed underneath, so they and their developer partners stacked up 
their schemes with as much valuable volume as they could. Those schemes then 
came crashing down under the scrutiny of two public inquiries.

Historic England (then English Heritage) didn’t cover themselves with glory 
either, repeatedly failing to get the old buildings listed, which would have 
settled the argument early on. The upshot of the inquiries, after years lost, 
money spent on lawyers and abortive designs and the continued decline of the 
buildings, was that they have to stay after all. The Corporation now had a 
bigger problem than when they started, which was to find a use for this 25,000 
square metres of characterful but awkward space.

The chance is there to make a museum exceptional in Britain and the world, 
like none other

Meanwhile, another decision was made which, if not certifiably dumb, gives 
reason to doubt. This is the plan to build abrand-new and very expensive 
concert hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/16/278m-concert-hall-musuem-of-london-site>
, in theoryacoustically perfect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/17/london-new-concert-hall-simon-rattle-acoustics-design>
, at the request of the future music director of the London Symphony Orchestra, 
Sir Simon Rattle. This would go on the current site of the Museum of London, on 
the edge of the Barbican in the City. It would probably involve, though this 
detail was dwelt on lightly, a big tower to help pay for the hall and the 
relocation of the museum. Thanks to the eccentricities of 1960s traffic 
planning, whichinsisted that pedestrians be raised on elevated walkways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/feb/22/building-the-brutal-barbican-peter-bloomfield>
, the museum is absurdly hard to find and enter, and its management would be 
delighted to move.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf2dd7f3ab1120977acd0d3bb45ed8cd442a99fe%2F0_0_6093_4230%2F6093.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smithfield%20General%20Market%3A%20the%20new%20Museum%20of%20London%20sets%20out%20its%20stall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smithfield%20General%20Market%3A%20the%20new%20Museum%20of%20London%20sets%20out%20its%20stall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf2dd7f3ab1120977acd0d3bb45ed8cd442a99fe%2F0_0_6093_4230%2F6093.jpg>
 The Victorian buildings of Smithfield General Market are ‘themselves a vast, 
habitable, layered exhibit of the history of London’. 
It is anyone’s guess whether the concert hall will happen, especially now that 
its chief backer, George Osborne, has faded so fast from power. But the idea 
has raised the notion of moving the museum and the possible means to do so. 
Which museum can then go to those market buildings that were giving the 
Corporation such a headache.

Which market buildings could not be a better home for it. As the museum’s 
director,Sharon Ament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/20/museum-of-london-to-relocate-to-smithfield>
, likes to point out, they are themselves a vast, habitable, layered exhibit of 
the history of London. There are bronze age traces underneath. There are the 
multiple spaces shaped by the market’s business of selling meat, poultry and 
fish. The trade in edible flesh, which has been going on in this area for over 
a millennium, continues in the meat market next door. There are those 
underground railway tunnels, into which it might be possible to open a view 
from the galleries, so that passing trains become part of the experience.

Museum of London design shortlist: from luxury boutique to history chic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/09/museum-of-london-smithfield-architecture-design-shortlist>
There was bomb damage in the war, and various versions of repair. There is a 
multiplicity of architecture – Victorian roof structures in iron and steel, 
cavernous storage space, the triangular Fish Market, a 1960s insert called Iron 
Mountain. Part of the attraction is its everydayness: it is a place where 
working lives have been lived for centuries and left their marks. It is 
connected to the city around it rather than standing apart. Streets run through 
and around the site, and shops are built into the fabric. There are no grand 
entrances or formal approaches. The chance is there to make a museum 
exceptional in Britain and the world, like none other. And yet – as the path of 
good architecture never runs smooth – there is still a risk the chance might 
not be taken.

The task for the museum’s architects is to bring out these qualities – which 
much of the time means leaving them to speak for themselves – while making the 
market buildings function as a museum. A competition has been run, with an 
eminent jury and an interesting shortlist of practices offeringa choice of 
approaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/09/museum-of-london-smithfield-architecture-design-shortlist>
. At one end there was the Danish/American/global practice BIG, whose flashy, 
icon-making style was just what the project doesn’t need; at the other, the 
French Lacaton and Vassal, whoseart spaces in the Palais de Tokyo in Paris 
<http://www.archdaily.com/248026/palais-de-tokyo-expansion-lacaton-vassal> are 
near-perfect example of the sort of subtle excavations the old market does need.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29e78c6a68622776c212f5080f3c1cb69b2d0238%2F0_0_3572_2526%2F3572.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smithfield%20General%20Market%3A%20the%20new%20Museum%20of%20London%20sets%20out%20its%20stall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smithfield%20General%20Market%3A%20the%20new%20Museum%20of%20London%20sets%20out%20its%20stall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29e78c6a68622776c212f5080f3c1cb69b2d0238%2F0_0_3572_2526%2F3572.jpg>
 A CGI of the outside of the new museum by Stanton Williams and Asif Khan. 
Last Thursday the jury chose the well-established Stirling prize-winning 
practice ofStanton Williams <https://www.stantonwilliams.com/>, teamed up with 
the youngerAsif Khan <http://www.asif-khan.com/> – best known for the MegaFaces 
<http://www.asif-khan.com/project/sochi-winter-olympics-2014/> pavilion at the 
Sochi Winter Olympics, for the Russian phone company MegaFon, where visitors’ 
faces were digitally turned into large 3D sculptures on the façade. Stanton 
Williams are good architects, precise and thoughtful, experienced in exhibition 
design. They propose to open up the markets’ extraordinary underworld of brick 
vaults, as do other entrants. They would retain much of the existing fabric. 
They have other good people on their team – the historic buildings expertJulian 
Harrap <http://www.julianharraparchitects.co.uk/> and the landscape architects 
J & L Gibbons <http://jlg-london.com/>.

Paul Williams, of Stanton Williams, talks with passion of the “power and 
physicality” of the existing buildings. “They make your hair stand on end,” he 
says, and promises to make the most of them. Khan speaks of making a 
“democratic city square” inside the old General Market building, “a resource 
for creativity” where “London’s greatest minds can talk about past, present and 
future”. Williams would like to give visitors a glimpse of the Fleet, perhaps 
London’s most famous buried river, which passes nearby. Sharon Ament talks 
about residues of salt and smoke left from previous uses, and the importance of 
retaining the “gritty quality” of the building.

All this is positive. What gives pause is that one of Stanton Williams’s least 
successful projects is the one most like the museum-market commission. This is 
the conversion of the Granary Building in King’s Cross, a magnificent 
industrial structure, into theCentral St Martins arts school 
<https://www.stantonwilliams.com/projects/ual-campus-for-central-saint-martins-at-kings-cross/>
. It could have been wonderful, with the energy of the students reverberating 
around this crystallisation of Victorian endeavour, but somehow the 
architecture is deadening, flattening, rigid, too orderly and perfect in detail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4de85aef83e8679ef9d9db820810a617ca3cd09d%2F0_0_1200_1600%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smithfield%20General%20Market%3A%20the%20new%20Museum%20of%20London%20sets%20out%20its%20stall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smithfield%20General%20Market%3A%20the%20new%20Museum%20of%20London%20sets%20out%20its%20stall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fnew-museum-of-london-smithfield-market-stanton-williams-asif-khan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4de85aef83e8679ef9d9db820810a617ca3cd09d%2F0_0_1200_1600%2F1200.jpg>
 The ‘traditionally grandiose’ spiral escalator of Stanton Williams’s concept, 
beneath a raised version of Smithfield’s existing dome. Photograph: Malcolm 
Reading Consultants\Stanton Williams 
There are signs that their Museum of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> might go the same way. A big spiral 
escalator swoops up towards a raised version of an existing dome in the sort of 
traditionally grandiose gesture that doesn’t feel right here. Some of the more 
humble parts of the existing building, the things that give it its 
everydayness, tend to be scrubbed away. The available images show a generic 
kind of detail – glass balustrades, conventional display cases – that would 
make it resemble a well-mannered shopping mall.

The democratic agora that Khan describes isn’t yet apparent in the images, 
which show something more like the bland emptiness of Foster and Partners’
British Museum Great Court 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/projects/great-court-at-the-british-museum/>. 
Williams and Khan are keen to distance themselves from this precedent, but they 
haven’t yet shown the evidence that they will be different.Lacaton & Vassall 
<https://www.lacatonvassal.com/> and a couple of other practices on the 
shortlist suggested more profound, enriching, resonant ways of bringing out the 
wealth of the building and its content. The winners say all the right things 
with conviction and sincerity but don’t give perfect confidence that they will 
achieve them.

It’s early days. The architects have so far produced ideas rather than a fully 
worked-out design. In the course of their career, especially in some of their 
designs for temporary exhibitions at theRoyal Academy 
<https://www.stantonwilliams.com/projects/the-age-of-chivalry/> and the Hayward 
Gallery <https://www.stantonwilliams.com/projects/spectacular-bodies/>, Stanton 
Williams have shown a degree of nuance and sensitivity that will be vital here. 
Asif Khan’s liveliness could yet be an asset to the project. But they will all 
have to play out of their skins, change habits and challenge themselves, if the 
great potential the museum in the market is to be fulfilled. They will have to 
create a work such as they have never done before.

 * This article was amended on 4 August to remove a picture of a clock from 
Smithfield meat market which is not part of the proposed new Museum of London 
site.  