
Prince Christian of Denmark avoided being swept out to sea on Thursday after a 
timely rescue fromGold Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> lifeguard and surf 
champion Nick Malcolm.

The 10-year-old royal, holidaying in Australia with his parents Princess Mary 
and Crown Prince Frederik, was pulled from a fast-moving rip at Mermaid beach.

“We got him before it got too serious, but he wouldn’t have come back in,” 
Malcolm’s supervisor, lifeguard Stuart Keay,told the Courier Mail 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/entertainment/celebrity/princess-marys-son-and-heir-to-throne-rescued-from-gold-coast-surf/news-story/e51035c4f61568446a0eaab45bb1a0c7>
.

Malcolm, who paddled out to save the young prince, was unaware of his identity 
until told by a bystander. “We didn’t have a clue,” Keay said.

Chief lifeguard Warren Young told reporters on Monday it was only after the 
Danish royals had left the beach that a bystander told Malcolm whom he had just 
rescued.

Frederik also personally thanked Malcolm for his help. Young told reporters 
the lifeguards hadn’t “rung a bell” about the incident because it was a 
“professional rescue” and they wanted to respect the family’s privacy.

Young also downplayed reports that Christian had been in dire straits, saying 
“the lifeguard was watching, his father was watching ... he was a good swimmer 
and he was relaxed in the water”.

“[The family] were doing the right thing and that’s why they’re fine today.”

The Danish royals were reportedly swimming between the flags.

But Young admitted conditions at the beach had been unpredictable and a rip 
could take an unwary swimmer out to sea “in seconds”.

Malcolm had been “overwhelmed by the attention” and was not speaking to media, 
he said.

“He’s kept it pretty quiet,” fellow lifeguard Shane Pierce told the Courier 
Mail. “I’m sure we’ll give him plenty of stick now we know.”

Malcolm has previously made headlines for his rescues.

In 2014 he rescued 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/sport/news/article.cfm?c_id=4&objectid=11189477> 
68-year-old English tourist John Sherlock, who slipped underwater at Mermaid 
beach from exhaustion and stopped breathing.

Malcolm and Keay managed to save the man’s life after 30 minutes of CPR.

“The type of cardiac arrest he was in, he was gone,” Malcolm told the New 
Zealand Herald. “It was pretty intense. Lots of rib-breaking and lots of hard 
work.”

Queensland lifesavers performed 3,648 rescues in the 2014-2015 reporting year 
<http://lifesaving.com.au/about/statistics/>, with almost 650,000 “preventative 
actions” taken in the same period. More than 130,000 lives have been saved on 
Queensland beaches since statistics began to be recorded in 1930.
 