 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Flabour-party-emails-texts-post-election-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436959554932%2F063e7fc6-7f86-4417-9553-61e1e51a6791-1541x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sophie%20Heawood%3A%20Labour%20isn%E2%80%99t%20working.%20It%E2%80%99s%20spamming%20us%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Flabour-party-emails-texts-post-election-sophie-heawood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sophie%20Heawood%3A%20Labour%20isn%E2%80%99t%20working.%20It%E2%80%99s%20spamming%20us%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Flabour-party-emails-texts-post-election-sophie-heawood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436959554932%2F063e7fc6-7f86-4417-9553-61e1e51a6791-1541x2040.jpeg>
 Illustration: Nishant Choksi for the Guardian 
If you felt so upset about the Conservatives’ election victory that you 
resolved to do something about it, and joined the Labour party the very next 
day, you will know that the past month has been hard. I don’t mean watching
George Osborne make cuts in places you didn’t think there were cuts left to be 
made <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/budget-2015-july>, like a barber who 
has run out of hair and made a start on his customer’s neck. I don’t even mean 
having to look at David Cameron’s face of smug bunting while he talks about 
bringing back fox hunting, while food banks make appeals on behalf of 
schoolchildren who go hungry during the holidays.

No, I mean the fact that, every time you so much as glance at your phone or 
computer, there is yet another email or text message from the soddingLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party. Less a political party and 
more a call centre now, they are spending all their valuable opposition time 
stalking you. I’m now being contacted several times a week by every leadership 
candidate, and every candidate for the deputy role, and my local party, some 
MEPs, plus all the mayoral candidates, if you live in London, and somebody who 
once met someone down the pub who owned the same breed as a backbencher’s dog 
and has something to say about it.

“You may think you know me,” reads an email header from deputy leader candidate
Caroline Flint <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/caroline-flint>. “Will you 
join me?” enquires her rival,Tom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson>. “Up for a hustings?” asks 
general secretary of the Labour party Iain McNicol, as if he’s my best friend 
inviting me to a barbecue. Clearly, the communications team has a directive in 
place to keep these headers chatty and brief, lest they take up too much of our 
time and leave us without enough hours in the day to read all their other 
emails.

I once got an email from Justine Miliband with the simple header “What time?”, 
which made me momentarily panic that I had made some kind of informal 
arrangement to meet up with the wife of the possible future prime minister. 
Until I remembered I had never met the woman. The other day, Londoners were 
texted by thetelevision presenter June Sarpong 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/June_Sarpong>, urging us to vote David Lammy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/david-lammy> for mayor, because he’s 
really nice and she used to go out with him.

Then you turn on the news and the interim party leader Harriet Harman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/harrietharman> is telling us she supports 
the Tory welfare cuts. And then, a moment later, she declares herself “happy to 
be over-ruled on this”. And then, a bit later still, she says, well, we have to 
do something, I mean, we’ve lost two elections after all.

And you think maybe, just maybe, if Labour spent less time and money on chatty 
communications, and more on working out an actual plan, they wouldn’t have to 
turn into a second Conservative party. (Or maybe they would: I mean, it worked 
out so well for the Lib Dems. Oh, wait, they’re dead.) Yes, turning to the 
right did work for Tony Blair, and it did bring Labour its only election 
victories in recent memory, but he was a rock star compared with this lot. In 
1997, before he turned into a scoundrel, he came in with charisma and a plan. 
If you are lacking in charisma and a plan, you can’t afford to give up on what 
you do have, which are principles.

The Labour email to end all Labour emails came last week. I glanced at my 
inbox and there was the jaunty question: “Cookbooks or Powerpoint 
presentations: what would make YOU come to Labour meetings?” To be honest – and 
feel free to quote me on this at the next policy review meeting – I don’t 
really want one of their cookbooks.

I don’t care if the next presentation is written in Powerpoint, felt tip or 
menstrual blood. What I want is for the Labour party to provide a big fat 
alternative to Osborne and his vision for oakum-picking in the 21st-century 
workhouse. I want to believe in an alternative, and I think that’s all any 
member wants. I realise that all the texts and invitations are sent in the hope 
of achieving this, but there’s no need to be so gormless about it. Cookbooks vs 
Powerpoint: herein lies the political revolution that literally nobody has been 
waiting for.
 