 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsophie-heawood-yorkshire-vs-rest-of-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438098273000%2F77afe787-ed80-47f4-aeaf-3e599adcfd1a-1343x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sophie%20Heawood%3A%20I%E2%80%99ve%20lived%20half%20my%20life%20in%20London%2C%20but%20I%E2%80%99ll%20always%20be%20a%20Yorkshire%20lass%20at%20heart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsophie-heawood-yorkshire-vs-rest-of-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sophie%20Heawood%3A%20I%E2%80%99ve%20lived%20half%20my%20life%20in%20London%2C%20but%20I%E2%80%99ll%20always%20be%20a%20Yorkshire%20lass%20at%20heart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsophie-heawood-yorkshire-vs-rest-of-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438098273000%2F77afe787-ed80-47f4-aeaf-3e599adcfd1a-1343x2040.jpeg>
 Illustration: Nishant Choksi for the Guardian 
Today, 1 August, is Yorkshire Day 
<http://www.yorkshire.com/features/yorkshire-day>, but we Yorkshire folk don’t 
like to make a fuss, which is why I’m resisting the urge to riot on the streets 
and set fire to wheelie bins until the government agrees to declare it a full 
national holiday, even though it should. It’s the least it could do, especially 
since we basicallywon the 2012 Olympics for the whole of Great Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/aug/13/yorkshire-olympic-medals-gold-tourism-leeds-york-dales-sheffield-hull>
, give or take a few other countries who won it a bit more convincingly. And 
before anybody makes a helpful gag about flat caps and Satanic mills, please be 
aware that the identifying feature that binds northerners together is not our 
whippets, but the quiet understanding that we’re better than other people. Not 
that there’s anything much to justify this superiority complex. As the comedian
Paul Tonkinson <http://www.chortle.co.uk/comics/p/511/paul_tonkinson> once so 
rightly explained, “People from Yorkshire are very proud of their 
underachievement. You see these old fellas in the pub going, ‘I’ve had a great 
life, me. Gone nowhere. Done fuck all. Aye.’”

I grew up in York, but I’ve now lived half of my life in London, an ex-pat, 
like most of my friends from home, who made the move, too. Yet, one by one, in 
the past few years they’ve all started quietly creeping back north, lured by 
its rugged beauty and Viking history, by which I mean cheaper housing stock and 
free babysitting. Even my last London stalwart, Nicola, just announced that she 
can resist the pull of the magnetic north no longer either, so now it’s only 
me. Fighting theYorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> voice 
inside me that whispers, “Butwhy do you have to sit in an upturned aeroplane 
seat in a cabaret bar in east London drinking something called Confessions of a 
Cucumber Salesman out of a jam jar? Andwhy is that man trying to sign you up to 
a course in mouse taxidermy?”

When I was 11, Fergie and Andrew, Duke and Duchess of York, had their first 
baby, and he took her a bunch of red roses. It was all over the front page of 
what was then called the Yorkshire Evening Press. Not the birth of the child, 
you understand, which had happened in a private hospital inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, ergo it barely counted even as 
scientific fact, but the fact that the flowers were red, the colour of the evil 
Lancastrians, when the Yorkshire rose is white. There was outrage, which struck 
me as quite brilliant: who could fail to be impressed by a county that was 
still determined, in 1988, to enjoy a war that had begun in 1455?

A failure to be impressed, though, is exactly what Yorkshire does give you. A 
Yorkshire childhood trains you to be distinctly unimpressed by the rest of the 
world, so that when you leave and become part of the rest of the world, you 
eventually just become unimpressed by yourself. Which is not exactly helped by 
going home and finding out that your best friend from primary school just 
bought a four-bedroom house with an orchard for the price of a parking space in 
Croydon, and that the boring marriage you weren’t sure about has produced three 
brilliant children, while all you’ve got is drunk. On something involving 
cucumbers.

Well, I do have one child, born and raised in London, so she doesn’t even know 
what she’s missing. It feels distinctly odd to have given birth to a 
southerner. She knows how cashpoints work, but on a recent trip north she asked 
what that big green thing was, having never learned to identify a hedge.

I pity her future sex life, which probably won’t begin in a field beside the 
sewage works, her formative erotic memories forever linked to the sensation of 
snaring underwear on bramble. She won’t know how it feels to grow up surrounded 
by emotional hill ranges: the angry, drunken row that is the Yorkshire Moors, 
the dark, wet, guilty hangover that is the Pennines. Not the conciliatory 
Dales, nor the forgiving Wolds. Worst of all, I worry about her education. She 
will never go to a school where everyone’s parents turn up 45 minutes early for 
all scheduled events, just so they can sit and complain about all the waiting.

Still, at least she will also miss out on being made to feel something of a 
pariah if she exhibits signs of joie de vivre before the pubs are open. Pubs 
that don’t even serve cucumbers.
 