
In 1967, soon after releasing his debut album, David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> typed a reply to his first ever 
American fan letter. He was so happy to have heard from this girl, Sandra, that 
he wrote back in some detail. “I’ve been waiting for some reaction to the album 
from American listeners,” he said. “There were reviews in Billboard and Cash 
Box, but they were by professional critics and they rarely reflect the opinions 
of the public. The critics were very flattering however. They even liked the 
single Love You Till Tuesday. I’ve got a copy of the American album and they’ve 
printed the picture a little yellow. I’m not really that blond. I think the 
picture on the back is more ‘me’. Hope you like those enclosed.” (Is it just me 
who is rendered a touch hysterical by the idea of a young Bowie, in the days 
before he went into character as a drugged alien in flaming leotards and 
zigzags painted across his head, yearning to look a bit more “me”?)

This lengthy epistle, reprinted in the forthcoming book More Letters Of Note 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/335749/>, looks 
set to prove the first rule of stardom, which is just how much all famous 
people want to be famous at the start – even the ones who later decide to 
become invisible. Bowie might be a reclusive enigma now, but in 1967 he was 
asking his first overseas fan whether he should open an American fan club as 
well as his existing British one.

While Celebrity Big Brother rages across our screens, full of desperate, 
wretched (and often gripping) people who seem to lurch from one reality show to 
the next, it is good to remember that it isn’t just them, theKardashians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> and the Beckhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/sep/05/-sp-victoria-beckham-fashion-empire-famous-successful>
 who want to be famous. The mysterious, enigmatic, intellectual ones want 
it, too. The Bowies, theTilda Swintons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton>, the Zaha Hadids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> – they all, at one point, 
yearned to be so successful that they could no longer walk down the street 
without wearing massive sunglasses in November.

With some, it is more covert: Bowie probably wouldn’t have spoken publicly 
about worries that his hair was the wrong shade of yellow on the album sleeve, 
whereas a Kardashian would have got three episodes of a TV show, a press 
conference, and a magazine exclusive out of this revelation. But it is still 
there.

The second rule of stardom is that they all say they don’t read their reviews, 
and they all lie, as I have learned in the course of doing many interviews. 
They never, ever even look at the papers, they say – and then they ask you 
about a particular colleague of yours who wrote something so horrible that they 
contemplated hiring an assassin and having him killed, and why couldn’t they 
have been reviewed by that other writer who seems so much nicer? This is the 
point where you realise they are not lying: they really don’t read their 
reviews – they consume them with every inch of their body.

The third rule of fame is that sometimes you meet the nicest, friendliest 
sorts and find yourself wishing they were more like the recluses. Once, having 
recently moved to Los Angeles, I was dispatched by the NME to interview theFoo 
Fighters’ Dave Grohl <https://www.theguardian.com/music/dave-grohl>, commonly 
referred to as “the nicest man in rock”, at his house “in the hills”. It turned 
out these were not the Hollywood Hills, as I had wrongly assumed, but some 
other hills much farther away, making my taxi ride very expensive, which is why 
I jumped out of the cab the minute we reached his gates.

I pressed  the intercom and a man who sounded strangely like Dave Grohl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/dave-grohl> answered, explaining how to 
drive up to the house. Embarrassed that I had moved to LA without learning to 
drive, and realising I had sent the cab driver away too soon, I hastily agreed 
with the voice I decided must belong to a butler. It would all be fine, 
I reassured myself, as Dave would be buried inside his mansion somewhere with 
no idea that I didn’t have a car. Fifteen minutes later, I made it to the front 
door, where Grohl stood chortling at me, having watched me hike across his 
property, while trying to hide my sweat patches, on his CCTV.

Now Mr Grohl is a very charming man, but there are times when you yearn for an 
enigma like the latterday Bowie, who would surely have taken one look at my 
damp armpits and been too polite, too otherworldly to say a thing.
 