
Once upon a time, goes a well-worn story, cities were made of streets. People 
were happy. They loved their neighbours and looked out for each other. Kids 
played outside. You knew where you stood: a house looked like a house and a 
street looked like a street. You could put out flags and tea kettles for a 
royal jubilee. Then ideological modern architects, in league with control-freak 
local councils, ripped it all up. Streets were insanitary, they said. Their 
residents (they thought but didn’t say) were too unruly. So they had to be 
corralled into soulless blocks, human battery farms, gulags, surrounded by open 
spaces that no one wanted or owned and so became colonised by gangs and drugs.

The story is oversimplified. You don’t have to look far into the literature of 
the past to find that alienation, dystopia and misery could flourish in good 
old streets. There are several ways to create successful shared spaces – courts 
and communal gardens, for example – as well as streets. Not everyone wants a 
house and private garden. One of the strengths of Britain’s big cities is the 
multiplicity of ways to live that they offer, including that reviled modernist 
housing, some of which turns out to have qualities of its own.

Brent council's Richard Barrett remembers both ‘camaraderie’ and the fact that 
taxi drivers would refuse to go there

But the street remains a successful and well-tried form of human settlement. 
For this reason, since the US writer and activistJane Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/04/jane-jacobs-100th-birthday-saskia-sassen>
 pointed this out in the early 1960s, planners, developers and local 
politicians have very gradually been walking back to the idea that existing 
streets should be cherished and new ones created. A basic proficiency has grown 
up in making them. The people who are now doing it best, especially in London, 
are the same local councils who once tore streets down. They are assisted by a 
contemporary type of architect, more cautious and chastened than their postwar 
forebears, but committed to the wellbeing of residents. At least for now: this 
success story is endangered both by the government’sHousing and Planning Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/gallery/2016/may/18/social-housing-tenants-demonised-housing-planning-act-in-pictures>
, which reduces councils’ ability to use their assets as they think best, and 
by the recessionary squeeze that might follow Brexit.

The whole story is laid out in the 48-hectare south Kilburn estate 
<https://www.brent.gov.uk/your-community/regeneration/south-kilburn-regeneration/>
, in the borough of Brent, west London, whereAlison Brooks Architects 
<http://www.alisonbrooksarchitects.com/> have completed 43 new dwellings. Here 
were terraces upon terraces, speculatively laid out in the 1860s, some of which 
became overcrowded and badly maintained, and so considered to be slums. Some 
were bombed in the war. In the following decades successive plans were proposed 
and implemented by local government, varying with changing fashions in typology 
or construction technique (point block or slab, brick or concrete, deck access 
or not), but with the same underlying idea of replacing all the old streets 
with something as different as could be.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7744c8ac17d39776ab5bb7155dd5b526cf82c626%2F19_89_2029_1218%2F2029.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7744c8ac17d39776ab5bb7155dd5b526cf82c626%2F19_89_2029_1218%2F2029.jpg>
 Ely Court prior to regeneration. Photograph: Paul Riddle  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c9bd9b28e4ef68c5d8852f8c75b9eeb4fe3c8b%2F0_422_6336_3802%2F6336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c9bd9b28e4ef68c5d8852f8c75b9eeb4fe3c8b%2F0_422_6336_3802%2F6336.jpg>
 … and after. Photograph: Paul Riddle 
There was a wave of glum and basic blocks built when money and materials were 
scarce, followed by elegant, slender oblongs with glassy stair towers and 
well-lit flats. There is a shopping precinct intended as the area’s “heart” 
which flutters feebly. Some pieces of terrace remain, as a result of effective 
opposition by their then residents. Some of the worst architecture was kept 
until the end of the reconstruction – towers in factory-made concrete panels of 
special aggression. The cumulative effect was, says Brent’s estates 
regeneration manager Richard Barrett, antisocial behaviour, with a poor 
infrastructure, poorly maintained. He should know, as he grew up on the estate. 
He remembers both “camaraderie” and the fact that taxi drivers would refuse to 
go there. The estate also figures, not too flatteringly, in Zadie Smith’s novel
White Teeth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525d251114cf17b38b177039ae98ff1948ce1c57%2F0_184_2624_1576%2F2624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525d251114cf17b38b177039ae98ff1948ce1c57%2F0_184_2624_1576%2F2624.jpg>
 ‘Unexpected angles’: Ely Court, designed by Alison Brooks Architects. 
Photograph: Paul Riddle 
The idea now is to “knit south Kilburn back into its geographical context” and 
to “create an environment that will allow people to improve their lives, and to 
aspire and believe”. Working to a masterplan originally drawn up a decade ago, 
the council is selectively demolishing existing blocks and replacing them with 
new ones. They are rebuilding at higher densities, such that there will be more 
and sometimes larger social rented units (in other words, council flats) than 
there were before, plus new homes sold on the open market to finance the whole 
operation (in which respect, high London values are helpful). No tenant has to 
move out of the area if they don’t want to, so communities are kept intact. 
There is a new park, a medical centre, community space. Cul-de-sacs and alleys, 
where you would have “been brave or foolish to go at certain times”, are being 
abolished or made safer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fe647e1de7e957c5f0c390cd6bae64ee7a077d6%2F65_58_2647_1862%2F2647.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fe647e1de7e957c5f0c390cd6bae64ee7a077d6%2F65_58_2647_1862%2F2647.jpg>
 Spaciousness and light inside. Photograph: Nelson Carvalho 
Alison Brooks’s Ely Court 
<http://www.alisonbrooksarchitects.com/project/ely-court/>, made up of three 
four-storey blocks inserted amid older slabs, is the latest part of the plan to 
be realised. It is not radical or ostentatious, but restores the ruptured 
fabric of the area. In council estates in London, says Brooks, “social 
segregation is reinforced by the architecture. It is so divorced in arrangement 
and scale”, so the aim is to “remove segregation, to start to merge with the 
neighbourhood”. What Ely Court achieves is not rocket science, but it is still 
too rare to see it done well.

They are handsome, plain, well-proportioned brick buildings with well-made 
window frames and considered details: the reveals of windows and doors have a 
certain depth, for example, to give a sense of solidity. This is what has 
become the shared style of responsible designers of housing. Brooks is one of 
the more playful of them, so in places her practice’s sober buildings break 
into unexpected angles in response to the canted geometry of the buildings 
around them. Inside the homes the ceiling heights are generous and windows run 
from floor to ceiling, which provides spaciousness and light and gives the 
exterior some sense of transparency. There are decent-sized balconies that are 
set into the blocks and feel like extensions of the living space rather than 
tacked-on appendages. The flat layouts make use of the odd angles to create 
individuality, and they have windows facing, where possible, in several 
different directions. The residents I meet – a local mother of four who rents, 
and relatively well-off retirees from the north-east who have bought – profess 
complete satisfaction with their homes and their neighbourhood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fa8d066926b5d97c73e2688c1561ad61a637635%2F0_0_4224_6336%2F4224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Kilburn%20estate%20review%20%E2%80%93%20homes%20that%20are%20streets%20ahead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fsouth-kilburn-estate-brent-council-alison-brooks-architects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fa8d066926b5d97c73e2688c1561ad61a637635%2F0_0_4224_6336%2F4224.jpg>
 ‘The lives inside the homes communicate with those on the street.’ Photograph: 
Paul Riddle 
And then – look, they make a street! Most of them front on to a thoroughfare 
previously forbidding at night, says Barrett, because it had too little 
frontage on to the pavement: “If anything untoward happened to you it was not 
going to be seen or heard.” The big windows and balconies, together with front 
gardens, create a zone where the lives inside the homes communicate with those 
on the street. At the back of the new blocks a footpath has also lost its 
formerly hostile feeling. At the same time the street-making is not pursued 
with dogma: the areas of grass left behind by the modernist architects mostly 
remain, but with less harsh architecture around them they acquire more purpose 
and charm.

The outcome of the sometimes fraught history of south Kilburn are homes better 
than the area has seen before, including those revered 19th-century terraces. 
This is partly a matter of basic considerations such as insulation against cold 
and noise, or low-maintenance materials, and partly of thoughtful design and 
planning. Indeed the composite of Victorian, postwar and 21st century, with 
which the area has half-accidentally ended up is more rich and diverse, and 
therefore offers more possibilities for living, than it would have been if the 
repetitive old streets had remained untouched.


None of this would have been possible without the role of the council. Like 
other London boroughs such as Hackney and Camden, Brent has rediscovered the 
confidence to plan in the long-term interests of their residents. They retain 
ownership of their property so they have an interest in the quality of 
construction. They keep a high degree of control on their buildings and insist 
on the designs that they want. Private property companies, always cutting costs 
to keep their shareholders happy, don’t act in the same way. Strange to say, 
given the frequency with which they are blamed for incompetence in general and 
bad housing in particular, councils are now building some of the best homes in 
the country.
 