
Angela has been living in the remote town of Ganyiel, in South Sudan’s Unity 
state, for 18 months. Trying to feed her five children has been hard.

Angela is angry with the country’s warring parties. “I pray for peace,” she 
says. “But if they won’t stop the conflict, I’m telling [president] Salva Kiir 
and [rebel leader] Riek Machar to fight each other with their own hands and 
stop killing our kids.”

Many internally displaced people in the area share Angela’s frustration. Their 
views were heard by Ertharin Cousin, the executive director of the UNWorld Food 
Programme (WFP) <http://www.wfp.org/>, and the deputy special representative of 
the UN secretary general in the UN mission in South Sudan, Toby Lanzer, when 
they toured Ganyiel last weekend.

“It’s important the world recognises the crisis here,” Cousin said. “People 
here are victims, and without us they have nothing.” She said the WFP had a 
shortfall of $250m (£168m) to operate its programmes for the next six months.

Although in a rebel-held area, Ganyiel is a relatively safe village, away from 
the fighting that started in December 2013 after Kiir accused his 
vice-president, Machar, of plotting a coup. The war has caused the deaths of 
tens of thousands of civilians and displaced almost 2 million people. Ganyiel’s 
isolation is worsened by constant flooding. An estimated 110,000 people are 
seeking refuge in the region, tens of thousandsmore 
<http://www.ipsnews.net/2014/03/wfp-airdrops-food-south-sudan/> than a year 
ago. With roads barely functioning, the best way to deliver aid is by air.

Kiir and Machar should be barred from South Sudan's caretaker government, says 
African Union
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/06/kiir-machar-caretaker-government-african-union-civil-war>
According to the WFP’s head of nutrition, Darlene Raphael, 32% of children in 
the region are malnourished; rates above 15% are considered critical. Raphael 
assists locals in teaching others how to prepare food four times a day and wash 
their hands with soap and water.

More funding alone won’t solve the food shortages. “We have logistical 
limitations such as not having anywhere to land and park more planes. 
Furthermore, donors have limits to how much more they will fund,” said a WFP 
representative.

The organisation has airdropped food around Ganyiel since March 2014. This 
year, 10 planes are regularly delivering cooking oil, sorghum cereal and yellow 
split peas. Almost 70% ofSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> is inaccessible during the 
rainy season and WFP is using the current dry period to prepare for the coming 
downpour.

According to WFP figures released 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/WFP%20Sth%20Sudan%20Situation%20Report%20%2367,%2006%20March%202015.pdf>
 in March, nationwide food distribution reached 377,000 beneficiaries in 
February. The UN says that 2.5 million people across the nation are food 
insecure, and that number could easily rise to 4 million by the end of the year.

In Ganyiel, things have improved greatly since the start of the war. One year 
ago the market was almost empty; today, it is filled with basic goods. There is 
a feeling of semi-permanence among the population. But everybody complains of 
regularly going hungry, despite the aid. The local commissioner, John Tap Puot, 
said government intimidation against journalists and civilians was ongoing and 
there weren’t enough medicines, doctors and water available. In 2014 the floods 
killed many cattle and destroyed crops, forcing locals to become dependent on 
the WFP and NGOs for food.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fsouth-sudan-food-crisis-ganyiel-child-malnutrition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427281925772%2F9326b700-7083-42cf-ae3d-7be846b0955b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Sudan%20food%20crisis%20leaves%20people%20of%20Ganyiel%20desperate%20for%20a%20peace%20deal%20%7C%20Antony%20Loewenstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fsouth-sudan-food-crisis-ganyiel-child-malnutrition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Sudan%20food%20crisis%20leaves%20people%20of%20Ganyiel%20desperate%20for%20a%20peace%20deal%20%7C%20Antony%20Loewenstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fsouth-sudan-food-crisis-ganyiel-child-malnutrition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427281925772%2F9326b700-7083-42cf-ae3d-7be846b0955b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A woman prepares a meal consisting of the roots of a water lily in Nyal, Unity 
state. Photograph: Tony Karumba/AFP/Getty Images 
The political and economic crisis in the country is growing. A recently leaked 
African Unionreport 
<http://ca.reuters.com/article/topNews/idCAKBN0M129M20150305> recommended that 
both Kiir and Machar be barred from any future government and – more 
controversially – that the AU take control of the country.

Lanzer says the government is printing money to avoid financial collapse, 
risking hyperinflation. Officials deny they are increasing the money supply. 
With a 60% drop in oil production due to the war and a falling global oil 
price, the country recentlyannounced 
<http://eaglefordtexas.com/news/id/147818/south-sudanese-minister-signs-mining-order/>
 it would vigorously pursue mining. But a lack of proper regulation risks 
profiteers exploiting untapped resources. Washington, which had hoped South 
Sudan would be a reliable, African success story, appearsuninterested 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/02/25/unmade-in-the-usa-south-sudan-bush-obama/> 
in further, serious engagement.

During a public rally 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/inpictures/2015/03/thousands-gather-salva-kiir-rally-south-sudan-150319071154992.html>
 for Kiir in the capital, Juba, last week, attendance was low – roughly 4,000 
people turned out – and few solutions were offered to the crisis. Thethreat of 
sanctions hangs over the nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/25/south-sudan-sanctions-loom-us-draft-resolution-un-security-council>
.

The latest UN figures show that 112,590 people are living in refugee camps 
across five states. In Ganyiel, people know about the recently collapsed peace 
talks. “I want the international community to force Kiir and Machar to sign a 
peace deal,” said Angela.
 