
Commercial planes should continue flying over the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> despite the risk of 
“miscalculation” from the apparent placement of surface-to-air missile 
launchers in the disputed region, Julie Bishop has said.

Australia’s foreign affairs minister, who raised the “deeply worrying” issue 
during her visit to Beijing last week, said her Chinese counterparts had 
neither confirmed nor deniedreports of the recent deployment to Woody Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/china-places-missiles-woody-south-china-sea-islands>
.

“They said that in any event they were entitled to establish self-defence 
facilities,” Bishop told the ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday.

Beijing places missile launchers on disputed South China Sea island
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/china-places-missiles-woody-south-china-sea-islands>
“We are talking about an area where civilian aircraft pass through, where 
there’s a lot of navigation, because it’s a significant trade route, not only 
for Australia but for other countries ... My point is that if there are 
surface-to-air missiles in an area where commercial aircraft fly, then there is 
a risk of miscalculation.”

Asked how the commercial airline industry should respond to the risk, Bishop 
said commercial ships and planes “should continue as normal ... becauseChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has undertaken not to militarise”.

She reaffirmed Australia’s calls for all countries claiming territory in the 
South China Sea to cease land reclamation work.

“A number of claimants have reclaimed land and constructed things but the 
scope and scale and speed of China’s activities have dwarfed those of all 
others,” Bishop said.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, and his New Zealand counterpart, John 
Key,made a similar call in a joint statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/coalition-under-renewed-pressure-to-send-australian-military-to-south-china-sea>
 after bilateral talks in Sydney on Friday. They said all claimants should take 
steps to ease tensions in the vital trade route.

Tensions rose last week after Beijing appeared to install batteries of eight 
missile launchers and a radar system on Woody Island, which is part of the 
Paracel Island chain and is claimed by China, Taiwan and Vietnam.

Images of the equipment were taken by the private company ImageSat 
International and the development was subsequently confirmed by the Taiwanese 
defence ministry.

Beijing accuses US of 'ulterior motives in hyping up' South China Sea missile 
move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/18/beijing-accuses-us-of-ulterior-motives-in-hyping-up-south-china-sea-missile-move>
The Chinese foreign affairs minister, Wang Yi, was asked about the reports 
after a meeting with Bishop on Wednesday. Wang did not deny that missile 
launchers had been installed but said the reports were an attempt by certain 
western media to create news stories.

“As for the limited and necessary self-defence facilities China has built on 
islands and reefs stationed by Chinese personnel, that is consistent with the 
self-defence and self-preservation China is entitled to under international 
law,” Wang said.

Several other countries have overlapping claims in the South China Sea, 
including Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines.

Australia does not have any territorial claims in the region but has 
repeatedly emphasised the importance of freedom of navigation.

The Labor opposition’s defence spokesman, Stephen Conroy, has called on the 
government to send a military plane or ship within 12 nautical miles of 
disputed islands, because countries like Australia should “demonstrate that 
they are not prepared to be bullied by China” over the unresolved territorial 
claims.
 