
After 10 months of bickering and failed deals, two inconclusive general 
elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/25/spain-mariano-rajoy-third-general-election-christmas-day>
 and some of the most dramatic political upheaval since its return to democracy 
more than four decades ago, Spain finally has a government again.


Mariano Rajoy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mariano-rajoy>, leader of the 
conservative People’s party (PP), was returned to office following a second 
investiture vote on Saturday, after the Spanish Socialist party (PSOE) chose to 
abstain to break the political paralysis and avoid a third election.

The vote, which brought an end to more than 300 days of political paralysis, 
saw Rajoy win the required simple majority in Spain’s 350-seat congress of 
deputies, securing the backing of 170 MPs from his own party, the centrist 
Citizens party and the Canaries coalition. A total of 111 MPs voted against him 
and 68 abstained, with 15 members of the PSOE defying their leadership by 
voting no. Rajoy is expected to be sworn in by King Felipe on Sunday.

Thousands of protesters gathered around parliament to demonstrate against 
Rajoy’s return and oppose what they see as his “illegitimate government”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fspain-to-get-government-after-10-month-political-impasse-mariano-rajoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26f66e99fc9bceae23899e11508cd4c6690f1f8b%2F0_0_3384_2328%2F3384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spain%20avoids%20third%20election%20and%20ends%2010-month%20political%20impasse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fspain-to-get-government-after-10-month-political-impasse-mariano-rajoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spain%20avoids%20third%20election%20and%20ends%2010-month%20political%20impasse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fspain-to-get-government-after-10-month-political-impasse-mariano-rajoy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26f66e99fc9bceae23899e11508cd4c6690f1f8b%2F0_0_3384_2328%2F3384.jpg>
 Protestors against Rajoy’s investiture for a second term in Madrid. 
Photograph: Gerard Julien/AFP/Getty Images 
Speaking after the vote, Rajoy said there was still a lot of work to do and 
called for congress to come together. “We’re going to try to look for agreement 
and understanding with everyone,” he said. “I’m happy because even though we 
received less support than in [the election] in 2011, a majority of Spaniards 
have continued to trust the People’s party, which has had to govern in the most 
difficult times.

“I think we’re a great nation and a great country and I hope that this isn’t 
just an investiture session, but that, as in other European countries where no 
one has a majority, we’ll be able to govern and work in a joint manner.”

Although the PP took the most seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/20/peoples-party-wins-spanish-election-absolute-majority>
 in the elections in December 2015 and June this year, it failed towin an 
outright majority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/spanish-elections-exit-polls-show-deadlock-likely-to-continue>
 in either. The PSOE, which came second in both, had vociferously refused to do 
anything to ease Rajoy’s return as prime minister, until its leader Pedro 
Sánchez was oustedin an acrimonious uprising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/spanish-socialist-leader-quits-pedro-sanchez-psoe>
 that has torn the party apart.


What do you think about the state of Spain's politics?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/what-do-you-think-about-the-state-of-spains-politics>
Sánchez had dismissed pleas from parts of the PSOE to allow the PP back into 
government, insisting that the latter was too deeply mired ina series of 
corruption scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/former-imf-chief-rodrigo-rato-heckled-at-start-of-corruption-trial>
 to be allowed to retake office.

He stood down as leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/pedro-sanchez-resigns-as-leader-of-spains-socialist-party>
 this month after losing a vote that would have allowed grassroots party 
members to back or sack him in a leadership contest.

The PSOE’s caretaker leadership had abandoned Sánchez’s position and decided 
to offer the necessary abstentions in Saturday’s investiture vote, thereby 
allowing Rajoy toform a minority government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/spains-acting-prime-minister-set-to-end-political-stalemate>
.

It voted against him in protest at his policies after the first investiture 
debate earlier this week, leading Rajoy to lose the vote by 180 seats to 170.

Sánchez resigned his seat hours before Saturday’s vote, saying: “I can neither 
go against my party nor against my electoral pledge.”

He did, however, hint that he was planning to run for leadership again, saying 
that he would work “in a loyal and constructive way” to rebuild an independent 
PSOE that kept its distance from the PP.

“On Monday, I’m going to get in my car and travel all across Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> to listen to all those who haven’t 
been listened to – party members and voters on the left,” he said.

The socialists have vowed to scrutinise Rajoy’s every move, reminding him that 
he is only prime minister once again because of their abstention.


“Mr Rajoy, the citizens well know – as do you – that neither you nor your 
project have our confidence,” PSOE spokesman Antonio Hernando told congress on 
Saturday. “We believe that you are not the president that Spain deserves, but 
what we need even less are third elections.”

Rajoy had adopted a conciliatory tone during the first debate on Wednesday. 

“I know there will be obstacles and that every step or law will have to be the 
fruit of an accord,” he said. “We’ve lost 10 months, but they won’t have been 
in vain if we’ve learned something.”


The Guardian view on Spanish politics: a deal at last, but uncertainty endures 
| Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/the-guardian-view-on-spanish-politics-a-deal-at-last-but-uncertainty-endures>
Rajoy’s first task when he resumes office will be to get next year’s budget 
approved. Spain’s economy grew by 0.7% over the previous quarter, but the 
country needs to find €5bn (£4.5bn) through tax increases or cuts if it is to 
meet its deficit target.

The PSOE has made it clear that the party will not approve the next 
government’s budgets or do anything to bolster its stability.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fspain-to-get-government-after-10-month-political-impasse-mariano-rajoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f0bcb34d5e8aeec54cac8ba5428493778774835%2F0_66_3684_2664%2F3684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spain%20avoids%20third%20election%20and%20ends%2010-month%20political%20impasse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fspain-to-get-government-after-10-month-political-impasse-mariano-rajoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spain%20avoids%20third%20election%20and%20ends%2010-month%20political%20impasse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fspain-to-get-government-after-10-month-political-impasse-mariano-rajoy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f0bcb34d5e8aeec54cac8ba5428493778774835%2F0_66_3684_2664%2F3684.jpg>
 Pablo Iglesias of Podemos delivers his speech during the session of Rajoy’s 
investiture. Photograph: Javier Lizon/EPA 
The disarray in the ranks of the PSOE has provided the anti-austerity party 
Podemos with an opportunity to displace it as the dominant force of the Spanish 
left.

The Podemos leader, Pablo Iglesias, told parliament on Thursday that his party 
would not “fall into line” and asked how the Socialists could provide a real 
opposition if they had allowed Rajoy to govern. In a blistering address, he 
told the PSOE: “It may be hard for you to recognise this, but you’re closer to 
the People’s party than to us.”
 