
Julen Lopetegui could have been in the West Midlands on Sunday, preparing for 
Preston; instead, he is on his way to Wembley. He had already begun working 
with the Chinese conglomerate seeking to buyWolverhampton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolves> when the phone rang. At the other 
end was Ángel María Villar, president of the Spanish Football Federation, with 
an offer he could not refuse. So Lopetegui turned away from Molineux and made 
for Madrid instead. On 21 July, Fosun International became the new owners of 
Wolves; on the same day, the man they wanted to lead them was unveiled as the 
coach of Spain’s national team.

His new office is on the first floor of Spain’s Las Rozas HQ, 25km north-west 
of the capital.Inherited from Vicente del Bosque 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/vicente-del-bosque-to-quit-spain-manager>
, coach for eight years,winner of the 2010 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/11/world-cup-final-spain-champions>
 andEuro 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jul/02/euro-2012-spain-italy-final-history>
, a picture of some of those celebrations remains on the wall and Lopetegui has 
not yet made it his own. But the office, like his team, does look a little 
different now. Less familiar, less lived-in, most of the books gone from the 
shelf. He has been away a lot, after all – especially in England, where 36 
Spaniards play in the Premier League, including seven of his squad, and where 
he might have set up home permanently. Had due diligence and the various checks 
at Molineux been completed sooner, the call could have been too late.

FA plucks Gareth Southgate for England job from a bare cupboard | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/12/fa-gareth-southgate-england-manager-candidates>
“When the federation called, naturally my objective became the national team, 
but it’s true that before that [Wolves and I] had been working hand in hand for 
some time,” Lopetegui says. “It was very close but in the end it wasn’t to be. 
I enjoyed the time I spent with them; there were offers from the Premier League 
but their project was especially attractive. Wolves is a great club, where 
there would be significant investment and a desire to grow, to shine again.

“I’m passionate about English football; it’s lived in a special way, unique. 
There’s a culture of believing in mid- and long-term projects. Admittedly, 
that’s changing: the division with the most [managerial] changes in the world 
last season wasthe Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. But there’s respect, a 
willingness to build properly, patience. Then there’s the fans’ passion. 
England invented football and the culture’s special. The challenge of bringing 
something new to English football was attractive; the chance to applying some 
of our culture, things I thought could help.”

There is a sense in Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> that 
English football needs that help, that its coaching lacks something and has 
been left behind. Put bluntly, that English coaches are not very good. “I 
wouldn’t dare to say that; it would be misplaced: I respect them too much, I’m 
sure there are fantastic coaches,” Lopetegui protests.

He does, though, see value in cross-fertilisation: England can, and has, 
gained from foreigners arriving there, Spaniards included. Nor, he says, is it 
one-sided. “Footballing cultures are enriched by ideas from outside. I don’t 
see thePremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> as a 
threat toLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>. They 
can coexist fantastically well, there’s room for two or three good leagues. The 
national team [benefits] too. Years ago, the international experience [our] 
players had was reduced to European games. Now, lots of them have emigrated. 
Breaking down barriers, succeeding away from home, living in another country, 
another culture, different football, makes you much stronger. It’s also a 
reality: this is a globalised world with lots of strong markets, which obliges 
us to be alert to other leagues, especially England.”

Lopetegui could pick a team of Premier League footballers against England on 
Tuesday, although he grins knowingly when the list stalls at centre-back. There 
are many good players to choose from – “Every time we pick a squad we commit an 
injustice,” he says – and he is at the mercy of the clubs.Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, say: “Cesc’s not playing as 
often as he did to begin with,” he says of Fàbregas. “In [Antonio] Conte’s 
system it’s hard to find a place for him. He’s a great player and if he was 
playing regularly I have no doubt that he’d be with us.”

Another player who is not there is Fàbregas’s Chelsea team-mate Diego Costa, 
forced to pull out of the squad on Thursday, to be replaced by the former 
Liverpool striker Iago Aspas. For Lopetegui, it is a pity: just when things 
were coming good. One goal in two years under Del Bosque for Costa was followed 
by three in two games under the new manager and the sense that, at last, he 
fits their football.

“That [improvement] is down to him,” Lopetegui says. “Diego lives football his 
way; we don’t want to change his character because it’s part of him. More has 
been said about that dark side but I prefer to talk about the good things. It’s 
‘journalistic’ to talk about the controversy; that’s the world we live in. He’s 
conscious of what he is, what he represents. He’s a good kid: a nice lad, a 
joker, good to be around. With time, he’s growing, adapting. He’ll make a 
mistake some time, hopefully not with us, [but] that’s part of football.”

Another man looking at the new era with optimism is Manchester United’s Ander 
Herrera, called up for the first time and likely to make his debut at Wembley. 
“He’s a good player who has evolved; he’s intelligent and has adapted to what 
coaches have asked, surviving in a very physical football. He’s bringing 
together a team like Manchester United from the middle and playing well.”

Lopetegui knew Herrera from Spain’s youth setup. And that, he suggests, could 
be an advantage – one that draws parallels with his England counterpart,Gareth 
Southgate <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate>. Lopetegui, a 
former Real Madrid and Barcelona substitute goalkeeper who went to the 1994 
World Cup but did not play a minute, was at Porto for the last two seasons but 
that is his only experience as a top-flight coach. His Spanish club coaching 
career is limited to 10 games with Rayo Vallecano in Spain’s second tier. Yet 
he spent four years with the federation, coaching Spain Under-19s and 
Under-20s, and the Under-21s to their European Championship win in 2013, and 
sees no reason why coaches such as Southgate should not progress from within.

“It’s no impediment, quite the opposite,” he says. “You know what a national 
team coach’s job is, the environment, the culture. There are specific factors 
that condition your work and you understand them. You compete in a couple of 
games every two months and your ‘Champions League’ is six or seven games in the 
summer. You have a lot of time to prepare and very little time to have an 
impact. You have to know how to condense your message and transmit it, find a 
way to ensure that the little ‘pill’ you give players is the right one, the 
right dose. There’s something enjoyable about the fact that you’re on edge, no 
margin.

“There’s an institutional dimension too: you represent your [country’s] 
football. That’s the bit that least attracts coaches but you do it willingly.”

It is the least attractive, but in the English case it can appear the most 
decisive. Venables, Eriksson, Hoddle, Allardyce, even Capello were all pushed 
towards the exit for reasons other than footballing failure. Lopetegui 
understands that and while he refuses to be drawn on Allardyce’s case, he says: 
“A coach – any coach, not just a national team coach – should try to be 
exemplary. And a national team manager even more so.” Then he adds: “I don’t 
think it makes you less of a coach to be exemplary, either. It should be 
innate.”

Lopetegui’s office is testament to the fact that this is a new Spain, but one 
where the old Spain remains present; the one thatfailed in Brazil in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/18/spain-chile-world-cup-group-b>
 andin France in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/italy-spain-euro-2016-match-report>
 and, more importantly, the one that went six years winning it all. As he steps 
out and heads down the stairs, he passes more pictures. In one of them, Iker 
Casillas holds the World Cup as captain but, aged 35 and with 167 caps, he is 
not here any more. How do you handle a case like that? “Naturally,” he says. 
“You have to follow what you believe in and be fair to the team. Some who last 
longer, some who you think respond well despite their age, some you think it’s 
not their time.”

Could England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> handle Wayne 
Rooney in a similar way? “Rooney? Personally, I like Rooney,” he shoots back, 
smiling.

It is not just Casillas, of course. Fewer and fewer of the men in the photos 
are still around: age, injury and form mean only two starters from the Euro 
2012 final against Italy are in this squad. But they are still there, somehow, 
the men who must be emulated. Success remains the expectation. “Comparing 
generations won’t help us win,” Lopetegui insists. “The generation that’s just 
passed isn’t only without doubt the most brilliant in Spanish football history, 
it’s one of the best in history. Comparing anything to that is not fair. But 
that doesn’t mean we haven’t got good footballers: we have got good 
footballers, with ambition, personality, desire. Players who are making big 
steps, but who have to follow their path, not someone else’s.”

That path takes them to Wembley on Tuesday, under new management, against an 
old opponent, in a country familiar to many of them, for a game that it was 
easy for them to focus on too much. Lopetegui had to tell them to forget as 
they prepared for Macedonia in a World Cup qualifier on Saturday night, which 
they won 4-0, but he was looking forward to it as much as they were. “My team 
is Real Sociedad and I remember a 1-2 at Wembley [in March 1981] when Zamora 
and Satrustegui, who both played for La Real, scored,” he says. “When I was a 
kid, beating England was incredible; it always had greater repercussion than 
beating anyone else. They’ve always been a reference point; they have so much 
history. This will be a special match, for sure.”

‘It’s nice to have played with the Spain manager’

“Mark Draper!” Lopetegui says, smiling. “Yes, yes, I remember Mark. I didn’t 
speak much English then, I must admit, but he was a nice guy. Where is he now?”

Now, he runs his Draper Norton football academy in Nottingham; back then, the 
formerLeicester City  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>and 
Aston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> midfielder was 
Lopetegui’s team-mate, playing under Juande Ramos at Rayo Vallecano in the east 
of Madrid. It didn’t last long, just four months in fact, but the experience 
was a good one. And, Draper says: “It’s nice to have played with the Spain 
manager.”

“It was deadline day, in January 2000,” Draper recalls. “I think it started 
with a recommendation from Atlético Madrid. I’d played in the Uefa Cup with 
Aston Villa and we had played a lot of Spanish sides and done pretty well: 
Atlético, Athletic Bilbao, Celta. So I think it came from there. I had fallen 
out of the Villa team. It was a Monday morning and someone called. I literally 
had an hour or two to make up my mind and I thought: ‘Why not?’” Did he know 
anything about Rayo? “Not particularly,” Draper laughs. “I knew they were in 
Madrid and that they were doing OK, but not much else.”

In Madrid, but not Madrid. Rayo played in the small, 14,000-capacity Estadio 
Teresa Rivero, with just three stands and a wall at one end. It is located down 
in the tough, consciously left-wing and working-class neighbourhood of 
Vallecas. Rayo are a bit different, a top-tier team that in terms of size 
Draper likens to a Championship club, a “family club” and an “unusual” one too. 
Players got paid in person at the club’s offices on a Friday – when they got 
paid. Away trips meant long bus journeys.

Eric Dier: England’s midfield mainstay with a foreign footballing brain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/eric-dier-england-midfield-foreign-footballing-brain>
When Draper arrived, he was met by an Englishman called Colin and put up in a 
city-centre hotel.Steve McManaman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/aug/29/newsstory.sport>, then at 
Real Madrid, became a friend and he spent time with some of Madrid’s players: 
Christian Karembeu, Guti, Raúl. In the Rayo team, his room-mate was the 
American goalkeeper Kasey Keller, who played ahead of Lopetegui that 1999-2000 
season, and he was helped especially by the Dutch midfielder Dave van den 
Bergh, who spoke perfect English.

“The first thing I learned to say in Spanish was how to get from the hotel to 
the stadium, so that I could tell the taxi drivers,” Draper says. He got 
involved as best he could, especially on those bus trips, but didn’t have time 
to pick up much more.

“I didn’t really know what to expect, but I really enjoyed it,” he says. “It 
was a more ‘total football’, more of a keep-ball game than in England. Not a 
slower pace, exactly, but less frantic, a bit different. The style suited me 
but Juande Ramos wanted me to play a little bit out of position, to the right, 
which was a bit of a problem.

“I was sub at Real Madrid, I played at Espanyol, in the Olympic Stadium, I 
played at Real Sociedad. I didn’t get on at the Bernabéu, which was a pity. In 
the end, I only played a few games, four or five. But the team did very well 
and I enjoyed it.

“At the end of the season, the loan came to an end but I didn’t go back to 
Villa: I signed for Southampton. I would have loved to have played more and 
maybe stayed, but going to Spain was a great experience.”

 * This article was updated on 12 November to correct an editing error which 
gave Iker Casillas an incorrect number of Spain caps  