
Team Sky have lost one of their founder members with confirmation that the 
sprinter Ben Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/19/ben-swift-contract-extension-team-sky>
 will move next year to the Italian-run team currently known as Lampre-Merida. 
The team’s new sponsor has yet to be announced but their management company 
signed an agreement in August with the Chinese company TJ Sport Consultation.

Wiggins and Froome leaks raise familiar questions for cycling but do little 
else
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/fancy-bears-chris-froome-bradley-wiggins-tues-cycling>
Swift has been at Team Sky since its inception in 2010 and this season the 
Rotherham-born ridercame close to winning the Milan-San Remo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/21/milan-san-remo-winner-rejects-towed>
 one-day Classic, finishing second to the Frenchman Arnaud Démare, improving on 
histhird place in the “Classic of Classics” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/may/08/team-sky-ben-swift-giro-ditalia-belfast-dublin>
 in 2014. He has also won stages in major events such as the Tour of the Basque 
Country, Tour of California and Tour Down Under, as well as taking the world 
scratch race championship on the track in 2012, plus silver medals in the 
points and Madison.

“It’s a hard, hard decision leaving Sky,” said Swift, who was keen to 
underline that the parting is entirely amicable. “It’s like leaving my family, 
but it’s now or never if I want to see how good I can be. I don’t really have 
anything to lose, and I’d like to publicly thank Sky for what they’ve done for 
me and BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling>. It’s going 
to be a culture change but I’ve been comfortable for the last seven years and I 
need to go outside my comfort zone.”

Comfortable Swift may have been, but his ability as a sprinter who shines in 
hilly stage races has sat uneasily with Sky’s constant need to prioritise the 
overall standings in the majority of the multi‑day events the team enter. “Most 
of the time, I would be second fiddle at Sky,” Swift said.

“When I have done my job for the team, then I get my opportunity. This team 
will be giving me more freedom and support. There will be various leaders, but 
they believe in my ability and I can have riders to support me.”

One early objective will be Milan-San Remo – a race close to the heart of the 
team’s general manager Giuseppe Saronni, who won it in 1983 – and other hilly 
Classics. Swift is also hoping for an opportunity at the Tour de France, where 
Sky’s focus in recent years has been to win overall with Chris Froome.

“My new team will have no out-and-out general classification rider which will 
open the door a bit. The chance of going there with some freedom would be 
nonexistent at Sky.”
 