
A pioneer monument and a lot of state troopers with batons and riot helmets 
stood between the mostly young native activists and theNorth Dakota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/north-dakota> state capitol on Friday 
afternoon. Many of the activists arriving at the capitol’s vast green lawn 
hadn’t heard that the Washington DC judge had decided against the Standing Rock 
reservation Sioux lawsuit. That was the lawsuit asserting that the Dakota 
Access Pipeline (DAPL) had gone forward without adequate tribal consultation. 
There was a sign of anguish when the news was delivered by megaphone, and then, 
a few minutes later, shouts of joy as a young woman with a long black braid 
standing in the pouring rain announced the victory chasing the heels of that 
defeat.

'We are protectors, not protesters': why I'm fighting the North Dakota pipeline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/18/north-dakota-pipeline-activists-bakken-oil-fields>
In a joint statement on Friday by the US army, the Department of Justice, and 
the Department of the Interior (which oversees Native American affairs), two 
major decisions were announced. One was a decision by the US army corps of 
engineers, the permitting body for the pipeline, to hold off on issuing permits 
to dig on federal land near or under the Missouri river above the Standing Rock 
reservation. The other was a landmark announcement that this fall, the 
government would discuss with tribes how “to better ensure meaningful tribal 
input into infrastructure-related reviews and decisions and the protection of 
tribal lands, resources, and treaty rights” and whether new legislation should 
be put in place to pursue those goals. It’s at least an implicit and maybe an 
explicit acknowledgment that the permitting process for the DAPL fell short of 
meeting the Standing Rock Sioux’s rights. It may become a landmark decision for 
all native rights in the United States, and it appears to be the result of 
tremendous international public pressure that probably changed the outcome of 
what could have been another quiet defeat.

What’s happening at Standing Rock is extraordinary and possibly transformative 
for native rights, Sioux history, and the intersection of the climate movement 
with indigenous communities. I spent two days in the Red Warrior camp, the big 
camp with dozens of teepees, hundreds of tents, and at least 1,000 people. It’s 
across the small Cannonball river from the Sacred Stone camp founded this 
spring to catalyze resistance against the DAPL intended to bring dirty crude 
from the Bakken oil shale in the northwest of North Dakota to Illinois, then 
down to refineries in the Gulf of Mexico for export. Resistance has been 
catalyzed, and the world electrified by the gathering of participants from 
tribes across North America and non-native supporters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2791475badbb9e79ce6b4a0b27a8f617eabc91c5%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20Rock%20protests%3A%20this%20is%20only%20the%20beginning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20Rock%20protests%3A%20this%20is%20only%20the%20beginning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2791475badbb9e79ce6b4a0b27a8f617eabc91c5%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Protesters near the Standing Rock Sioux reservation in Cannon Ball, North 
Dakota, on Friday. Photograph: Andrew Cullen/Reuters 
Friday morning in the camp, I asked Dallas Goldtooth of the Indigenous 
Environmental Network what were the precedents for this. Sitting in the back of 
his minivan, as his small children milled about and the boy across the road 
came to shake his hand, he told me: “There’s nothing, honestly. There’s nothing 
that can compare. One-hundred and eighty different tribal nations have sent 
letters of solidarity.” Goldtooth, who is Dakota and Dene, went on to describe 
the unprecedented support of tribes from all over the United States and Canada 
for this resistance, along with climate and environmental groups – a coalition 
with tremendous possibility for the future of both indigenous rights and the 
climate movement.

The joy is widespread. The first person I met was a young Hoopa/Yurok woman 
from far-northern California, who told me this is the most amazing thing she’s 
ever been part of. The next morning, a small man came up and greeted me, 
introduced himself as Frank, “from right here”, a member of the Standing Rock 
Sioux. Somewhere in the conversation he said : “I wake up happy every day about 
this.” I asked him how this changed the past, thinking of the losses the 
Lakota/Sioux faced over the past 150 years, but he heard the question 
differently. He mentioned that their old enemies the Crow and the Cheyenne came 
to stand with them, and that the old divisions are over.

Faces of the North Dakota pipeline protest: 'Sacred land is who we are'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/aug/25/north-dakota-pipeline-protest-pictures>
When I asked that question, I was thinking about what I heard from climate 
activist and environmental lawyer Carolyn Raffensperger, who had spent time at 
the camp earlier and has a long history in the area. “There are moments in 
history that can heal the past and the future,” she said. “This is a healing 
moment. It’s extraordinary. I’m hoping that it heals the river, which has 
suffered assaults that are unspeakable.” Though climate activists oppose the 
pipeline, because it’s part of the machinery to keep fossil fuel flowing and 
temperatures rising, the Standing Rock oppose it because it would tunnel 
underneath the Missouri river and threaten their water supply if it ever 
ruptures.

The river is their only source of water. And as Raffensberger mentioned, it 
has been violated in many ways, including by the Oahe Dam in South Dakota, 
which turned a free-flowing river into a long unnatural lake. The Cannonball 
river used to meet the Missouri in such a way that their their turbulent waters 
turned out big round stones – which white people saw as cannonballs, thus the 
name – but now the smaller river sinks quietly into the lake, and the stones 
are gone and so are the forces that made them.

There are moments in history that can heal the past and the future
Carolyn Raffensperger 
As Standing Rock tribal chairman David Archambault said in an editorial last 
month: “When the Army Corps of Engineers dammed the Missouri River in 1958, it 
took our riverfront forests, fruit orchards and most fertile farmland to create 
Lake Oahe. Now the Corps is taking our clean water and sacred places by 
approving this river crossing. Whether it’s gold from the Black Hills or 
hydropower from the Missouri or oil pipelines that threaten our ancestral 
inheritance, the tribes have always paid the price for America’s prosperity.” 
It will again, if the corporations and banks behind the DAPL have their way, 
but this may be a turning point in history; they could lose.

That’s what members of Native American nations from the California Yurok to 
the Michigan Chippewa and the other activists and supporters are hoping, and 
it’s a tremendous hope against the odds or at least against the record of the 
past. Victors like to forget how they got their spoils, but the despoiled have 
long memories. In the central circle of the camp, some words and ideas 
recurred: that peace and prayer were the means here, that being humble 
mattered, that ancestors mattered, that this was nonviolent.

I met an older woman from the Pine Ridge reservation, one of the poorest 
places in the United States and the site of some of the fiercest Native 
American resistance in the 1970s. She told me she had come when the camp was 
just beginning, when she saw seven teepees there. The next morning there were 
hundreds of people, and the occupation had stepped up a level. It kept growing, 
and there are plans to continue, though a Dakota winter may winnow out all but 
the toughest. When I arrived, the camp spread in all directions from the main 
entrance on the road. A long avenue of flagpoles lined the main road down what 
had been grasslands before, with nearly 200 flags from native nations around 
the country. Near the entrance was a sprawling camp kitchen, with mountains of 
supplies, indoor and outdoor facilities and open fires on which some of the 
cooking was done, and all of the gigantic vats of coffee seemed to be boiled. 
The grass was flattened and dried in some places, worn through in others, and 
after Wednesday’s rain some of the bare places became mud wallows. People made 
camp on both sides, some in tall white or painted teepees, most in tents, a few 
in recreational vehicles.


Horses were staked in the grass or kept in small corrals. People flew flags, 
covered their car in graffiti – “Water is life” or its equivalent in Lakota, 
“Mni wiconi”, and “No DAPL” were the most common slogans. There was a 
remarkable absence of brochures, leaflets and petitions, along with meetings 
and perceptible organizational structure. There was a classroom, a table where 
volunteers lawyers were available (they were also there to witness and 
represent anyone who might be arrested), sweatlodges. It was a village, though 
one without commerce of any kind or alcohol, drugs, or weapons. People chopped 
wood, fed horses, made coffee, visited with their neighbors, told their 
stories, came to ceremonies and talks, and waited to see how they could make 
history.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5942af12749a4a43b6b484e1b392d2c3c8542a14%2F0_27_3351_2011%2F3351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20Rock%20protests%3A%20this%20is%20only%20the%20beginning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20Rock%20protests%3A%20this%20is%20only%20the%20beginning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5942af12749a4a43b6b484e1b392d2c3c8542a14%2F0_27_3351_2011%2F3351.jpg>
 A protest encampment near Cannon Ball, where members of some 200 Native 
American tribes from across the US and Canada have gathered to lend their 
support to the Standing Rock Sioux tribe’s opposition to the pipeline. 
Photograph: Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images 
Which left time on some days for cultural celebration by a thousand people 
from dozens of cultures. Thursday, the people of the Pacific north-west paddled 
down the Missouri river in magnificent boats they had brought with them. They 
were scheduled to come up the Cannonball about 3pm, and people were beginning 
to line the shore when runners came to call people to the central circle where 
ceremonies were held and information distributed. There, Archambault spoke 
about the governor’s calling out the national guard, seeking to calm fears by 
saying they would be used for traffic management and would never be allowed to 
come to the camp.

In fact, men in uniform from the sheriff’s department and state troopers were 
already being used to turn people back on Highway 1806, which goes south from 
the Bismarck area to the reservation. I ran into them Wednesday afternoon, 
looking like they were combat-ready for Afghanistan, and they appeared to be 
turning all cars back not far down the highway from Bismarck. I took a huge 
detour through the rolling green countryside and got back without a mishap, but 
the goal seemed to be discouragement. On Friday, I saw more uniformed men 
turning people back about a dozen miles above the camp and then, again, further 
north, another blockade sending people back. There seems to be a concerted 
effort to prevent people from reaching the camp or to at least inconvenience 
them.

Meanwhile, Archambault spoke, and then everyone wandered back to shore where 
the huge Tlingit boat and other crafts were arriving. Goldtooth had noted that 
the river tribes had who responded most strongly, groups who had fought or were 
fighting their own battles over water. The ceremonies were unhurried, with the 
boats passing by and then pointing their prows to shore and asking, with 
speeches of gratitude, songs in native languages, and jokes, permission to land.

The fight is about water and rights. The Missouri is the longest river in the 
United States, joining the Mississippi at St Louis; any pollution caused by a 
spill from the DAPL on its current route would impact the reservation first but 
would continue downstream all the way to the Gulf of Mexico. It would impact a 
huge swathe of the agriculture and residents at the center of the continent. 
You could also note that the Missouri and Mississippi meet close to where a 
police officer killed Michael Brown in Ferguson, a suburb of St Louis, the 
event that prompted the formation of Black Lives Matter (members of which were 
also at the camp showing solidarity). The river goes onward to flow past New 
Orleans, where the natural disaster of Hurricane Katrina turned into the 
unnatural disaster of a city blockaded and its citizens shot down and stranded 
by the authorities. Histories flow together.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F346955435e382557b2489e05f1308feb23441c20%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20Rock%20protests%3A%20this%20is%20only%20the%20beginning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20Rock%20protests%3A%20this%20is%20only%20the%20beginning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fnorth-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F346955435e382557b2489e05f1308feb23441c20%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Women and girls from the Colorado River Indian tribes dance after arriving at 
a protest encampment near Cannon Ball, North Dakota. Photograph: Robyn 
Beck/AFP/Getty Images 
What’s happening at Standing Rock feels like a new civil rights movement that 
takes place at the confluence of environmental and human rights and grows from 
the last 60 years of lived experience in popular power and changing the world. 
This is already a movement with national solidarity – there were support 
demonstrations in San Francisco and Tulsa, Oklahoma, among other places – and a 
national day of action is scheduled for Tuesday.

Many involved in the climate movement see it as a human rights movement or a 
movement inseparable from human rights. Indigenous people have played a huge 
role, as the people in many of the places where extracting and transporting 
fossil fuel take place, as protectors of particular places and ecosystems from 
rivers to forests, from the Amazon to the Arctic, as people with a strong sense 
of the past and the future, of the deep time in which short-term profit turns 
into longterm damage, and of the rights of the collective over individual 
profit. All these forces are antithetical to capitalism, and it to them.

There is nothing guaranteed about the outcome for the DAPL, the larger 
movement that the uprising at Standing Rock has begun, and the connections it 
strengthens. It’s only a beginning but it’s a spectacular beginning and a 
reminder that sometimes the future is made by dreamers and warriors who come 
together unexpectedly.
 