
The Turnbull government says it has no plans to reintroduce caps on the number 
of university places, even as a Coalition state minister calls for limits and 
federal Labor vows to force higher standards through funding agreements with 
institutions.

Australia's civic life will suffer if the major parties turn universities into 
factories | Robert Simms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/10/australias-civic-life-will-suffer-if-the-major-parties-turn-universities-into-factories>
The New South Wales education minister, Adrian Piccoli, has revived debate 
about ending Australia’s demand-driven system, which allows public universities 
to access funding for as many bachelor-degree students as they are able to 
enrol.

“Where there are a limited number of ... jobs available, they should be 
capping places,” Piccoli, a Nationals MP,told Fairfax Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/atar-charade-bring-back-student-caps-says-nsw-education-minister-adrian-piccoli-20160214-gmu1v3.html>
. “Why are we training all of these people when the majority of them won’t get 
jobs?”


The federal education minister, Simon Birmingham, responded by saying the 
government had “no plans to reinstate caps” on places but he was looking 
closely at admission practices and standards.

In 2012, the Gillard government removed limits on the number of 
commonwealth-supported university places for domestic undergraduate courses, 
except medicine.

This fuelled a 22% increase in student numbers between 2009 and 2013, 
according to a review commissioned by the Coalition 
<http://docs.education.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/review_of_the_demand_driven_funding_system_report_for_the_website.pdf>
, while the total cost of the commonwealth grant scheme increased from $4.1bn 
to $6.1bn over the same period.

The Abbott government’s education minister, Christopher Pyne, backed the 
demand-driven system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/12/labor-signals-shift-from-demand-driven-funding-system-for-university-places>
 as “Julia Gillard’s great achievement” but he alsochampioned a separate 
measure to deregulate the fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/23/-sp-higher-education-changes-a-policy-in-search-of-plan-b>
 that students could be charged, which was blocked twice in the Senate.

Now attention is turning back towards quality and standards at universities, 
amid scrutiny of lax enrolment practices.

Birmingham said he had asked the higher education standards panel 
<https://www.education.gov.au/higher-education-standards-panel-hesp-0> to 
review university admission practices and standards, with a view to increasing 
transparency and helping incoming students become “uni-ready”.

The federal government would consult on ways “to ensure the higher education 
sector is sustainable while also supporting more Australians who start a course 
to finish and find work”.

“That means supporting excellence, diversity and opportunity for all 
students,” Birmingham said in a statement on Thursday.

“With record numbers of students enrolling, they need to not only be following 
their passions but also thinking about the career options their degree offers. 
Universities should also be ensuring every student is supported to finish their 
course so they don’t end up just being another number on an enrolment list.”

Labor’s higher education spokesman, Kim Carr, who has long called for a focus 
on university completion rates and employment prospects, said he 
regarded enrolment caps as “unnecessary and unsophisticated”.

“There are more effective ways of making universities more accountable for the 
spending of public money,” Carr told Guardian Australia.

Labor’s higher education policy 
<http://www.nodebtsentence.org/laborsfairerplan>, released in September, 
reaffirmed support for the demand-driven system, but included some measures 
that could prevent unrestricted growth. It placed an emphasis on increasing 
completion rates and quality, with a proposed new higher education commission 
ensuring universities are fulfilling labour market needs.

Labor reveals $14bn cost of university fee policy and says it can afford it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/23/labor-reveals-14bn-cost-of-university-fee-policy-and-says-it-can-afford-it>
Carr said on Thursday his party was committed to “raising standards within our 
university system and working with the universities through charters and the 
higher education commission to ensure that there’s a stronger correlation 
between entrance standards and completions and employment outcomes”.

“It’s simply not satisfactory to enrol a large number of students in teaching 
and nursing where they can’t get employment or where there are only short-term 
contracts available and a high-level churn of graduates,” he said.

“The government has come to recognise the validity of Labor’s approach by 
referring these matters to the standards panel, which of course is in sharp 
contrast to what they said when we released the policy.”

Asked whether Labor’s push might prompt universities to enrol fewer students 
than they otherwise would have, Carr said: “I am sure they will be much more 
conscious of their enrolments if there’s higher attention paid to completions.”

The Coalition encountered significant political difficulties over its 2014 
budget measure to reduce the public subsidy for university degrees and remove 
limits on the fees institutions could charge, prompting Birmingham todelay the 
proposed start date to allow further consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/01/higher-education-funding-changes-put-on-the-back-burner-for-at-least-a-year>
.

But the savings remain factored into the government’s budget bottom line, 
apart from the impact of delaying the proposed start date from January 2016 to 
January 2017.
 