
1951: Clement Attlee’s Labour government, under the Iron and Steel Act 1949, 
nationalises the industry via the Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain 
(ISCGB), which becomes sole shareholder in 80 companies – many other smaller 
firms remain in business outside the nationalised sector.


1953: Winston Churchill’s Conservative government replaces the ISCGB with the 
Iron and Steel Holding and Realisation Agency, which privatises most of the 
industry. Only Richard Thomas and Baldwins, at the time the UK’s largest steel 
company and owner of the Ebbw Vale works, stays in public ownership.

Tata Steel: Corbyn urges Cameron to recall parliament over crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/30/tata-steel-uk-business-government-could-take-temporary-stake-find-buyer>
1967: Harold Wilson’s Labour government passes the Iron and Steel Act 1967, 
renationalising the industry and bringing 14 big private companies – about 90% 
of UK production – together as the British Steel Corporation, with a workforce 
of 268,500.

1980: A pivotal year. Margaret Thatcher’s Conservative government, elected in 
1979, sets out to cut British Steel’s losses at a time of overcapacity in the 
industry, rising energy prices and a deepening recession. 1980 begins with the 
first national strike by steel workers for more than 50 years, over pay and the 
threat of plant closures. A deal is eventually struck after nearly 14 weeks, 
but in May the government appoints Ian MacGregor as British Steel chairman to 
drive through its savage rationalisation programme and by the end of the year 
Consett, Corby and Shotton steelworks have closed, with the loss of more than 
20,000 jobs. Total employment in the industry almost halves between 1979 and 
1981, from 156,600 to 88,200.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fthe-rise-and-fall-of-the-british-steel-industry-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20fall%20of%20the%20British%20steel%20industry%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fthe-rise-and-fall-of-the-british-steel-industry-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20fall%20of%20the%20British%20steel%20industry%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fthe-rise-and-fall-of-the-british-steel-industry-video-explainer&media=>
The rise and fall of the British steel industry – video explainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/mar/30/the-rise-and-fall-of-the-british-steel-industry-video-explainer>
1988: Privatisation by the Thatcher government creates British Steel plc, a 
FTSE 100 company. In 1989-90 the company makes a pre-tax profit of £733m. UK 
steel workforce: 55,000.


1992: After the UK slides into another recession in the early 1990s, demand 
for steel declines. Ravenscraig steelworks closes, ending steelmaking in 
Scotland.

1999: British Steel merges with Dutch company Koninklijke Hoogovens to form 
Corus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/corus> Group. UK steel workforce: 
28,900.

2002: Closure of Ebbw Vale steel mill in latest round of Corus cuts as it 
seeks to stem losses.


2007: Indian company Tata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel 
buys Corus. UK steel workforce: 23,000.

March 2016: Tata Steel announces plans to sell its loss-making UK steel 
business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/30/tata-steel-uk-business-government-could-take-temporary-stake-find-buyer>
, putting at least 15,000 jobs at risk at sites including Port Talbot, 
Llanwern, Rotherham, Shotton, Corby, Redcar and Hartlepool.
 