
Workers have voted to accept a temporary 3% pay cut and changes to terms and 
conditions as part of the deal to sell Tata Steel’s long products business to 
Greybull Capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/11/tata-steel-deal-saves-4400-uk-jobs>
.


Tata Steel deal saves 4,400 jobs in UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/11/tata-steel-deal-saves-4400-uk-jobs>
Members of the Community, GMB and Unite unions backed the changes, aimed at 
paving the way for the deal, which includes the huge steel plant at Scunthorpe. 
Community officer Steve McCool said it was an extremely difficult decision, but 
the vote was a “major step forward” towards securing the future of the business.

The sale to Greybull is a rare piece of positive news for the industry, which 
is in crisis because of cheap Chinese imports and other problems such as energy 
costs.

Greybull and Tata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> agreed the deal 
to sell the long products division last week, for a nominal sum of £1.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsteelworkers-accept-3-pay-cut-in-tata-deal-with-greybull-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe2952e8627c1621ad48d1359f2a6d8f89b0ad05%2F162_89_2984_1791%2F2984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steelworkers%20accept%203%25%20pay%20cut%20in%20Tata%20deal%20with%20Greybull%20Capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsteelworkers-accept-3-pay-cut-in-tata-deal-with-greybull-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steelworkers%20accept%203%25%20pay%20cut%20in%20Tata%20deal%20with%20Greybull%20Capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsteelworkers-accept-3-pay-cut-in-tata-deal-with-greybull-capital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe2952e8627c1621ad48d1359f2a6d8f89b0ad05%2F162_89_2984_1791%2F2984.jpg>
 (From left) Bimlendra Jha, chief executive of Tata Steel UK, Paul McBean, 
chairman of the Scunthorpe works’ multi-union committee, and Marc Meyohas, 
partner at Greybull Capital. Photograph: Steve Morgan/PA 
The deal will safeguard up to 4,400 jobs and keep open a steelworks in 
Scunthorpe, two mills in Teesside, an engineering workshop in Workington, a 
design consultancy in York, and associated distribution facilities, as well as 
a mill in northern France.

The firm will be renamed British Steel, a brand that disappeared in 1999 with 
the creation ofCorus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/corus>, which was 
later bought by Tata.

Greybull will only pay the nominal fee for Tata’s long products Europe (LPE) 
division because it has agreed to take on the firm’s liabilities and put 
together a £400m funding package to keep the business going. A loan from the 
government on commercial terms could form part of this funding package.

Tata is looking for buyers for the rest of its UK business, including the Port 
Talbot works in south Wales, with thousands of jobs hanging in the balance.

 