
Stephan Jaeger shot a 12-under-par 58 – equalling the lowest score in major 
tour play – in the Web.com Tour’s Ellie Mae Classic on Thursday.

The 27-year-old German player finished with a 10-foot birdie putt on the 
par-five 9th at TPC Stonebrae in Hayward, California.

Ryo Ishikawa shot a 12-under 58 to win the 2010 Crowns on the Japanese Tour, 
but Jaeger’s is the first 58 on either the PGA or Web.com Tour. He breaks the 
record of 59 held by Notah Begay III, Doug Dunakey, Jason Gore, Will Wilcox and 
Russell Knox. Six players have shot 59 on the PGA Tour, and one on thePGA Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour> Champions.

“Everything went well,” Jaeger said. “I was driving the ball well. I was 
making everything. I got the good breaks. [Breaking 60] pretty much was in my 
head the whole back nine.”

On the final hole, Jaeger hit a three wood off the tee and hit a layup to 95 
yards. “We had a good strategy for that hole,” Jaeger said. “I was going to 
play it as a three-shot hole, take the bunker out of play off the tee and at 
worst make par.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fstephan-jaeger-record-score-golf-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9698031673e9ebb48d65109b53d5103e028cbe5%2F0_119_5073_3044%2F5073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephan%20Jaeger%20makes%20record%20low%20score%20of%2058%20at%20Web.com%20Tour%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fstephan-jaeger-record-score-golf-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephan%20Jaeger%20makes%20record%20low%20score%20of%2058%20at%20Web.com%20Tour%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fstephan-jaeger-record-score-golf-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9698031673e9ebb48d65109b53d5103e028cbe5%2F0_119_5073_3044%2F5073.jpg>
 Jaeger’s record-breaking scorecard. Photograph: Ryan Young/US PGA Tour 
“It went in a little fast for my liking,” he said about his final putt. “On a 
day like that, it’ll go in ... Right now, I’m actually kind of happy to be 
done, to be honest with you. It’s very stressful for you. It’s kind of like 
going on the back nine on Sunday. I’m happy I performed the way I did. It was 
the icing on the cake, the last hole obviously.”

Jaeger came to the US as a foreign exchange student in 2006. He went to high 
school for two years in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and played in college for 
Tennessee-Chattanooga.

The three-times Southern Conference player of the year played both nines in a 
six-under-par 29. He birdied the 11th and holes 13 to 17 on his opening nine, 
and the 1st, 2nd, holes 4 to 6 and the 9th on the back nine. Jaeger got up and 
down for par on the par-four 7th and almost made a 30-footer on the par-four 
8th.

“Even the bad shots, I’d get a good bounce and have like 15 feet and I’d hole 
that,” Jaeger said.

Jaeger’s performance was put into context by the rest of the field. In 88C 
heat with the wind at 8-15mph, Jaeger was more than 11 strokes below the field 
average of 69.258. His worst hole was a three-putt par on the par-five 3rd.

Jaeger is 102nd on the developmental tour’s money list, with the top 25 at the 
end of the season earning PGA Tour cards. The winner on Sunday will land 
$108,000 in prize money. “I’d much rather be in the top 25 at the end of the 
year, with or without the 58,” Jaeger said.

Josh Teater, Xander Schauffele and Rhein Gibson were tied for second at 62, 
four strokes behind Jaeger.
 