
In 1997 the young architectural practice Haworth Tompkins 
<http://www.haworthtompkins.com/> was commissioned to redesign the Royal Court 
theatre in London. Since then they have transformed the way theatres look and 
work, redesigning thepop-up Almeidas 
<http://www.haworthtompkins.com/built/proj23/index.html>, the National, Bristol 
Old Vic <http://www.haworthtompkins.com/progress/proj18/index.html>, Liverpool 
Everyman, the Young Vic,the Bush 
<http://www.haworthtompkins.com/built/proj33/index.html>. Their work has been 
as influential as that of any artistic director. Co-founder Steve Tompkins 
speaks on behalf of a cooperative organisation.

Your background was in social housing. Why on earth did you take on theatres?
Theatre architecture is not just about performance. It’s about how you frame 
civil society. Where are the spaces in which strangers can meet at peace in a 
city? That for us is the underpinning idea. If you look at the support space of 
the theatre as a commercial space like a shopping mall or a branded coffee bar 
something has gone terribly wrong. You predispose the audience to being in a 
mood of consumerism rather than human transaction.

What makes an ideal theatre building?
It has to be able to respond to the mood of the performance. If you’ve got a 
gaiety space and you’re putting on Beckett you’re in trouble. If you have a 
sombre black box and you’re trying to do a comedy it’s deadly. That applies not 
just to the auditorium but to the facade. A theatre should behave like a good 
host. It needs to have eyes in the back of its head, to pull people in and 
diminish divisions. These should be spaces where you feel at home at any time 
of the day.

National Theatre makeover: big round of applause for Haworth Tompkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/05/national-theatre-makeover-haworth-tompkins-review-decluttered-beautiful>
What’s the most important factor?
Lighting is crucial. I’m phobic about lighting that is too bald. A lot of 
foyers are overlit. The Royal Court 
<http://www.haworthtompkins.com/built/proj26/index.html> has very low levels of 
light. If you go to the Theatre Upstairs you might easily turn back on the way: 
you think, I must have gone wrong, this can’t be in the public territory. That 
was what we wanted: the idea of leaving the party and venturing up the dark 
staircase to the attic.

What are the main difficulties?
Intelligent people become foamy-mouthed arch-conservatives when it comes to 
architecture. And of course many of the best theatre practitioners prefer to 
work in a found space. Whenthe National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/05/national-theatre-makeover-haworth-tompkins-review-decluttered-beautiful>
 was being designed,Denys Lasdun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jan/12/guardianobituaries> said to Peter 
Brook: “I guess you’d rather have a bomb site in Brixton” and Brook said “yes“. 
You have to be extraordinarily self-confident to ride that out while conceiving 
an enormous concrete palace of culture.

You won the 2014 Stirling prize for your redesign of the Liverpool Everyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/mar/15/new-liverpool-everyman-haworth-tompkins-in-pictures>
. What was it like working there?
People were anxious that it would become too posh, that the soul of the 
building would be lost. One taxi driver actually stopped the cab and said: “You 
fuck that up, you’re fucking fucked.” That was pretty much the text for the 
project. It has a sense of occasion, but there are corners to perch in, places 
for conspiracy.

The new Liverpool Everyman – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/mar/15/new-liverpool-everyman-haworth-tompkins-in-pictures>
You were working on Battersea Arts Centre 
<http://www.haworthtompkins.com/progress/proj04/index.html> when it went up in 
flames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/13/major-fire-at-battersea-arts-centre>
 a year ago. How is it now?
The grand hall was magnificent – very sociable and celebratory – but quite 
technically constrained. After the fire we were left with the charged shell of 
this extraordinary space. We developed a filigree timber version of the ceiling 
which keeps the historic character of the room but is technically more capable. 
Battersea was built when craftsmanship was a given. It has beautiful mosaic 
floors, carving, elaborate plasterwork. We wanted to keep that grandeur.

You’re working on Nicholas Hytner’s new London theatre 
<http://www.haworthtompkins.com/progress/proj16/index.html>. What will that be 
like?
It’s at Potters Fields Park between the GLA building and Tower Bridge and it 
will open in autumn 2017. It will seat 900. We were aiming for that sense of a 
wrap that you getat the Young Vic 
<http://haworthtompkins.com/built/proj15/index.html>. We have been learning 
from courtyard spaces.

Is there anything you dream of doing?
I would love to design an opera house. Probably not in Britain. It would be 
interesting to create something that wasn’t about social elitism and capital 
consumption: something more democratic and more gutsy. It would be good to work 
withKatie Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/14/british-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell>
, and do with an opera house what she has done in her productions.
 