
Not for the first time in a Test career now well set in a period of sustained 
brilliance, Australian captain Steve Smith’s timing was impeccable on day four 
of the Melbourne Test. No sooner had the Australian captain driven through 
cover to bring up his 17th Test century than umpires Ravi and Gould stopped 
play for a monsoonal downpour, which struck at 2.50pm at the MCG and did not 
clear.

For the rest of the day’s play the sun fried but never entirely frazzled the 
Pakistan attack, among whom only Mohammad Amir went without some kind of reward 
in between being clobbered to all parts by Smith, Peter Handscomb and, ever so 
briefly, their much-maligned team-mate Nic Maddinson.

The latter pair provided an interesting study in contrasts. Both came into 
this side two games ago as greenhorns on equal footing, but now look like 
members of entirely different species. Maddinson’s 22 was by a factor of four 
his highest Test score so far but again ended with an error of judgement and 
technique when he charged leg-spinner Yasir Shah and missed, making the type of 
delivery his colleagues had hammered look like Shane Warne’s Gatting ball.

Pay dispute continues as ACA digs in heels over revenue sharing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/29/cricket-pay-dispute-aca-digs-heels-revenue-sharing>
Handscomb, meanwhile, is playing with the freedom and confidence that comes 
from a series of impressive early scores. When he departed for a muscular 54 by 
middling a square drive straight to the man at point off the otherwise 
innocuous Sohail, you could have heard a pin drop around the Melbourne cricket 
ground.

Where Maddinson’s premature demise on a dream batting wicket confirmed our 
pre-existing bias, Handscomb’s just seemed aberrant, which is also the most 
charitable way of describing Usman Khawaja’s failure to add more than two runs 
to his overnight tally of 95 before a windy waft at Wahab Riaz sent a thick 
edge behind to Sarfraz. The Australian No3 hung his head like a man convicted 
and will wait at least another week for his sixth Test century.

On the contrary, Smith was never going to squander a chance to bolster his 
numbers in what amounted to high level centre wicket practice. He contributed 
only 35 of a 92-run stand with Handscomb and never showed an overriding desire 
to dominate the bowling, knowing full well how his own attack had tired in this 
unusual and sustained four-day spell of humidity in Melbourne.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fsteve-smith-shines-as-australia-and-pakistan-head-towards-soggy-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0db633eb0c6437cc9e26052054d9e9a72aece55c%2F0_13_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Smith%20shines%20as%20Australia%20and%20Pakistan%20head%20towards%20soggy%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fsteve-smith-shines-as-australia-and-pakistan-head-towards-soggy-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Smith%20shines%20as%20Australia%20and%20Pakistan%20head%20towards%20soggy%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fsteve-smith-shines-as-australia-and-pakistan-head-towards-soggy-draw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0db633eb0c6437cc9e26052054d9e9a72aece55c%2F0_13_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Pakistan’s first innings hero Azhar Ali left the field after a sickening blow 
to the head while fielding at short leg. Photograph: William West/AFP/Getty 
Images 
As well as a mastery of his own game, Smith is gradually adding to his 
repertoire a keen understanding of what is happening to his partner at the 
other end. Having allowed Handscomb far more of the strike in their union, the 
Australian captain took the load off his replacement Maddinson, squirrelling 
away 37 of their combined 59. Smith also picked his targets in the opposition 
attack, deferentially blunting Yasir and Amir before attacking their relievers 
Sohail and Wahab; every one of his nine boundaries came from the latter pair.

Wahab was the other player to post a century today, though not the kind you 
write home about. His 100 front-foot no balls in the 16 Tests since his recall 
to this side bely the 31-year-old’s almost 400 games of experience in 
professional ranks. It’s a good thing he pursued cricket and not javelin.

Yasir was again an unconventional delight, abandoning the packed leg-side 
field of day three and throwing caution to the wind. His unflappability in the 
face of harsh treatment has served him well here; 2-150 from 34 overs would 
cause soul-searching in lesser competitors. One in every five deliveries he 
bowled to David Warner on day three landed on or over the boundary rope, but 
today he tied up Smith, Maddinson and Matthew Wade, the latter of whom has 19 
runs from four innings since his return to bolster Australia’s batting.

The deciding Test in Sydney is looming large and a number of players in each 
side are likely to move on from this this one with question marks next to their 
names rather than impressive numbers. Departing with both due to the most 
unfortunate moment of the day is Pakistan’s batting star and unlucky short leg 
Azhar Ali, who was struck flush on the helmet by a Matthew Wade pull. He left 
the field by his own steam but will be tested for concussion.

The now inevitable draw in Melbourne dovetails with the first Test played 
between these nations, also at the MCG, back in 1964. Then Australia granted 
their visitors only a single Test and a four-day one at that, suffering a dose 
of poetic justice by reaching only 88-2 in pursuit of 166 in the dying stages. 
As was the case then, the frustrations of this encounter are evenly shared.
 