
In May 1912, Chicago landscape architect Walter Griffin won an international 
competition to design an unnamed capital of Australia. Overseas entrants had 
been given only maps, a cyclorama landscape print and – if they could access it 
– a plaster model of the site to work with.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, some of the proposed designs suggested futuristic, 
high-density metropolises built around elaborate canals and weirs (third-placed 
Frenchman, Donat Alfred Agache, even pitched a formal European-style city 
through which raged a wild river – like the Seine in Paris).

Many of the international designs were simply impractical, however, suiting 
colder, wetter climates and more confined spaces. They lacked sympathy for the 
landscape.


Griffin – the conjurer and dreamer – was a lousy draughtsman. So his wife, 
world-renowned architectural artist Marion Mahony Griffin, rushed to produce a 
series of watercolour and photographic dye images of their dreamt capital.


In nine weeks they created a stunning composition: a city of hexagonal 
boulevards and streets joined by bush corridors, studded with monumental 
buildings and anchored by land and water axes. Its heart, where the axes met, 
was an artificial lake that would emerge with the damming of the Molonglo river 
to flood the plains.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd98a74df2cb348ad38a765400635d6dca11df62%2F0_207_7360_4414%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra's%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20'mediocrity'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra%27s%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20%27mediocrity%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd98a74df2cb348ad38a765400635d6dca11df62%2F0_207_7360_4414%2F7360.jpg>
 ‘Ridiculous expanse’: Canberra almost a century later. Photograph: Nature 
Connect/Corbis 
It was a beautiful blueprint, resonant of the garden city movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/mar/17/ebbsfleet-garden-city-george-osborne>
 that influenced the Griffins’ evolution as architects at the foot of the 
Chicagoan maestro Frank Lloyd Wright. But beyond Marion’s grey-green, brown and 
russet images, this low-rise, medium-density, monumental capital had an 
ideological foundation, reflecting Walter’s stated intent to design a city for 
a country of “bold democrats”.


After winning the competition, Griffin declared he’d “planned a city not like 
any other city in the world ... an ideal city – a city that meets my ideal of 
the city of the future”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd59df4da26ddbd369d707fb50c70e31316e455b%2F0_0_3500_3628%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra's%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20'mediocrity'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra%27s%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20%27mediocrity%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd59df4da26ddbd369d707fb50c70e31316e455b%2F0_0_3500_3628%2F3500.jpg>
 A plan of Canberra from 1927. Illustration: Buyenlarge/Getty Images 
Perhaps the greatest of many misconceptions about Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra>, however, is that it was 
actually built according to Griffin’s superb design.

As Paul Reid, author of Canberra Following Griffin: A Design History of 
Australia’s National Capital <http://catalogue.nla.gov.au/Record/130859>, 
points out: “Canberra’s citizens proudly claim Griffin as the designer of their 
city ... The impression given is that modern Canberra is Griffin’s city, with a 
few changes necessitated by modern life, of which he would have approved. In 
fact the vitality of Griffin’s proposed urban terraces and monuments has been 
replaced by quiet suburbs on a serene landscape.”

Griffin had long been intrigued by the 1901 evolution into federation of this 
vast continent of disparate colonies of convicts, miners, stockmen and soldier 
settlers. He was thoroughly taken with the symbolism of the capital as 
explained byKing O’Malley – an American who posed as a Canadian 
<http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/omalley-king-7907> (as only the 
Commonwealth-born could serve in Australia’s parliament), and a shyster on many 
other fronts.


We desire to have a city that will be the Gotham of Australia

O’Malley’s capital would be symbolic of a federation forged without the cold 
steel, cordite and corpses defining nationhood elsewhere. It would enshrine 
those progressive Australian precedents – women’s suffrage, workers’ rights, 
social security, high living standards – that were the envy of much older 
nations.


“We desire to have a city that will be the Gotham of Australia ... [and] in a 
few years will rival London in size, Athens in art and Paris in beauty,” 
O’Malley said with typical hyperbole. “If an Australian can produce a design, 
it will be accepted; but we require the best we can get, whether it comes from 
Swede or Dane, from Quaker, Shaker or Holy Roller.”

At a March 1913 ceremony atop Kurrajong hill, overlooking the rabbit-plagued, 
sheep-studded blank canvas for the capital, the future city became “Canberra” – 
itsetymology cradled in “Ngambri” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/26/living-canberra-on-top-world>
, the name of the first people of the limestone plains. Officials laid a 
six-sided foundation stone as the intended base of a monolithic obelisk.

The Griffin Canberra was a testament to peace. But war would soon change all 
that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79b314fdb94aa0246ba8f57dfcb83f4e2ca6c687%2F0_0_5084_3050%2F5084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra's%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20'mediocrity'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra%27s%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20%27mediocrity%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79b314fdb94aa0246ba8f57dfcb83f4e2ca6c687%2F0_0_5084_3050%2F5084.jpg>
 Canberra in the 1930s: the city’s design changed dramatically from Walter 
Griffin’s original plan. Photograph: Alamy 
The Anglophile Australian planners overseeing the capital project were already 
hostile to elements of Griffin’s plan when he arrived in Australia to salvage 
it in May 1914. Then, barely a month later, came the spark of the first world 
war – the assassination in Sarajevo of the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, 
Archduke Franz Ferdinand. Australia obsequiously trailed Great Britain to war 
in August 1914.

From a population of some five million, 416,000 Australian men – about half of 
all those eligible – enlisted.Of the 331,000 deployed, some 60,000 were killed, 
about 155,000 wounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/23/anzac-day-should-be-quarantined-from-politicians-a-solemn-moment-to-reflect-on-the-enduring-agony-of-war>
, and tens of thousands more psychologically and emotionally ruined.


The new federation’s peaceful optimism segued to sombre mourning for a 
generation of lost men, while the country remained bitterly divided on the 
rights and wrongs of the war.


White Australia’s mood had shifted. While the nation redefined itself with 
war’s legacy, well before the guns stopped in November 1918 the planners and 
politicians had rethought how the fledgling national capital ought to symbolise 
its nationhood.

The planners were contemptuous

The architectural anchors of the Griffins’ south-north land axis were the 
“capitol” on Kurrajong hill and the “casino” at the foot of Mount Ainslie, a 
steep, forested rise named after a mythologised plains pioneer who was actually 
a sadistic, alcoholic, lunatic Scot posing as a courageous Waterloo veteran.


The land axis dissected a vast triangle formed by Kings and Commonwealth 
Avenues with their cross-water bridges, and Constitution Avenue at right angles 
on the northern flank of the lake. The southern apex of the triangle would be 
dotted with monumental buildings, among them apartments and shops.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41f6b44644e3a7faf3e8da509a95e46726773176%2F0_274_2916_1750%2F2916.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra's%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20'mediocrity'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra%27s%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20%27mediocrity%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41f6b44644e3a7faf3e8da509a95e46726773176%2F0_274_2916_1750%2F2916.jpg>
 The future King George VI attends the opening of the federal parliament in 
Canberra in May 1927. Photograph: Popperfoto/Getty Images 
The plan accommodated a series of communities, each in a triangular precinct 
of between 12 and 25 acres, mostly comprising terraces with front and back 
yards. The larger, higher blocks, linked by bush corridors, were for bigger 
freestanding houses. There would be plenty of space – but no isolated suburbia.


The capitol was intended to be the most symbolically democratic of the public 
buildings: a place, Griffin explained, for popular reception and ceremony – “or 
for housing archives and commemorating Australian achievements rather than for 
deliberation or counsel ... representing the sentimental and spiritual head, if 
not the actual working mechanism of federation”.


Fatally nebulous in definition, it would nonetheless be – physically and 
metaphorically – above parliament and the houses for the prime minister and the 
governor general, so the people might watch over their head of state and chief 
executive.


Leading to the casino, meanwhile, Marion drew a vast, 600-ft wide and much 
longer park – a “midway pleasance” or playground of the city. The casino itself 
would be a place of leisure incorporating theatres, small restaurants featuring 
al fresco dining, stalls, children’s parks and a beer garden.

“In the early 1890s there were 30 German newspapers in Chicago and a number of 
German theatres, not to mention the beer gardens,” says Karl Fischer, a German 
planning academic and visiting fellow at the University of New South Wales. 
“The beer gardens were a model forLloyd Wright’s 1913 Midway Gardens 
<http://www.mnn.com/your-home/remodeling-design/photos/6-destroyed-frank-lloyd-wright-buildings/midway-gardens>
 precinct on Chicago’s Lakefront, and also more than likely for the casino 
which Griffin proposed for the northern end of his midway pleasance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf040a11917d38817988e49c5718de0d9e18a6f8%2F0_273_4095_2459%2F4095.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra's%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20'mediocrity'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra%27s%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20%27mediocrity%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf040a11917d38817988e49c5718de0d9e18a6f8%2F0_273_4095_2459%2F4095.jpg>
 Canberra’s new Parliament House on Capital Hill was opened in 1988. 
Photograph: Lukas Coch/EPA 
While O’Malley and others embraced the beauty and broad concept of the Griffin 
plan, Australian officials – and some politicians – never wanted any of this 
“continental-style”, medium density, communal life with outdoor eating – let 
alone such Germanic oddities asbeer gardens. They wanted their bungalows on 
vast, private suburban blocks. Besides, O’Malley was teetotal and had ensured 
that so, too, was the infant capital.

As governments rose and fell repeatedly in the first decade and a half of 
federation, senior public servants overseeing the capital project were the 
mainstay. Most important were the intimidating surveyor, Charles Scrivener, 
Commonwealth works director, Percy Owen, New South Wales chief architect Walter 
Liberty Vernon and home affairs department secretary David Miller. Colonels 
Owen and Miller, former Boer war commanders, insisted on their military titles 
in peacetime; Vernon, commanding officer in the NSW Lancers, became a light 
horse regimental commander.

War against Germany was brewing and the Griffins – avowed pacifists and 
Germanophiles, followers of eastern philosophy and mysticism – were an uneasy 
fit. Walter wore his hair long, and favoured soft collars and exuberant 
neckwear. Marion, five years older, exuded pre-Raphaelite mystique and 
composure. They looked and thought differently to the Australian political and 
public-service elite who were, as the war loomed then raged, ever more bound to 
Empire.

The planners were contemptuous of Griffin. Even before he arrived they’d begun 
building a small city south of the proposed lake (to which they were implacably 
opposed), starting with a power station in a place Griffin earmarked 
residential.

Griffin, once in Australia, agreed to redraw his plans to accommodate elements 
of the other designs favoured by government, after the crusty colonels had 
personally bastardised his design. But he was shunned.

Griffin stuck to his plan for a city straddling a lake; they continued to plan 
and build bits of their underwhelming, prosaic capital south of the Molonglo. 
Wartime austerity stalled work to a snail’s pace. Any saving was sought – 
including on the foundation stone obelisk. It is still missing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4a442d28db75b0dcd55d6cc1cf518d3dbd0872b%2F0_324_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra's%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20'mediocrity'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2317%3A%20Canberra%27s%20vision%20of%20the%20ideal%20city%20gets%20mired%20in%20%27mediocrity%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fstory-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4a442d28db75b0dcd55d6cc1cf518d3dbd0872b%2F0_324_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Protest on the lawns of Canberra’s Old Parliament House, January 2016. 
Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP 
In 1916, Australia’s official war correspondent Charles W Bean 
<https://www.awm.gov.au/about/charles-bean/> witnessed the horror of the 
western front. He resolved to establish a place in Australia where the 
relatives of the dead and missing could mourn and remember. It would be a 
military museum, an archive and a shrine.


Meanwhile, Griffin had been sidetracked into designing a grave for General 
William Bridges 
<http://www.canberratracks.act.gov.au/heritage-trails/track-4-act-pioneers-cemetery/general-bridges-grave>
, the Gallipoli commander whose body was shipped home to Australia and buried 
on the hill at Canberra’s royal military college,Duntroon 
<http://www.army.gov.au/Army-life/Army-careers/RMCD>. Cognisant of the 
emotional potency of Bean’s idea and how war had re-shaped Australia’s 
disposition, Griffin suggested the Australian War Memorial complimented the 
essence of his capitol, and that it and Bridges’ grave might go atop Kurrajong 
hill.


Again they shouted him down. The capitol died on Marion’s drawings along with 
plans for medium-density living amid the monuments, lively boulevards and 
inter-linked, vibrant suburbs.


The war memorial, opened in 1941 <https://www.awm.gov.au/>, today stands in 
place of Griffin’s casino. Marion’s midway pleasance is, conversely, a vast, 
empty (except on occasions such as Anzac day) windswept parade ground lined 
with monuments to battles, wars and military units. Constitution Avenue is a 
lifeless thoroughfare that is only now, along with other parts of inner 
Canberra, accommodating the medium-density vision Griffin articulated a century 
ago.


Stand atop Mount Ainslie and you’ll see some of the original Griffin plan, its 
oblique geometry like the veins of maple leaf held to the sun. The city is 
finally attaining the Griffins’ intended vibrancy, but its ridiculous expanse – 
more than 800 square kilometres for a population not yet 400,000-strong – is a 
stage for too many dormitory suburbs of big, energy-hungry houses.

Story of cities #18: Vienna's 'wild settlers' kickstart a social housing 
revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/08/story-cities-18-vienna-austria-cooperative-self-build-settlers-social-housing-revolution>
Naturally Canberra scarred the Griffins. Marion was especially embittered, as 
evidenced by her disjointed autobiography,The Magic of America 
<http://www.artic.edu/magicofamerica/>. She described Walter’s time in Canberra 
(ending when prime minister Billy Hughes effectively sacked him in 1920 as 
“director of design and construction”) as “a perpetual battle one might say, 
against an Empire ... continual warfare. The one word that describes the 
methods here (in Australia) is inefficiency, and the one that describes the 
ideal is mediocrity.”

The couple lived, until Walter’s death in India aged 61, in Castlecrag – the 
Sydney suburb they had designed, and where municipal trouble resonated with 
their battle against Canberra officials.

But there is a more melancholy postscript. Only one of the structures that the 
pacifist Walter Griffin designed for Canberra was ever actually built on its 
intended site. And that is the grave for the general, Bridges, upon that hill 
at Duntroon.

Paul Daley writes the Postcolonial column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog> on Australian 
identity and Indigenous history for The Guardian. He is the author ofCanberra 
(NewSouth Books, 2013) <https://www.newsouthbooks.com.au/books/canberra/>.


Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 