
At first the jury was out about Ed Balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> competing on Strictly Come 
Dancing. Was the 49-year-old having a gigantic midlife crisis? Would it scupper 
the former Labour shadow chancellor’s chances of a political comeback?

What about his wife, Yvette Cooper, still active in the Jeremy Corbyn-led 
Labour party – how much more of watching inept, delusional, miscast men 
humiliating themselves could one woman take?

On a wider level, hadn’t 2016 been tough enough without the nation having to 
witness what promised to be a weekly master-class in crazed dad-dancing? Yet 
the implausible has happened, and Balls isn’t only surviving with almost all of 
his dignity intact, the people of Britain have taken him to their hearts to the 
point where he could actually win it.

It seems unkind to point out that this isn’t down to the quality of Ed’s 
dancing – but unkind we must be. On a positive note, he isn’t anywhere near as 
bad as previous unlikelyStrictly contestants, such as Ann Widdecombe or John 
Sergeant, both of whom lumbered around the dance floor in the manner of 
melancholy blind buffaloes. Compared to them, Ed can move – just not always in 
the right directions at the right times. In the main, he’s been exuberantly 
average, with the emphasis on “exuberantly”, and another emphasis on “average”.

Along with his professional partner, Katya Jones, Ed has now tackled several 
dances, most of which have been imbued with the overall ambience of the last 
five minutes of a riotous, mildly violent wedding disco after multitudes of 
wine boxes have been consumed, and everyone wants to strut their stuff, and let 
it all hang out.

Ed’s highlights have included, an American smooth that was Winnie the Pooh 
meetsFlashdance in a head-on collision. A charleston where to watch was to 
believe that a sack of spuds could take on human form. A Halloween routine 
where you wondered whether defibrillators would have to become involved, either 
for Balls, or the viewers. During this last dance, there was much unseemly 
clawing at his own body parts, suggesting either that Ed considered himself 
quite the sex-pot, or that the proverbial ants had gotten into his pants. 
Though even this was not as terrifying as the time that Balls attempted to lift 
Jones in the air, and ended up frantically grabbing at her legs in a way that 
suggested he had mistaken her for a large log that needed feeding into a 
wood-chipper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c1d9e7ba32d265fadc68068af6d7c6e2dac833%2F0_143_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strictly%20fans%20take%20Ed%20Balls%20and%20his%20dad-dancing%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strictly%20fans%20take%20Ed%20Balls%20and%20his%20dad-dancing%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c1d9e7ba32d265fadc68068af6d7c6e2dac833%2F0_143_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 Katya Jones and Ed Balls have been taken to the nation’s hearts. Photograph: 
Guy Levy/BBC 
However, while early dances looked as though Jones was fighting off a series 
of surprise attacks by a large demonically possessed pyjama case, Ed is 
definitely improving. In last night’s show, he came on for a silent 
movie-themed quickstep, and danced like a plank. I’m sorry, I do apologise, I 
misread my own notes. He came onholding a plank as a prop. He didn’t dance like 
a plank – there were times he danced like a teddy bear trying to push its own 
stuffing back in, or like Tippi Hedren fighting off crows inThe Birds, but it 
wasn’t at all plank-like. In fact, the judges decided that his quickstep more 
or less resembled a quickstep, and awarded him his highest marks of the series, 
as Cooper clapped enthusiastically in the audience.

What a hoot! Come to think of it, it really isn’t such a mystery why Ed is 
proving to be such a massiveStrictly draw, or why so many people are voting for 
him, in a way they didn’t in the (ahem) election “unpleasantness” of 2015. The 
fact is, that, while politicians such as George Osborne may or may not have 
been being a wee bit sarcastic when they “congratulated” Balls for cutting a 
rug onStrictly, in all the important ways, Balls is killing it.

Everyone loves a trier, and, in stark contrast to his somewhat fearsome 
political persona, Balls is coming across as game, hardworking, good humoured, 
self-deprecating – even occasionally rhythmic.

Will Balls lift the glittering Strictly trophy? Who knows. As a tragic regular 
Strictly viewer, with no life, I’m not sure that ultimately I’d want Ed to win. 
(Go, lovely, plucky model Daisy Lowe, who meanieStrictly viewers don’t seem to 
want to vote for because she’s too pretty!) At time of writing, it was unclear 
whether Ed had made it through to next week’s show, though it’s unlikely that 
theStrictly audience would be ready to let him go any time soon. In these 
turbulent times, it’s even arguable that he is providing a valuable national 
service by amusing Britons with his signature style of dad-boogying.

Whatever happens next with Ed Balls and Strictly, the smart money’s on the 
fact that an important public image battle has already been won.
 