
Back in the 1970s, Sir Charles Goodhart, then at the Bank of England, came up 
with the law which nowbears his name 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodhart%27s_law>, and which tends to be 
paraphrased: “When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.” 
So, for instance, when rail company employees put their efforts into meeting a 
target – say, season ticket sales – they might just forget about their central 
purpose, to provide a good train service.

Goodhart’s law sheds light on the unfolding disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/14/southern-rail-strike-rmt-leader-says-he-was-barred-from-acas-talks>
 that is Southern rail. Southern is a small part of the Govia Thameslink 
Railway (GTR) mega-franchise, and is 60% owned by the transport company 
Go-Ahead, and contracted so tightly by the Department of Transport that 
Southern rail itself has little room for innovation or imagination – precisely 
the reverse of what rail privatisation was supposed to deliver. In fact, it may 
just be a textbook case of Goodhart’s law. GTR’s contract ties Southern rail so 
completely into the will of the Department of Transport that it keeps just 3% 
of the takings. The only way of making a profit is to remove human employees 
from platforms (job half done) and from trains (job stalled).

Southern rail strike: RMT leader says he was barred from Acas talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/14/southern-rail-strike-rmt-leader-says-he-was-barred-from-acas-talks>
When the contract is dysfunctional – as it clearly is in this case – the main 
effort of the organisation shifts from meeting public or customer needs to 
meeting financial or other targets which seem only subtly different, but in 
practice amount to a huge shift in resources, and therefore a waste of public 
money.Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail is governed 
by earnings targets from its owners, and it keeps little of the ticket revenue, 
so of course its objective is to cut costs – and to meet the Whitehall demands 
on driver-only operation.

Because Goodhart’s law also applies to contracted service providers, it 
explains the misalignment between the interests of the Department ofTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport>, the GTR franchisees and the poor 
battered passengers who need the railway to work in order to make a living.

Goodhart explains something about why so many public services meet their 
targets but fail their customers. It also explains why GTR has made such a 
dog’s dinner of its relationship with its staff. Hence the current strike by 
drivers and guards who want to retain their dual responsibility for safety on 
the big train routes (on the small train routes, guards have already been 
lost). Hence the resulting misery, loss of earnings, divorces, air pollution, 
traffic and all the rest. And hence the effective removal of Sussex from the 
transport system. More than one-fifth of trains have been cancelled or severely 
delayed for much of the year since April, even without strikes. Without 
drivers, there are now, of course, no trains at all on the Southern network.

What Goodhart doesn’t really explain is why all three sides – the unions, 
ministers and managers – pretend that failing the customers, which they seem 
happy to allow in their various ways, is all the fault of the others.

Nor why the transport secretary, Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, has waded into the strike 
with such gusto with his embarrassing defence of GTR’s failings, pretending 
that the primary problem has been industrial action.

So Grayling breathes a sigh of relief that his failure to hold GTR to account 
gets lost in the bluster, only matched by the glee with which the unions plunge 
in, aware that they have some public support (well, who wants a human-free 
railway? Not me!). At least, they have some support for now.

In fact, you can’t help feeling there must be a better strategy for holding 
the government and managers to account than plunging us back into the strike 
days of the 1970s – and letting Grayling and GTR off the hook for their 
appalling service before the strike.

Desperate commuters, it’s time for a rebellion the government can’t ignore | 
Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/commuters-rebellion-government-cant-ignore-southern-rail>
When it comes to the tired old public versus private debate, this situation 
emphasises that neither direct Whitehall control (which has failed so badly 
with Southern) nor all-out privatisation has provided us with choice, 
competition or innovation.

So what should the union do instead? First, dodge the government’s strike 
trap, which lets Grayling avoid responsibility for the underlying failings of 
the franchise by pointing a finger at the workers. Second, learn from rail 
unions on the continent which leave the gates open instead of bashing 
passengers (the company don’t get the fares anyway). Third, use their 
campaigning power, which is not small, to reinvent train franchising so that 
the railways include a genuine diversity of operators.

That means making it possible for the failed Southern franchise to be taken 
over by a new cooperative provider owned by investors, passengers and workforce 
– which also controls the tracks and signals as the original Southern railway 
did between the wars. And while we are about it, we need to appoint an 
independent inquiry to wrestle the truth about the role of the Department of 
Transport, GTR and its ownersGo-Ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goaheadgroup>. That won’t be achieved by 
falling into their strike trap.
 