
Dumped federal minister Stuart Robert has reportedly pledged to pay back the 
costs of taxpayer-funded trip to attend the opening of a mine in which he owned 
“minor shares”.

Robert was quoted in the Gold Coast Bulletin 
<http://www.goldcoastbulletin.com.au/news/gold-coast/mp-stuart-robert-defends-hefty-travel-bill-which-was-paid-by-taxpayers/news-story/248da0704923570a41c3c081e65bca28>
 saying he would repay the $1,091 he spent on return flights between Brisbane 
and Townsville on April 2013.

“To ensure there can be no conflict I wish to voluntarily repay the costs in 
question in addition to any such penalty the Department [of Finance] may wish 
to apply,” Robert said.

Attempts by Guardian Australia to contact Robert or his office have been 
unsuccessful.


Before Stuart’s announcement on Tuesday the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, suggested the 
finance department might look into claims.

The department’s entitlement records 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P32_ROBERT_Stuart.pdf> show 
Robert spent $1,091.49 on return flights from Brisbane to Townsville on 10 
April 2013, the day the then Queensland premier, Campbell Newman,officially 
opened the Mount Carlton 
<http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2013/4/10/new-mine-boost-for-north-queensland-economy>
 gold, silver and copper mine south-east of Townsville.

Robert and his family members held shares in the mine’s proponent, Evolution, 
according to anupdate to the parliamentary interests register 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/House_of_Representatives_Committees?url=pmi/declarations/roberts_43p.pdf>
 that he filed on 6 February 2012.

The Australian newspaper reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/stuart-roberts-1600-bill-despite--gold-mine-link/news-story/bf563844487677bf27af2857cf45780b>
 that a state government itinerary of the official opening showed the event was 
also attended by Robert – then the federal opposition’s spokesman on defence 
science, technology and personnel – and the Queensland Liberal National party’s 
then president, Bruce McIver.

Stuart Robert's China trip: Labor asks AFP to investigate linked mining shares
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/15/stuart-roberts-china-trip-labor-asks-afp-to-investigate-linked-mining-shares>
Guardian Australia has sought comment from Robert, who was forced to quit from 
the ministry last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
 after he came under scrutiny over a “private” trip to China in August 2014 
when he attended a mining cooperation deal involving a Liberal donor.

Labor has written to the Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/15/stuart-roberts-china-trip-labor-asks-afp-to-investigate-linked-mining-shares>
 asking them to investigate the China trip. The shadow attorney general, Mark 
Dreyfus, said if the latest reports about Robert were true it showed “that his 
earlier antics in China were not isolated incidents”.

“There appears to be a pattern of behaviour here in using his public office to 
benefit both himself and wealthy Liberal donor Paul Marks,” Dreyfus said.

“Mr Robert was clearly unfit to remain in the ministry – despite the 
protestations of his mate Scott Morrison [the treasurer] – and his behaviour 
absolutely warrants an investigation by the AFP.”


Marks served on the board of Evolution Mining at the time of the mine opening 
event butresigned as a non-executive director in November 2013 
<http://www.evolutionmining.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/986.pdf> “to 
pursue his other business interests”.

Turnbull, when asked about the travel claims in Rockhampton in central 
Queensland on Tuesday, said the expenses occurred in 2013 when the Coalition 
was in opposition.

“I don’t know the circumstances of the matter but these things are dealt with 
by the Department of Finance in the ordinary way,” the prime minister said.

“It is not appropriate for me to make a comment on something that’s happened 
at that time. Stuart has paid a heavy price around the circumstances of his 
China trip. The matter that has been raised in the media today will no doubt be 
addressed by the Department of Finance in the normal way.”

Stuart Robert loses job as minister after China trip furore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
Robert, the MP for the Gold Coast seat of Fadden, lost his ministerial 
position after revelations he had attended an event in Beijing to celebrate a 
deal involving Nimrod Resources, an Australian mining company headed by Marks.


The trip – which he said was undertaken in a private capacity – attracted 
attention because amedia release issued by China MinMetals Corporation 
<http://www.minmetals.com/english/News/201505/t20150528_68729.html> said Robert 
had extended his congratulations “on behalf of the Australian Department of 
Defence” and had presented “a medal bestowed to him by Australian prime 
minister in honour of remembrance and blessing”.


This was followed by a meeting with the Chinese vice-minister of land and 
resources in the reported presence of Nimrod Resources the next day.

A report by the senior public servant Martin Parkinson found Robert had “acted 
inconsistently” with the statement of ministerial standards. During the course 
of Parkinson’s investigation, Robert disclosed a trustee shareholding in 
Metallum Holdings, which had an interest in Nimrod Resources.

“Mr Robert recognised that this connection would create the impression that at 
the time he went to Beijing he had something personally to gain from the Nimrod 
Resources project,” Turnbull said on Friday.

Morrison, who said early last week the China story was a “ridiculous beat-up”, 
backed Turnbull’s handling of the issue.

“There was further information when Mr Robert cooperated fully and extensively 
with the inquiry undertaken by Dr Parkinson, as you would expect someone to do 
– which he did,” Morrison told 2GB on Monday.

“It ended where it has ended and that is the end of the matter.”
 