
“It is a principle of music to repeat the theme. Repeat and repeat again as 
the pace mounts.” William Carlos Williams had it right, in words later set by 
one of music’s most repetition-obsessed composers, Steve Reich in hisThe Desert 
Music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O5qOtXql-oI>. 

But it’s not just the minimalists, the likes of Reich or Philip Glass 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Stu7h7Qup8>. Repetition is a musical 
fundamental that connects every culture on Earth. And it’s not just the songs, 
symphonies or operas we love that are so often built on patterns that repeat – 
drumbeats, rhythms, melodies, harmonic cycles – it’s also that we love to 
listen to the same music, the same recording, again and again. And instead of 
being bored by the fact that we know that particular moment of achingly 
expressive vibrato is coming up on Billie Holliday’s recording ofSummertime 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uYUqbnk7tCY>; or that the fugue in the Kyrie 
fromBach’s B-minor Mass <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cRqsdRwnqJc> is going 
to resolve in its final bar so radiantly into the major key from the minor; or 
that, despite our fondest hopes, Violetta is always going to die to those 
morbidly delicious strains of Verdi’sLa Traviata 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YgrkE3qtmik>, our enjoyment increases the more 
we hear them. Far from diluting our pleasure, repeating them only seems to 
amplify our involvement in these musical experiences.

It’s an odd phenomenon that has little crossover in other art forms. As 
Elizabeth Hellmuth Margulis’s 
<https://aeon.co/essays/why-repetition-can-turn-almost-anything-into-music> 
work has revealed inOn Repeat: How Music Plays the Mind 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Repeat-How-Music-Plays-Mind/dp/0199990824/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1461596441&sr=8-1&keywords=margulis+on+repeat>
, her book on precisely this phenomenon, it’s certainly not the same with 
words. If you say a phrase – a collection of words – over and over again it 
starts to become simply a collection of sounds rather than “meaning” anything. (
Gertrude Stein <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FJEIAGULmPQ> and other avant 
garde writers made a new kind of literature from this fertile borderland where 
words are carriers of sound instead of signifiers of meaning.) It’s called 
“semantic satiation” – that moment when a phrase is overloaded through so much 
repetition that it slips out of the meaning-processing part of our brains.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvugqRAX7xQE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvugqRAX7xQE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvugqRAX7xQE&media=>
Listen to It’s Gonna Rain by Steve Reich <https://youtu.be/vugqRAX7xQE> 
This emptying out of the semantic dimension is the point where musical meaning 
starts to be made. Reich has always known that: two of his works from the 1960s,
Come Out <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g0WVh1D0N50> and It’s Gonna Rain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vugqRAX7xQE>, feature a single phrase or 
sentence repeated against versions of itself, looped at different speeds. Using 
the technology of the time, Reich creates a dense web of sound from these 
tape-loops to a point at which the original sentences have given up their 
semantic meaning completely to create a hugely rich texture of musical 
experience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJvNQLJ1_HQ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJvNQLJ1_HQ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJvNQLJ1_HQ0&media=>
Listen to Canon in D major by Pachelbel <https://youtu.be/JvNQLJ1_HQ0> 
Reich is only an extreme example of what composers have always done with 
repetition: everything fromPachelbel’s Canon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JvNQLJ1_HQ0>, with its hypnotically repeated 
bass line, toBeethoven’s Fifth Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RegMZfOv4OU>, made and propelled by the 
manipulation of a repeated four-note cell, to thevast majority 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3oxbVz26gLQ> of songs ever written 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h5EofwRzit0>, with their carousels of verses 
and choruses, are made to work with the pleasure centres of musical repetition 
that seem to exist in our brains.

Patterns of repetition aren’t just musical techniques. They’re invitations for 
listeners to participate

The exceptions to music’s repetitive rule only prove it by default: Joseph 
Haydn’s music so often works by setting up a pattern of predictability before 
breaking it with an unexpected musical punchline; but he’s dependent on our 
existing love of repetitive structures for his tricks to work. Pieces composed 
expressly with as little repetition at possible – the brave new worlds of works 
byKarlheinz Stockhausen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V1ia-W_JgjE> or Pierre 
Boulez <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HXJWHG_6KAI>, say, create a new kind of 
musical experience in which the thrilling sense of discombobulation and 
alienation comes as much from the music’s lack of repetitive moorings as the 
visceral dissonance and rhythmic unpredictability of their new musical idioms.

But patterns of repetition aren’t just musical techniques for composers to 
play with. They’re invitations for listeners to participate. AsMargulis 
<http://www.elizabethmargulis.com/> puts it: “Repetitiveness actually gives 
rise to the kind of listening that we think of as musical. It carves out a 
familiar, rewarding path in our minds, allowing us at once to anticipate and 
participate in each phrase as we listen. That experience of beingplayed by the 
music is what creates a sense of shared subjectivity with the sound, and – when 
we unplug our earbuds, anyway – with each other, a transcendent connection that 
lasts at least as long as a favourite song.”

I love that idea of being “played by the music”: it resonantly captures why it 
is that we want to return again and again to the music we love the most – the 
music we repeat, the music that plays with and on us the most.

In music, exact repetition simply doesn’t exist

But part of that play is an acknowledgement of an existential truth: that 
there’s no such thing as exact repetition.


Composer Thomas Adès 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Thomas-Ades-Noises-Conversations-Service/dp/0571278973/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1461596983&sr=8-1&keywords=ades+full+of+noises>
 describes what I mean: “Music is in motion all the time … with each note it’s 
either closer or further away, it’s not in the same place that it was before. 
It can’t be. If you play one note twice, it’s going to have different 
implications, because you will have been altered by the first one. I don’t 
really think exact repetition is possible, especially in performance: it’s 
simply a different kind of movement … you’ve got a little older since it was 
first played, and you’ve probably started to think about something more, as we 
do when we get older. So the second time it comes, it has more urgency.” As 
we’re listening to the music – listening along with the music, as Margulis 
would put it – we’re changed by it, just as we are changing in time ourselves.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIl6-lZYDpqY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIl6-lZYDpqY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIl6-lZYDpqY&media=>
Listen to Schubert’s Piano sonata in A major <https://youtu.be/Il6-lZYDpqY> 
That’s something that Schubert <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2T1IZ6r3A5w> 
understood and used as a fundamental musical truth. He often repeats whole 
sections of movements in his sonatas, string quartets, symphonies, and songs, 
but he makes the same music mean something utterly different on its return. The 
slow movement of theA major piano sonata, D959 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Il6-lZYDpqY>, is a case in point. The piece 
starts with a lulling, melancholy melody, which is blown apart by some of the 
darkest and most violently explosive music he ever wrote. When the tune returns 
after this outburst, it has scarcely been altered, but its expressive effect 
has been profoundly transformed. Previously an innocent if soft-focused tune, 
it’s now obliterated, desolate, a tragic revenant.

As Arnold Schoenberg said: “Intelligibility in music seems to be impossible 
without repetition.” Yet exact repetition, where everything stays the same? 
Well: just as our heartbeats are similar but different in time, pulse after 
pulse, each older than the last – in music, exact repetition simply doesn’t 
exist.

• Tom Service’s new programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03sct7m> The 
Listening Service <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b078n25h> begins on BBC 
Radio 3 on Sunday 1 May at 5pm and weekly thereafter. Each programme asks a 
different musical question; the first three shows are on beginnings, 
repetition, and what is it about Mozart?
 