
Martin Bain, the Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> 
chief executive, has warned that the Premier League’s bottom-placed club will 
not be able to spend their way to safety in January and made it plain that 
Ellis Short, the owner, is open to a potential takeover.

Bain is attempting to reduce a £140m debt and £73m wage bill. Asked how much 
moneyDavid Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> would be 
handed next month, his reply was stark. “Limited. I could probably say very 
limited with regards to the January transfer window. We’re rebuilding and 
restructuring, it’s going to take a while and we’re not going to be able to 
spend to get out of trouble.”

Fernando Llorente double steers Swansea to vital win over Sunderland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/swansea-city-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
This dictates that Moyes, Sunderland’s seventh manager in just over five 
years, cannot expect anything approaching the £15m budget that his predecessor, 
Sam Allardyce, spent last January. Allardyce spent that cash on Lamine Koné, 
Jan Kirchhoff and Wahbi Khazri, who all played key roles in the club’sescape 
from relegatio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/sunderland-everton-premier-league-match-report>
n, but this season Khazri has lost form while Kirchhoff has struggled with 
injuries.

With Moyes reluctant to offload his two most saleable assets, the goalkeeper 
Jordan Pickford and Koné – understood to have a £25m release clause in his 
contract – in order to fund purchases, Sunderland’s survival chances will be 
heavily dependent on their manager’s coaching skills.

It signals the end of a series of transfer‑market quick-fixes and managerial 
changes, which have averted a series of potential relegations but failed to 
break thecycle of struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/30/david-moyes-einstein-barry-glendenning>
.

“We’ve reached a point where we can’t have that short-term hit to plug the 
holes in the dam,” Bain said, pointing out that only three of the 46 players 
sold since 2009 made the club a profit.

“Maybe in the past – and I don’t want to talk disparagingly of anyone at the 
moment – we didn’t do the right due diligence on players. It’s the big buys 
that come back and haunt you. If you get those wrong, it causes you a big 
issue. There’s so much money involved that you need policies and procedures in 
place before buying, but there’s not been a lot of them at Sunderland.”

After pouring more than £200m into the club, Short has instructed his advisers 
to talk to parties displaying potential interest in buying him out for about 
£170m. Although more than one possible buyer is on the horizon, no sale appears 
imminent.

Meet the model turned chief executive who has walked into a Sunderland storm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/25/sunderland-martin-bain-sam-allardyce>
Bain – who says he and Moyes are “not thinking about relegation at the minute” 
– is adamant the American financier would only sell to a party capable of 
turning Sunderland into a positive force. “We would listen to offers,” he said. 
“I believe Ellis has the interests of the club at heart and he wouldn’t turn 
away anything that is beneficial to Sunderland Football Club. I’m not saying 
Ellis Short is disappearing off into the horizon and is completely closing the 
purse strings, though. He is not.

“He wants what’s best for Sunderland. Does he still want us to succeed? Yes, 
he does. Is he taking money from Sunderland? No – and I am confident he will 
continue to fund the club and cover shortfalls. Ellis Short has put a lot of 
money into this football club. Ellis Short is passionate about Sunderland.”

Bain emphasised his admiration for Moyes, whose side host Chelsea on Wednesday 
night. “David is absolutely the right choice for us. I’m really pleased we’ve 
got him. We’re very, very fortunate. David works harder than most people I’ve 
met in the game.”

Bain also played down any concerns that either he or Moyes could be tempted to 
quit. “I really do believe in life that when you have a bond, a relationship, 
you don’t want to let one another down. I think I’ve got that with David. I 
wouldn’t want to walk out on David and I don’t think it’s in David’s character, 
either.”
 