
They are “doing more damage to London,” said the former chancellor Lord Lawson 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201516/ldhansrd/text/151214-0001.htm>
 in the House of Lords, “than almost anything since the Blitz.” In the same 
spirit of absurdist hyperbole, they might be said to be the most transformative 
public works since Joseph Bazalgette built London’s sewers and river 
embankments. They are not, but they do have the potential to change the spirit 
and character of the capital and of other cities that follow the same path, as 
well as making its transport cleaner, healthier, safer, more efficient and 
better able to deal with growing pressure of numbers. They might even prove 
that the city’s former mayor Boris Johnson was capable of doing something right.

“They” are the cycle superhighways, the most conspicuous of several measures 
promoted under Johnson. They add up to an unprecedented plan, which is to make 
the sprawling, awkward, inconsistent city of London bike-friendly. The places 
most often cited for the exemplariness of their cycling provision – Amsterdam, 
Copenhagen, more recently Manhattan – were already more ordered, compact and 
coherent in their layout. InLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, the 
street pattern changes moment by moment, straight to winding, leafy to 
truck-thronged, wide to narrow.

This in turn reflects the politics of the city, in which power is diffused 
among its 32 boroughs, plus the City of London, each with its own identity and 
attitudes. The city’s mayors, for all their ability to attract headlines, have 
limited means to enforce their will. The superhighway network therefore has to 
deal with the fact that the royal borough of Kensington and Chelseadoesn’t want 
them on its land <http://lcc.org.uk/pages/cycle-superhighways>, meaning there 
will be a highway-free void in the middle of the capital. In the City, 
meanwhile, the impatient, assertive people who work for the financial industry 
won’t wait long for the red man to turn green, which means they don’t take well 
to the elaborate multi-phase traffic lights, at which bikes, cars and 
pedestrians must patiently wait their turn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bc85921c8cb52f5e6f57ac077e22da55a6c47ba%2F0_0_3500_2442%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Superhighway%20to%20cycling%20heaven%20%E2%80%93%20or%20just%20a%20hell%20of%20a%20mess%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Superhighway%20to%20cycling%20heaven%20%E2%80%93%20or%20just%20a%20hell%20of%20a%20mess%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bc85921c8cb52f5e6f57ac077e22da55a6c47ba%2F0_0_3500_2442%2F3500.jpg>
 Former London mayor Boris Johnson meets one obvious dissenter as he cycles 
across Vauxhall Bridge. Photograph: John Stillwell/PA 
Andrew Gilligan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/nov/28/cycling-on-vauxhall-bridge-a-liar-claim-and-a-few-damned-statistics>
, the journalist who became Johnson’s cycling commissioner in 2013, says that 
“a lot of councils are really cowardly” and that while majorities usually 
support cycling schemes, local politicians are easily impressed by vocal 
minorities. In Kensington and Chelsea, he says, it only needed 15 objections 
from residents for one proposal to be stopped. It therefore required Johnson’s 
“leadership” and investment of “significant political capital” to make anything 
happen. Gilligan himself is not an especially diplomatic figure. “He pissed off 
large numbers of people,” says one involved in London’s bike politics, “but he 
made it happen.”

Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> infrastructure, as 
commonsensical and humdrum as it might seem, is not just about engineering. It 
is political, cultural and social. It has to reconcile territorial disputes 
between people on bikes, people in vehicles and people on foot and between 
different kinds of cyclist. It can take on aspects of class conflict, in which 
drivers sometimes cast themselves, counterintuitively, as underdog victims of a 
two-wheeled elite. It obliges choices as to what kind of city its citizens and 
politicians want, with what balance of public benefits and private freedoms and 
for whom.

Just before he left the mayoralty this spring, Johnson inaugurated a stretch 
running along Bazalgette’s Victoria Embankment from the City of London to 
parliament. Cyclists applauded him as he rode along it. Van drivers hurled 
obscenities. Running through the centre of the city and the districts of the 
country’s government, past landmarks such as the Tower of London and the Palace 
of Westminster, it was the most conspicuous of his interventions, symbolic 
confirmation that new cycle routes were not marginal but as important to the 
running of the city as railway lines and roads for vehicles.

Municipal sphinxes have left riddling signs that have to be interpreted at 
speed

The route, called the east-west cycle superhighway, is contentious. Taxi 
drivers hate it 
<http://www.yorkpress.co.uk/news/national/14265654.High_Court_to_rule_on_cabbies__challenge_to_London_cycle_superhighway/>
. It affects the car-bound journeys of people of power and influence:Lord Sugar 
moaned during its construction 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/boris-johnson-ambushed-by-lord-sugar-on-radio-phonein-over-cycle-superhighway-a3127981.html>
 and Sir George Iacobescu, the man in charge of the Canary Wharf development, 
said it strangled traffic, and lobbied Downing Street against it. The Royal 
Parks objected to aproposed extension past Buckingham Palace 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/victory-for-boris-johnson-as-buckingham-palace-cycle-superhighway-is-given-a-trial-a2917531.html>
. Gilligan says that Boris “kept being harassed by MPs, colleagues plucking at 
his sleeve and complaining that their drive from wherever had got longer by so 
many minutes”.

For the cyclist, the east-west superhighway is the most impressive part of a 
system that can be ramshackle in parts. It is broad and stately, under the 
embankment’s plane trees, well separated from fuming drivers alongside. It 
feels safe. When complete, it will run alongside St James’s Park, through Hyde 
Park and onwards, making it possible to ride 18 miles fromBarking in east 
London to Acton in the west 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/world-leading-cycle-route-unveiled-in-london-18-mile-route-protect-cyclists-barking-acton-9708384.html>
, and be separated from traffic almost the whole time. It was announced last 
week that it will be joined by a route north from Oxford Circus, through 
Regent’s Park to Swiss Cottage, after the new mayor, Sadiq Khan, approved it.

A superhighway, in theory, is a route that separates cyclists from other road 
users, although early examples achieved this sketchily, with strips of blue 
paint that acted more as ignorable suggestions than actual barriers to trucks 
and cars. It is linked to other measures given catchy names by the journalists 
Johnson and Gilligan. There are “mini-Hollands” 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/travel-information/improvements-and-projects/cycle-mini-hollands>
, whereby three outer boroughs get to share £100m on making local improvements. 
There are alsoQuietways 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/travel-information/improvements-and-projects/quietways>, 
which join up the slack and underused byways of the city to make safe and 
unthreatening routes. Thefirst of these 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2016/june/london-s-first-quietway-route-now-open>
 runs six miles from Waterloo station to Greenwich through council estate car 
parks, little-known parks and along disused railway embankments. Created with 
the help of the charitySustrans <http://www.sustrans.org.uk>, it opened in June.

The logic, says Gilligan, is that London is facing ever more demand for 
transport and that encouraging bicycle use is the best way to meet this demand. 
Building more roads on the congested and high-priced land is physically and 
politically unfeasible. Expanding the underground network is slow and 
expensive. A cycling commuter takes up much less space than one in a car, which 
rather obviously means that they use the existing roads more efficiently. 
Cycling has the added benefit of reducing pollution and benefiting the health 
of participants, at least of those who don’t get injured.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1fc7c398d28a94d920b4f32847db7fbe787bff5%2F0_0_3399_2167%2F3399.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Superhighway%20to%20cycling%20heaven%20%E2%80%93%20or%20just%20a%20hell%20of%20a%20mess%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Superhighway%20to%20cycling%20heaven%20%E2%80%93%20or%20just%20a%20hell%20of%20a%20mess%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1fc7c398d28a94d920b4f32847db7fbe787bff5%2F0_0_3399_2167%2F3399.jpg>
 ‘Contentious’: a section of the east-west cycle superhighway. Photograph: 
Transport for London 
What stops more people riding bikes is danger and the perception of danger, 
especially among parents with children, women and older people. The risk of 
death is actually small and declining:figures from Cycling UK 
<http://www.cyclinguk.org/publication/cycle-magazine/cycle-campaign-news-april-2016>
 show 33 deaths out of 90m London cycle journeys in 1989, falling to nine out 
of 270m journeys in 2016. But well-reported tragedies such as thedeath of 
26-year-old Ying Tao <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-33223823> 
outside the Bank of England last year, induce understandable fear. The idea of 
superhighways and allied measures is both tobe safer and to feel safer, so that 
more cautious cyclists will venture out. Few school runs are made by bike and 
campaigners want to change this.

In its current state, the incomplete system imperfectly achieves these aims. 
The Embankment stretch is mostly glorious – “Just before it opened I had trucks 
snarling down my back,” says one user. “Afterwards, I could chat to a colleague 
as we went along” – but it unravels into confusion at its end. Elsewhere, the 
network can be inconsistent and bewildering. Municipal sphinxes have left 
riddling signs that have to be interpreted at speed: 
turn-right-give-way-cross-turn-left, turn right in two phases only, go left in 
order to go right. Inscrutable numbers and symbols refer to a higher concept 
that is imperfectly explained.

There is a plethora of special conditions, works of intellectual ingenuity 
that as soon as comprehended change into something else. You have to decipher 
which half-defaced cycle logo on the pavement and which little blue sign is 
telling you where to go and how to behave in relation to pedestrians. They, 
also confused, may swear at you in the belief that you are encroaching on their 
space. At some point on an unfamiliar route you are likely to lose the thread 
and find yourself discharged into the hostile realm of HGVs. It resembles an 
old-fashioned board game: go back three spaces, throw a double to avoid the 
Dark Forest or a six to find the Magic Bridge.

The Lycra lout, with his unpleasant musk of sanctimony and testosterone, looms 
over all discussions about cycling

Objections are not all from privileged lords. A mini-Holland in Waltham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/nov/07/waltham-forest-mini-holland-row-politics-protests-and-house-prices>
, north-east London, brought out a multi-ethnic, not-posh crowd of hundreds of 
protesters objecting to its effects on shops and traffic congestion. A 
Conservative councillor, supporting the objectors, said that cyclists are 
“almost entirely middle-class, young white men”. Gilligan dismisses this 
argument – “It’s complete rubbish to say the motorcar is the bastion of the 
poor” – but the row shows that the virtues of cycling are not always 
self-evident to everyone.

Gilligan, like other pro-cycling campaigners, has a series of arguments to 
refute the most common objections. Cycling routes are usually good for shops 
that lay along them, they say. Traffic will adapt to new circumstances. “People 
think it is like water and if you narrow the pipe it will flood,” says 
Gilligan, “but it is not a force of nature. It is a product of human choices.”

If you give less road space to cars and improve conditions for cycling, in 
other words, more people will give up driving. There will still be congestion, 
but for other reasons than new cycle lanes – “population growth, the rise of 
Uber cars, cheaper petrol”.

His basic argument is indeed overwhelming: it can only be good if more people 
use a city’s roads more efficiently, at less cost to themselves and in public 
expenditure, while causing less pollution and less danger to themselves and 
others than is created by driving. More than that, a city that is more pleasant 
for cycling should, at least in theory, be more pleasant for everyone else. 
Sustrans says its new Quietway has helped civilise an area around Millwall 
Football Club, whose character was previously dominated by brutal fences for 
segregating fans. At their best, mini-Hollands create quieter, calmer zones for 
pedestrians. The Victoria Embankment is now a better place for walking thanks 
to the buffer that the cycle lane creates between pedestrians and cars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4744fd7a28b88a2fbdc51e51eac50f8a0f2e0561%2F123_337_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Superhighway%20to%20cycling%20heaven%20%E2%80%93%20or%20just%20a%20hell%20of%20a%20mess%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Superhighway%20to%20cycling%20heaven%20%E2%80%93%20or%20just%20a%20hell%20of%20a%20mess%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Flondon-cycle-superhighways-heaven-or-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4744fd7a28b88a2fbdc51e51eac50f8a0f2e0561%2F123_337_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
 ‘It resembles a board game’: a superhighway junction at Cambridge Heath, east 
London. Photograph: Matthew Chattle/Rex/Shutterstock 
Yet we fall short of Utopia, not least because too many cyclists are 
themselves imperfect citizens. The Lycra lout, with his unpleasant musk of 
sanctimony and testosterone, looms over all discussions about cycling. Peter 
Murray, chairman of New London Architecture and a passionate cyclist, recalls 
the “die-in” held to commemorateMoira Gemmill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/19/moira-gemmill>, the design 
director killed in Westminster in April 2015. The roundabout where she died was 
briefly closed as cyclists lay on the ground in protest. Taxis, vans and 
scooters respected the moment. “The only people who spoiled it were the Lycra 
brigade”, who insisted on picking their way across.

Val Shawcross, deputy mayor for transport under Sadiq Khan, wants to promote 
walking as much as cycling and says the latter should be “for all ages and 
genders”. So it is essential that superhighways achieve their ambition of 
attracting different, gentler users. In the short term, they are more likely to 
increase aggression: drivers, for example, now shout at cyclists if they don’t 
use the highways. There has been a kerfuffle about lunchtime joggers using the 
cycling surface, although Murray and other regular cyclists are relaxed about 
this. The name “superhighway” is unhelpful, as it suggests an unimpeded charge, 
Froome-like, along the Champs Élysées, and their shade of blue implies a 
cycling equivalent of motorways. In reality, as cyclists are slowed down by 
crossings for pedestrians and detours behind bus stops, they require a more 
careful pace.

There is a strong suspicion that Boris Johnson rushed through his cycling 
plans in order to claim credit before his mayoralty expired, with the 
combination of self-aggrandisement and inattention to detail that typified his
other grand projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/10/boris-johnson-london-legacy-folly-vanity-rowan-moore>
. There are indeed glitches. Shawcross accuses him of causing unnecessary 
disruption by starting too many roadworks at once. But, given the blind 
unreason of Lord Lawson, and the capacity for obstruction offered by the 
complexities of improving cycling in London, this is an occasion to be grateful 
for his gung-ho spirit.
 