
After the shock of Donald Trump’s presidential win wore off, it didn’t 
surprise me that one of the first things I saw women doing online was advising 
others toget IUDs as soon as possible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/14/birth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds>
. Anticipating the end of Obamacare, coverage for birth control, perhaps even 
abortion, a lot of women started to think about long-term contraception and 
talking about their options online. With social media, getting involved is 
easier than ever. And with Trump– the most overtly misogynist politician in 
history – in office, we have our work cut out for us. This is by no means an 
exhaustive list, but here are 10 things women can do that might ease our minds, 
and protect our rights.


‘Please, I am out of options’: inside the murky world of DIY abortions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
 * We all know that reproductive justice will be under the gun with Trump – 
and Pence, a well-known extremist on abortion rights – in office. Lots of 
people are already donating toPlanned Parenthood 
<https://www.plannedparenthood.org/>, which is great. But we should also give 
some love – money and time – toindependent abortion clinics 
<https://prochoice.org/> and abortion funds <https://abortionfunds.org/> (small 
grassroots orgs that raise money to help women afford their procedures).

 * If you’re considering getting that IUD while your insurance carrier still 
covers it,now also might be a good time to stock up on Plan B, better known as 
the morning-after pill. It’s over the counter now, but that could change.

 * Get a passport if you don’t already have one. This is especially important 
fortrans people <http://www.transequality.org/know-your-rights/passports>, 
because they are good for much longer than driver’s licenses andright now 
<https://twitter.com/charl_carles/status/798538038724825088> you can list your 
gender without having to provide proof, and don’t need to have your name 
legally changed.

 * If you’re a young person <http://www.advocatesforyouth.org/>, find out what 
your school’s sex education curriculum is like and if you have comprehensive 
sex ed <http://www.siecus.org/> – protect it. Organize with fellow students, 
lobby your school board, reach out to reputable sex-ed orgs for help. 
Abstinence-only education funding could be reinstated and dangerous (and 
inaccurate) ideas about sex, sexuality and gender could be taught.

 * In the wake of electing a president that normalized sexual assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/locker-room-talk-not-harmless-rape-culture-trump>
 by calling it “locker room talk”,do not be surprised if you see an uptick of 
everyday harassment and assaults. Pay attention to organizations like Hollaback 
<http://www.ihollaback.org/> (fights against street harassment) and Know Your IX
 <http://knowyourix.org/> (protects students’ Title IX rights as they pertain 
to sexual violence), and find out your workplace and school 
discrimination/harassment policies.

 * If you are a DREAMER, immigration rights experts are suggesting that you do 
not apply <https://www.nilc.org/issues/daca/> for a temporary work permit if 
you don’t already have one as it could open up undocumented young people to 
possible deportation under a Trump administration. If you want to support 
undocumented young people, see if the schools in your area have appropriate and 
progressive policies and resources for DREAMERs, and ask local organizations 
already working on the issue how you can best support them.

 * Fight back against the misogynist-in-chief by making sure there are more 
women than ever in other offices. And consider running yourself. Look at your 
city council, local offices – even the PTA. Exert positive influence where you 
can.

 * Hate crimes are already on the rise since Trump won the election. If you’re 
afraid for yourself, or think your rights are being violated, contact the ACLU. 
If you want to support those that are being targeted – show up. Go to protests, 
donate money to Black Lives Matter and listen to what Muslim activists are 
saying about what they need right now. Pay attention to the Southern Poverty 
Law Center.

 * Start local. We’re all sharing on Facebook and Twitter, looking for ways to 
channel our energy. In addition to doing that and looking at the big 
organizations that are known nationally – find out what your community needs. 
What’s going on in the school system, in your town?

 * As the culture war rages on, one of the things we’re going to be told is 
that Americans don’t actually hold progressive values. We’re going to see an 
increase in shaming around issues like abortion, LGBT identity and sexual 
assault. If you are able tospeak out about your experiences, able to share your 
story – do it. Post on Facebook, use a hashtag on Twitter or just talk to 
people in your everyday life. If we can lessen stigmatization culturally, it 
could help sway policy as well.
 