
Fewer than a third of people believe that the BBC licence fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-licence-fee> should be scrapped, a 
survey has found.

Support for the £145.50 annual fee rises with the age and income level of 
respondents, according to the survey conducted by Strategy Analytics as part of 
its quarterly consumer metrics study.

Can I watch BBC iPlayer with a black and white TV licence?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/bbc-iplayer-black-white-tv-licence>
Just 29% of those surveyed believed that the licence fee should be scrapped. 
While 41% felt that the fee was still the best way to fund the corporation, 28% 
thought it should be advertiser-funded in the same way as state-owned Channel 4.

Just 15% believed there should be a subscription fee only for those who want 
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> services.

The report also revealed that many people are hazy on the details of the 
licence fee – just 44% know that it costs in the range of £125 to £149.


The average estimate of the cost was £124.29 – 15% lower than the real charge. 
The “fair” amount people thought they should be charged averaged £101.57 – 30% 
lower.

The survey, by Strategy Analytics, revealed that just over 8% of respondents, 
equivalent to1.6 million households, admitted they do not pay the licence fee.

The study found that people were split over new rules to close the so-called 
iPlayer loophole 
<http://%20https//www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/31/bbc-iplayer-loophole-closes-as-licence-required-for-catchup-tv>
; previously those using only the digital catch-up service were not legally 
required to pay the licence fee. Almost half (47%) of those surveyed disagreed 
with the move, while 40% agreed.

Of the 1,023 people surveyed, 71% said they felt the BBC was important to them 
and were satisfied with the services it provides.


“Overall the BBC has strong appeal with and satisfaction among the British 
public, although it struggles to identify with younger and lower income 
groups,” said David Mercer of Strategy Analytics.

“These are the groups who tend to be most resistant to the idea of the licence 
fee. So the BBC will be under pressure to increase its ratings with these 
audiences if it wishes to retain the licence fee in future charter 
negotiations.”


The BBC’s new 11-year royal charter comes into force next year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/bbc-welcomes-granting-of-new-charter>
.

 