
An awkward grey creature stands on the edge of Frihamnen harbour in Gothenburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/18/insider-guide-gothenburg-sweden-west-coast-green-spaces>
. It looks like a homemade robot elephant, cobbled together from industrial 
remains strewn around the dock. Clad in rusty sheets of corrugated steel, its 
truncated body stands on gawky little legs, lurching this way and that with 
cartoonish wonkiness.

“We wanted people to be curious about what this thing could be,” says 
Francesco Apuzzo ofRaumlabor <http://raumlabor.net/bathing-culture/>, the 
Berlin-based architectural collective behind this mysterious structure. It 
could be the chubby cousin of one of the laser-wielding AT-AT killing machines 
from Star Wars, but it has a more benign purpose. “People have to climb up the 
steps and only then do they discover the soft wooden interior of the sauna 
within.”

Carnival of design
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/04/this-year-the-london-deisgn-festival-is-huge>
Once inside, bathers are enveloped by walls of warm wooden shingles, giving 
the feeling of being swallowed into the belly of the beast. Made of strips of 
veneer, like those used to cover furniture, the shingles warp and wrinkle with 
the humidity as you steam, giving the impression you’re inside a living, 
breathing thing. With its DIY aesthetic and earthiness, it is a far cry from 
the stark clinical quality or slick luxury of most contemporary spas.

The project is one of the experimental enclosures on show in Soak, Steam, Dream
 
<http://www.uk.roca.com/news-and-events/fairs-and-events/events/reinventing-bathing-culture>
, an exhibition of bathing culture at Roca London Gallery, designed by
Kellenberger-White <http://kellenberger-white.com/> for the London design 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/london-design-festival>. Curator 
Jane Withers is a self-confessed “ofuro-holic” (the Japanese term 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furo> for someone addicted to hot water) and her 
selection ranges from a sauna-studded walkway that zig-zags through a remote 
mountain ravine in Chile, to pop-up sweatboxes driven around on the back of a 
bike in the Czech Republic.

Withers summons the wisdom of the Swiss architectural historian Sigfried 
Giedion, who saw society’s attitude to bathing as a litmus test of its attitude 
to human relaxation. “It is a measure of how far individual wellbeing is 
regarded as an indispensable part of community life,” Giedion wrote in 1948, 
identifying two modes of bathing: individual ablutions, conducted in private, 
and the more collective social activity. For the former, cleansing is the only 
goal; for the latter, says Withers, washing is a preliminary ritual in a watery 
odyssey.
 Forest fringe … Kengo Kuma’s Kogohi Bathhouse 
<http://www.londondesignfestival.com/events/soak-steam-dream-reinventing-bathing-culture>
 in Japan. Photograph: Roca London Gallery 
We're not sauna obsessives … but with everyone stripped of clothing, the sauna 
is ultimately a democratic space

It is this odyssey she hopes to take visitors on, having spent years “bathing 
in the shadows of the great water cultures”, from a Roman bath off-grid in 
rural Tunisia and a Japaneseonsen where sulphurous hot springs bubble into the 
cold river water to Moscow’s great Sandunovský baths, “where thebanya stove 
bellows flames like a dragon”.

Some of the most curious structures in the show come from Czech group H3T 
<http://www.h3t.cz/>, whose love of steaming goes back to their earliest 
projects together as students. One of their first structures wasa floating sauna
 <http://www.h3t.cz/projects/plovouci-sauna> on a pond near the spa town of 
Poděbrady, built in 2009 from odds and ends, including a cast-iron stove found 
at a dump. A small box clad with polycarbonate panels, it glowed on the lake by 
night like a floating lantern, illuminating the movement of misty bodies within.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsoak-steam-dream-sauna-london-design-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc51ff934d4971cbc7bb326d1b519dd464f4b7d02%2F0_2_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweatbox%20heaven%3A%20welcome%20to%20the%20sauna%20and%20steam%20of%20your%20dreams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsoak-steam-dream-sauna-london-design-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweatbox%20heaven%3A%20welcome%20to%20the%20sauna%20and%20steam%20of%20your%20dreams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsoak-steam-dream-sauna-london-design-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc51ff934d4971cbc7bb326d1b519dd464f4b7d02%2F0_2_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Misty morning … H3T’s Flying Sauna in the Czech Republic is suspended from a 
bridge and can only be accessed by boat. Photograph: Roca London Gallery 
They designed a similar structure <http://www.h3t.cz/projects/letajici-sauna> 
a year later, this time suspended from a disused bridge over the River Odra, 
which was only accessible by boat, hung from the rickety crossing before the 
authorities caught wind of it. With a policy of “bring your own firewood”, it 
was a guerrilla sweatbox, unmanned like a floating bothy, available to anyone 
brave enough to reach it. It lasted a few weeks before planners demanded its 
removal. H3T went on to develop a series of mobile saunas, beginning with the
Cyclosauna <http://www.h3t.cz/projects/cyklosauna-kolonok>, built on the back 
of a tandem. It looks like something dreamed up by Heath Robinson, with a 
concertina fabric pod from which a little chimney pokes up, and it could 
happily seat up to six people inside its translucent cocoon.

“We’re not sauna obsessives,” says H3T’s Darina Bartková, “but we do see them 
as the perfect vehicles to ask questions about public space and social 
gathering. The sauna is an ideal place to have a debate or discussion – with 
everyone stripped of their clothing, it is an ultimately democratic space.”
 Germán de Sol’s Termas Geométricas, in Chile. Photograph: Roca London Gallery
It is a belief shared by architect and sauna enthusiast Tuomas Toivonen, who 
together with Nene Tsuboi built theKulttuurisauna 
<http://www.kulttuurisauna.fi/)> on the waterfront in Helsinki, a place for 
bathing and discussion, designed with the simple, raw quality of a rustic 
Japanese temple. “More than creating a space for physical bathing,” he writes 
in The Ten Commandments of the Public Bath, “the architecture of the bath 
requires – and creates – a space of anti-conflict, anti-competition and 
anti-hierarchy.”

There’s a common belief that bathing creates a sense of community, an 
affiliation the Japanese call “brothers in the skin”. It was the aim of 
Raumlabor’s project in Gothenburg, as the first intervention in an area slated 
for a swath of mixed-use development. Like London’sKing’s Cross Pond Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-swimming-blog/gallery/2015/may/21/kings-cross-pond-club-in-pictures>
, a rustic lagoon (intended to be temporary and currently slated for closure,
against local outcry 
<https://www.change.org/p/argent-fusion-keep-kings-cross-pond-open-for-all-year-swimming-please-don-t-scrap-it)>
) in Argent’s grand regeneration project, it provided a space free from 
consumption, where you could soak among the cranes.

The naked truth about saunas | Andy Symington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/25/naked-truth-saunas-finland>
“Public baths were once an intense place for social gatherings in our cities,” 
Raumlabor writes. “They were places not only for relaxation and sport, but also 
for politics, discussion, business deals, eroticism, hedonism and crime … a 
place where there is no competition, consumption or spectacle, but where the 
focus is purely on sharing spaces and thoughts, and enjoying and benefiting 
from the water.”

At the height of the Victorian bathing boom – a culture lovingly documented in 
the recent encyclopedic bookVictorian Turkish Baths 
<http://www.victorianturkishbath.org/EBOOK/ZBookDetails.htm> – there were more 
than 600 Turkish baths across the UK, a number that has dwindled to 14. With 
our shrinking living space prompting us to rethink the boundaries between 
public and private, and the appetite for public bathing only increasing, this 
exhibition gets up a real head of steam.

• Soak, Steam, Dream 
<http://www.roca-exhibitions.co.uk/soaksteamdream/hp/index.html> is at Roca 
London gallery from 16 September until 28 January 2017. TheLondon Design 
festival <http://www.londondesignfestival.com/> runs from 17 to 25 September.
 