
My dinner companion and I meet in the damp concrete passageway that runs 
beside and behind a suburban corner store. We’re opposite the street from the 
blonde brick vat that is Melbourne’s 3RRR radio studio and there’s more than a 
little of the teenage drug deal aesthetic about the way Jess and I stand in 
front of a locked back door, sure we’ve followed the directions but not 
confident we’re in the right place, awkward and clutching our handbags. Seven 
o’clock, we were told – and exactly on seven the door swings open and a 
black-clad, red-haired girl welcomes us inside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dede160596cb3432bee11f5d54374583dde4ab6%2F0_0_1825_2738%2F1825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweetest%20goodbye%3A%20Melbourne%20dessert%20chef%20farewells%20seven%20years%20of%20'pop-up'%20degustations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweetest%20goodbye%3A%20Melbourne%20dessert%20chef%20farewells%20seven%20years%20of%20%27pop-up%27%20degustations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dede160596cb3432bee11f5d54374583dde4ab6%2F0_0_1825_2738%2F1825.jpg>
 Pierre Roelofs has spent seven years inventing sweet treats. Photograph: Jess 
Bicknell 
I am still partly expecting to spend the next hour waiting on a rotting couch 
for someone called Johnno, Fred Flintstone or the King to show up “with the 
gear” but instead we’re led into a cream room, warm with low light, where 
smooth timber booths, tables and chairs ache with suburban 1950s Danish 
minimalism. Jess and I sit down and the redhead proffers a drinks menu while a 
crowd that definitely wasn’t in the passageway earlier pours through the door 
and fills every seat.

This, friends, is how Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> does dinner. Except, 
it’s also not quite dinner – unless dinner is a four-course meal made almost 
entirely of sugar, soft fats and tea.

Jess and I and the sudden crowd are visiting the temporary East Brunswick home 
of a pop-up dessert palace. Our near-secret, low-light dining experience is the 
creation of chef Pierre Roelofs, who has spent seven years inventing sweet 
treats for the sugar inclined.

Testament to his restless creativity is that his fascination with dessert 
experimentation is approaching an end. “Dessert evenings with Pierre Roelofs” 
may always sell out but Jess and I are attending one of the final few sittings 
before the pop-up closes in December and Pierre himself pops off to do (the 
waitress tells me) “something else”.

Jess and I commit to savouring the experience. The appeal of a tasting menu 
consisting entirely of surprise desserts somewhat exceeds that of an ordinary 
sweet tooth – we have mouths full of them and think of ourselves more as 
“sucrosiers” than mere aspirants to late-life type 2 diabetes. The chef, of 
course, knows us better than we do; the drinks menu consists of teas and juices 
that complement the syrups, puddings and caramels to come.

I note the only accompaniment to tea is soy or almond milk. No squeezed cow? 
No; tonight in hipster East Brunswick the chef has erred on the side of bolder 
vegetarianism. I order a soy milk chai that’s so sweet and fresh it doesn’t 
need honey – but I add some anyway because I’m in a dessert restaurant. It’s 
delicious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97727620bcd68ae98165820ac44371b256eeb1b9%2F0_83_2930_1965%2F2930.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweetest%20goodbye%3A%20Melbourne%20dessert%20chef%20farewells%20seven%20years%20of%20'pop-up'%20degustations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweetest%20goodbye%3A%20Melbourne%20dessert%20chef%20farewells%20seven%20years%20of%20%27pop-up%27%20degustations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97727620bcd68ae98165820ac44371b256eeb1b9%2F0_83_2930_1965%2F2930.jpg>
 A dessert tower by Pierre Roelofs. Photograph: Jess Bicknell 
Our first course is delicious too and it arrives in a plastic tube next to a 
glass of warm water. This is Roelofs’ answer to the question: what would it be 
like to drink a lamington? He’s deconstructed the quintessential Australian 
cake to its component parts; the tube contains cakey crumbs, coconut gel and 
raspberry jus with a chocolate end that you soak for four seconds in hot water 
to melt before inhaling the whole thing like a choc-coconut-flavoured lover you 
haven’t seen in six months. It lasts less than second, yet the body hums with 
remembered pleasure for minutes. Jess and I agree: we should like to eat 10.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90cee6fc8fbd3d36928dba21436a7e4f2690e6a2%2F12_257_3330_4242%2F3330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweetest%20goodbye%3A%20Melbourne%20dessert%20chef%20farewells%20seven%20years%20of%20'pop-up'%20degustations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweetest%20goodbye%3A%20Melbourne%20dessert%20chef%20farewells%20seven%20years%20of%20%27pop-up%27%20degustations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsweetest-goodbye-melbourne-dessert-chef-farewells-seven-years-of-pop-up-degustations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90cee6fc8fbd3d36928dba21436a7e4f2690e6a2%2F12_257_3330_4242%2F3330.jpg>
 Something like a salad: a dish from Pierre Roelofs’ most recent dessert menu. 
Photograph: Rebecca Newman 
Second course is something like a salad, only that it’s a jumble of a more 
saccharine kind: pieces of watermelon jostle with tiny balsamic meringues, 
candied nuts, millet and orange crumble. It washes the lingering chocolate, 
chai and honey from my mouth so the next course – a mango foam pudding – works 
entirely on its own terms.

This third dessert is a progression of summer flavours from childhood. Fresh 
mango sinks into lemon curd and yoghurt and the effect is like wallowing in 
holiday twilight.


I’m in a sugar reverie when the final dessert is served: a deconstructed 
cheesecake. “It’s inspired by the work of this weaver – and New York,” explains 
the waitress, pointing to a textile artwork on the wall. Of course it is. 
Still, every morsel of biscuit, strawberry crumble and jelly that I swallow 
makes me think of Melbourne and its culture of casual pop-ups, careless food 
and fashion trends, and its city-wide, playful appreciation of the most 
precious, fleeting pleasures.


There’s little ceremony once our plates are cleared: we’re ushered out of the 
room and back into the passageway with strawberry still on our lips. The meal 
is over and soon the restaurant will disappear as well. But the chef knows – 
oh, how he knows – that we will always remember it.

• Dessert evenings with Pierre Roelofs 
<https://www.pierreroelofs.com/#dessert_evenings> are running at Milkwood Cafe 
in East Brunswick until 30 December

 