
When I first heard that there was a new app, “Hey! Vina <https://vina.io/>”, 
for women looking to make friends with other women, I had one reaction: it must 
be full of sad, desperate losers. I know, I’m the pathetic one: a grown woman 
talking like an insecure teenager about total strangers trying to have a nice 
time. Turns out a lot of people disagree with me. When the app launched in 
America, 110,000 users signed up to it in the first six months. It was so 
successful that the app has now launched worldwide. Tinder has even invested in 
it.

But the forging of friendships is such an important part of childhood, I 
started to wonder if my attitudes and fears around it were forever stuck there, 
too. You can’t use an app to make friends, my negative voices all hissed, you 
should just be able to find them in the real world, even though this is how 
people reacted to online dating years ago and it’s now so common that half the 
weddings I go to are of couples who met on a profile page. (I even went to one 
where the groom had printed all the wedding stationery in theGuardian typeface, 
to honour their having met onGuardian Soulmates 
<https://soulmates.theguardian.com/>.)

But however many “real life” friends you may have had at one point, life does 
change. Relationships break up, people move away, sometimes friendship groups 
implode. According to Facebook, I have hundreds of lovely friends, but most of 
them are faces on a scrolling screen only. In real life, I often think things 
like, “I could go to the cinema tonight, who should I text?” – and end up 
texting nobody.

I have hundreds of lovely friends, but most are just faces on a scrolling 
screen

So when I downloaded the app, I was relieved to find that the people on Hey! 
Vina seemed perfectly normal, or even a bit more interesting than that. Quite a 
few were women who’d recently moved to the UK from another country to study – 
from Holland, South Africa, Portugal. There was a British girl who loved 
galleries and wanted to find someone else who would wander round with her, 
staring at art. A trans woman who had only recently started living as one and 
wanted new friends for her new life. I realised this might be the perfect place 
for me to say that I really enjoy Iranian cinema – something I once mentioned 
on a dating website, leading to a painfully laborious conversation with a man 
who probably knew as little about it as I did. It’s not that it’s my specialist 
subject, I’d just like to go and see some. Perhaps, through this friendship 
app, I might actually get round to it.

So I do IT. I hit the button that lifts details from my Facebook page so I 
don’t have to fill in any forms, and can just get started. I start scrolling, 
and pressing the “Hey!” button on women who look nice. After a while I grow 
disheartened, as nobody is liking me back. I check back the next day and still 
nobody wants to be my friend. It turns out it is me who is the sad, desperate 
loser. So this is how karma feels. Why won’t they notice me? I am almost 
distraught – until I bother to actually look at my own profile and realise it 
has taken the photo from my Facebook page: a 1980s paparazzi shot of Princess 
Diana and Fergie, on a ski lift. Which, personally, is a female friendship I’d 
be more than happy to emulate, but people on here clearly want to see your real 
face.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fswipe-left-for-a-bestie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57d7a04907f0eb34b41e321e7edadbaeb9181c6d%2F0_0_882_1671%2F882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swipe%20left%20for%20a%20bestie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fswipe-left-for-a-bestie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swipe%20left%20for%20a%20bestie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fswipe-left-for-a-bestie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57d7a04907f0eb34b41e321e7edadbaeb9181c6d%2F0_0_882_1671%2F882.jpg>
 ‘Am I suddenly about to realise I’m actually a lesbian?’: the Hey Vina! app 
has now been launched worldwide. Illustration: Andrew Rae 
I change the picture and quite soon am befriended back by Ana, a Portuguese 
28-year-old who is in London for a couple of years to perfect her English. We 
chat a bit through the app, I apologise for Brexit and the failings of my 
countrymen, and we agree to go to a café. Except, being a true Londoner, I have 
to cancel twice before we actually meet up.

It feels weird, walking into a café I know quite well and realising that my 
blind date is that girl in the black coat at that table, smiling sheepishly. Am 
I suddenly about to realise that I’m actually a lesbian? Is this where my life 
changes? But no, it is not that kind of date.

“In Portugal,” Ana says, “you can just call your friends and say, ‘Let’s go 
for dinner tonight,’ and everybody comes. But in England, people say, ‘Yes we 
must meet up,’ but it’s more general. They don’t actually come. Or they have to 
organise it in their calendar three weeks in advance.” I tell her this is more 
of a London thing, and that it’s different in smaller towns, but she doesn’t 
look convinced. I feel a pang of guilt about my cancellations. And then the 
conversation moves on and I find myself mentioning Brexit again.

“It is making me depressed,” she says, which is exactly what I was going to 
say, so we are probably meant for each other. We do have a nice time, though – 
I find out all about her MA in marketing; she finds out about my theories on 
new money, old money, and why that scruffy guy over there probably went to Eton.

With friend dating, you are waiting to see if you click, but the end goal is 
not an after-dark frisson

In my head, I am comparing the experience to online dating, in which there is 
always an end goal, a question of is this going somewhere, are they into me, am 
I into them? There is always a potential unveiling: of skin and of intent. With 
friend dating, you are also waiting to see if you click, but the end goal is 
not commitment or an after-dark frisson. It’s to organise another trip to the 
café, which Ana and I promise to do soon – then she has to leave. I stay in the 
café a bit longer, realising I have thoroughly enjoyed myself. But was it 
friendship, or something more performative? I’m not sure yet.

The same week, I see my old friend Melissa, who moved to New York to manage a 
bar, but is in London on a flying visit. Her job is inherently sociable, you 
would think, but when I ask how life there is going, she says: “I’ve not really 
found my people.” She does have friends, but says they don’t quite feel like 
her tribe. “I have a type,” she adds, “I’ve been analysing it and I’ve realised 
that the problem is I’m not meeting my kind of women. I have a definite type.”

That’s it, I think – it really is the same as romantic dating. We do have 
types. So perhaps, rather than accepting the friends we find at work, we should 
identify the qualities we want in one, and then look for them on an app. So I 
tell Melissa about it, and about the friend date I went on. She looks slightly 
horrified, so I show her it. “Wait,” she says, scrolling through the profiles 
on my phone, “These people actually seem… all right?”

Before I can stop her, she’s clicked through to look at my own profile. I am 
embarrassed. “Since when,” she asks, almost laughing, “were you interested in 
Iranian cinema?” And I think to myself that the other me, the one who describes 
herself to total strangers on the internet, has been interested in it for a 
very long time, actually.
 