
The US, Russia and other powers have pledged to use airdrops to deliver 
urgently needed humanitarian aid to Syrian civilians, but have failed to agree 
a date to resume stalled peace talks, underlining the depth of international 
divisions over the crisis.

John Kerry, the US secretary of state, and Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign 
minister, chaired a meeting in Vienna of theInternational Syria Support Group 
<http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2015/11/249511.htm>, which promised to 
“solidify” anagreement reached in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/syria-cessation-of-hostilities-full-text-of-the-support-groups-communique>
 on a cessation of hostilities.

The meeting’s one advance was to call for airdrops  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/25/syria-un-wfp-airdrop-food-high-winds-technical-difficulties>
of supplies by the World Food Programme to besieged areas – an option the UN 
has seen as a last resort – if ground access is not granted by the Syrian 
authorities by 1 June. Last week government forces blocked a UN and Red Cross 
convoy from reaching Darayya, near Damascus.


Airdrops are fraught with technical and logistical difficulties, including 
high cost and a low volume of supplies compared with land convoys, as well as 
hazards for civilian aircrew operating over a country at war and for civilians 
on the ground.Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> can also 
fall into the wrong hands.


'Nearly half of my life has been war – I want to go back and rebuild Syria'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/17/syria-war-rebuild-country>
In addition to the UK, France, the EU and the Arab League, the group includes 
Saudi Arabia and Turkey – both seeking the overthrow of the Syrian president, 
Bashar al-Assad – and Iran, his most important regional ally. Neither the 
Syrian government nor the opposition took part.


That combination of countries ranged on opposing sides of the five-year 
conflict explains the conference’s meagre results. “If the commitments of the 
parties to the cessation are not implemented in good faith, the consequences 
could include the return of full-scale war,” the communique warned.

Philip Hammond, the UK foreign secretary, highlighted the significance of the 
airdrop decision. “This is a very important step forward, not only because it 
will save countless thousands of lives on the ground, but also potentially 
because it will save the political process,” he said.

James Sadri of the Syria Campaign said: “We are seeing the hint of a backbone 
from the international community that everyone assumed had disappeared. But any 
celebration is tempered by the reality that airdrops are only a drop in the 
ocean for the more than a million people suffering from starvation sieges in
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.” Hammond also said Russia had 
to “call their client to order” and ensure Assad “delivers on the obligations 
that Russia is making on its behalf in these meetings”.

The Vienna conference conspicuously failed to agree a date for the next round 
of Geneva talks. Staffan de Mistura, the UN envoy overseeing the indirect 
negotiations, was in the Austrian capital seeking support for a new round to 
keep the diplomatic route open, despite the apparentlyunbridgeable gaps between 
the Syrian parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/oct/09/who-backs-whom-in-the-syrian-conflict>
.


“We are still waiting for some type of concrete outcome of this meeting, but 
we cannot wait too long,” he said afterwards. “We want to keep the momentum. 
The exact date I am not at the moment revealing it because it will depend also 
on other facts.”

De Mistura has estimated that more than 400,000 people have been killed in the 
five-year conflict, which hasdisplaced more than half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/mar/09/a-visual-guide-to-the-war-in-syria-what-happened-and-where-we-are-now>
 of Syria’s pre-war population of 23 million.

Hammond said: “If the opposition fighters do not see some relief on the 
ground, they cannot justify staying at the table in Geneva. So I hope we’ve 
done two things today: provided a very important piece of humanitarian relief, 
but also saved that political process.”

France’s foreign minister, Jean-Marc Ayrault, said the goal was to resume 
talks in June, although the fasting month of Ramadan begins on 6 June.

The ISSG reiterated that 1 August remained the target date for agreement on a 
political transition which would include a “broad, inclusive, non-sectarian 
transitional governing body with full executive powers”. That looks 
unattainable.


Arab and western officials had said earlier that they did not expect 
significant achievements from the Vienna talks. The conventional wisdom 
regarding the current situation in Syria is that Russia is calling the shots 
and that the US is working with it, despite the two countries’ ostensible 
disagreement about Assad’s fate. “We are dealing with tactical steps, but there 
is nothing beyond them,” one senior Gulf diplomat told the Guardian.

If the transition does not begin by August, Saudi Arabia has hinted that it 
may provide heavier weapons to rebel forces. Kerry has referred vaguely to a 
plan B, but few expect a dramatic change in Barack Obama’s final months in the 
White House. “We believe we should have moved to a plan B a long time ago,” 
said the Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir.

“Kerry has been making noises about consequences for violations of the 
ceasefire, but I don’t think the Americans have much to offer, or anything that 
will change things in a significant way,” one opposition adviser said.


Salem al-Meslet, spokesman for the rebel High Negotiations Committee 
<https://twitter.com/syrianhnc_en>, said: “There can be no solution while our 
country is terrorised by a regime which turns back supplies of basic 
necessities, including even baby food, as happened in Darayya last week.”

Rebels on the ground remain deeply sceptical about the value of diplomacy. 
“Syrians don’t need more theatrical meetings in Geneva or Vienna, but food, 
medicines & safe zones,” tweeted one opposition network,@RevolutionSyria 
<https://twitter.com/RevolutionSyria>. “While the world talks ‘peace’ … Assad’s 
gangs are busy literally butchering people in Syria.”


Earlier this month, a surge in bloodshed in Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/russia-united-nations-discuss-aleppo-truce-syria>
 wrecked the 10-week-old partial truce sponsored by Washington and Moscow that 
had allowed the UN-brokered talks to carry on. De Mistura said its earlier 80% 
effectiveness had now been reduced to 50%.

The opposition National Coalition <https://twitter.com/syrcoalition?lang=en-gb>
 also called on the ISSG to establish a taskforce to deal with the plight of 
thousands ofdetainees and “forcibly disappeared persons” 
<https://twitter.com/SyrCoalition/status/732598180320186368> who are assumed to 
be held by the Syrian government.


The Russian military was meanwhile reported to be constructing a new base in 
the Syrian town of Palmyra, within the protected zone that holds the 
archaeological site listed by Unesco as a world heritage site and without 
asking for permission.

The ancient site was damaged by Islamic State, which held Palmyra for 10 
months until Syrian troops backed by Russian air strikes recaptured Palmyra in 
March.
 