
And there was me thinking the Proms <https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> 
were the big deal in classical music in the summer. Such hubris! The true 
colossus who bestrides the classical-music empire in this season of effulgence, 
sun, and pleasure isn’t the Proms, Covent Garden, the Metropolitan Opera – or 
even Glyndebourne.

It is, of course, the violin’s very own Mel Gibson lookalike, André Rieu 
<http://www.andrerieu.com/en/home>, with his abiding addiction to dressing up 
like aDisneyfied version  <http://www.andrerieu.com/en/pictures/tour-2011-26>of 
a 19th-century concert-master.

The Dutch violinist’s summer concert, beamed live from his home town of 
Maastricht, set a UK cinema record last weekend, according toCharles Gant’s box 
office report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/at-the-british-box-office>. With box 
office takings of £1.1m from 460 cinemas, the annual event has set a record for 
a music concert concert at UK cinemas. And that doesn’t mean just classical 
concerts: Rieu’s army of fans turned him into a Take That- and One 
Direction-beating draw at the nation’s picture-houses, and, indeed,Picture 
Houses <https://www.facebook.com/picturehouses?filter=1>.

With the faces of his band and dancers locked into a terrifying rictus  
<http://www.asset1.net/tv/pictures/show/andre-rieu/Andre-Rieu-Reasons-The-Orchestra-16x9-1.jpg>
grin as they were forced to play the very acme of commodified classical music, 
and as poor oldStrauss waltzes and polkas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tXH1NyIh_c8> and other unsuspecting 
masterpieces were turned into saccharine fodder, Rieu’s brand of music making 
isn’t what I personally would choose to watch at a cinema, but clearly there’s 
plenty who disagree, making this the only music concert to have grossed over 
£1m in the UK in a single day.

If you can’t beat ’em, join ’em. I’m off down the hairdressers and 
haberdashers for a can of hairspray, a Mel Gibson mullet, and some blue velvet 
tails.

 