
In nearly simultaneous statements Sunday night, Ted Cruz and John Kasich 
announced plans to coordinate their campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/25/ted-cruz-and-john-kasich-team-up-in-deal-to-stop-trump>
 to play to each other’s regional strengths and, hopefully, deny Donald Trump 
enough delegates to become a first-ballot nominee.

This bold plan takes us from a status quo where Trump might reach the 1,237 
delegates required to become the Republican party nominee, with his opponents 
mathematically eliminated, to one in which Trumpmight reach the 1,237 delegates 
required, with his opponents still mathematically eliminated. The most Cruz and 
Kasich’s plan can do is wreck the Republican party.

Ted Cruz and John Kasich team up in deal to stop Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/25/ted-cruz-and-john-kasich-team-up-in-deal-to-stop-trump>
The GOP reflexively blames Washington gridlock and electoral failure on 
co-opted candidates and the perversions of the political process thwarting the 
will of the people. Meanwhile, Donald Trump has spent the last two weeks
successfully castigating the Republican delegate process as a rigged game 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/trumps-system-is-rigged-argument-is-working/>
. His opponents’ brightest idea was to jointly announce their plans to rig it 
even more.

That is a kind of plan. Then again, so is burning down your house to collect 
the insurance money.

Here’s the strategy: Cruz will focus on friendly territory in Indiana, while 
the “moderate” Kasich focuses on friendly territory in Oregon and New Mexico. 
How the rest of the states get divvied up is anyone’s guess, as ishow much 
money Kasich will have on hand 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/04/john-kasich-fundraising-222235> for the 
states he’s supposed to lure away from media-saturated Trumpism.

This is a political superhero team assembled out of a kill-priced remainder 
bin of bad ideas. There hasn’t been a sadder or less formidable duo since the 
Wonder Twins on the old Super Friends cartoon – two kids from another planet 
whose superpowers involved one turning into forms of water and the other 
turning into shapes of animals.

Only in this case you have John Kasich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kasich>, who takes the form of a 
perpetually peevish dad who looks like the only thing he wants to say at a 
podium is,Hey, kids, quit playin’ grab-ass and take a knee, before “moderately” 
suggesting we start the third world war in the Middle East.

His partner, Cruz, takes the shape of whatever the guy from Duck Dynasty 
<http://thinkprogress.org/lgbt/2016/02/01/3744785/duck-dynasty-rid-the-earth-of-marriage-equality-supporters/>
 thinks is most likely to prevent a Muslim apocalypse and start the Christian 
one.

But they’re both serving an establishment attempting to salvage a party that 
has spent years fomenting resentment against elites and Washington insiders.


The GOP's anti-Muslim posturing: evidence of a party gone off the rails | Ali 
Gharib
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/24/anti-muslim-efforts-republican-party-donald-trump-ted-cruz>
Kasich touts his Ohio mailing address, but he also brags about his 1990s role 
negotiating budgets in the House, where he was a ranking committee member. 
After Congress, he became a managing director at Lehman Brothers, which stopped 
existing after it broke itself and the world. He also took the Obamacare 
Medicaid expansion in Ohio.


And despite Cruz’s insurgent antics, remember that this is an Ivy 
League-educated former US supreme court clerk who worked in the Bush 
administration 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/ted-cruz-isnt-crazy-hes-much-worse-20151204>
 and who decamped for a top-flight law firm before partially fundinghis Senate 
campaign with loans from Goldman Sachs 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/right-turn/wp/2016/01/14/10-reasons-that-goldman-sachs-loan-is-a-nightmare-for-ted-cruz/>
. Ted Cruz can refuse to play nice in Congress all he wants, but railing 
against ivory towers falls apart when you studied at two of them and work in a 
third.

As for the everyman touch, well, if you like “dadbod” as a concept, you could 
vote for Kasich. On the other hand, outside of very fundamentalist audiences, 
Ted Cruz comes off like a Martian whose sleeper-agent research on humanity was 
conducted by watching six hours ofThe Junior Christian Science Bible Lesson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ulGXKULw_pk> on public access TV.

Whatever these two hope to accomplish is doomed. Kasich will enter the 
Republican national convention a distant third, and Cruz will come in second. 
Both will then have to argue that they have some right to ignore the desires of 
everyone who voted for the first-place candidate.

That is not a plan. At best, it’s a plan to have another plan later, with the 
hope that somehow events between now and then will recast snookering the 
majority of Republican primary voters as a noble act.
 