
A teenager from Washington state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-state> has become the seventh 
person to indicate that she will break ranks with party affiliation and become 
a “faithless elector” in an attempt to prevent Donald Trump being formally 
enshrined as president-elect when the electoral college meets on 19 December.


Levi Guerra, 19, from Vancouver, Washington, is set to announce that she is 
joining the ranks of the so-called “Hamilton electors 
<http://www.hamiltonelectors.com/>” at a press conference at the state capitol 
in Olympia on Wednesday.

The renegade group believes it is the responsibility of the 538 electors who 
make up the electoral college to show moral courage in preventing demagogues 
and other threats to the nation from gaining the keys to the White House, as 
the founding fathers intended.

“I stand behind Hamilton electors,” Guerra said in a statement to the 
Guardian. “I promised those who elected me that I would do everything I could 
to keepDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> out of 
office.”

Guerra is one of 12 electors in Washington state who on 19 December have been 
mandated to vote forHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, the Democratic 
candidate, as part of the electoral college. Within the arcane structures of 
American democracy, the election of the president is not direct by all the 
people, but passes indirectly through the electors who are in turn expected to 
vote for the candidate that won their state.

Clinton took Washington state by 53% to Trump’s 37%. Instead of following the 
electoral college norm of voting for Clinton, Guerra will cast what is in 
effect a protest vote directed at Trump – she will write in an “alternative 
Republican” of a more moderate political stripe than the president-elect as a 
way of highlighting her deep fears about his presidency in the hope of 
encouraging Republican electors in red states to follow suit.

“I’m only 19 and this is my first time being involved in politics, but I hope 
that my willingness to put my country before my party will show that my 
generation cares about all Americans,” Guerra said.

Guerra becomes the third electoral college member in Washington state to come 
out and proclaim they will break ranks with Clinton as part of a protest 
directed squarely at Trump. In addition, there arefour electors 
<http://www.coloradoindependent.com/162679/electoral-college-revolt-colorado-electors-hamilton>
 from Colorado who have similarly pledged to vote against the Democratic grain 
as a statement that they see Trump as unfit for the nation’s highest office.

Should these seven electors go through with their pledge to vote against their 
state’s winning candidate when the electoral college convenes on 19 December, 
it would mark an outpouring of political disgust at the future president that 
is virtually unparalleled in electoral college history. The last time more than 
one elector broke ranks was in 1912, and only then because the Republican 
vice-presidential candidate, James Sherman, died before the vote was held.

The most recent presidential election in which a single faithless elector 
cropped up was 2004. Here, too, there were special circumstances as a 
Democratic elector from Minnesota appeared mistakenly to vote for John Edwards 
for both presidential and vice-presidential roles (John Kerry was the 
presidential candidate).

The paradox of this year’s protest is that the seven faithless electors all 
plan to vote against Hillary Clinton, coming as they all do from blue states, 
despite the fact that the target of their ire is Trump. So far, the closest 
that any elector from a red state has come to defecting is Art Sisneros from 
Texas, whoannounced his resignation 
<https://theblessedpath.com/2016/11/26/conflicted-elector-in-a-corrupt-college/>
 as a member of the electoral college on grounds that he is not prepared to 
cast his vote for the Republican nominee.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhow-far-is-too-far-for-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20far%20is%20too%20far%20for%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhow-far-is-too-far-for-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20far%20is%20too%20far%20for%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhow-far-is-too-far-for-donald-trump-video&media=>
How far is too far for Donald Trump? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/nov/23/how-far-is-too-far-for-donald-trump-video>
Sisneros, an industrial salesman from Houston, 40, told the Guardian that in 
his opinion, and according to his religious faith, Trump was not fit to be 
president. “He is not someone who would rule justly or wisely. His track record 
shows that he is a man of coveting and self-serving – a liar and a cheat should 
not hold that position.”

He said that he had paid a high price for his decision. Though other electors 
in Texas had been supportive, seeing his stance as serious and considered, he 
has received numerous threats against himself and his family.

“I’ve shrugged the threats off as people working out their emotion – I think 
it will blow over,” he said.

Under the electoral college system, US presidents are not chosen directly by 
individual citizens but are voted into office by the 538 electoral college 
electors who are selected by each state. That explains why Clinton is currently 
2,307,149 votes ahead of Trump on the popular vote, but lost the election by 
306 to 232 electoral college votes (pending the outcome of 19 December).

In modern convention, the electoral college system has been read to mean that 
the electors vote as one block within each state on a winner-takes-all basis 
according to which presidential candidate won the popular vote within that 
state, (apart from Maine and Nebraska which split the vote partly by 
Congressional district).

But this year’s protesters disagree. Sisneros said that he studied deeply the 
history of the electoral college and had concluded that the system allowed for 
each elector to bring their own moral compass to bear on deciding how to vote. 
“Electors weren’t intended to be pledged or bound to any one candidate, they 
have their own conscience.”

The seven Hamilton electors take a similar view, that the way the system was 
conceived by the founding fathers was to allow for the moral intervention by 
electoral college members precisely as a way of dealing with the kind of 
existential threat posed by a Trump figure. They cite the statement by 
Alexander Hamilton in the Federalist Papers: “The process of the Electoral 
College affords a moral certainty, that the office of the President will never 
fall to the lot of any man who is not in an eminent degree endowed with the 
requisite qualifications.”

Bret Chiafalo, 37, from Washington state was cofounder of the Hamilton 
electors. He told the Guardian that the “founding fathers made it very clear 
that electors should not elect an unfit president. That’s what I and the other 
Hamilton electors are trying to do – to work out what ‘unfit’ means and to 
educate our fellow electors of both main parties about that.”

Along with Guerra and Robert Satiacum, who has also indicated 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/politics/articles/2016-11-04/washington-state-elector-says-he-wont-vote-for-clinton>
 that he intends not to vote for Clinton, Chiafalo faces a $1,000 fine from 
Washington state for not following party ranks in the electoral college vote. 
He said he was considering bringing a lawsuit in federal court to challenge the 
fine, following the argument that any attempt to prevent electors voting 
according to their conscience was unconstitutional.

Chiafalo predicted that the rebellion could go much further than the seven who 
are currently on board. He said that by his reckoning there were between 50 and 
100 electors across the country weighing up whether to vote their own way as a 
protest against Trump, though he conceded that his estimate was not backed by 
hard evidence.

• This article was amended on 1 December 2016 to correct the number of votes 
by which Clinton is ahead of Trump in the popular vote.
 