
1 Has the Chilcot report changed anyone’s mind?

Only the truly committed will wade through every one of the 2.6 million words 
in the bloated report authored by Sir John Chilcot and his committee. The seven 
years they have taken to produce their findings is longer than the six years 
British troops were present in Iraq. Most people, including many who originally 
supported the removal of the monstrous Saddam Hussein, had already come to 
their own conclusions that the invasion was sold on a false prospectus and the 
appallingly inadequate preparations for the aftermath doomedIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> to a grisly fate.

Chilcot’s service is to gather a vast amount of testimony and publish secret 
documents, especially private communications fromTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> to George W Bush, that would 
not otherwise see the light of day for many years, if ever. That ought to be 
highly valuable to policymakers and future historians.

2 Why can’t Tony Blair just admit the war was a mistake?

He has repeatedly expressed regret about the loss of life, both British 
service personnel and Iraqi casualties.In the marathon news conference he 
staged in response to Chilcot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-crushing-verdict-tony-blair-iraq-war>
, the former prime minister sounded throaty, looked crushed and acknowledged 
some errors. He now concedes that he ought to have been much more challenging 
about the so-called intelligence which was used to justify the invasion, though 
he can’t bring himself to admit that he didn’t properly interrogate the 
intelligence because he was desperate for it to support the pro-war conclusion 
he had already come to.

He has also accepted that he should have asked many more questions about 
whether the allies were prepared for what would happen after the toppling of 
Saddam. What he can’t bring himself to say is: “If I knew then what I know now, 
of course I would never have taken Britain to war in Iraq.” Some react to his 
defiance by putting it down to self-delusion, denial and vanity. The most 
important reason is this: for Blair to accept that the entire enterprise was a 
mistake would be to say to the bereaved that their loved ones died in vain for 
a terrible folly.

3 Did Blair secretly commit himself to war earlier?

A lot of the instant reaction to Chilcot focused on a note written by Blair in 
late July 2002 which he begins by promising Bush “I will be with you, 
whatever”. T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/with-you-whatever-tony-blair-letters-george-w-bush-chilcot>
his blank cheque to the American president horrified British diplomats who saw 
the note at the time and its existence had already been revealed in books about 
the war. The “whatever” is then followed by a series of “buts” from Blair 
setting out conditions that needed to be met before they attempted the removal 
of Saddam. This happened at several stages on the road to war.

The “whatever” was designed to win Bush’s trust and ear. The trouble is that 
it meant that the president took it for granted that Blair would support him 
whether or not his conditions were satisfied. Andrew Card, Bush’s chief of 
staff, later told me that, from the time of the Crawford ranch meeting at 
Easter 2002, the Americans took it as a given that Britain would join military 
action. Colin Powell, the US Secretary of State, assumed the same.

4 Did Blair lie his way into war?

Ever since the invasion, countless protesters, placards and web posters have 
called him “Bliar” because he made Saddam’s alleged possession of weapons of 
mass destruction his main justification for the war and those weapons did not 
exist. We now know – in fact, we have known for a long time – that the 
intelligence about WMD was nearly all wrong and much of it was pure fiction.

To take just one of many examples, the Iraqi army never had the capability to 
fire WMD within 45 minutes of an order to do so. Indeed, all Saddam’s WMD had 
gone by the time of the invasion and were probably secretly destroyed by the 
Iraqis after the 1990-91 Gulf war. Those who want to believe the simplest 
explanation – that Blair just made it all up – have been disappointed by 
Chilcot.

He acquits Blair and his closest advisers of “sexing up” the infamous dossier 
published in autumn 2002, one of the few points of satisfaction for Blair in an 
otherwise damning report. Chilcot lays the blame on MI6. The spies 
over-promised about their ability to gather reliable intelligence from within 
Saddam’s Stalinist regime. The agency realised that one of its key sources was 
a fabricator even before the invasion, but Chilcot says MI6 kept this concealed 
not just from the public, but also from Blair.

Blair had been given warnings, including from senior members of his own staff, 
that much of the intelligence seemedstale, thin or flaky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/movie-plot-the-rock-inspired-mi6-sources-iraqi-weapons-claim-chilcot-report>
 and did not support a case that Saddam was an imminent threat. His culpability 
was to use his trademark evangelism to represent the bogus intelligence as 
compelling evidence that Saddam was a real, present and growing danger when he 
was not.

5 Was the war illegal?

Chilcot concludes that the legal basis for the invasion was “far from 
satisfactory” and confirms that the cabinet never tested the advice from the 
attorney-general after he had an eleventh-hour change of mind. The report fails 
to offer a verdict on whether the war was unlawful on the grounds that the 
committee is not qualified to judge. The invasion did not have the explicit 
sanction from the United Nations that Blair had sought: the fabled “second 
resolution” for which he fought frantically but in vain.

On the other hand, the war was never condemned by a vote of the UN and the 
occupation was subsequently given a form of endorsement in post-invasion 
resolutions passed by the Security Council creating a framework for Iraq’s 
future. The International Criminal Court hasn’t the jurisdiction to rule if the 
conflict as a whole was illegal. It can prosecute individuals for war crimes, 
even if they were not present on the battlefield. Some of the bereaved families 
want to see Blair in a dock and lawyers suggest he could face criminal 
prosecution in Britain under the 19th-century law on “misconduct in public 
office”. Nationalist parties have suggested that he could be tried by 
parliament using the ancient procedure of “impeachment”, last activated in 1806.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ften-things-chilcot-reveals-about-tony-blair-and-iraq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F487f93ce9088f2fc128ea023c18456be5aaeb6d3%2F0_316_3225_1935%2F3225.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20things%20that%20Chilcot%E2%80%99s%20verdict%20reveals%20about%20Tony%20Blair%20and%20the%20Iraq%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ften-things-chilcot-reveals-about-tony-blair-and-iraq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20things%20that%20Chilcot%E2%80%99s%20verdict%20reveals%20about%20Tony%20Blair%20and%20the%20Iraq%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ften-things-chilcot-reveals-about-tony-blair-and-iraq%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F487f93ce9088f2fc128ea023c18456be5aaeb6d3%2F0_316_3225_1935%2F3225.jpg>
 Sir John Chilcot presenting his 2.6 million word report on the war. 
Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/PA 
6Could the war have been stopped?

Up to the cusp of the invasion, key members of the cabinet could have acted to 
stop British participation in the invasion. Any one of John Prescott, deputy 
prime minister at the time; Gordon Brown, chancellor; and Jack Straw, foreign 
secretary, could have halted it by resigning. While all the focus has been on 
Blair, it is important to remember that his senior colleagues had it in their 
power to halt the march to war and didn’t. The late Robin Cook was the only 
member of the cabinet to quit and his resignation speech has been richly 
vindicated by subsequent revelations and events. With varying degrees of 
enthusiasm or reluctance, the rest of the cabinet went along with it, Clare 
Short included.

It is also worth recalling that the diplomatic, military and intelligence 
establishment signed up for the war – the military were especially keen to 
maximise the British contribution – whatever they later said when it went 
horribly wrong. Most of the press backed the removal of Saddam, as did the Tory 
opposition and the majority of public opinion at the time of the invasion. Even 
had Britain stayed out of it, the war would have happened because Bush was so 
determined on it.

7Why were the allies so ill-prepared for the aftermath?

The conventional war in Iraq was won easily, with relatively low casualties 
and at an astonishing pace. Saddam was toppled in less than a month. It was the 
aftermath that went catastrophically wrong. Blair insists this could not have 
been foreseen. Chilcot rejects that excuse, and rightly so. The danger that the 
fall of Saddam would unleash sectarian conflict in Iraq was both predictable 
and predicted. Bush, who displayed breathtaking ignorance about the country he 
was invading, simply didn’t want to know about it. Tony Blair didn’t want to 
think about it until it was too late. After a private pre-war warning from the 
French president, Jacques Chirac, that invaders would not be welcomed as 
liberators, Blair turned to an aide, rolled his eyes and said: “Poor old, 
Jacques. He just doesn’t get it, does he?”

As it turned out, Chirac had “got it” about would happen in Iraq better than 
Blair or Bush. The post-invasion failures to establish order and maintain 
essential services destroyed the myth of allied military invincibility and 
betrayed the promise to Iraqis that they would have a better life. Violent 
factions multiplied in the vacuum. Iran intervened. Abolishing the Iraqi army 
put 400,000 discontented former soldiers on the streets. Chilcot is withering 
about the performance of the British military. Initially complacent about the 
southern provinces under its control, the army was ultimately forced into an 
abject retreat from Basra. The cost in blood and treasure was enormous.

8 Did the war lead to Isis?

It is often contended that the invasion of Iraq fanned the flames of conflict 
across the Middle East. Blair has responded that, had Saddam and his sons not 
been removed from power in 2003, conflict would have later erupted in Iraq 
anyway because the Arab spring triggered a cascade of uprisings against 
tyrannical regimes. This happened in Egypt, Libya and Syria so his 
counter-factual is plausible.

Publication of Chilcot has also amplified claims that the war fuelled the rise 
of Isis and detonated the conflict in Syria. Martin Chulov, our Middle East 
editor and author of a definitive study of Isis, responds: “The Syrian civil 
war was not driven by Isis. It fed directly out of the Arab awakenings and was 
a bid to oust a ruthless regime from power. Assad could not have prevailed 
against the will of the streets. So he tried to transform the uprising into 
something that was driven by internationally-backed global jihad. Isis grew out 
of the chaos. They flourished with Assad’s direct and indirect support until 
they became a monster no one could control.”

9 Are lessons being learned?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ften-things-chilcot-reveals-about-tony-blair-and-iraq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bee33994b67c66e68cb7c6e2bf8f741f46cb0e8%2F90_243_3085_1850%2F3085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20things%20that%20Chilcot%E2%80%99s%20verdict%20reveals%20about%20Tony%20Blair%20and%20the%20Iraq%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ften-things-chilcot-reveals-about-tony-blair-and-iraq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20things%20that%20Chilcot%E2%80%99s%20verdict%20reveals%20about%20Tony%20Blair%20and%20the%20Iraq%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ften-things-chilcot-reveals-about-tony-blair-and-iraq%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bee33994b67c66e68cb7c6e2bf8f741f46cb0e8%2F90_243_3085_1850%2F3085.jpg>
 The report that took loner to compile than the six years British troops were 
in Iraq. Photograph: David Wilcock/PA 
Whitehall had early sight of the report and sources say that some lessons are 
already being applied. The false intelligence was the gravest failure in the 
history of the Secret Intelligence Service, worse even than the penetration of 
MI6 by the Cambridge spy ring in the early years of the cold war.

Much of the blame is attributed to the eagerness of Sir Richard Dearlove, the 
head of MI6, to please a hungry prime minister by going directly to No 10 to 
feed supposedly “hot” intelligence to the boss before it had been tested. It is 
now said that there is much more robust separation between those gathering 
intelligence and those assessing it, and new firewalls have been placed between 
the spies and the politicians.

10 Could an Iraq war ever happen again?

That seems unlikely after the defeats in Iraq and Afghanistan. Some policy 
thinkers worry there could be a sound case for intervention in the future and 
it won’t happen because the scars are so deep. Strategy is a mess. After the 
horrors in Iraq, Britain, with France and America, took a different approach 
when genocide was threatened by Colonel Gaddafi in Libya, using air power but 
not deploying troops. That form of intervention-lite has turned out badly. The 
failings in Iraq and Libya resulted in reluctance to intervene in Syria when 
anti-regime protesters rose up against the dictatorship of Bashar al-Assad. 
Even when he unleashed chemical weapons on civilians, parliament refused to 
sanction British intervention at the first time of asking. More Syrians have 
died since that conflict began in 2011 than Iraqis have died since the invasion 
of 2003. Non-intervention can be every bit as blood-stained as intervention.
 