
Terry Pratchett’s Wee Free Men, an adventure about a nine-year-old girl who 
teams up with a troupe of small, kiltedblue men to defeat an evil queen, is 
being made into a film by the Jim Henson Company.

Pratchett’s story, set in Discworld, but aimed at a young adult audience, will 
be adapted by his daughter, award-winning video game writerRhianna Pratchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/27/terry-pratchett-remembered-by-rhianna-pratchett-daughter-obituary-2015>
.

It’s the second time the story has been earmarked for the big screen. In 2006, 
Sony Pictures acquired the rights for the book and hired Sam Raimi to direct 
it. Pratchett, who died last year from Alzheimer’s, hated the script, telling
SFX magazine <http://www.gamesradar.com/sfx/> that it “had all the hallmarks of 
something that had been good, and then the studio had got involved”. He 
retrieved the rights in 2009.

Wee Free Men is the first of a series of five books that feature a race of 
characters known as the Nac Mac Feegles, Pratchett’s spin on the mischievous 
fairies of Victorian children’s stories. In Pratchett’s world, the charismatic 
clan speak in broad Glaswegian and spend their time drinking, fighting and 
stealing. The book’s protagonist, Tiffany Aching, befriends them after she 
realises she is one of a very few human beings who can see them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fterry-pratchett-discworld-wee-free-men-film-jim-henson-company%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a720f03b07514981706231bf75b74a13ec3813b%2F0_76_1872_1123%2F1872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Terry%20Pratchett's%20Wee%20Free%20Men%20to%20be%20made%20into%20film%20by%20Jim%20Henson%20Company&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fterry-pratchett-discworld-wee-free-men-film-jim-henson-company%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Terry%20Pratchett%27s%20Wee%20Free%20Men%20to%20be%20made%20into%20film%20by%20Jim%20Henson%20Company&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fterry-pratchett-discworld-wee-free-men-film-jim-henson-company%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a720f03b07514981706231bf75b74a13ec3813b%2F0_76_1872_1123%2F1872.jpg>
 Terry Pratchett and his daughter Rhianna at home in 1998. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
Rhianna Pratchett, known for writing the critically-acclaimed reboot of the 
Tomb Raider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/feb/13/tomb-raider-reboot-preview>
 video game, told the BBC it had long been her ambition to adapt Wee Free Men 
for the screen. “I’ve loved the Jim Henson Company’s work all my life, so it’s 
a great honour to team up with them,”she said 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-highlands-islands-36846239>. 

Terry Pratchett was sceptical about film adaptations of his work making it to 
the big screen after a number of projects fell through. His 1987 novel,Mort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2016/may/11/illustrating-terry-pratchetts-mort-in-pictures>
, was stalled in development because, according to Pratchett, American film 
executives didn’t like the idea of the personification of death, a key 
character in the Discworld universe.

“I wrote a couple of script drafts which went down well and everything was 
looking fine and then the US people said ‘Hey, we’ve been doing market research 
in Power Cable, Nebraska, and other centres of culture, and the Death/skeleton 
bit doesn’t work for us,”he told fan site alt.fan.pratchett 
<https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/alt.fan.pratchett/gxbB8D_2O00/EkIvyQZZ8XQJ>
. “It’s a bit of a downer, so lose the skeleton.”
 