
King Abdullah II of Jordan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan>, looking 
regal in army dress uniform, gazes down from a poster on the General 
Intelligence Department office near the Palestinian refugee camp at Baqa’a, 
where guards man new watchtowers flanking the metal gate and high wall across 
the front of the unmarked stone building.

 Security has been tightened since the first day of Ramadan when a young man 
arrived at the local branch of what all Jordanians call themukhabarat in the 
early morning andgunned down five employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/jordan-intelligence-officers-killed-refugee-camp-attack-baqaa>
 before fleeing. The suspected killer, Mahmoud al-Masharfeh, was captured later 
that day.

And then, two weeks later, hundreds of miles away on the border with Syria, 
seven border guards died in asuicide mission claimed by Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/21/jordanian-soldiers-killed-by-car-bomb-outside-syrian-refugee-camp>
. Video footage showed a white pickup truck speeding across the desert and 
trailing a cloud of dust, before a huge explosion. It was Jordan’s worst 
terrorist incident in more than a decade. Thousands of Syrian refugees trapped 
in no man’s land suffered further misery when the Rukban crossing point was 
summarily closed.

 There were significant differences between the two attacks. Masharfeh was 
apparently a lone wolf – though one with past form. Rukban was a sophisticated 
assault on an Arab country playing a frontline role in the US-led coalition 
fighting Isis – its stance hardened by the immolation of the captured Jordanian 
pilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/03/isis-video-jordanian-hostage-burdning-death-muadh-al-kasabeh>
 Muadh al-Kasasbeh in 2015. And both have undermined the kingdom’s security and 
raised troubling questions about present performance and future prospects.

 Masharfeh, 22, pleaded not guilty when he appeared in court on 14 July. 
Acquaintances described a young man who had radical religious views, spent two 
years in prison for links to a Salafi-jihadi group in Gaza and had been 
mistreated by the men he targeted. “He was very extreme and he was a loner,” 
recalled Hamza, who went to the same Baqa’a school and had heard of his 
interest in extremist preachers. “Everyone here was very shocked but people are 
afraid to talk because they are scared of themukhabarat.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fon-the-middle-east%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fterrorist-attacks-and-security-lapses-fuel-fears-for-jordan-stability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23714b12d742f7de5d2ee601acd6daf0e3c706d3%2F170_0_1950_1171%2F1950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Terrorist%20attacks%20and%20security%20lapses%20fuel%20fears%20for%20Jordan's%20stability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fon-the-middle-east%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fterrorist-attacks-and-security-lapses-fuel-fears-for-jordan-stability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Terrorist%20attacks%20and%20security%20lapses%20fuel%20fears%20for%20Jordan%27s%20stability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fon-the-middle-east%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fterrorist-attacks-and-security-lapses-fuel-fears-for-jordan-stability%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23714b12d742f7de5d2ee601acd6daf0e3c706d3%2F170_0_1950_1171%2F1950.jpg>
 Jordan’s King Abdullah II speaks to military personnel. Photograph: Khalil 
Mazraawi/AFP/Getty Images 
 According to one theory Masharfeh was a double agent who turned on his 
handlers – thus his apparent ease in entering the GID compound on 6 June; the 
more obvious explanation, say others, was that the guard was asleep at his 
post. No group claimed responsibility for the killings.

 Masharfeh was caught after acting suspiciously in a mosque a couple of miles 
away, shooting one worshipper with his 7mm pistol before being overpowered. “Of 
course what’s happening in Syria and Iraq affects us here,” said Abu Safwan, 
the imam and a retired army officer who witnessed the drama. “We are used to 
dangers on our borders, but maybe we need to do more inside the country. I 
don’t think this guy was from Daesh [Isis]; maybe he was taking revenge.”

King Abdullah immediately appealed to his people to close ranks. “Our national 
unity is the weapon with which we confront all plots that target our 
stability,” he declared the following day. But senior Jordanians admit 
privately that something had gone badly wrong with both security procedures and 
vigilance. Heads, some predict, will roll after a decent interval.

And some also believe that the Rukban attack may have been a “false flag” 
operation mounted by Syrian intelligence – payback for Jordan supplying weapons 
to the rebels fighting Bashar al-Assad as well as a useful reminder of the 
dangers of Isis. “You can’t prove it, but you can’t refute it either,” argues 
Labib Kamhawi, a leftwing writer who describes Jordan as a country “walking on 
hot coals”.

 Military and intelligence matters are one of half a dozen “red lines” 
Jordanian media must not cross. “There is shocking level of self-censorship,” 
admits one journalist. “No one wants to get on themukhabarat shit-list,” sighs 
another. But these sensitive issues are still widely discussed. “The image of 
Jordan’s all-powerful security apparatus that can prevent any attacks has been 
shaken,” says Daoud Kuttab, director general of Amman’s Radio Balad. “For a 
while people were scared, but no one feels the country is falling apart. 
Jordanians are quite resilient. Still, there is a lot of worry about the future 
because of Syria and Daesh.”

 Back in March, a serious incident in the northern city of Irbid left 
unanswered questions after an unprecedented 11-hour firefight between security 
forces and an Isis “sleeper cell” with links to drug trafficking. Seven 
terrorists and one army officer were killed and weapons and explosives seized. 
But an official gag order means very little is known about what happened.

 Other serious security problems have been partially exposed since then. Last 
November, a police captain named Anwar Abu Zeidmurdered two American security 
contractors and three others at a training centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/09/two-americans-killed-at-police-training-centre-in-jordan>
 before being shot himself. That was on the 10th anniversary of the 2005 Amman 
al-Qaida bombings, when 60 people died.Officials described the killer as 
psychologically disturbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/jordan-police-officer-killer-disturbed-not-jihadist>
 and motivated by financial problems, not jihadi leanings. Isis praised him as 
one of the “martyred ‘lone’ knights of the caliphate” while – far more 
alarmingly – thousands attended his funeral chanting “Death to America, Death 
to Israel”.

And the gun used by Abu Zeid led to more troubling revelations. Last month, 
the New York Times and al-Jazeeraexposed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/27/world/middleeast/cia-arms-for-syrian-rebels-supplied-black-market-officials-say.html?_r=1>
 a story that was officially denied by the government in Amman but has still 
not been reported by Jordanian media: the sale on the black market of assault 
rifles, mortars and rocket-propelled grenades that were secretly purchased by 
Saudi Arabia for Syrian rebels and then stolen bymukhabarat officers, several 
of whom have since been dismissed or tried in secret.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fon-the-middle-east%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fterrorist-attacks-and-security-lapses-fuel-fears-for-jordan-stability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9847bf2ed8c5e7ef10c51ac71a2f14eb34b7651%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Terrorist%20attacks%20and%20security%20lapses%20fuel%20fears%20for%20Jordan's%20stability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fon-the-middle-east%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fterrorist-attacks-and-security-lapses-fuel-fears-for-jordan-stability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Terrorist%20attacks%20and%20security%20lapses%20fuel%20fears%20for%20Jordan%27s%20stability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fon-the-middle-east%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fterrorist-attacks-and-security-lapses-fuel-fears-for-jordan-stability%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9847bf2ed8c5e7ef10c51ac71a2f14eb34b7651%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Al-Zaatari refugee camp in the Jordanian city of Mafraq, near the border with 
Syria. Photograph: Muhammad Hamed/Reuters 
On the Amman rumour mill the gossip is that these embarrassing details were 
leaked by the CIA, furious at the damage to its operation and the corruption at 
the heart of what was widely considered until recently to be the best 
intelligence service in the Arab world. “They saw money, not Daesh,” concludes 
Kamhawi.

Incidents like these matter because polling 
<http://www.iri.org/resource/jordan-economy-breeds-widespread-dissatisfaction-government>
 shows that most Jordanians are satisfied with the performance of their 
military and security forces, even when grumbling about the economy, a bloated 
state sector, high youth unemployment and all the problems created by the 
presence of 1.2 million Syrian refugees; an officer who posted the video of the 
Rukban attack on social media added a pointed comment about the dangers of 
welcoming too many “dirty guests”.

The war next door certainly looms large. “It is the fallout of the Syrian 
catastrophe that is destabilising the countries of the eastern Mediterranean, 
including Jordan’s demography,” said Prince Hassan, the king’s uncle and former 
crown prince. And everyone knows that the refugees – like the Palestinians and 
Iraqis before them – are unlikely to be going home any time soon.

Abdullah’s popularity does help contain dissatisfaction. “Unlike in Lebanon or 
Syria there is respect for the regime,” suggests Nabil, a recent graduate. “You 
can be disgruntled with the government, but you assume that the royal family 
will take steps to rectify the problem.”

Yet support for Isis – in Jordan and elsewhere – has been repeatedly linked to 
dissatisfaction, poverty and ignorance. “People join Daesh not because they 
believe its ideology but because they are offered jobs and a voice when the 
state has failed to deliver,” insists one veteran analyst. Large numbers have 
also joined the al-Nusra Front, al-Qaida’s Syrian affiliate, or beentried  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/27/-sp-courts-jordan-crush-support-isis>
in Amman’s state security court just for praising it on Whatsapp or Facebook.

In one recent survey 
<http://www.iri.org/resource/jordan-economy-breeds-widespread-dissatisfaction-government>
, 87% of those polled were unable to name a single positive achievement of the 
last parliament, which is notoriously open to manipulation by themukhabarat. 
And with new elections due in September, no one is holding their breath in 
expectation of more accountable government. The race will also be another test 
for the country’s Islamists, who are tolerated to a degree unusual in the Arab 
world – as long as they remain weak and divided.


In the past few months constitutional amendments have given Abdullah greater 
power over key appointments, his position bolstered by the knowledge that the 
US, Britain and other western supporters need Jordan more than ever in a region 
racked by multiple crises. Stability and security are relative, but real change 
does not appear to be on the agenda. Loyalty to the king may not be enough.

“Isis is being squeezed on the ground and it will seek retribution in Jordan 
and elsewhere,” warns a European diplomat. “The GID has a phenomenal grip on 
internal dissent, but it can only do so much. Something is definitely brewing 
here but it’s hard to judge the pace of it.”

 