
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has impressed investors 
with much better than expected sales over Christmas after it cut prices and 
boosted customer service by putting thousands more staff in stores.


Shares in Britain’s biggest retailer rose 6% to 168p as it revealed a 1.3% 
rise in sales at established UK stores in the six key Christmas and new year 
shopping weeks. Analysts had been expecting a grim trading update – with sales 
down by up to 3% untilindustry data released this week indicated Tesco had 
turned things around in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/tesco-shares-soar-on-rumours-of-a-happy-christmas>
.

The chief executive, Dave Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dave-lewis>, who joined Tesco in 2014 to 
lead a revival of the supermarket after a dramatic slide in sales and profits, 
said the group had sold more items to more shoppers after it reduced prices on 
an improved range of products and stepped up its customer service.

Retail Christmas: the winners and losers in the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/retail-christmasuk-uk-winners-and-losers>
“These results show another step in the right direction. We were more 
competitive than last year,” Lewis said. But he added: “We are obviously 
pleased with the performance over Christmas but I don’t think it takes away 
from conditions that make the market extremely challenging. We recognise there 
is progress but we continue to see more to do.”

Tesco had simultaneously released a trading update for a longer period – the 
three months to 28 November – and it showed sales at established UK stores down 
1.5%. But that was still well ahead of expectations and Lewis said that during 
the previous year Tesco had been issuing a lot of discount vouchers.

This Christmas Tesco issued a quarter less discount vouchers than 12 months 
earlier and Lewis said the grocer had moved away from voucher promotions to 
lower basic prices. He is expecting food price deflation, which stood at 
between -1.7% and -2.4% over the quarter, to continue for at least the next 
year. Lewis said Tesco had cut its own prices by between 2%-2.5% over that 
period.

Over Christmas, Lewis said Tesco had reduced the price of seasonal goods such 
as turkey, stuffing, vegetables, mince pies and Christmas puddings by an 
average 5%.


Sainsbury’s and Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> 
also reported better than expected trading over Christmas, in a sign that 
Britain’s big supermarkets are finally fighting back against the rapidly 
expanding German discounters.

Some analysts estimate that sales at established Aldi stores rose by less than 
1% in December as it made its lowest gain in Christmas market share since 2012. 
But Lewis insisted it was too early to suggest that the traditional chains had 
Aldi and Lidl on the back foot.

Sainsbury’s festive sales were still lower than the previous year, falling by 
0.4% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/13/sainsburys-christmas-sales-better-than-expected>
, but that was well ahead of City forecasts for a fall of 0.7%. Morrisons 
reporteda surprise rise in sales of 0.2% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/morrisons-sales-rise-over-christmas-trading-period>
, its first increase in four years.

Tesco said it expected to meet profit expectations as its performance over 
Christmas was boosted by better availability of products on the shelf and more 
on-time home deliveries.


“The improvement in the operations is not visible to everybody but we have 
spent a huge amount of time redesigning the organisation. There has been a 
fundamental shift in the way we run Tesco, notably in the UK but also in 
central Europe and Asia,” said Lewis.

Lewis said a range of changes had helped Tesco’s largest supermarkets – the 
Extra stores – to achieve sales growth over Christmas after several years of 
decline.


In the three months to 28 November, however, sales were still down in the 
largest stores, which have been hit by the rapidly rising popularity of small 
neighbourhood stores and online shopping. Lewis said it was unclear if they had 
really turned the corner.

But he said: “This idea that big stores are a weight around our neck or some 
sad dinosaurs clearly hasn’t been the case. As we have improved the offer … 
people have seen they can get everything they need under one roof and that is 
the most convenient form of shopping.”


The retailer’s Tesco Express convenience stores also performed well, with 
sales up 3.5% at established stores.


Analysts were impressed by Tesco’s Christmas trading figures, with Phil 
Dorrell of consultants Retail Remedy describing them as “extraordinary”. He 
said Tesco’s performance over the festive period was “all the more remarkable” 
as its underlying sales were down by 1.5% in the third quarter.

Tesco also saw a pick-up in performance overseas, with sales at established 
stores up 4.1% over the six-week Christmas period compared with a 2.9% rise in 
the previous quarter. Sales at established Irish stores, where Tesco faces even 
greater competition from Aldi and Lidl, rose 2.9%.

James Anstead, an analyst at Tesco’s in-house broker Barclays, said: “We think 
that this trading performance should impress the market.” He added: “Although 
the UK market continues to face a number of significant challenges – not least 
the growth of discounters and deflation – today’s statement supports us in our 
more positive outlook on this name.”
 