
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is facing a claim for £150m 
from 60 shareholders seeking to recoup losses following accounting 
irregularities at the supermarket chain.

The case comes after the grocer was forced to suspend four senior executives 
and call in investigators in September 2014, when it discovered its profits had 
been artificially inflated by £250m.

The discovery of the accounting irregularities, which Tesco subsequently 
revised to £263m, caused the group’s value to slump by about £2bn. Two months 
later the law firmStewarts Law, along with litigation funders Bentham Europe, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/25/uk-firm-tesco-shareholders-lawsuit-stewarts-law-compensation-profits-scandal>
 began soliciting angry shareholders to support joint action against Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/25/uk-firm-tesco-shareholders-lawsuit-stewarts-law-compensation-profits-scandal>
.

After spending two years putting that case together, the claim is expected to 
be filed with the high court later this month.

Jeremy Marshall, chief investment officer of Bentham, said: “This is the first 
wave. There will be a second series of investors that will join a bit later. A 
lot of people thought this case would never get off the ground.”

Marshall added that a sticking point had been that investors will need to 
prove dishonesty at director level in order to win any claim.

He added that those efforts had been assisted by news last month that the 
Serious Fraud Office (SFO) had chargedthree former senior Tesco directors with 
fraud in relation to the accounting scandal at the supermarket chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/sfo-charges-former-tesco-directors-with-fraud>
.

“The SFO felt it had credible evidence [to bring charges] allowing investors a 
sufficient level of comfort,” Marshall added.

Carl Rogberg, the former finance director of Tesco UK, Christopher Bush, the 
former managing director of Tesco UK, and John Scouler, the former commercial 
director for food, have all been charged with one count of fraud by abuse of 
position and one count of false accounting.All three men deny the charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/22/former-tesco-directors-plead-not-guilty-fraud-charges-accounting-court>
.

The SFO said its investigation into Tesco remained ongoing and it is still 
possible that further individuals could face action.

Tesco did not comment on the claim.
 