
Tesco is planning further rounds of price cuts after profits more than halved 
in the first six months of its financial year. The UK’s biggest retailer made 
operating profits of £354m, excluding exceptional items and itsnow offloaded 
Korean business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/07/tesco-reduce-net-debt-homeplus-korean>
, in the six months to 29 August, compared with £779m in the same year before.

Sales at established stores in the UK slid by 1.1% in the six months to 29 
August and the group warned that trading conditions remained challenging. 
Profits in the UK and Ireland dived 70%, but a 26% fall in profits at Tesco’s 
international businesses also disappointed the City.Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> said the fall was largely down to 
the impact of new tax and Sunday trading laws on its business in Hungary.

Dave Lewis, the Tesco chief executive who joined from Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/01/tescos-new-boss-dave-lewis-shares>
 just more than a year ago, insisted that the six months to the end of 
February, the second half of the group’s last financial year, were Tesco’s 
“year zero”, and that the company was rebuilding from there.

He said underlying sales were now rising in Tesco’s Asian and central European 
operations, while the trend in the UK was improving as Tesco attracted more 
shoppers who were buying more items on each visit.

Lewis said: “We have delivered an unprecedented level of change in our 
business over the last 12 months and it is working. The first-half results show 
sustained improvement across a broad range of key indicators.”

Underlying sales in the UK had continued to fall as a basket of food from 
Tesco was now 3% cheaper than a year ago, he said. Tesco said price cuts – as a 
result of grocery market deflation and its own action – had cost it around 
£200m over the half year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Ftesco-profits-more-than-halved%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64c801cc246284b21536663ee0646e055587673a%2F365_541_4764_2858%2F4764.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20profits%20tumble%20by%20more%20than%20half&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Ftesco-profits-more-than-halved%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20profits%20tumble%20by%20more%20than%20half&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Ftesco-profits-more-than-halved%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64c801cc246284b21536663ee0646e055587673a%2F365_541_4764_2858%2F4764.jpg>
 Profits in UK and Ireland fell by 70%. Photograph: Jim Wileman/Alamy 
Lewis said Tesco would continue to cut prices. “I think there is more 
deflation to come – some we have to do as we invest ourselves and I don’t see 
the market changing,” he said. The next six months would be significant, he 
believed, as Tesco would be trading against a period when it boosted sales with 
heavy promotions and use of discount vouchers, schemes that Lewis said he did 
not want to repeat. “There is still volatility in our business,” he said.


Tesco shares closed up 2.5% at 197p as analysts welcomed better than expected 
UK trading from from the retailer.

Lewis said Tesco had undergone a dramatic transformation in the year since he 
joined the business. He has cut thousands of jobs, closed loss-making stores 
and enticed shoppers back with seven waves of price cuts. “Every important part 
of Tesco has been or is being transformed operationally, culturally or 
financially,” he said. “A virtuous circle in the UK is starting to work. Every 
bit of benefit that we get we have invested back in the business.”


He said Tesco had dramatically improved the availability of its products and 
introduced hundreds of new ideas - from super-hot Kimono Dragon chillis to 
large blackberries that can be eaten as a snack. “When I joined, we were losing 
customers to every competitor. Now we are net gainers. As we improve our offer, 
people are coming back to Tesco.”

There was a marked improvement at Tesco’s largest stores, which are being hit 
by changing shopping habits towards buying small amounts at neighbourhood 
stores. Sales at Tesco Extra sites dropped by 1.1% in the three months to the 
end of August compared to a 6.3% slide when Lewis arrived at the business. “I 
look at them as assets and our job in retail is to make them much more worth 
the trip,” he said.

Tesco says national living wage will cost it £500m by 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/06/tesco-will-pay-suppliers-more-quickly>
The improvement in trading puts Tesco on track to achieve its target of annual 
profits on a par with last year. Excluding the Korean business and changes to 
the way Tesco calculates profit, the retailer is now targeting £950m of 
full-year operating profit, compared with £1.4bn previously. Lewis said that if 
there was any sign that Tesco was trading well enough to beat that target, the 
difference would be invested in improving services, products or prices for 
customers.

Phil Dorrell, of consultants Retail Remedy, said the results showed Tesco was 
“ready to move from intensive care into the recovery ward”. The group “isn’t 
cured but it is definitely over the worst”, he added.

Tesco has had a traumatic year, hit by an accounting scandal and the fierce 
grocery price war. It has been losing sales to discount retailers such as Aldi 
and Lidl and last yearposted a record £6.4bn loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/22/tesco-suffers-record-64bn-loss>
, one of the biggest in British corporate history. The company was forced to
sell off its South Korean business Homeplus for £4bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/07/tesco-reduce-net-debt-homeplus-korean>
 to alleviate the £8.6bn debt that has reduced its credit rating to junk status.

On Wednesday, Lewis said Tesco would not be selling its loyalty card data 
business, Dunnhumby, which was put on the market as part of the debt reduction 
plan. Lewis said he wanted to “draw a line” under talk of major restructuring 
and the company had decided not to offload any other major assets, such as 
retail operations in eastern Europe or Thailand.


Tesco now hopes to rebuild its balance sheet by improving cash generation 
rather than major asset sales or a rights issue, Lewis said. “We will stay 
focused on generating better returns from the assets we’ve got.”

He did not rule out sales of smaller businesses that no longer fitted with 
Tesco’s strategy, however, raising speculation that the Dobbies garden centres 
or Giraffe restaurants businesses could yet be offloaded.
 