
At midnight on 29 June, the sun was directly north and well above the hills. 
It had not gone down since I arrived in theArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic>, three days earlier, and would not 
set for weeks. It rolled around the sky like a marble in a bowl, sometimes 
behind clouds or mountains or the smoke of the three or four hundred wildfires 
somewhere south of us, but never below the horizon. The midnight sun made the 
green hilltops glow gold, and lit our walk through the wildflowers and the 
clouds of mosquitoes to the mountaintop.

Down below, I could see our tents, our camp kitchen, tiny from the heights, 
and our two rafts, all along the sandy beach and flowery grass bench alongside 
the shallow Kongakut River. A few days earlier, a couple of bush planes had 
dropped off our group of nine for a week’s journey 65 miles down the river that 
threads its way from the Brooks Range of mountains to the northern coast of
Alaska <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska>.
x 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/08/alaska_map/giv-30080o3dVdXMNJTa0/>
Ours was not one of the great ascents of history, but my companions and I were 
exhilarated by the beauty of the place and by the unusual feeling of hiking at 
midnight. We climbed high enough to be able to see over the rough treeless 
ranges to the Arctic Ocean and the coastal plain where we were headed. The
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) <http://www.fws.gov/refuge/arctic/> is a 
remote fastness, separated from the rest of Alaska by the Brooks mountains 
across its southern perimeter, and numerous rivers winding down through the 
foothills and across the northern coastal plain to the Arctic Sea. It is a huge 
place where caribou, musk ox, wolves, bears and other wild creatures live 
pretty much as they always have.

As we travelled slowly north at the speed of the Kongakut River’s currents and 
our own paddling, Shell was sending a drilling rig to the Arctic Ocean. On 16 
June, the company’s massive rig, the Polar Pioneer, had broken through a 
blockade of valiant activists in kayaks outside Seattle – thekayaktivists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/15/seattle-kayak-activists-detained-blocking-shell-arctic-oil-rig>
 – and was being towed up the coast. It was expected to begin drilling by 24 
July.

We were guests of the Sierra Club, the world’s oldest environmental group, 
whose experts had brought us at this critical juncture to experience this 
remote, fragile, pristine place during the new round of conflict over its fate. 
On 3 April, the Obama administration hadannounced a plan 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/04/03/letter-president-arctic-national-wildlife-refuge-proposed-designations>
 to recommend wilderness status for the most embattled parts of the ANWR, a 
move that would forever ban oil extraction from that land. However, on 17 
August, with winter fast approaching, the administration gave Shella permit for 
exploratory drilling 
<http://royaldutchshellplc.com/2015/08/17/shell-gets-final-permit-for-arctic-oil-drilling/>
 just off the north coast of Alaska. This first drilling site was hundreds of 
miles to the west of the refuge, but oil spills travel. It was an ominous step 
for the future of the American Arctic. Next week, president Obama will visit 
Alaska, where he will address Arctic leaders on climate change. Somehow he will 
have to justify the administration’s decision to let Shell start drilling.

Drilling for oil in the Chukchi Sea poses layers of threat. The 
industrialisation of a wild place – noise, bustle, roads, industrial equipment 
on a grand scale, toxic chemicals – would cause a level of damage that 
scientists and environmentalists consider unacceptable. Chances of an oil spill 
from any wells dug beneath these seas are high, and cleanup is a reassuring 
misnomer rather than a practical reality in these cold, rough waters. Oil-spill 
cleanups are considered successful if they remove a modest percentage of the 
oil. Twenty-six years after the wreck of the oil tanker theExxon Valdez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2014/mar/24/exxon-valdez-oil-spill-disaster-arctic>
 in southern Alaska’s Prince William Sound, the wildlife and the fishing 
community there have not recovered from being drenched in dirty crude oil. A 
quarter of a million birds died in that disaster.

The refuge is as real as the wildflowers at our feet. But it also stands for 
the idea that some places can remain wild

We know that a viable future for the biosphere depends on leaving most of the 
known reserves of fossil fuel in the ground, so finding treacherous new 
locations from which to extract what activists call extreme oil, does not just 
tempt fate – it punches fate in the face. There is an ugly irony about 
extracting oil from one of the places already threatened by the effects of 
burning fossil fuel – where the summer ice is much reduced and temperatures are 
shooting up: you make the place complicit in its own destruction.

The refuge is as real as the bright wildflowers at our feet that glorious 
night and the clouds of mosquitoes buzzing around our heads, as tangible as the 
caribou that migrate through it annually to give birth on the coastal plain 
before they return to their winter homelands inCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>. But it is also a symbol. It stands 
for the idea that we do not need to devour everything, that some places can 
remain free and wild, that they do not need to be dominated by human beings or 
ravaged by our ravenous hunger for fossil fuel.

* * *

In 1960, just as Alaska was attaining statehood, President Dwight D Eisenhower 
signed an order to set aside one wild corner of the region in perpetuity, 
excluding it from certain kinds of private development and exploitation. The 
nearly 9m acres became part of the vast lands that theUS Fish and Wildlife 
Service <http://www.fws.gov/> manages; protection of wildlife was a principal 
goal, although the land was not given nearly the kind of protection that 
national parks get. In 1980, the protected area was doubled and given the name 
“refuge”. The Republican party and the petroleum companies for which it stands 
have long been demanding drilling on that coastal plain – the great expanse of 
tundra we were approaching on our journey, the plain that shone pinkish gold 
when we saw it from afar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd75f2fa430174c8993d35dd4c0cbeb7fa0da699c%2F0_93_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd75f2fa430174c8993d35dd4c0cbeb7fa0da699c%2F0_93_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘A bill to protect the coastal plain has been introduced in every session of 
Congress since 1986.’ Photograph: Fitz Cahall 
The coastal plain is also known as the 1002 area 
<http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/fs-0028-01/fs-0028-01.htm> (a reference to section 
1002 of the 1980 Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act). The 1002 
zone, comprising 1.5m of the arctic refuge’s 19m acres, does not have the 
protected status of the surrounding area and is vulnerable to exploitation if 
environmentalists lose the battle to protect it. The 1980 act laid the ground 
for the battles that have raged since. Although advocates for drilling in the 
refuge have claimed that the oil industry would bring economic benefits to the 
region, Republican figures about how much oil and how many jobs would be 
created are wildly exaggerated.

A bill to protect the coastal plain has been introduced in every session of 
Congress since 1986. Legislation to open the place to drilling was moving 
through Congress in 1989 when theExxon Valdez oil spill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2014/mar/24/exxon-valdez-oil-spill-disaster-arctic>
 stalled it. Bills to drill were introduced and blocked in 1991 and 1995. 
Exploiting the area was a key goal of the George W Bush administration, and 
huge battles over it were fought in the House and Senate during the Bush years. 
There were filibusters, dramatic speeches, shouting matches, monumental sulking 
by the Alaska delegation, and even the controversial moving of an exhibition of
ANWR photographs by Subhankar Banerjee 
<http://www.subhankarbanerjee.org/selectphotographs.html> at the nearby 
Smithsonian to a less prestigious location after Senator Barbara Boxer held up 
the images to show the place’s beauty and vibrant wildlife. One critic noted 
that Banerjee’s lush colour photographs undermined then-secretary of the 
interior Gale Norton’s assertion that this place is “a flat white nothingness”.

The refuge is the great sacrificial beast at the altar of the cult of 
petroleum. As the former house majority leaderTom DeLay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tom-delay> put it in 2001, once this great 
symbol is gone, “We feel very, very confident we will be able to crack the 
backs of radical environmentalists.” Drilling in the refuge would suggest that 
the fossil fuel corporations have won, and that nothing is too good, too 
pristine, too ecologically valuable to set aside from that pursuit. The state 
of Alaska has made its own stabs at opening up the ANWR to industrial 
development; a lawsuit brought in district court by the state to do so was 
fought by a dozen environmental groups and rejected by the judge on 21 July of 
this year.

Climate change is already disordering this place in countless ways: thawing 
permafrost and vanishing sea ice are radically changing the very surface of 
land and sea, while the wildfires that break out in Alaska’s rapidly warming 
weather are increasing. Almost 400 fires scorched Alaska in June of this year, 
the worst month on record for fire in the state, with 1.6m acres burnt. Some of 
the fires burned the forest floor itself – a deep accumulation of moss, twigs, 
needles, and other fuel – down to the permafrost, making that permafrost more 
vulnerable to melting or melting it directly.

We will leave the Age of Petroleum behind. Whether we do so willingly and in 
time to limit the devastation of climate change, or only after all the carbon 
in the depths of the earth has been extracted, burned, and returned to the 
upper atmosphere, is what the fight is about.

* * *

The southern border of the refuge curls around Arctic Village, where we 
stopped to refuel. Its scatter of brightly coloured little houses, a community 
centre, general store, and lots of free-roaming dogs constitutes the political 
and cultural centre of the US Gwich’in tribe. A larger population ofGwich’in 
<http://www.gwichin.org/gwichin.html> people lives on the Canadian side of the 
border, and the Gwich’in ancestral lands are roughly similar to the range of 
the huge Porcupine caribou herd (named after the Porcupine River). These 
hunter-gatherers have historically derived a great deal of their food and some 
of their clothing from these tough, magnificent animals. They, in turn, 
survived winters by pawing beneath the snow for fodder – until climate change 
began to bring freak thaws that melt the snow and then freeze it into thick, 
impenetrable ice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3a66e112c299d2698070206e0a3f07b7a24e3b%2F0_152_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3a66e112c299d2698070206e0a3f07b7a24e3b%2F0_152_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 ‘Caribou survive the winters by pawing beneath the snow for fodder.’ 
Photograph: Eric Post/AFP/Getty Images 
Most Gwich’in are ardently opposed to drilling in the ANWR and the Arctic 
Ocean, and this has set them in opposition to the majority of Alaskans, 
including other indigenous groups. Alaska is an economy based on mining and 
drilling, one where petroleum companies wield more political influence than any 
other group, and where residents receive annual cheques from the oil royalties 
– $1,884 last year. Some members of the coastal Inupiat community, the 
Gwich’in’s neighbours to the north, have supported drilling – or at least some 
Inupiat members of the isolated island town of Kaktovik off the coast of the 
refuge have.

As Dan Ritzman, leader of our expedition and the Sierra Club 
<http://www.sierraclub.org/>’s Arctic expert, told me afterwards, “The 
250-person community of Kaktovik is in the uncomfortable position of being 
physically located in a place that matters nationally. This place is, for them, 
simply their backyard, and it is at times confusing and even insulting that 
people across the Lower 48 and beyond would care, and take action to decide how 
that land is managed. Some people in the community think drilling should occur 
in the refuge; and others think it should not be drilled. At the heart of the 
issue for this Inupiat community is the ability to participate in deciding what 
does or does not happen on this land. That part of the community is finding its 
voice more and more.”

The Gwich’in have been articulate about their opposition to drilling ever 
since it was first proposed in the 1980s. As Gwich’in leader Sarah James said 
many years ago, “The coastal plain itself is a birthing place for so many 
creatures that we call it ‘Where Life Begins’. Fish come here from the Arctic 
Ocean to spawn. Polar bears make their dens along the coast. Wolves and 
grizzlies and wolverines have their young here. And many kinds of birds from 
different parts of the world come here to nest.” Female polar bears give birth 
in their winter dens on the plain, and the Porcupine caribou herd comes here, 
to this place relatively safe from predators and insects, to give birth every 
summer.

In the city of Fairbanks, Alaska, the night before we flew to the Arctic, two 
Gwich’in leaders, Princess Daazhraii Johnson, and her brother, former tribal 
chair and current university vice-chancellor Evon Peter, joined us for dinner. 
They talked about their struggle to protect this place and what it means to pit 
yourself against most of the politicians and industrial powers in the state. As 
Princess Johnson put it recently: “A birthing ground is no place for a 
battlefield. Each summer up to 40,000 calves from the Porcupine caribou herd 
are born and nurse on the coastal plain of the refuge. Protecting the coastal 
plain of the refuge is about upholding our rights to continue our Native ways 
of life as our communities depend upon the Porcupine caribou herd to survive.”

* * *

In many ways, the animals are still in charge in the ANWR, or at least – in 
many of the encounters with the 250 or so species of bird and mammal in 
residence there – humans are not. White gulls dive-bombed us on the trip, 
seemingly indignant to see humans at all. A moose could trample or gore you – 
and Alaska’s irascible moose are the largest of their kind, standing upward of 
seven feet at the shoulder, the males sporting broad paddle-like antlers that 
spread several feet. In a willow grove near the Kongakut River, on our first 
day’s hike, we found a waterlogged antler that a moose had shed: it was 
staggeringly heavy and looked as though it might make a nice cradle for a baby. 
The strength of the neck that could carry the weight of two of these was 
impressive to contemplate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7782c67959aadba3a507967d5993ada39b30e034%2F0_372_5609_3365%2F5609.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7782c67959aadba3a507967d5993ada39b30e034%2F0_372_5609_3365%2F5609.jpg>
 ‘Grizzly bear males weigh up to three quarters of a ton and, standing on their 
hind legs, tower high above a human.’ Photograph: Paul Souders/Getty Images 
And then there are bears, grizzly bears, Ursus arctos horribilis. The males 
weigh up to three quarters of a ton and, standing on their hind legs, tower 
high above a human. Their fangs are thick ivory daggers; their claws, curved 
black stilettos. Ritzman told us about a pilot who recently had to shoot a bear 
at the very site where we were camping – the bear charged at him and he fired 
warning shots with his .44. That sometimes works but in this case it did not do 
much, so he shot the bear at close range. The huge slug did not kill it, but it 
did amble off after being hit. Ritzman mentioned that you do not want to shoot 
a full-grown grizzly in the head; bullets can ricochet off their skulls, which 
are up to two inches thick. His advice to us took the form of bear etiquette: 
if you are intruding on the bear, apologise and back away – but never turn your 
back. If the bear is intruding on you, look big, give a show of strength, let 
it know you are not an easy meal. We walked around that week cognisant that we 
were potential meals, easy or not. We were careful about going off alone and 
gave warnings – claps or shouts – when we went into the willow brush or 
anywhere else we might surprise a bear.

We saw a grizzly the first evening we spent on the shores of the Kongakut. 
Some of the members of our expedition were already in their tents when Ritzman 
and guide Peter Elstner saw a bear lumbering along the steep mountainside less 
than a mile from us. Through a spotting scope it was easy to watch the light 
brown creature meander in and out of willow clumps, sniffing for food, not in a 
hurry. As it turned this way and that, I was reminded that though the front end 
of a bear is formidable, the rear end, tail tucked into its hindquarters, is 
abject, almost apologetic-looking. The guides speculated on whether they would 
have to keep watch all night with Peter’s 12-gauge shotgun to scare them off. 
But when the bear began clambering down the slope toward the flat river expanse 
we were camped on, it paused, perhaps sniffed the air and us, then turned tail 
and loped off. I took that for, perhaps, youthful exuberance, but Peter thought 
it was a clear sign it had had a bad experience with humans and did not want 
another one. The guides were going to be able to sleep after all.

The new cold war: drilling for oil and gas in the Arctic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/jun/16/drilling-oil-gas-arctic-alaska>
Though the wildlife of the place is rich, and though we saw dall sheep on a 
steep, stony slope, a tiny white Arctic fox at the end of the journey, bald 
eagles, hawks, common merganser ducks, eider ducks, arctic terns and various 
kinds of gulls, we did not see the caribou we had hoped for. This time of year, 
they are here in the refuge in huge numbers – the Porcupine caribou herd, now 
numbering about 169,000, migrates from Canada’s Yukon/Northwest Territories 
every spring to calve on the north slope, then returns with the calves to its 
winter grazing lands. We saw traces everywhere: antlers, other bones, hoof 
prints, dung, and once a great hank of soft, woolly underhair, part of the 
winter coat that a musk ox had shed. But the animals had gone before us, 
perhaps pushed onward by the warmer-than-usual weather.

Birds from all 50 states and every continent but Australia come to the refuge 
in summer; it is a major nesting site for migratory birds. This place is 
already changing as the climate does: new species are advancing north, ones 
adapted to earlier conditions are now in decline. Red foxes are spreading 
north, invading the territory and preying on the cubs of the smaller arctic 
fox. The old model of protecting the earth meant putting barriers around the 
most beautiful and the most ecologically significant places, making parks and 
preserves and refuges. By the early 1960s, the idea that anything could ever be 
kept separate enough to protect it had to be retired.

The effects of climate change in Alaska demonstrate that we must think 
systemically, that everything is connected

The effects of climate change in Alaska demonstrate that we must think 
systemically, that everything is connected. The Arctic is hard hit by changes 
caused elsewhere: Alaska is a capital of climate-change deniers but it is also 
a place that is burning, melting, and metamorphosing at terrifying speed. And 
when climate change unfolds in the Arctic, the feedback loops make it all 
worse. As white sea ice, which reflects sunlight and heat back to the heavens, 
loses area in the Arctic seas, the dark water beneath it absorbs sunshine and 
accelerates the heating of our oceans. As new heat records are set in Alaska, 
the permafrost melts. There are local impacts from melting tundra – buildings 
and infrastructure tip and tilt when once-solid foundations turn to mush, and 
the methane beneath the permafrost begins to emerge, preventing ice from 
forming on lakes. The emergence of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, from the 
thawing north also has global significance. Climate change feeds climate 
change, and the far north disintegrates.

There was one species of wildlife we saw far more than we wanted to and that, 
until the cold end of our journey, we were almost never without, no matter the 
wind, the rain, or the smoke. Alaska’s most ubiquitous and least-loved wild 
animal is a droning grey insect hungry for blood. Humans have some options to 
avoid them – mosquito nets, protective clothing, repellent sprays – caribou 
have nothing but immersion in water and migration into the stronger winds and 
lower temperatures of the Arctic coast. The stings can drive them mad, and they 
lose a lot of blood to the insects. Mosquitoes are, on the other hand, a key 
food for a lot of birds. The warm weather and swarms of insects may have driven 
the caribou on before us. After we left the refuge, we met a woman who lived 
alone at a refuelling station who had, the day before, from a small plane, seen 
a herd she estimated at three miles wide and 20 miles long.

To the west of the ANWR is the massive infrastructure of the Prudhoe Bay 
oil-extracting region now run by BP. I saw it from the air; it looked like a 
behemoth of a factory that had been disassembled across a vast plain: pipes, 
roads, structures, vehicles. Prudhoe’s oil fields began producing in 1977, 
peaked about a decade later, and have declined in productivity to about 300,000 
barrels a day. More than 1,000 square miles have been industrialised to produce 
the crude that is sent 800 miles along the Trans-Alaska Pipeline to Valdez on 
the south coast. About 450 oil and toxic chemical spills occur annually.

Millions of gallons of industrial chemical and toxic byproducts stored on site 
mean that the place will never be pristine, even when the last barrel of crude 
has travelled down the pipeline. Prudhoe Bay’s industrialised landscape, with 
its factory-like structures, its hundreds of miles of pipelines, its 1,114 oil 
wells, its roads, and its residues, is a reminder of what petroleum extraction 
on land really means.

* * *

Alaska is remote and lightly populated; the ANWR even more so. No human beings 
live permanently in the refuge, and only 300 permits a year are granted for 
visitors, most of whom come for only a brief stay during the summer months. The 
state of Alaska itself is estimated to have more caribou than people. Its land 
mass is a little larger than France, but while that country has 68 million 
people, Alaska’s population is only about 736,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1920f0c5f94a8ac5b441c26661ed56e316cea5f3%2F0_376_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1920f0c5f94a8ac5b441c26661ed56e316cea5f3%2F0_376_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘Alaska is a little larger than France, but while the European country has 68 
million people, the state’s population is only about 736,000.’ Photograph: Fitz 
Cahall 
There is something magical about being in the refuge. Imagine that you are 
hundreds of miles from the nearest building, the nearest road, that you are in 
a realm of no advertisements, no marketing, no commerce, no electronic 
communications, few machines but the tiny bush planes that drop off and pick up 
explorers, that all that bustle and distraction and racket and almost all the 
earth’s human population is to the south of you. You are entirely immersed in 
the luminous midsummer light that never stops.

We woke up the last morning before we reached the sea in a flowering meadow 
spreading west from the riverbank. Vivid blue-violet lupins, magenta fireweed, 
fragrant dark pink sweet peas and pale Indian paintbrush bloomed on the green 
ground. It looked like grasslands, unless you got down on your knees and saw 
how little grass was visible among the low plants, mosses and lichens – the 
food the caribou depend on. This Arctic prairie stretched on, low and level, 
far further than the eye could see. It seemed as though you could walk forever 
on it, or at least for days, until you came to the next river.

The evening we made camp there, some of the people who went out for a long 
stroll came back exalted, saying that it seemed like heaven, as though your 
deceased grandmother, your long-dead dog, your childhood friends might come up 
and greet you in that unearthly light, that endless openness. The flowery plain 
was scattered with caribou antlers: the delicate backswept branching antlers of 
female caribou, the sturdier antlers of male caribou, sometimes with mosses 
growing on the older ones. Near our tents, patches of the prairie had been 
peeled up by bears, but we did not see large animals there, just their traces. 
And then we got into our rafts and the morning of flowers turned into the 
afternoon of ice.

First there was a shelf of ice – aufeis, as Germans named it, or ice on top – 
that in the coldest places spreads out when a river flows and freezes. This 
process repeats over and over, the ice damming the water behind it so that more 
and more of it spreads further and further, creating a plateau of ice far 
beyond the riverbanks. We floated on our small rafts by a single shelf of it – 
startling to see in what looked like a summer landscape – and then were 
surrounded by high walls of white and pale blue ice on either side of the 
shallow river. A mile or two into this new realm, Ritzman and Elstner pulled 
the rafts onto gravel bars and we got out in our high rubber boots to explore, 
sloshing through the clear, chilly water.

In some places, ledges of ice had been undercut by the flowing water and they 
sometimes fell off, crashing like thunder. In others, surface melt carved 
meandering streams that flowed in curving little beds, darker against the white 
ice, then formed waterfalls as they fed the river. Sometimes the ice cracked, 
and some of the cracks were blue within. That blue! It is a cold, pale, 
otherworldly colour, an ethereal turquoise, as cold as cold blue can be. We 
were now in the deep Arctic, the blue, grey and white world, the unearthly 
earth, the place so northern that this world of winter ice had survived into 
midsummer. Everyone was exhilarated to have arrived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06864e0d7810b7836deb8083bd440e7bf560e7d3%2F0_9_2367_1420%2F2367.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20battle%20to%20protect%20Alaska%E2%80%99s%20great%20wildlife%20sanctuary%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Solnit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Falaska-wildlife-sanctuary-obama-arctic-oil-drilling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06864e0d7810b7836deb8083bd440e7bf560e7d3%2F0_9_2367_1420%2F2367.jpg>
 ‘A small white Arctic fox fled us toward the eastern end of the sandbar.’ 
Photograph: Gregory Tervel/AFP/Getty Images 
Some of us stayed up most of the night to see what the sun would do. It looked 
as though it was going to set, because it was a fiery red. A long streak 
reflected across the still water, though it remained well above the horizon. A 
small white Arctic fox fled away from us toward the eastern end of the sandbar. 
The thunder ofaufeis breaking came from south of us. There were no seashells on 
this shore, but huge grey tree trunks that must have washed up the Mackenzie 
River and out to sea lay on the gravel sand, here where the only trees for many 
miles were low willows. I kept finding heart-shaped rocks at my feet.

It felt utterly peaceful if not entirely safe – it was too stark for that. 
Somewhere far south of us the Polar Pioneer was being towed toward the Arctic 
Ocean. A few days later, Shell’s icebreaker the Fennica was found to have a 
huge gash in its hull, caused by an underwater rock, and sent back to Portland, 
Oregon, for repairs, where it too was blockaded, this time by climbers who 
suspended themselves on ropes across the channel, then by kayakers, and finally 
by a few passionate swimmers who threw themselves in on the spur of the moment. 
The Fennica is supposed to be critical to addressing an oil spill, except that 
it had already proven itself frighteningly vulnerable in the rough waters it 
was supposed to traverse. All that frenzied activity seemed far away as we 
walked along that beach at the end of the world.

This was not a comfortable or easy place, but it was a serene and exhilarating 
one. Even for those who will never visit these remote shores, the idea of them, 
the images of them, the knowledge of them, brings an expansiveness to the heart 
and mind that is tantamount to hope and faith. The value of places that let us 
dream big and coexist with the other species who share this earth cannot be 
measured. 

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email> 
here.
 