
Seeking sustenance in a Brummie cafe to get me through the Tory conference, I 
heard myself request “a full English Brexit”. That’s what it does to your head: 
several days of close confinement withConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> salivating over departure 
from the European Union.

Back in the conference hall, the full English Brexit was being served up by 
Theresa May and all the mini-Mays in the cabinet as they sought to satisfy the 
audience’s appetite for the starkest form of rupture with our partners of the 
past four decades. There are several possible ways of exiting the EU. They 
range from amicable separation to bitter divorce. TheTory gathering in 
Birmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/toryconference> set Britain on 
a course that leads to the most turbulent, disruptive and hazardous form of 
departure. It was the working assumption of all the cabinet ministers I spoke 
to, and this was so regardless of which side they took during the referendum, 
that it is now near inevitable that Britain will cease to be a member of the 
single market. Among those Tories who have always yearned for that outcome, I 
found them talking as if it was a given. Even more significantly, ministers who 
would once have recoiled in horror from that prospect now sound resigned to it.

This is hugely significant and how we got to this point needs some 
explanation. In June, it was not a given that Britain would do Brexit the hard 
way. Out had won, but only narrowly. There was much room for interpretation of 
what that meant. There was quite a lot of talk from leading Outers about 
needing to respect the 48% who voted the other way. Once the forces of Remain 
had recovered from the shock of their defeat, they initially remustered around 
the cause of preserving British membership of the single market and with it the 
trade and investment on which so many livelihoods depend. They could cite the 
Tory party’s election manifesto. This had clearly suggested that, even if 
Britain voted to leave the EU, a Conservative government would sustain 
membership of the single market.The manifesto promised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/14/conservatives-election-manifesto-2015-the-key-points>
: “We are clear about what we want from Europe. We say: yes to the Single 
Market”. That, Remainers declared, was the trench where they would dig in.

That trench is still there, but I found very few people left defending it in 
Birmingham. The Tories are plunging towards hard Brexit and a riven Labour 
party is not in a fit condition to stop them. After an initial period of 
complacency, investors are waking up to the prospect that Britain could lurch 
out of the EU without reliable access to her most important markets. The more 
loudly her activists cheered Mrs May, the faster came the plunge in the pound. 
By the end of the week,sterling had dropped so vertiginously  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/07/flash-crash-in-pound-spooks-investors-business-live>
that one pound didn’t buy one euro at bureaux de change. As it has become 
clearer that Britain’s government is tilting towards the Full Monty Brexit, so
European leaders have hardened their language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/08/eu-leaders-line-up-to-insist-uk-will-pay-a-high-price-for-brexit-stance>
 about the penalty that will entail.

Why has this happened? A large part of the explanation is Mrs May and how she 
is choosing to resolve the paradox of being a prime minister tasked by the 
voters to deliver an outcome that she campaigned against. Many of the hardline 
Tory Brexiters were highly wary when she first moved into Number 10 because she 
had been a Remainer, albeit a near-invisible one, during the referendum 
campaign. Now the Brexiters speak of Mrs May in glowing terms. “It turns out 
that having a Remainer as prime minister has worked perfectly for us,” one 
remarked to me. “She has to keep proving to us and the party that she is 
serious.”

Remainers in the cabinet often sounded like they were the psychological 
captives of the Brexiters

She threw them three big lumps of meat. One of those announcements was really 
spin disguised as meat. Her “Great Repeal Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-great-repeal-bill-eu-british-law>
” will in reality transfer EU law into British law, to then be removed or 
amended at a later date. Her more substantial announcement was that she would 
trigger article 50, the formal notification to the EU that Britain wants a 
divorce, no later than March next year. This creates an unforgiving timetable 
for what will be a horrendously complex and fraught negotiation.

Even some of the Brexiters in the cabinet are starting to sober up to the 
reality of it. To describe the inundation of papers on the subject that he is 
consuming, one minister adopted an Americanism and told me it was “like 
drinking from a fire hydrant”.

That negotiation will not be made easier by the prime minister’s third, and 
most significant, act. That was to set a firm face against trying to find any 
accommodation with EU countries over freedom of movement. “We are not leaving 
the European Union only to give up control of immigration again,” she declared. 
One of her cabinet confirmed to me that they plan to approach the negotiations 
by telling the EU that freedom of movement is simply not on the table; they 
only want to talk about trade. If you believe that the Out vote was powered by 
opposition to migration, then the only form of Brexit that respects the 
referendum result is a mode of departure that ends freedom of movement. This 
position has a logic to it and some of the recanting Tory Remainers contend 
that this logic is too powerful for them to argue with it. Resistance, they 
say, is futile. It is impossible to reconcile rejecting freedom of movement and 
the jurisdiction of the European court of justice with continued membership of 
the single market. So Britain will be left to gamble on trying to get some sort 
of tariff deal with EU countries at a time when they are in no mood to do us 
any favours.

Stockholm Syndrome describes how some hostages become traumatically bonded 
with their kidnappers. Remainers in the cabinet often sounded like they were 
the psychological captives of the Brexiters.Amber Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd>, a liberal Tory who was a 
star of the Remain campaign, was one of the ministers who made a hostage-video 
sort of speech to the conference. The home secretary announced that companies 
would be forced to declare how many foreigners they employed, as if attracting 
skilled people from abroad was a mark of shame. In her setpiece at the end of 
the conference, Mrs May denounced “citizens of nowhere”. That was a clever 
applause line with unclever implications for a country that thrives by 
attracting overseas talent and investment. It is this that will be noted by the 
rest of the world, not fatuous rhetoric about Britain “going global”. The 
conference resounded to the slam of doors being shut.

There were a few voices of resistance. One was the effervescently gobby former 
ministerAnna Soubry. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/30/anna-soubry-brands-liam-foxs-free-trade-speech-delusional>
 Another was the former cabinet ministerNicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>. They stood out so much 
because those prepared to argue openly for a softer Brexit were so thin on the 
ground in Birmingham. Tory resistance to hard Brexit has been badly weakened by 
what has been happening in the Labour party since the referendum. In its 
immediate aftermath, Labour MPs declared that they would battle to preserve 
membership of the single market. Then they examined the vote in their party’s 
traditional heartlands in Wales, the north of England and the Midlands and grew 
terrified by the strength of the Out vote there.

The Labour conference in Liverpool  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labourconference>was notable for the 
number of prominent MPs from its centrist wing declaring they could no longer 
defend unrestricted freedom of movement. Jeremy Corbyn has another position 
again. He is hostile to the single market but in favour of unlimited migration. 
The net result is that the Tory soft Brexiters do not think that they can rely 
on support from the main opposition party.

Business and the City are becoming increasingly agitated that Brexit will not 
be the soft landing they hoped for. Representatives of manufacturers at the 
conference spoke of becoming more depressed by the day. But the mood of the 
times is not sympathetic to business arguments. It was striking to witness a 
Tory conference eagerly applaud a Tory prime minister lacerating corporate 
Britain. Some Tories say publicly, and more will say privately, they are 
willing to sacrifice some prosperity if that is the price of curbing 
immigration. This made it especially ironic that the Tories met in Birmingham, 
a melting-pot city whose prosperity was built on entrepreneurship and trade. 
Never has the Conservative party sounded less like a friend of business. Never 
has the Conservative party sounded more hostile to liberal free markets. Were 
theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party under a different 
form of management, the Tories might be more nervous of alienating business by 
taking the hard route to Brexit. But not in a century of Sundays are the CBI 
and the City going to ally themselves with Mr Corbyn.

Free-market liberals still have some champions in government, notably at the 
Treasury, which thinks the economic impact of a hard Brexit will be severe and 
long lasting.Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, the chancellor, told the 
conference that the referendum result was not a vote to make Britain poorer. 
That he would not have said unless he feared his colleagues are pushing in a 
direction that will leave Britain very much the poorer. The chancellor sounded 
like a man losing the battle. Lost it will be unless he finds some more friends 
and quick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fbrexit-theresa-may-philip-hammond-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6272f2a04d1d124356e1c94b601560ecf78185ce%2F0_38_2077_1244%2F2077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20loudest%20sound%20in%20Birmingham%20was%20of%20doors%20being%20slammed%20shut%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fbrexit-theresa-may-philip-hammond-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20loudest%20sound%20in%20Birmingham%20was%20of%20doors%20being%20slammed%20shut%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fbrexit-theresa-may-philip-hammond-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6272f2a04d1d124356e1c94b601560ecf78185ce%2F0_38_2077_1244%2F2077.jpg>
 Nicky Morgan, the former education secretary, was one of few Tories prepared 
to call for a softer Brexit. Photograph: Steve Back/Barcroft Images  