
Not a totally new idea, but a good one: the Hallé Orchestra’s “Priceless 
Classics” <http://www.halle.co.uk/pricelessclassics.aspx>concert on 6 September 
invites the audience at the Bridgewater Hall, Manchester, to pay only what they 
think the gig was worth on the night. The Hallé’s chief executive, John 
Summers, told the Today programme that the idea was to introduce new audiences 
to the “great music” that the orchestra plays, and that this format was a way 
of getting to the substance rather than the style of the usual concert hall 
conventions.

Hallé orchestral concerts deserve the audience’s full attention | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/23/halle-orchestral-concerts-deserve-the-audiences-full-attention>
That might seem like an odd thing to say, given that the concert presents an 
atypical programme (10 short pieces rather than a substantial symphony or 
concerto) in an unconventional way: listeners will be able to “come and go as 
you like”, and – shock horror! – “bring your drinks in”, and each of the works 
on the programme will be introduced on screen. This all means putting a lot of 
new-fangled stylings before more traditional kinds of musical substance.

They’re all ideas that have been tried before (such as the free Proms in 
recent seasons,including this year <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/efnrzc>, or the 
Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment’sNight Shift 
<http://www.oae.co.uk/thenightshift/> concerts among others), and orchestras 
know that they work in terms of engaging a new audience and revitalising a more 
conventional crowd. But the Hallé’s boldness in their #pricelessclassics is in 
asking the audience to put their own value on the experience.

The results will be fascinating: what is is the perceived price tag of a 
one-off orchestral concert experience for its audience? I have a funny feeling 
the Hallé might be surprised with how much rather than how little people are 
prepared to pay: at theProms <https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms>, the 
best musical experiences are had by thousands every night for a fiver. The 
value of the concert that they, and everyone else in the hall, get from 
Promming is worth much more than £5 in terms of the musical, emotional and 
communal richness that everyone is part of in the Royal Albert Hall. You can’t 
really put a value on the best things in life – except, in September, the Hallé 
rather hope you can.
 