
The Lady Chablis, the transgender nightclub star from Savannah, Georgia, who 
successfully lobbied Clint Eastwood to play herself in his 1997 adaptation of 
the John Berendt novelMidnight in the Garden of Good and Evil 
<http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/midnight-in-the-garden-of-good-and-evil-1997>
, has reportedly passed away at the age of 59.

Chablis, who told Entertainment Tonight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aT_BxSuSVVU> in 1996 that she changed her 
legal name to reflect her long-time stage name (including the “The”), was a 
drag star who also lived publicly as a woman. Her unforgettable turn in the 
1997 movie, which marked the first time that a mainstream American film 
featured a transgender actor portraying a transgender woman (and did so without 
pathologizing her or making her a subject of ridicule), led to both ups and 
downs, asshe told 
<http://savannahnow.com/do/2013-03-04/lady-chablis-turns-xxx-march-9-birthday-bash-savannah>
 Savannah reporter Linda Sickler before one of herannual 
<http://savannahnow.com/column-accent/2012-08-19/bunny-city-55-lady-chablis-doesnt-miss-beat>
birthday 
<http://savannahnow.com/do/2016-03-10/lady-chablis-celebrates-birthday-club-one-show>
 shows at Club One.

“I got to meet certain people, I got to work as a model, I opened at the 
Kennedy Center and headlined a jazz tour. I got to write a bestselling book and 
be in a movie,” Chablis said, while admitting: “Also, it put me in the 
limelight where I had to wear that label ‘drag queen’. I’ve never been 
comfortable with that label.

“That sort of brought me out of the closet,” she added. “I had to come to 
terms with that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQGYlF6uZBJY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQGYlF6uZBJY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQGYlF6uZBJY&media=>
Chablis, who in the movie is portrayed receiving hormone shots, called her 
1996 autobiographyHiding My Candy 
<https://www.amazon.com/Hiding-My-Candy-Autobiography-Savannah/dp/0671520954> 
in reference to the fact that she had not had sexual reassignment surgery, and 
often joked about her status in her act. But when she came to prominence in the 
90s, before terms like transgender had come to the fore and the spectrum of 
transitions was less widely understood or accepted, she was alternately 
referred to, even by friends like the author Berendt, as a “a full-time 
transvestite” or “a preoperative transsexual”, and her fame left her less able 
to “pass” and more subject to harassment.

“Not everyone is into The Lady Chablis,” she told Sickler.

As a result of the publicity from the movie, Chablis left her longtime home in 
Savannah for West Columbia, South Carolina – though she continued to perform 
regularly at Club One, where she had been their inaugural performer. The Club 
memorialized heron their Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/clubonesavannah/?fref=ts>, noting that she had long 
donated proceeds from her show to diabetes and LGBT causes.

Redmayning and Ruffalo-ing: how Hollywood can make better trans movies | Jane 
Fae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/redmayne-rufflalo-hollywood-trans-movies-danish-girl-roles-movie>
Berendt, too, issued a statement 
<http://www.wtoc.com/story/33047598/midnight-star-savannah-legend-lady-chablis-has-died>
 in which he said that Chablis was the character about whom he was most often 
still asked. “Chablis could be playful and ironic, but she had a tough inner 
core,” he wrote. “‘Don’t be fooled by this dress I’m wearing,’ she’d say with a 
hint of danger in her voice.”

Her most recent national media appearance was on an episode of the Real 
Housewives of Atlanta in 2013 
<http://www.bravotv.com/the-real-housewives-of-atlanta/season-6/videos/read-by-a-drag-queen>
, when cast members went to Club One to catch her show and NeNe Leakes asked 
Chablis to teach cast member Mynique Smith to both read and throw shade.

On social media, fans 
<https://twitter.com/KosherSoul/status/773928175432785920> memorialized 
<https://twitter.com/terryteachout/status/773893727278342144> her with a 
shortened version 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=two%20tears%20in%20a%20bucket&src=typd> – “two 
tears in a bucket” – of one of her most famous lines from the movie: “It’s like 
my mom always said: ‘Two tears in a bucket, motherfuck it,’” – a 
Chablis-ification of the classic and sadly non-vulgar idiom that there’s no use 
crying over spilt milk.

 * This article was amended on 8 September 2016. A previous version mistakenly 
placed West Columbia in North Carolina instead of South Carolina.  