
When summer’s thick haze returns there is only one place I want to be: 
ensconced in a torrid affair with a book. And so every year I remind myself to 
break away from the compulsory hecticness of the world and to sink back into 
love, to fall irrevocably into the depths of literary ecstasy.

My affairs have been as diverse as they are all-consuming; I have spent hours 
lying in bed withJK Rowling 
<http://www.amazon.com/Harry-Potter-Hard-Cover-Boxed/dp/0545044251/ref=tmm_hrd_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&sr=&qid=>
, days on the beach withChimamanda Ngozi Adichie 
<http://www.amazon.com/Americanah-Chimamanda-Ngozi-Adichie/dp/0307455920/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1435338535&sr=1-1&keywords=chimamanda>
 and weeks in the park withToni Morrison 
<http://www.amazon.com/God-Help-Child-A-novel/dp/0307594173>. When we leave 
each other, I am different;I carry a piece of them with me 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/179622>, and that warmth 
sustains me through the cooler seasons.

I spent my childhood hiding away in the labyrinth of the local library, 
creating storylines, characters and universes of my own with help from the 
authors whose words gave spark to my vivid imagination. I was always happier 
tucked in the corner of a Barnes & Noble aisle than outside during the months 
when my friends joined soccer clubs and basketball teams.

During these years, books were my teachers and friends. I met Junie B Jones 
<http://www.amazon.com/Junie-Joness-First-Boxed-Books/dp/0375813616/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1435338630&sr=1-1&keywords=junie+b+jones>
,Eragon 
<http://www.amazon.com/Eragon-Inheritance-Book-Christopher-Paolini/dp/0375826696/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1435338644&sr=1-1&keywords=eragon>
, Pollyanna, Heidi, Anna Karenina and the entireBaby-Sitters Club 
<http://www.amazon.com/Baby-Sitters-Club-Kristys-Great-Idea/dp/0545174759/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1435338660&sr=1-1&keywords=babysitters+club>
. We trudged through first grade adventures, childhood existential crises (what 
if I’m not always happy?!) and life experiences I had never been through myself 
but found ways to empathize with through these characters. Adultery was never 
part of my high school repertoire, but Anna Karenina’s turmoil was still 
legible to angst-ridden 14-year-old me. I lived and learned through these 
characters, and I am better for it.

The sticky months carry with them a natural languor that defies rapid 
activity. Summer is not the season to move swiftly, to move far, to moveat all 
really. Now is the time to revel.

As I mature, summer’s laziness takes on new meaning. I have been out of school 
for years; there are no more responsibility-free days dedicated to nothing but 
counting cracks in ceilings or collecting coins for ice cream trucks that go by 
when parents aren’t home. There are no finals to actively not study for, no 
midterms to blow off by sitting on my roof and cry-readingJohn Green novels 
<http://www.amazon.com/Fault-Our-Stars-John-Green/dp/014242417X/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1435338760&sr=1-1&keywords=the+fault+in+our+stars>
. I am not beholden to immersing myself in complex theory or detailed histories.

But books are still here to offer a return to the carefree curiosity left 
behind in childhood, to bridge the gap between the youthful version of myself 
that delighted so wholly in the unknown and the “adult” who finds far too much 
comfort in familiarity.

They turn my morning commute into a journey that extends far beyond the 
insular drudgery of the New York City subway. Flights are doubly satisfying: I 
am transported across entire universes as I traverse land.

When I am sad, feeling my temperament unsuited to the brightness of summer 
sun, fiction allows me to lose myself in its kaleidoscopic narrative layers, to 
escape the recesses of my own logic. When I want to withdraw from the world 
around me, poetry offers a place to lay my head and dream. Non-fiction pushes 
me to more wholly examine where I sit, to ask questions of myself and those 
around me – to pay attention, to stay woke, if you will.

Today, books take me back home, too. Teju Cole 
<http://www.amazon.com/Open-City-Novel-Teju-Cole/dp/0812980093/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1435338775&sr=1-1&keywords=open+city>
’s words sit with me in Union Square after work.Maaza Mengiste’s breathtaking 
novel 
<http://www.amazon.com/Beneath-Lions-Gaze-Maaza-Mengiste/dp/0393338886/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1435338794&sr=1-1&keywords=beneath+the+lion%27s+gaze>
 takes me back to Ethiopia; I read her words and return to my aunt’s kitchen, 
spice and freshly roasted coffee in the air.

Books are prepackaged vacations, adventures of your own making. Whether your 
day is structured entirely by work or wholly free of responsibility, they lay 
new worlds at your fingertips and ask only that yousteel yourself for what lies 
within 
<http://bookriot.com/2015/06/23/dear-book-nerd-episode-38-can-turn-friends-readers/>
.
 