
One of the many depredations resulting from a highly powerful rightwing press 
and a cowed BBC is that there is a new carelessness about truth. Boris Johnson 
knocked offa column for the Sun on Friday 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/7095695/UK-and-America-can-better-friends-than-ever-Mr-Obama-if-we-LEAVE-the-EU-says-Boris-Johnson.html>
 morning in which he repeated the trope beloved of the US radical right that 
Barack Obama’s Kenyan origins mean somehow that he is not a “real” American. We 
should not trust part-Kenyan Obama and his urging Britain to stay in the EU. It 
was partisan, unforgivable nonsense, with uneasy tones, at best, of crude 
identity politics, at worst, of sinking to a semi-racist smear. Johnson was 
badly caught out.

For, ultimately, truth-seeking and truth-telling matter, as does the language 
in which they are framed. An article in theFinancial Times is more credible 
than one in theDaily Express because the reader knows that its writer and the 
paper are more committed to objectivity than is a Eurosceptic propaganda sheet.

But Johnson has built a career out of extravagant use of language with only a 
tenuous relationship to the truth – and until now it has made many of us smile. 
He became the pantomime buffoon of British politics, a different politician 
because of his good one-liners even if they served a very rightwing cause. Now 
it has become more serious. The referendum is about Britain’s place in the 
world, real jobs and real economic prospects. It deserves better than smears 
based on falsehoods.

Boris and Brexit provide light relief as Obama and Cameron tackle Syria issue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/22/boris-and-brexit-provide-light-relief-as-obama-and-cameron-tackle-syria-issue>
My Hertford College office in Oxford’s Catte Street is just across the road 
from the Bodleian, one of the world’s great libraries. The fellows at my 
college want to impart an appetite for truth and their students diligently 
acquire and marshal facts, accessing this great library and its millions of 
books; they are then challenged on both their acquired knowledge and how they 
interpret it.

Yet increasingly I wonder, particularly in the humanities and social sciences, 
how much our society values their efforts. If and when as graduates they try to 
enter the public square, they will find it inhabited by hundreds of Boris 
Johnsons who regard truth-seeking as secondary to the principal task of 
smearing opponents, ideas and propositions they don’t like, supported by 
half-truths or no truths at all. All that scholarly effort is devalued. Just 
join Leave and make it up. Be sure nobody will challenge you – unless an 
American president is in town.

The postmodernist claim that there is no such thing as truth, only 
interpretations; that evidence is not to be trusted and all there can be are 
pluralist “conversations”, in which anything can be asserted, is the culture in 
which a Johnson can flourish. Elide it with the politics of identity where 
blood, culture, race and ethnicity trump argument and rationality – think Nigel 
Farage darkly muttering about Obama’s family background: “There is clearly 
something going on there” – and there is a toxic fusion that permits the 
speaker to say more or less anything he or she wants.

Witness Johnson’s article. If the public square is then largely framed by a 
media whose core purpose has transmuted from the dissemination of information, 
news and fact to the propagandising of a worldview, then the zany 
anti-Enlightenment, anti-democracy project is complete. Euroscepticism, Farage 
and Johnson are the result.

The referendum debate is widely disparaged for not having provoked elevated 
debate involving fact-based analysis and counter-analysis, so leaving ordinary 
citizens bewildered. A referendum on EU membership in our culture so damaged by 
a pop postmodernism could never have been that. It was called precisely because 
the only way Cameron could attempt to beat populist identity politics, 
threatening to overwhelm his party, was to use populism back. Hold and win a 
referendum.

The problem for the Remain camp is that, perforce, it can’t fight with fire. 
It has to hope that there is still sufficient British attachment to fact, 
evidence and argument – and hard-headed appreciation of economics – that it can 
win. I think building theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
is a noble cause and that Europeanness is part of my identity. But I fear that 
emotion will always be bettered by worship at the ancestral shrine of 
Britishness, an identity I believe I can pursue along with my Europeanness. 
Sadly that doesn’t cut much mustard on many doorsteps.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fbarack-obama-tells-young-people-they-can-change-the-world-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20tells%20young%20people%20they%20can%20change%20the%20world%20%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fbarack-obama-tells-young-people-they-can-change-the-world-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20tells%20young%20people%20they%20can%20change%20the%20world%20%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fbarack-obama-tells-young-people-they-can-change-the-world-video&media=>
Barack Obama tells young people they can change the world – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/apr/23/barack-obama-tells-young-people-they-can-change-the-world-video>
What still does is fact. The British do respect different points of view, but 
not to the point where authors are away with the fairies. Postmodernism is now 
widely recognised as transient nonsense: it has few fresh adherents even if it 
has left a cultural legacy. Universities have recommitted to be firm custodians 
of academic freedom in the quest for understanding, backed by evidence. The 
BBC, a public broadcaster born of the best Enlightenment tradition of reason, 
should rejoin their ranks. Its new understanding of objectivity – to treat 
everything as equal claim and counterclaim – is to surrender. It is not good 
enough in reporting, say, Treasury analysis on the economic impact of leaving 
the EU to then “balance” it with a one-liner fromBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> or an interview with John Redwood 
who have plainly not had time to read the 200-page document.

If Leave have fact and analysis with which to respond, that is different. Both 
sides should earn their place on news bulletins, not be gifted it because they 
have an opinion whose value is allegedly equal. If the BBC is terrified that 
John Whittingdale will take his revenge, after 23 June, if it sticks to 
Reithian rigour then so be it. Better go down fighting than turn into a 
glorified clearing house for rival press releases.

The referendum may be unedifying, but it is showing up the great cleavage in 
our country. Are we so keen to assert an idea of Britishness and so careless 
about evidence-based argument that we will damage ourselves economically by 
leaving the EU? Is politics to be framed by unfounded prejudice, funny 
one-liners and untruths? Do the majority of us want to live in a country 
constructed by the Eurosceptics and their press? Johnson’s article, I feel, was 
a watershed moment. I hope others see it that way too.
 