
Bridging the gap

It’s that time of year when football traipses its muddy boots into cricket’s 
freshly vacuumed deep pile. We still have five ODIs and a T20 remaining in 
Pakistan’s tour not to mention five rounds of County Championship fixtures to 
play before the final day of the season on 23 September, by which stage the 
Champions League will be in full swing, the Premier League will be reasserting 
its dominance in the sporting consciousness and any optimism surrounding the 
future of the England national side will presumably be a fading memory on the 
back of Sam Allardyce’s first match in charge.

Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> versus football in August 
(and, increasingly, September) has long been an annual British turf war – like 
the Boxing Day battle between Bridge on the River Kwai and a nice long walk – 
with the general tone one of mourning that the summer sport has to give way so 
soon to its winter equivalent, pads and gloves stomped into the outfield by the 
latest Nike/Adidas/Puma ÜberStrike boot as it hares down the wing.

It’s an odd complaint. Largely because mixed in with the moaning is a pining 
for a time that didn’t really exist. A week separated the first county 
championship, which ended on the 30 August 1890, from the start of the 
fledgling Football League on 6 September but just two years later there was 
overlap, Sussex and Somerset waiting for the rain to stop at Hove while Newton 
Heath, The Wednesday and co were kicking off on 3 September.

So you won’t hear the Spin bemoaning the encroachment of association football, 
with all its ill-advised tattoos, disrespect for officials and ugly 
commercialism, on the rarified land of cricket (with …ah 
<https://twitter.com/bbc5live/status/555786006067429376> … and yes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/england-alex-hales-fined-reaction-dismissal-fourth-test-pakistan>
 …well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/17/royal-bank-scotland-talks-sponsor-english-cricket>
). Instead we’ll remember a time when the two sports came together to put on a 
remarkable cricket match.

Thirty-six years ago last week, Britain’s first floodlit cricket contest took 
place. And it took place at a football stadium. Kerry Packer’s colourful World 
Series in the late 70s had whet the public’s appetite for floodlit cricket. 
While plenty of counties talked the talk, in 1980 Surrey walked the walk and 
were the first to take the plunge.

With cricket grounds – even established Test venues such as The Oval – not 
equipped with floodlights, an alternative venue was required. Packer had 
encountered similar issues and innovated by using stadiums usually reserved for 
Australian rules football but with Aussie rules venues in short supply in south 
London, Surrey opted to use Chelsea’s Stamford Bridge. The touring West Indies 
team were persuaded to provide the opposition. More than 10,000 tickets were 
sold. An artificial pitch was put in. So far, so good.

Surrey, though, had a problem. Their Gillette Cup semi-final against Yorkshire 
on Wednesday, the day prior, was rained off. Thursday was the designated 
reserve day and the Brown Caps were obliged to play. Which they did, beating 
Boycott and co comfortably at The Oval (Yorkshire having raced to 135 all out 
from 53.5 overs).

Fortunately Essex had already been placed on standby. “It was all teed up, 
we’d been standing by just in case so weren’t totally surprised to be there,” 
said Graham Gooch, the Essex opener. “It was a great evening, 11,000 people 
turned up and there was a really good atmosphere.

“The dimensions at the ground were obviously unusual – it was short at the 
sides, longish at the ends. You got good value for your shots, and I think the 
crowd got plenty of fielding practice. I remember the wicket actually played 
quite well, which was paramount if you were playing the West Indies, with their 
pace.”

West Indies batted first and made 257 from their 40 overs, Viv Richards, Faoud 
Bacchus and Collis King all hitting half-centuries. In reply, Essex lost Neil 
Smith early on before Gooch and Ken McEwan began peppering the terraces. They 
were 192 for one when rain brought things to a premature conclusion after 28 
overs.Essex won on a faster scoring rate 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/current/match/665095.html>.

“Not everyone found it that easy to make runs, despite the short boundaries,” 
said Gooch. “Though having to face Malcolm Marshall and Michael Holding might 
have had something to do with that. Still, we did OK and won on a faster 
scoring rate when the rain came, with me still in on 111.

“It was a fun night, but played fairly seriously. If people put big 
man-of-the-match prizes up you tend to find that the players try a little bit 
harder. But West Indies were the team of that era, and it’s always nice to beat 
them in any competition. I think the man-of-the-match award was a holiday for 
two in Tobago, but I never took it. I think I only phoned up a couple of years 
later and they told me I was too late.”

The following weekend, Chelsea laboured to a 2-2 draw with Wrexham and at 
particularly soporific points the home fans could be heard chanting: “We want 
cricket.” Cricket has never returned to Stamford Bridge, however, and it’s a 
long time since Test cricket in England shared a pitch with a football club 
(1902 at Sheffield United’s Bramall Lane). But as the Premier League’s 
deafening roar shunts cricket further from the spotlight over the final weeks 
of the season, it’s worth remembering that the sports once went hand-in-hand 
rather nicely.

This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe,just visit this page, find ‘The Spin’ and follow the instructions 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/email-prefs?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Spin+2016&utm_term=185298&subid=830441&CMP=EMCSPTEML942>
.
 