
Campaigners battling to persuade us to leave the European Union always knew 
the key to referendum success was to cow theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. If it could be bullied into 
interpreting impartiality as giving each side exactly equal time whatever the 
merits of the particular argument – following the agenda set by the Eurosceptic 
press – Leave would be largely home. As one Leave insider contentedly told me 
last week, job done.

The BBC was certainly cowed – and with very good reason. In the lead-up to 
this year’s charter renewal it had been subject to such sustained vilification 
that its very existence was in doubt. The corporation and the EU became the 
bêtes noires of any rising rightwing Tory politician or columnist. The last two 
Conservative culture secretaries, Sajid Javid and John Whittingdale, were open 
critics of not just the BBC as an over-powerful, over-extended bastion of 
liberalism but the very concept of public service broadcasting. The chair of 
ITV, Archie Norman, a former Tory MP, argued that the BBC should do no more than
“market failure” broadcasting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/14/battle-for-the-bbc> – certainly 
not produce content that was popular. A panel of partisan practitioners and 
experts, assembled by Whittingdale, judged the BBC an overblown organisation 
that needed scaling back.

The fallout from the Savile affair cost the BBC both its director general and 
its chairman. Chancellor George Osborne casually shifted the growing burden of 
offering licence-free TV to over-75s – at least £700 million – on to its 
shoulders. This great public corporation, cherished only by its listeners and 
viewers, was bracing for break-up and downsizing along with a newly restrictive 
definition of public service broadcasting. Its instinct to challenge had been 
pulverised out of it: I recall one senior BBC executive saying that the daily 
anti-BBC broadside by the press put even the bravest and the best on the 
defensive.

But last week came the draft of the new charter 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-36259237> and there was a minor 
miracle. The BBC is not to be partially privatised or broken up. It is not to 
be forced out of making popular TV and radio, beaten back into a ghetto of 
“market failure” programmes. It is to continue as a public corporation with an 
unconstrained mandate to educate, inform and entertain – the classic definition 
of public service broadcasting – until 2027, funded by a licence fee on which 
it has exclusive lien that will be indexed to inflation. Its independence is 
enshrined in the new charter, and it will be governed by a 14-strong unitary 
board of whom only five will be government nominees – not the majority 
originally proposed. The BBC and public service broadcasting lives on.

But if miraculously still standing, it is blooded and bowed. Its critics can 
claim important concessions which could still produce the result they want, 
even if more subtly and slowly than a frontal onslaught. The BBC has lost the 
power to regulate and audit itself, crucial buttresses to its independence. 
Regulation will pass to Ofcom, given carte blanche to oversee the entire 
organisation and order a cessation of activity it judges to be 
anti-competitive, while the National Audit Office has been given equivalent 
freedom to investigate every aspect of the corporation’s activities – even its 
commercial arms generating non-licence-fee revenue.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbbc-miraculously-suvived-but-enemies-may-still-triumph%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3eca26ea0269872646a7d4c565a5af8911a6f67%2F0_77_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20BBC%20needs%20more%20courage%20to%20thrive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbbc-miraculously-suvived-but-enemies-may-still-triumph%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20BBC%20needs%20more%20courage%20to%20thrive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbbc-miraculously-suvived-but-enemies-may-still-triumph%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3eca26ea0269872646a7d4c565a5af8911a6f67%2F0_77_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Rona Fairhead was ousted by the prime minister, showing where the power lies. 
Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
The BBC is being redefined not as an autonomous organisation that expresses 
public service broadcasting on the licence-fee payers’ behalf, but as a state 
corporation subject to state and party interference. Theprime minister’s 
summary ousting of the chair, Rona Fairhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/14/theresa-may-role-bbc-chief-exit-brutal-extraordinary-rona-fairhead>
, was the introduction to the new order – and the clearest expression yet of 
where power now lies. Whoever succeeds Fairhead will be careful to make sure 
the BBC does not offend the powers that be: its freshly asserted independence 
is highly qualified.

Then there is money. The BBC’s power base is its audiences. Radio looks fairly 
secure but television – especially popular TV – is an expensive and 
hyper-competitive game. The BBC has been multiply disabled. Sustainable TV 
success is about holding the rights to popular content – just as the production 
company Love owns the rights to theGreat British Bake Off, despite it being 
paid for and commissioned by the BBC, nurtured on BBC2 and riskily backed on 
BBC1. Already at least 50 per cent of all BBC output has to be made by 
independents like Love; now it will be up to 100 per cent, unless the 
corporation’s own in-house content maker – BBC Studios – can win commissions in 
open competition. The BBC’s capacity to deliver a critical mass of programmes 
to which it owns the rights, and with them creating a public service culture 
and incubating in-house creativity, is being deliberately undermined.

Moreover, having to pay for both the World Service and the pensioners’ free 
licences, means the BBC simply can’t afford the £75m three-year deal that Love 
set as a minimum price for successor series – despite it being a BBC creation 
suffused with BBC values. Love owned the crucial content rights. Even the 
presenters, Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins, informed at the last minute, clearly 
thought the deal was shabby, money-grabbing and likely to threaten the feel of 
the show –and refused to go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/13/sue-perkins-and-mel-giedroyc-to-leave-great-british-bake-off>
 with it to Channel 4. It won’t take an edict from the culture secretary or 
special pleading from ITV to force the BBC into minority, “market-failure” 
programming. Lack of money and independents owning the content rights to its 
successful programmes will do the job for it.

The final twist is having to disclose who earns what above a ceiling of 
£150,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/14/bbc-presenters-pay-to-be-made-public>
, an obligation not placed on any other broadcaster or the independents like 
Love bidding for BBC commissions. A requirement for transparency can hardly be 
faulted, but it should be universal: if presenters like Laura Kuenssberg or 
Tess Daly want to avoid their pay being public information, better work for an 
independent, ITV or Channel 4. To work for the public service broadcaster is to 
risk stigma, and from the BBC’s point of view makes it harder to attract and 
retain talent.

The BBC has survived for now: pulling it down overtly was too much of a 
political risk – rather like the NHS it is just too good, too trusted and too 
loved. But the political hard right wants it dead, rather as it wanted Brexit.

David Cameron staunched the worst of Whittingdale’s and Javid’s ambitions, and 
May has held the line – but the BBC is still badly damaged. If it wants 
long-term survival, it must create great TV content to which it owns the rights 
– and if it wants long-term respect from all its viewers and listeners, it must 
never repeat the callow approach to reporting of the referendum. Remainers pay 
the licence fee too.

The BBC’s stay of execution gives it the chance for its great traditions of 
embedded creativity and journalistic courage to challenge its implacable 
enemies. The open question is whether it will seize it.
 