
Jaime Jandler didn’t start out in life thinking he’d be the king of a 
burgeoning emoji-themed sex toy empire. But when you invent the Emojibator – a 
small, battery powered vibrator shaped like an eggplant, in an obvious homage 
to the sexual interpretation of the purple fruit emoji icon – andinvite 
potential customers <https://emojibator.com/> to “Go fuck yourself. Literally.” 
– well, you’d better hope your mother has a sense of humor.

The inventor of emoji on his famous creations – and his all-time favorite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/27/emoji-inventor-shigetaka-kurita-moma-new-york-text>
 He also didn’t think more of the world would know him as “Jaime Jandler” than 
by his real name (which he prefers to keep under wraps, to avoid his sex toy 
business being the only thing that Google knows about him). The Long Island 
native went to the University of Delaware to study business management, then 
settled in Philadelphia and spent a few years working in tech while trying to 
build his musical career.

Jandler and his business partner, Kristin, launched the small company with an 
order of 1,000 4.84-inch vibrators and a couple of press releases in late 
August. One of those press releases (toCosmopolitan 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.com/sex-love/news/a63262/emoji-vibrator/>) apparently 
hit a sweet spot, and they sold out before the end of September.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fsex-toy-emoji-vibrator-eggplant-jaime-jandler-emojibator%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8319fd4840b2e9b037e09d2718df566fb10af19%2F0_360_3488_2093%2F3488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Emojibator%3A%20how%20a%20euphemistic%20fruit%20became%20an%20actual%20sex%20toy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fsex-toy-emoji-vibrator-eggplant-jaime-jandler-emojibator%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Emojibator%3A%20how%20a%20euphemistic%20fruit%20became%20an%20actual%20sex%20toy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fsex-toy-emoji-vibrator-eggplant-jaime-jandler-emojibator%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8319fd4840b2e9b037e09d2718df566fb10af19%2F0_360_3488_2093%2F3488.jpg>
 ‘We don’t think sex needs to be taken seriously all the time,’ says founder 
Jaime Jandler. ‘We make products that are both intimate and silly.’ Photograph: 
Courtesy of Emojibator 
By the end of their second month in business, they’d sold another 1,000 
vibrators through their website and scored retail contracts with New York’s 
Museum ofSex <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> and sex toy 
retailer Good Vibrations – and, come Thanksgiving, they’ll release their second 
retail offering: a chili pepper.

“It has more of a little bit of a curve” explained Jandler.

The Emojibator wasn’t the product of a lot of market research or a deep-dive 
on theconnection between humor and sex 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/humor-sapiens/201105/laughing-all-the-way-the-bedroom>
. “I was really just looking to start a new business” said Jandler. “I stumbled 
upon this idea as a joke, in a late-night brainstorming session on video chat.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fsex-toy-emoji-vibrator-eggplant-jaime-jandler-emojibator%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85adf439d5008937a34a783646e8a297da915c11%2F384_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Emojibator%3A%20how%20a%20euphemistic%20fruit%20became%20an%20actual%20sex%20toy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fsex-toy-emoji-vibrator-eggplant-jaime-jandler-emojibator%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Emojibator%3A%20how%20a%20euphemistic%20fruit%20became%20an%20actual%20sex%20toy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fsex-toy-emoji-vibrator-eggplant-jaime-jandler-emojibator%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85adf439d5008937a34a783646e8a297da915c11%2F384_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
 Renard and the eggplant. Photograph: Courtesy of Emojibator 
“It had that ‘wow’ factor’ and I thought it had viral potential” he added. “I 
guess I was right.”

Jandler and his partner then connected with a Chinese manufacturer on Alibaba 
with experience selling quality sex toys. “I modified a mold that had already 
existed, working with a really great, awesome sex toy manufacturer” he 
explained.

The rest, including a photo shoot with an unsuspecting feline named Renard, is 
history.

Or could be. In a statement, Jandler added that the fledgling company has even 
bigger plans. “The challenge we face now is seizing this opportunity to 
permanently change the public’s perception about sex toys and masturbation, and 
an even bigger task of changing consumer behavior along the way,” he said.

“Our mission is to destigmatize masturbation and promote healthy sexuality” – 
one emoji-themed sex toy at a time. “We don’t think sex needs to be taken 
seriously all the time,” he added. “So we’ll make more unique products that are 
both intimate and silly.”
 