
Crystal Palace’s players probably regard homework as a safely distant 
schoolday memory or, if they have children, something to assist with 
sporadically. For Scott Dann and company though, change is almost certainly in 
the south London air.

One of the first things Sam Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sam-allardyce> did on taking charge at 
Sunderland was to begin firing off frequent emails to every player. Packed with 
video clips, the accompanying attachments both deconstructed their own 
strengths and weaknesses and provided detailed briefings on future opponents.

Sam Allardyce the organiser will bring normality back to Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/sam-allardyce-crystal-palace-manager>
When they came into training the next day, recipients were not only expected 
to be fully conversant with the party pieces and vulnerabilities of rivals 
included in these mini dossiers but able to demonstrate enhanced understanding 
of their own games.

“If a player digests his own statistical information in his own time, on his 
own laptop, tablet or whatever, without a coach standing over him, it makes it 
easier for him,” said Allardyce. “It helps with the pressure. There’s a fear 
factor but spending time at home analysing things can help control it.”

He will expect such “empowerment” to produce sufficiently improved results to 
enable Palace to take a break in the Gulf – most likely Dubai or Doha – in 
February. A big believer in the benefits of Vitamin D derived direct from 
strong sunshine, he implored Ellis Short, Sunderland’s owner, to fund a squad 
trip to the United Arab Emirates last season and credited it as a big reason 
why, against all odds, the club avoided relegation.

“Historically almost every team I’ve managed has returned from even just a 
five-day break with improved physical output,” said Allardyce. “Bolton, 
Blackburn, West Ham, Sunderland; Dubai had a big impact on them. The players 
are knackered after Christmas but we get them relaxed.”

He is equally keen on exposure to extreme cold. Cryotherapy is probably not 
unknown to his latest charges but Allardyce is so convinced of the merits of 
near daily post-training visits to a minus-135-degree ice chamber that he 
installed a state-of-the-art machine at Sunderland in an effort to accelerate 
muscle recovery. Jermain Defoe – who previously hired a mobile cryotherapy unit 
for £1,000 per two-minute visit – swore by it, though certain team-mates were 
less enthusiastic.

A blend of old school and the surprisingly progressive, the 62-year-old 
retains personal perspective by performing transcendental meditation most days. 
On Wearside Allardyce felt encouraging his players to follow suit might be a 
field too far but he did encourage them to visit the then newly recruited club 
psychologist. Meanwhile he harboured no compunction about boring his backline 
to tears courtesy of training sessions devoted to the ABC of rudimentary 
defending.

Sometimes manhandling senior professionals while working on body shape and 
positioning in assorted situations, he prompted a radical improvement in, among 
others, Patrick van Aanholt, Sunderland’s left-back, but admitted: “We’ve gone 
so far back to basics, I’m boring myself.”

That sentiment was shared by DeAndre Yedlin, the right-back then on loan from 
Tottenham Hotspur but now at Newcastle. “Every Thursday at Sunderland every 
defender would do strict defensive drills, with no attacking at all,” he 
recalled. “We hated it because it was not the most fun thing to do but it 
worked. And Sam made something click in my head. He made me think like a 
defender.”

Given the five goals Palace recently conceded at Swansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 followed by afurther three at Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/robert-snodgrass-hull-city-crystal-palace>
, Dann and friends should brace themselves for similar treatment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fsam-allardyce-crystal-palace-selhurst-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4621f72d644fa9cdc81ef4b163437f39982ff411%2F179_95_3474_2085%2F3474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Sam%20Allardyce%20Algorithm%20may%20be%20new%20to%20Crystal%20Palace%20but%20it%20succeeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fsam-allardyce-crystal-palace-selhurst-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Sam%20Allardyce%20Algorithm%20may%20be%20new%20to%20Crystal%20Palace%20but%20it%20succeeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fsam-allardyce-crystal-palace-selhurst-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4621f72d644fa9cdc81ef4b163437f39982ff411%2F179_95_3474_2085%2F3474.jpg>
 Jermain Defoe was one of several key players who thrived under Sam Allardyce 
at Sunderland. Photograph: Jason Cairnduff/Reuters 
Once Defoe convinced Allardyce to stop accepting received wisdoms and deploy 
him as a lone forward, Sunderland settled into a 4-1-4-1 formation with certain 
gifted players – most notably Defoe and Wahbi Khazri – granted creative licence 
while some were asked to sacrifice their talent for the team. Selhurst Park 
regulars can expect Andros Townsend to be offered Khazri-style freedoms by a 
man who has long coveted the England winger but it may be different for others.

Fabio Borini morphed from flamboyant striker into no-frills wide midfielder 
last season, with tracking back his new speciality. “I call my job a blind role 
because people don’t notice you, sometimes it’s more about going backwards than 
forwards,” said Sunderland’s Italian forward last spring. “But it makes others’ 
roles easier.”

The 100 best footballers in the world 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/20/the-100-best-footballers-in-the-world-2016-interactive>
Not that Borini disliked Allardyce. “Sam’s a very straight guy,” he said. “You 
know what he’s thinking and, even if you don’t, he’s going to tell you.”

Indeed Dick Advocaat’s successor was largely popular among his old Wearside 
squad who seemed to relish the amalgam of sometimes unreconstructed 
blokeishness with an unexpectedly subtle understanding of their assorted 
religions and cultures.

Younès Kaboul, disillusioned with Advocaat, looked reborn under Allardyce, 
swiftly appearing a different player while also agreeing to serve as a de facto 
minder for his fellow the French speakers, Khazri, Lamine Koné and Yann M’Vila.

“Sam knows the Premier League better than his own family,” said Kaboul, now at 
Watford, last spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/21/sunderland-younes-kaboul-break-point>
. “He knows how to upset teams, stay in games and win them. I don’t think he 
needed much time to understand us as footballers or people. One week of 
training was enough.”

Behind the sometimes uncomfortably brash exterior lurks sufficient emotional 
intelligence for Allardyce to be acutely alive to dressing room ecosystems and, 
endeavouring to improve Sunderland’s chemistry, he duly offloaded Costel 
Pantilimon and Steven Fletcher last January before signing Koné, Khazri and Jan 
Kirchhoff.

On his watch the squad remained astonishingly injury free, with his use of 
sports science to tailor individual regimes keeping even the notoriously frail 
Kirchhoff on the pitch.

This fascination with data dictates that Allardyce, unlike Alan Pardew, will 
be comfortable debating analytics and its potential transfer market deployment 
alongside Palace’s American backers. Indeed he adores discussing algorithms, 
Moneyball and his field trip to meet Billy Beane, the famous, analytics 
pioneering, general manager of Oakland Athletics baseball club.

The “Allardyce Algorithm” is a little different from Beane’s but, when it 
comes to survival, appears unrivalled.
 