
Promises of a “northern powerhouse” have been challenged by figures that show 
a decade-long north-south brain drain, with up to 310,000 graduates leaving the 
north to move to southern cities, despite the fact thatnobody can afford to 
rent a box room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/05/rents-continue-rise-uk-london> 
in the south, andpints are 27 times more expensive 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/foodanddrink/fancy-a-pint-this-map-shows-just-how-much-the-price-of-beer-costs-across-the-uk-and-londoners-won-t-a3093916.html>
. According to Lord O’Neill, former Tory treasury minister and one-time 
chairman of Goldman Sachs Asset Management, the only cities in the UK 
attracting graduates are London and Bristol. He is campaigning for more 
business initiatives and greater investment in east-west rail links between 
Newcastle, Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool.

The northerner who left –

Rebecca Nicholson

Just over a decade ago, I slid down the drain myself, moving from the 
motherland (north Lincolnshire – it’s the north, and I’ll fight you about it) 
to London for work. My family live there, so I go back often. I used to call it 
going home. But recently, after visiting, I asked my sister for a lift to the 
station so I could “catch the train home”, which was a jolt. In that moment
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and I finally made it official. 
It was a surprise as it was only ever supposed to be a temporary fling. Somehow 
I haven’t quite managed to ever call it off.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfcf3c010bc49039276908e1426bdbb2d46f37dd%2F0_328_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20northern%20brain%20drain%3A%20'I%20daydream%20about%20moving%20back'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20northern%20brain%20drain%3A%20%27I%20daydream%20about%20moving%20back%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfcf3c010bc49039276908e1426bdbb2d46f37dd%2F0_328_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Sheep grazing in hills, near Scunthorpe, Lincolnshire. Photograph: Michael 
Mahovlich/Getty Images/Radius Images 
London is so vast and varied that any experience of it is unlikely to be 
universal. Some of it reeks of wealth and privilege, some of it is trapped in 
cycles of poverty that should put the rest of the city to shame; these two 
sides may brush postcode borders, but rarely meet. My own London’s grip has 
loosened and tightened over the years, but it keeps a hold on me. I have loved 
it and loathed it, sometimes on the same day. I moved there two weeks after I 
graduated to do an internship at a long-dead magazine. I was broke but people 
saved their train tickets for me to claim back as “expenses” and I stayed on 
friends’ sofas. I had the best summer of my life. That summer extended into 
years. All the parties and nightclubs and gigs I had read about in those 
magazines, the bright and brash nights that had seemed like untouchable 
fantasies in my hometown, were real.

North of England loses 310,000 graduates in 10-year brain drain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/19/brain-drain-southward-310000-graduates-left-north-ten-years>
Now that I’m a bit too old to go out much without days of suffering what can 
only be called an aftermath, it seems strange to look back and think that, 
apart from work, nightlife was the main draw, but when you’re gay, the lure of 
a city is strong: you go to find your tribe. In fact, if you are different in 
any way, the city can be welcoming like that. Most of those clubs in which we 
danced away our 20s have been torn down and replaced withFoxtons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/25/police-use-cs-spray-as-anti-gentrification-protesters-mass-in-brixton>
 flats and chain restaurants. Younger generations have found their own fun, but 
what keeps me here is different now: my friends, my friends’ babies, having a 
local, the fact that, after many years of not talking to whoever lived next 
door, I now know many of my neighbours. People can talk about London as lonely 
and isolated, and I know that this side of it exists, but what has made it a 
keeper for me at this point is finding a raggedy impersonation of a community.

I am, however, clear-eyed and non-native enough to know that it’s a disgrace 
that so much is concentrated here: no wonder the country has no idea what its 
own face looks like when the majority of its politics and media are fixed in 
one place. London is not Britain; it’s a version of it buoyed by money. Calls 
for its independence in the aftermath of Brexit, while perhaps not entirely 
sincere, show the arrogance of this disconnect. And yet, in electing a Muslim 
mayor while much of the world shifts so far to the right that a “register” of 
Muslims become a possibility, I feel enormous pride in my city. It’s 
complicated.

I daydream about moving back to the north all the time, and have done for 
years. I look at property websites and can scarcely allow myself to imagine 
living anywhere with more than one bedroom. The word “garden” takes my breath 
away. Yet here I am, still not quite managing to go, starting to call London 
home.

The northerner who came back –
Helen Pidd 

When I left home in coastal Lancashire in 1999, I had no intention of ever 
returning. The north of England held little interest for me. I preferred the 
accent, but that was about it. I was blasé about the nightly sunsets over 
Morecambe bay, the Cumbrian fells in silhouette, and hated the fact we lived so 
near the Lake District that my parents made us go walking there most Sundays.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8343c5fefaa98d6b3f93f098258705020cbfca3%2F0_153_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20northern%20brain%20drain%3A%20'I%20daydream%20about%20moving%20back'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20northern%20brain%20drain%3A%20%27I%20daydream%20about%20moving%20back%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8343c5fefaa98d6b3f93f098258705020cbfca3%2F0_153_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Autumn in the Lake District. Photograph: Kimberley Coole/Getty Images/Lonely 
Planet Images 
I knew I would live in London one day, and I did, on and off, from 2004 until 
2013. I thought about staying on in Edinburgh after university, but I was 
offered a job when I graduated and so down I went. I never even considered 
stopping halfway. All the national media was in London; it was where the bands 
I liked played; where you could get fed after 8pm somewhere other than a 
chippy; and it was a good few degrees warmer, too.

It was in London that I started to identify as a northerner. I would bang on 
about how much nicer people were where I came from, how much cheaper everything 
was, while quietly despairing on every trip home that Lancaster, my nearest 
city, didn’t even have an H&M or a Wagamama. Trends took a year to reach 
Lancashire; when one of my oldest friends described my outfit as “very London” 
I was chuffed to bits, even though I knew she meant it as a diss. Equally, I 
quite liked the assumption from ignorant southerners that I was working class 
because I said bath instead of baaarth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13f440d5b76d646f174f52006ab07f0fb7b3c87a%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20northern%20brain%20drain%3A%20'I%20daydream%20about%20moving%20back'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20northern%20brain%20drain%3A%20%27I%20daydream%20about%20moving%20back%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13f440d5b76d646f174f52006ab07f0fb7b3c87a%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 How anyone stays sane when commuting by tube? Photograph: Forest 
Woodward/Getty Images 
Then I got really into riding my bike. I had always cycled to work at the 
Guardian – I still do not understand how anyone stays sane when commuting by 
tube – yet as I approached 30, I started tomiss open space. I rode to Brighton 
and resented the first few hours battling through London traffic. I started to 
fantasise about an existence where I could reach the hills on warm summer 
nights, passing hedgerows rather than stinking bins. The brat who spoiled every 
family Lakeland walk between 1990 and 1994, who dreamed of 24-hour bagel 
bakeries and who had memorised the Monopoly board, was craving the life she had 
been so determined to leave behind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc10f93bae2de1999f9a5a25526577a4c1b58afae%2F0_336_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20northern%20brain%20drain%3A%20'I%20daydream%20about%20moving%20back'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20northern%20brain%20drain%3A%20%27I%20daydream%20about%20moving%20back%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnorthern-brain-drain-moving-back-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc10f93bae2de1999f9a5a25526577a4c1b58afae%2F0_336_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Life outside the capital: Media City in Salford. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian 
And then the Guardian’s north of England editor job came up. I wouldn’t have 
gone for it had the BBC not just opened Media City in Salford. It was a sign 
that you could operate at national level without being crammed into a grotty 
flatshare in Zone 3 – and recognition that there was life outside our 
overcrowded capital.

Refuge by Volta, Manchester: ‘It’s a glamourpuss’ – restaurant review | Marina 
O’Loughlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/04/refuge-by-volta-manchester-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
Now I live in Manchester, in a redbrick three-bedroom terraced house that cost 
less than a one-bed studio in a crappy bit of outer London. Not everything is 
cheaper: the other day I bought a pot of tea inthe Refuge, Manchester’s 
trendiest new bar <http://www.refugemcr.co.uk/>, and was aghast to be charged 
more than four pounds. A pint is approaching a fiver in many places in the 
city’s Northern Quarter nightlife district. Rents are going up, the pay is 
still way below London salaries, and most of the best graduate jobs are in the 
south-east. Despite rapid improvement, the restaurant scene isn’t a patch on 
the capital’s, either.

But it’s only two and a quarter hours to London on the train if I want a fancy 
feed: I remember days when I would spend almost that long trying to visit a 
friend in south-west London from my flat in the north-east. Attitudes are just 
as liberal as in the capital:our Lord Mayor is a former Mr Gay UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/17/manchester-to-swear-in-first-openly-gay-lord-mayor>
 and when a young gay couple got beaten up on the tram for singing show tunes, 
police helped the Lesbian and Gay Chorusstage an onboard musical singalong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/17/lgbt-choir-stagea-singalong-manchester-trams-homophobic-attack>
. I spent this weekend in the very same snow-capped peaks I used to scowl at 
while plotting my escape to the big city as I waited for the bus on Morecambe 
prom. My mum and dad can’t believe I came back voluntarily. I wonder what took 
me so long.

 