
On a wintry night in 2010 a few months before 29 men were killed in the Upper 
Big Branch mine explosion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/06/us-mine-explosion-west-virginia>
, the coal boss, Don Blankenship – then one of the richest and most powerful 
men in West Virginia – squared up to Robert Kennedy Jr in a public debate about 
destructive mining practices and climate change.

The contest had been an epic smackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/22/kennedy-coal-debate-blankenship> 
and about 1,000 people turned out to see the scion of the liberal Kennedy clan 
take on the native son and champion of coal.

But Kennedy, despite his impressive command of facts, never really managed to 
land a punch, or cause a ripple in Blankenship’s impassive demeanor – let alone 
win over an audience stacked with miners from the coal baron’s MasseyEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Company.


“When you criticise what we do as an industry, you are criticising the people 
that are teaching your Sunday school, that are coaching your little league,” 
Blankenship told Kennedy. The line got the biggest applause all night.


Six years later, Blankenship and the coal industry he championed are both on 
the ropes.The former chief executive is headed to prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/06/massey-energy-don-blankenship-prison-upper-big-branch-mine>
 and some of the biggest coalmining companies in the world are in bankruptcy or 
possibly headed that way –knocked out of electricity markets by cheap natural 
gas and the environmental regulations Blankenship so vehemently opposed.

The former chief executive of Massey Energy was sentenced this week to a year 
in prison for willfully violating mine safety standards – the highest penalty 
available under the law. Blankenship was not accused of direct responsibility 
for the accident – the worst in 40 years in the US.

Next week Peabody Energy, the world’s largest publicly traded coal company, 
will come to the end of a 30-day grace period to repay its crushing debts or
fall into bankruptcy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/coal-miner-peabody-energy-bankruptcy>
.

The company’s share price has fallen by 98% since 2011.

US electricity industry's use of coal fell to historic low in 2015 as plants 
closed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/04/us-electricity-industrys-use-of-coal-fell-to-historic-low-in-2015-as-plants-closed>
Peabody missed two interest payments totaling $71m on its debt on 15 March. 
The company also laid off more than 250 workers at its Powder River Basin mine 
in Wyoming, billed as the biggest coalmine in the world.

Three other coal giants have declared bankruptcy within the last six months, 
ArchCoal <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal>, Patriot and Alpha 
Natural Resources. Alpha bought out Blankenship’s old firm nine months after 
the Big Branch Disaster.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fus-coal-industry-decline-natural-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1da92321ce1fd0ce959e7119cae2d5d028b7286%2F0_37_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20death%20of%20US%20coal%3A%20industry%20on%20a%20steep%20decline%20as%20cheap%20natural%20gas%20rises&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fus-coal-industry-decline-natural-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20death%20of%20US%20coal%3A%20industry%20on%20a%20steep%20decline%20as%20cheap%20natural%20gas%20rises&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fus-coal-industry-decline-natural-gas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1da92321ce1fd0ce959e7119cae2d5d028b7286%2F0_37_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Former Massey Energy CEO Don Blankenship makes his way across Virginia Street 
in Charleston, West Virginia, on Wednesday. Photograph: F Brian Ferguson/AP 
With Blankenship headed to prison, the entire US coal industry appears headed 
for a historic transformation – forced mainly by cheap natural gas produced by 
fracking.

The US energy information administration last month released estimates showing 
coal production declining across the country by 29% in the first 10 weeks of 
2016 compared with the same period last year.

The agency said it anticipates natural gas will overtake coal as the country’s 
biggest source of electricity this year – a projection that is expected to 
result in hundreds more layoffs in the coming months.

On the same day, Arch Coal announced it would stop pursuing the Otter Creek 
project in Montana, which would have been one of the biggest surface mines in 
the country, blaming capital costs and weakness in the coal markets.

The Obama administration has also squeezed off prospects for future coal 
projects, overhauling the system of fossil fuel leases on public lands. In his 
finalState of the Union address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/state-of-the-union-address>, Obama said he 
would push for changes to the leasing of public lands for oil, coal and gas 
leases at cut-rate prices, saying: “Rather than subsidize the past, we should 
invest in the future.”


 Meanwhile, the US coal industry’s efforts to find new markets in Asia and 
Europe have run into troubles. China is moving away from coal, and it is 
getting harder to get coal to the other big potential market in India. On 1 
April, the company behind the proposed Gateway Pacific Terminal suspended the 
$700m project until the courts can rule on a challenge from the Lummi tribe.

However, Blankenship, in line with leading officials in West Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/west-virginia> and other coal-producing 
states, blames Barack Obama’s efforts to fight climate change, and rules due to 
come into force cutting emissions from power plants.


Blankenship then and now denied climate change was even occurring, describing 
it as “Obama’s hoax”.

The debate that night in 2010 was about mountaintop removal mining, a practice 
heavily promoted by companies like Blankenship’s of blowing the tops off 
mountains to get at thin seams of coal.

The practice reduced majestic treed mountains to barren moonscapes, and fouled 
streams and valleys with toxic mining debris. But it was cheaper because it 
kept labour costs down.

That night Kennedy condemned the technique as a crime of historic proportions. 

“This is the worst environmental crime that ever happened in our history,” 
began Kennedy. “It is a crime, it is a sin, and it is a moral obligation to 
stop this from happening.”


Until Blankenship’s sentencing this week, however, no coalmining executive had 
ever been sent to jail for putting coalminers’ lives in jeopardy by placing 
profit over safety.
 