
There’s a new word in the lexicon of media bullshit: it is “distinctiveness”. 
A report, commissioned by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport and 
published last week, argues that “greater distinctiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/bbc1-radio-1-radio-2-bbc-dcms>” 
in the BBC’s output will allow its commercial rivals to make an extra £115m a 
year.

That seems pretty great, doesn’t it? The BBC’s output gets massively more 
“distinctive”, which sounds like absolutely unanswerably superb news, and at 
the same time commercial broadcasters make millions of extra pounds. How hugely 
splendid all round. Hooray.

So what is this “distinctiveness” that we’re all going to be enjoying? What 
are distinctive things? Well, I’m immediately thinking of the taste of chicken 
liver, the sound ofJames Mason <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/apr/13/1>
’s voice, the design tradition of Citroën cars until the late 80s, the smell of 
pipe smoke, the style ofRaymond Chandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/24/100-best-novels-the-big-sleep-raymond-chandler>
’s prose. Those are all thoroughly attractive attributes and I can’t wait for 
BBC TV and radio programmes to sort of somehow start having more of that kind 
of thing about them.

This is like telling a boxer to throw a fight and make it look realistic

And, in other related brilliantness, ITV, Sky, Heart FM et al will have lots 
more money – which obviously isn’t distinctive at all, a certain uniformity 
being an unavoidable drawback of any currency, but is still nice to have and 
they can always choose to use it to buy lovely distinctive things like sci-fi 
chess sets, pool showers made out of telephone boxes, Toby jugs and clown 
shoes. So that’s great too.

Unfortunately the distinctiveness of a Hitchcock movie, a Lowry painting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/08/lowry-portrait-father-and-two-sons-auction-sothebys>
 or a Cole Porter lyric doesn’t seem to be the sort the report is getting at, 
because that’s a kind people really like. That would be entirely 
counterproductive to its stated aims. By “distinctiveness”, the report means 
that the BBC should deliberately target smaller and more niche audiences, in 
order to allow the commercial sector to take the bigger ones. Its distinctive 
flavour would be less like chicken liver and more like calves’ brains. Because 
that would be fairer on the market place.

This repellent tang is to be achieved in broadly three ways: the corporation 
should generate more content in less populist, and indeed less popular, genres; 
it should schedule programmes less aggressively; and it should take more risks 
in commissioning new ones. So Radio 1 should be more likeRadio 1 Xtra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/04/bbc-dj-criticises-all-white-radio-1-all-black-1xtra-silos-nihal>
, broadcasting more obscure music and talking. The news website should ditch 
entertainment and soft news stories in favour of in-depth analysis. And BBC1 
should do arts documentaries in primetime, make more new programmes and stop 
using Strictly Come Dancing as a stick with which to beat The X Factor.

These aren’t terrible ideas. Aggressive scheduling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/13/strictly-come-dancing-x-factor-saturday-ratings>
 is annoying. I’m sure many viewers, as well as ITV’s shareholders, take the 
view that, if the BBC were to rise above the fray and scheduleStrictly Come 
Dancing at a time that doesn’t clash with The X Factor, it would be serving the 
public better. And the notion of more primetime arts, science and history 
programming, more analytical journalism, and more risk-taking new commissions 
is metaphorical music to ears that scorn Radio 2’s literal kind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbbc-report-niche-distinctiveness-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6c837b70a32316161533005c42b360f60572255%2F0_0_2418_2500%2F2418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20trouble%20with%20getting%20the%20BBC%20to%20be%20less%20popular%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbbc-report-niche-distinctiveness-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20trouble%20with%20getting%20the%20BBC%20to%20be%20less%20popular%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbbc-report-niche-distinctiveness-david-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6c837b70a32316161533005c42b360f60572255%2F0_0_2418_2500%2F2418.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
But these ideas have not been arrived at in order to improve the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, but specifically to make it do less 
well. The report doesn’t advocate highbrow contentdespite the fact that it 
might not be popular, butbecause of it. If a new BBC1 documentary about 
Turgenev for 7 o’clock on Saturday nights turned out to be a runaway ratings 
winner, then that, too, should be axed and replaced by something else.

The report’s authors advocate greater risk-taking specifically in the hope 
that such risks do not pay off. For them, the only risk is that they do. If the 
distinctiveness they claim is vital were actually to be enjoyed by more people 
than the corporation’s current output, then ITV, Sky and Channel 5 would be 
complaining about that and then the culture secretary would have to commission 
a report calling for more blandness, less risk-taking and more 
audience-despising primetime bilge.

This puts the BBC in an almost impossible position. How can a broadcasting 
institution be expected deliberately to perform less well than it’s capable of? 
To put shows on at a certain time, when it knows more people would watch them 
at another time? To stop making its most popular programmes and not merely take 
risks on new shows that might not be so popular, but on ones that hadbetter 
bloody not be or there’ll be hell to pay in Whitehall? This is like telling a 
boxer to throw a fight and make it look realistic. And what’s to be the 
corporation’s reward – its equivalent of a bookie’s massive bribe? At most, to 
limp through charter renewal with comparatively little further pummelling. For 
now.

BBC white paper may be delayed until after EU referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/04/bbc-white-paper-may-be-delayed-until-after-eu-referendum>
The BBC is under unprecedented political pressure, its morale is low and those 
who work for it and run it are understandably asking the question: what do we 
have to do to assuage our critics, to be allowed to continue? This report’s 
answer can be summed up in one word: fail. Fundamentally that is the 
requirement. “More distinctive” is just a way its authors have found of saying 
“less successful” – but which they think will nevertheless sound vaguely 
positive to media wankers who flatter themselves they’re creative. Idiots with 
clever-sounding jobs can nod along with the uncontroversial-seeming concept of 
distinctiveness and are very unlikely to bother working out what it actually 
means.

It will be a fight to get rid of the BBC. Of the nearly 200,000 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/4-percent-agree-ofcom-regulate-bbc>
 who responded to agovernment consultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/504003/PDF_FINAL_20160224_AM_Clementi_Review.pdf>
 also published last week, 81% said the BBC was serving its audience “well or 
very well”. People still like it, they still consume its services more than any 
other broadcaster’s and so, crucially, they would miss it. This report is in 
favour of reducing its audience — but, according to Mark Oliver, one of the 
study’s authors, “would still leave BBC reach at a level that would be 
sufficient to maintain support for the licence”.

Maybe it would. For now. But this report makes the strategy of those 
commercially or ideologically opposed to the BBC startlingly clear. An overt 
challenge to the corporation’s existence remains politically unfeasible — the 
public would miss it too much. The first step, then, is to turn it into 
something that fewer people would miss – and eventually, over time, to make it 
so distinctive that hardly anyone likes it at all.
 