
A clutch of conductorial tales to update you on this week, as a motley crew of 
maestri take up new jobs, leave old ones, and re-kindle the embers of a 
six-decade-long relationship.

The new jobs first: Czech conductor Jakub Hrůša 
<http://www.br.de/nachrichten/oberfranken/inhalt/jakub-hrusa-neuer-chefdirigent-bamberger-symphoniker-100.html>
 has been announced today as the Bamberg Symphony Orchestra’s new Musical 
Director, taking over from Jonathan Nott, who has been with the Bambergers 
since 2000. The orchestra’s chief executive Marcus Rudolf Axt calls the 
appointment a continuation “of the Jonathan Nott era with consistency yet 
distinctiveness”, but where Nott brought an expertise in new music and a flair 
for original programming, Hrusa’s credentials – apart from the five programmes 
he has conducted with the orchestra so far – are in the freshness and energy he 
brings to the Czech repertoire thathe loves so much 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D4MlPnY2Hg8>, resonating with the Bamberg 
orchestra’s Bohemian sound, with their playing culture that comes from the many 
Czech musicians who founded it after the war. Whether Hrůša will continue the 
contemporary side of Bamberg’s recent programming remains to be seen.

French conductor Alain Altinoglu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/15/don-giovanni-review-royal-opera-house-london>
 – who made his debut at Covent Garden with Mozart’s Don Giovanni earlier this 
year, who’s conducting at Bayreuth this year, and who alongside Krill Petrenko 
could be one of the finest conductors you’ve never heard (althoughTim Ashley 
might disagree! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/15/don-giovanni-review-royal-opera-house-london>
) – is taking over as Music Director ofLa Monnaie in Brussels 
<http://www.lamonnaie.be/en/news/>. It’s the post that Ludovic Morlot left last 
year citing artistic differences. Altinoglu will hope his long-term 
relationship with the players fares better, and that he receives the financial 
and creative support he needs.

The departing conductor is Riccardo Chailly 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EF_pWIBTWw8>, who announced last week he will 
quit his job at the Gewandhaus Orchester in Leipzig four years earlier than 
planned, at the end of 2016. It’s not too difficult to read the runes here: 
Chailly is also responsible for one of the music world’s most politically and 
creatively challenging roles: leading the opera house of La Scala Milan, and a 
few weeks ago he signed a contract to take over theLucerne Festival Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/aug/14/riccardo-chailly-music-director-lucerne-festival-orchestra-abbado>
 every summer. Chailly leaves an enormously significant legacy with the 
Leipzigers in the 10 years he has been there – especially in his visionary 
re-thinkings of the symphonies of Beethoven and Brahms, and his departure 
creates a vacancy that the world’s maestros will be queuing up to fill.

It was one of the strangest artistic own goals of recent times when the 
Concertgebouw Orchestra <http://www.concertgebouworkest.nl/en/> managed to 
alienate their most illustrious living conductor,Bernard Haitink 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w7qOQVo3eLo>, by failing to involve him in 
their 125th anniversary celebrations a couple of seasons ago. Haitink said at 
the time felt “ignored” and “almost humiliated”, and hasn’t conducted the 
orchestra since, the ensemble that he first worked with in 1956 and where, 
leading them for a quarter of a century, he catalysed one of the greatest 
periods in their gilded history. Happily, the Concertgebouw’s apology from its 
management - accepting “that feelings have been hurt unnecessarily, for which 
we would like to extend our sincere apologies” – appears to have rebuilt 
bridges, and Haitink will celebrate 60 years of his relationship with the 
orchestra in the 2016/17 season. Even in the turbulence of today’s orchestral 
merry-go-round, it’s possible for there to be an outbreak of common sense.

 