
It has been a rotten week for the theatre. One of London’s most vital stages 
is in the hands of peoplewho write like this 
<http://blog.shakespearesglobe.com/post/152286922818/statement-regarding-the-globes-future-artistic>
: “We have now concluded that a predominant use of contemporary sound and 
lighting technology will not enable us to optimise further experimentation in 
our unique theatre spaces and the playing conditions which they offer.”

Are these scribes up to judging what makes a play lively? The ousting of Emma 
Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/25/emma-rice-step-down-artistic-director-shakespeares-globe>
 as artistic director by the board of Shakespeare’s Globe is really depressing.
Rice’s productions have sizzled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/08/midsummer-nights-dream-shakespeares-globe-theatre-review-emma-rice>
 and sold out. Her early statements aboutShakespeare being hard to understand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/11/emma-rice-interview-shakespeares-globe-theatre-wonder-season-midsummer-nights-dream>
 were ill-advised, but her interventions have been purposeful, not wild. She 
has cut some text: which director hasn’t? She has tweaked some phrases: I like 
that less but haven’t found it terrible. She has used artificial lighting and 
amplified sound. That has been exciting. It does not have to be exclusive. In 
her remaining 18 months I hope she will have some non-artificially lit 
productions.

One of the dispiriting aspects of this kerfuffle is that it tries to set three 
innovative artists against each other

Crucially, she has honoured the particular connection at the Globe between 
audience and actor. Being at the Globe can be like taking part in a quickly 
turning emotional debate. Audiences spin between comedy and tragedy, caught on 
a phrase and a pause. The attention is extraordinary, and I don’t believe that 
connection is totally dependent on lighting. It has also to do with being in 
the open air, with people standing. With urgent delivery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Femma-rice-shakespeares-globe-ousting-comment-susannah-clapp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2dc57312d40fa5ff146150bb0d1ccc8a2e5c372%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Globe%20isn't%20just%20a%20heritage%20project%20%E2%80%93%20Emma%20Rice%20understood%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Femma-rice-shakespeares-globe-ousting-comment-susannah-clapp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Globe%20isn%27t%20just%20a%20heritage%20project%20%E2%80%93%20Emma%20Rice%20understood%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Femma-rice-shakespeares-globe-ousting-comment-susannah-clapp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2dc57312d40fa5ff146150bb0d1ccc8a2e5c372%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 Emma Rice’s debut production as artistic director at the Globe, A Midsummer 
Night’s Dream, May 2016. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
All three directors of the Globe have celebrated this. One of the dispiriting 
aspects of this kerfuffle is that it tries to set three innovative artists 
against each other. Artificially. Mark Rylance and Dominic Dromgoole are 
tremendous Shakespeareans, but they were never pedantic sticklers for authentic 
practices. Rylance was a visionary first leader. Dromgoole took the adventure 
further, not least with extraordinary new work, such as Che Walker’sThe 
Frontline <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/jul/11/theatre.reviews>. Emma 
Rice brought Bowie into Shakespeare. What is peculiar is that a theatre that 
was routinely reviled as ersatz is now regarded as in dire need of protection 
from innovation. The Globe never was merely a heritage project. To think so is 
to mistake its rubbers, notebooks and fridge magnets for its main project, its 
plays.
 