
If I were going to sue my university for something I didn’t get while I was 
there, I don’t think I’d pick “a first in history”. That’s not what frustrated 
me or felt unfair. Which is where I differ from 38-year-old Oxford graduateFaiz 
Siddiqui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/04/graduate-sues-oxford-university-1m-failure-first-faiz-siddiqui>
. When he bitterly reflected on the ways his student days had been a letdown, 
it was the 2:1 that rankled.

Like Siddiqui, I didn’t get a first. Unlike him, I didn’t get a 2:1 either. 
But, looking back, academic success really wasn’t what I was desperate for. 
Perhaps I didn’t want it enough. Though it really, really felt like I did. As I 
remember, I wanted it urgently all the time. Which is one of the reasons I 
didn’t get a first.

Fairness is like a new God. We invoke His name all the time. Yet, deep down, 
few of us believe He really exists

I was not a romantic success story at that age – that’s what I’m alluding to. 
And, frankly, I blame my education. I managed to arrive at university with the 
impression that betraying the mildest implication of sexual or romantic 
interest was like a mini-rape. Desire was something that should not merely be 
tastefully expressed within the bounds of politeness and respect, but 
completely concealed. I was perfectly content with this rule because letting 
someone know you fancy them is potentially extremely embarrassing, so the 
notion that it was also unutterably rude suited me quite well. In the short 
term. Which was actually much less than a term.

My seduction strategy was to seem cold and aloof and wait for the object of my 
desire to seduce me. It’s a technique that can work – if you’re, for example, a 
very beautiful woman. Unfortunately, that’s one of the many things I am not. 
When you’re landed with my gender and level of attractiveness, the aloofness 
reads as terror, which makes a mockery of all the effort it takes to feign the 
aloofness to conceal the terror.

But it wasn’t a paucity of academic opportunities that made me feel life was 
unfair. In fact I was overwhelmed by the abundance of academic opportunities. 
To paraphraseDouglas Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/15/guardianobituaries.books>: I love 
academic opportunities – I love the squelching noise they make as they get 
squandered.

Graduate sues Oxford University for £1m over his failure to get a first
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/04/graduate-sues-oxford-university-1m-failure-first-faiz-siddiqui>
Faiz Siddiqui takes a different view. He reckons his university’s teaching was 
“appallingly bad” and “boring” and that this stopped him getting a first and so 
“denied him the chance of becoming a high-flying commercial barrister”. He 
trained as a solicitor instead and is now suing his alma mater for £1m in lost 
earnings he says he’s incurred as a result of this academic underachievement. 
It clearly hit him hard – he suffers from depression and insomnia and, the 
court was told, has a “fundamental inability to hold down any professional day 
job for any significant length of time”. I hope, for his sake, he’s not too 
directly involved in conducting his own case.

Siddiqui is a fairly feeble sympathy-magnet – not even strong enough to wipe a 
sympathy-VHS. Then again, he doesn’t want our sympathy, he just wants £1m of an 
educational charity’s money. But he obviously sincerely believes that his 
experience at Oxford was unfair. When he did the Indian imperial history 
course, he says, half the teaching staff was on sabbatical and so everything 
was rushed and overstretched. That’s what stopped him getting a top degree, 
which stopped him getting the career he wanted.

He’s clinging to that episode of bad luck, of unfairness, as the point where 
it all started to go wrong. Through sleepless nights, and jobless days, he’s 
speculated on what might have been if that course had gone differently, if his 
tutor hadn’t been so busy, if he’d got the job he wanted, the career he 
deserved. He’s filled a cave in his mind with the riches that would have been 
his if only everything had been fair.

Fairness is like a new God. We invoke His name all the time. Politicians of 
every stamp publicly dedicate themselves to His service: “We need a fair 
society forhardworking families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/11/benefit-sanctions-hurting-low-paid-vulnerable-people>
”; “Britain must get afair deal from the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/01/bundesbank-president-jens-weidmann-says-uk-should-get-a-fair-brexit-deal>
”. All violence, hatred and misery is explained as being caused by His absence. 
Fairness is what everyone says they want, the governing principle we can all 
agree on. Yet, deep down, very few of us believe that He really exists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ffaiz-siddiqui-oxford-university-painful-truth-fair-crack-of-whip-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63e5a53628f1d1fbd98421202e9fc9b43ad9d6b6%2F0_0_1946_2908%2F1946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20painful%20truth%20about%20a%20fair%20crack%20of%20the%20whip%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ffaiz-siddiqui-oxford-university-painful-truth-fair-crack-of-whip-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20painful%20truth%20about%20a%20fair%20crack%20of%20the%20whip%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ffaiz-siddiqui-oxford-university-painful-truth-fair-crack-of-whip-david-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63e5a53628f1d1fbd98421202e9fc9b43ad9d6b6%2F0_0_1946_2908%2F1946.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Life feels unfair so much of the time, and in ways that politics can seldom 
solve. There are the huge unfairnesses of people who are killed or injured in 
war zones, who are starving, who watch loved ones die of disease or penury. For 
those people, life justifiably feels unfair. But it also feels unfair for the 
millionaire businessman who gets caught in the rain and drops his papers in a 
puddle; for the successful and professionally fulfilled musician who steps in a 
dog shit and a bit gets smeared on the hem of his trousers; for the loving 
newlyweds whose Wi-Fi crashes halfway through watching a film on Netflix.

Evolution has not taught us to count our blessings. We’re hyper-conscious of 
things that are going wrong for us, which may have gone right for other people, 
and haunted by the threat of annoying, unlucky or tragic events that haven’t 
happened yet but might. Meanwhile aspects of our lives that are currently good 
or calm, and previous disasters that have passed and we’ve recovered from, 
don’t get factored in to the same extent. It makes sense: such good fortune is 
banked, you’ve got to focus on what’s coming up. I’m sure it’s an attitude 
that’s given humans the edge in everything from mammoth hunting to mergers and 
acquisitions, but it accentuates the negative and makes everything feel unjust. 
It means the grass is always greener on the other side. It also means no one 
person’s estimation of what’s fair is accurate.

Fairness is the unattainable median. At a deep superstitious level, we all 
believe in an unequal distribution of luck. Things are either unfairly against 
us or unfairly in our favour – and most people’s secret, unworthy aim is to 
either join or remain in the latter group.

A sad fact of human nature is that, when things feel fair, they’re often not. 
When giving out the best parts in sketches to the ensemble cast of a stage 
revue,Robert Webb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/29/peep-shows-david-mitchell-and-robert-webb-reunite-for-new-comedy>
 once said that you can tell when it’s fair because then everyone will feel 
hard done by. But if anyone thinks they’ve been given a fair amount to perform, 
it invariably means they’ve got too much. So bias feels like equity, privilege 
like justice. Meanwhile, in utopia, everyone feels equally dissatisfied.
 