
Thomas Eric Duncan, the first person to die of Ebola in the United States, was 
not the right kind of victim for the west: he wasn’ta pretty young woman 
smiling in sunglasses 
<http://www.drudgereportarchives.com/data/2014/10/14/20141014_140931.htm> as a 
Cavalier King Charles spaniel named Bentley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/15/texas-ebola-nurse-dog> licks her 
cheek; he didn’t have a young,benevolent doctor’s face 
<http://www.nbcdfw.com/news/health/Ebola-Patient-Dr-Kent-Brantly-to-Leave-Hospital-Thursday-272102161.html>
 that looks “appropriate”plastered on newspapers 
<https://twitter.com/sierra_n_salone/status/502795675428347904>; he wasn’t a 
kindly older nurse who told reporters howGod had spared her 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/nationnow/la-na-nn-ebola-survivor-nancy-writebol-recovery-20140903-story.html>
. He wasn’t the kind of person to whom primetime news specials would dedicate 
20 minutes and glorify with quotes from loved ones about his kind spirit or 
ceaseless determination to overcome an unfair affliction.
Thomas Eric Duncan was black, he was poor, and he was African.
A Dallas hospital turned away the uninsured Liberian immigrant 
<http://time.com/3502174/ebola-thomas-eric-duncan-liberian-bodies-treatment/> 
after an initial exam concluded he suffered only from a “low-grade viral disease
 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2014/10/01/353029054/hospital-official-ebola-patients-travel-not-relayed-to-doctors>
”, and the media turned him into the unsympathetic, undeserving face of a 
contagion with which the west is frantically grappling.

He – and the West Africans to whom he is tied by both birth and cause of death 
– have become nothing more than disease vectors responsible for infecting 
innocentwestern health workers 
<http://www.vox.com/2014/10/15/6981157/a-second-health-worker-in-dallas-tests-positive-for-ebola>
, tarnishing pristine nations by importing the blemish of an African scourge. 
And yet, American citizenship alone does not sanitize the blight of blackness; 
Amber Joy Vinson, thesecond healthcare worker diagnosed with the virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/15/ebola-second-texas-nurse-transferred-atlanta>
, is already being met withscrutiny 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/ebola-virus-outbreak/dallas-ebola-nurse-amber-vinson-should-not-have-traveled-cdc-n226551>
 as Nina Pham’s quarantined dog receives anoutpouring of support 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/dallas-officials-vow-to-care-for-ebola-patient-nina-phams-dog/>
.

Ebola now functions in popular discourse as a not-so-subtle, almost completely 
rhetorical stand-in for any combination of “African-ness”, “blackness”, 
“foreign-ness” and “infestation” – anebulous but powerful threat 
<http://www.who.int/csr/disease/ebola/faq-ebola/en/>, poised to ruin the 
perceived purity of western borders and bodies. Dead African bodies are the 
nameless placeholders for (unwarranted 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/10/15/health/ebola-fears/index.html>, racist 
<http://jezebel.com/from-miasma-to-ebola-the-history-of-racist-moral-panic-1645711030>
) “panic 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/10/15/parents-ebola-panic-is-taking-over-my-clinic.html>
”, a conversation topic too heavy for the dinner table yet light enough for 
supermarket aisles.

To date, fewer than 20 cases of Ebola have been treated outside West Africa 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/07/31/world/africa/ebola-virus-outbreak-qa.html#outside-africa>
 in the current outbreak. Meanwhile, in West Africa itself – mostly in Sierra 
Leone, Guinea, Liberia, and Nigeria – the death toll hasrisen to nearly 4,500 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-29615452>. Girls and women in the region, 
tasked with thegendered social responsibility of caring for sick family members 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/2014/08/14/3e08d0c8-2312-11e4-8593-da634b334390_story.html>
, are dying at a rate that eclipses their male counterparts. Liberia is
perilously under-resourced 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mojo/2014/10/liberia-ebola-going-need-lot-more-bodybags>
 to deal with the outbreak, and the United States has perhaps ominously 
committed onlymilitary personnel 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/09/us-military-liberia-fight-ebola> 
there. “If this epidemic of Ebola rages out of control in West Africa,”Barack 
Obama said on Wednesday evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/15/obama-ebola-international-threat-european-leaders>
, “it will spread in an age of frequent travel and the kind of constant 
interactions that people have across borders.”

But we will still write off the “Africa patient” 
<https://twitter.com/AP/status/519192473529516032> who infected a hospital in 
Spain and not bother with silly things like geographic specificity. We will 
breathe a sigh of relief when we remember that theSpanish priest infected in 
Liberia 
<http://online.wsj.com/articles/missionary-doctor-infected-with-ebola-dies-in-madrid-1407835487>
 was afforded access to anexperimental drug 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/08/14/health/ebola-vaccine-drugs-faq/> though West 
Africans were not; after he died, we wondered aloud whether Africans even 
deserve Christianity.

We will tweet <https://twitter.com/dabeard/status/517790857869537280> about 
how much more terrifying Ebola is thanblack-eyed ghost children 
<https://twitter.com/janinegibson/status/519957204573904897>. We will make sure 
to specify thatalcohol, not Ebola 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/lifestyles/health/chi-ebola-cases-20141010-story.html>
, killed a British man in Macedonia. We will suggest that Ebola is so common 
among West Africans – even the ones who make it to New York City – that it 
might as well bepart of the weather forecast 
<http://blogs.villagevoice.com/runninscared/2014/10/nigerian_independence_day_parade_2014_cloudy_with_a_chance_of_ebola.php>
. We will not mention thatNigeria hasn’t had a live case in six weeks 
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/4769ca32-52c4-11e4-a236-00144feab7de.html#axzz3GE6x5kE6>
.

We will try to hide our fear behind jokes with dying black bodies as their 
punchlines. We will “self-quarantine 
<https://twitter.com/DRUDGE/status/522350000106635264>”. We will dedicate 
Reddit threads 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/Jokes/comments/2ig1pw/good_jokes_about_ebola_will_most_likely_go_viral/>
 andTwitter accounts <https://twitter.com/EbolaJokesDaily> to our Ebola 
“jokes”. We will giggle at ourEbola memes 
<http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/events/2014-ebola-outbreak>. We will suggest 
that perhaps Ebola is really just theIsis of biological agents 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/what-is-ebola>.

And when this is all over, we will move on and find a new reason to weaponize 
black suffering to account for our unshakeable fear. There will always be a new 
emergency, a new threat, a new reason thatblack bodies cannot be allowed to 
infiltrate the borders 
<http://www.blackcommentator.com/54/54_guest_immigrants_pf.html> of nations 
that our blood and sweat have built. Black death is remarkable only to the 
extent that its perpetrator could also affect citizens more deserving of 
sympathy, of news coverage and of life.

We are comfortable with viruses that ravage entire communities, so long as 
those communities do not look like the ones we believe are deserving of health 
<http://mic.com/articles/100618/one-powerful-illustration-shows-exactly-what-s-wrong-with-media-coverage-of-ebola>
. Black bodies exist only on the receiving end of apocalyptic fanfare like 
airport screenings designed to weed out Ebola carriers (withdubious success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/14/ebola-screenings-heathrow-airport-mixed-response>
) orexcessive, deadly force from police 
<http://www.propublica.org/article/deadly-force-in-black-and-white> that claim 
to protect and serve all people. Africa exists only instark contrast 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/08/25/othering-ebola-and-the-history-and-politics-of-pointing-at-immigrants-as-potential-disease-vectors/>
 to the civilized west, where disease and disorder must be contained to 
preserve health and hierarchy.

To be black – African or otherwise – is to be born into a world that 
anticipates your death with bated breath (orbotched execution 
<http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/26797-the-death-penalty-missouri-and-the-continued-devaluing-of-black-life>
 cocktail, orvigilante bullet 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/10/to-raise-love-and-lose-a-black-child/381189/>
, orsyphilis needle <http://www.cdc.gov/tuskegee/timeline.htm>). It is to 
occupy a position ofsocial death 
<http://www.yorku.ca/intent/issue5/articles/jaredsexton.php>, to exist in a 
liminal space that guarantees neither rights nor recognition under the law. It 
is to be a perpetual contaminant in the body of the western world.
 