
The much-anticipated PlayStation 4 title, The Last Guardian, has been delayed 
again. Ina statement on the console’s official blog site 
<http://blog.us.playstation.com/2016/09/12/an-update-on-the-last-guardian/>, 
the president of Sony Computer Entertainment Worldwide Studios, Shuhei Yoshida, 
gave the new date of 6 December. The date had previously been given as 25 
October.

The five-week postponement is the latest in a troubled development cycle that 
began almost a decade ago. Originally announced in 2009, The Last Guardian was 
to be a PlayStation 3 follow-up to the designer Fumito Ueda’s critically 
acclaimed PS2 titles Ico and Shadow of the Colossus. A winter 2011 release was 
first announced, thencancelled 
<http://blog.us.playstation.com/2011/04/19/update-on-the-last-guardian-and-icoshadow-of-the-colossus-collection/>
 owing to “technical difficulties”. In 2013 Ueda left Sony and development 
seemed to go into limbo until Sony announced the PS4 version at the E3 2015 
event – to a rapturous reception. Ueda would now be developing the game with 
his new studio in conjunction with Sony Japan.

However, a playable demo of the game shown at this year’s E3 revealed 
significant camera and graphical issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/21/the-last-guardian-hands-on-playstation-ps4-fumito-ueda-game>
.

In his blog post Yoshida-san wrote: “Fumito Ueda, genDESIGN and JAPAN Studio 
have a wonderful vision for The Last Guardian’s touching, emotional journey of 
friendship and trust, and we want to deliver the most polished experience 
possible for our fans who have supported us for so long. A delay is a difficult 
decision, particularly with this game, but we have encountered more bugs than 
anticipated while in the final stages of development.

“To ensure that The Last Guardian delivers on the experience that the game’s 
creators have envisioned, we need to take the extra time to work on those 
issues.”

The Last Guardian features a young boy attempting to escape from a deserted 
mountain city with the help of a giant flying beast named Trico. The action 
adventure has drawn praise for its visual design and atmosphere, but there have 
been consistent worries over the capacity of the studio to deliver the title 
with the level of polish demanded in the Ps4 era.
 