
This year, a Fifa football tournament took place that included no superstar 
players or teams from the global sport; in fact, there was no pitch and no ball.

Despite these disadvantages, live coverage of the final was shown in more than 
100 countries to an audience of about 5 million and generated 40m comments on 
Facebook and Twitter. That’s how sporting success is measured nowadays.

The event was the Fifa Interactive World Cup, an annual e-sports competition, 
featuring the world’s best gamers, competing in the multimillion-selling Fifa 
computer game series. For a growing number of fans, these teen and 20-something 
cyber athletes are a new kind of star in international football, securing their 
own lucrative sponsorship deals and attracting huge numbers of viewers to their 
official channels on YouTube and Twitch, a live streaming service.

More than a dozen major clubs around the world, including West Ham and 
Manchester City, have now employed Fifa players to represent them in e-sports 
competitions and this blurring of the lines between the real and virtual sports 
is something publisher Electronic Arts is very keen to foster.

Since its inception in 1993, the Fifa series has sought to replicate every 
facet of the professional game, forging licensing deals with international 
sides and clubs all over the world to use their player names and stadiums.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fhow-they-definitely-didnt-make-fifa-17-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20they%20definitely%20didn't%20make%20Fifa%2017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fhow-they-definitely-didnt-make-fifa-17-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20they%20definitely%20didn%27t%20make%20Fifa%2017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fhow-they-definitely-didnt-make-fifa-17-video&media=>
How they definitely didn’t make Fifa 17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/28/how-they-definitely-didnt-make-fifa-17-video>
Fifa 17, which comes out later this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/fifa-17-new-engine-new-story-mode-and-five-more-key-additions>
, features more than 650 sides from 30 leagues, and hundreds of key players 
have been digitally scanned in HD detail to ensure accurate facial likenesses. 
It is a process that has led to the game’s dominance of the sports sim genre, 
shifting more than 7 million copies a year. But it is not always smooth.

This week, Iceland’s football association, KSI, complained about the small sum 
of $15,000 (£11,500) it was offered to feature the country’s national side in 
the latest Fifa title. “They are the ones buying these rights and they almost 
want it for free,” KSI president Geir Þorsteinssontold the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/37424733>. “The performance at the Euros 
show that we are quite a good team and many would like to play with our team.”

Electronic Arts will not comment on individual deals, but David Rutter, vice 
president and executive producer of the Fifa series, concedes that these 
negotiations are a vital – and challenging – element of the development 
process. “We have a dedicated team who manage licences with clubs, leagues, and 
partners,” he said. “It is sometime straightforward. It is sometimes complex.”

Things seem to have gone much more smoothly with the English Premier League. 
In 2010, Electronic Arts inked a deal to become the organisation’s technology 
partner, with EA Sports branding appearing on all televised matches and EA 
sponsorship of the league’s player performance index, which gathers stats on 
all Premier matches. In August, EA Sportsbecame the lead partner of the Premier 
League <https://www.premierleague.com/news/67814>, giving it even greater 
access to clubs and players.

But in a troubled sector, where corruption scandals and rising ticket prices 
are alienating fans, the integration between the Fifa franchise and the real 
sport of football is mutually beneficial. EA gets the official credentials, but 
Fifa gets to connect with a young demographic that is moving away from viewing 
mainstream televised sports or attending matches and toward watching YouTubers 
and e-sports.

According to market analyst Super Data, the global e-sports market will be 
worth $1bn in 2017, the revenue coming from advertising, ticket sales and 
merchandise, with a global online audience of more than 200 million.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fthe-beautiful-game-20-how-fifa-17-taught-real-football-a-lesson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57e557515b18bbab806c78c5ce14962a39f9d772%2F0_322_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20beautiful%20game%202.0%3A%20how%20Fifa%2017%20taught%20real%20football%20a%20lesson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fthe-beautiful-game-20-how-fifa-17-taught-real-football-a-lesson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20beautiful%20game%202.0%3A%20how%20Fifa%2017%20taught%20real%20football%20a%20lesson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fthe-beautiful-game-20-how-fifa-17-taught-real-football-a-lesson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57e557515b18bbab806c78c5ce14962a39f9d772%2F0_322_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Iceland’s performance at Euro 2016 led to a disagreement over the fee paid to 
the country’s football association for inclusion in this year’s title/ 
Photograph: Bertrand Langlois/AFP/Getty Images 
“If you look into certain sports in the US – like baseball where the average 
viewer is 53 [years old] or to niche sports like Nascar and wrestling – 
e-sports can compete,” said Manny Anekal, founder of e-sports media company 
Versus Sports. “In fact, just this past week, the Turner Sports eLeague 
actually drew more viewers in both ‘total’ and ‘18-34 [years old] demographics 
than the televised[Chelsea v Liverpool Premier League match] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. That was pretty impressive to me.”

Through the Fifa titles, then, the sport has a chance to reconnect with a 
young viewer base and thereby maintain its lucrative advertising deals with 
youth brands such as Coke and Adidas. “A lot of kids are getting priced out of 
going to matches, especially with the English Premier League,”says David 
Bytheway, a pro Fifa player who now represents 
German Bundesliga side Wolfsburg in Fifa tournaments.

“One of Wolfsburg’s main strategies in getting involved with Fifa is to 
connect with their fans in the interactive world. When children get home from 
school, switching on the TV isn’t the first thing they’re doing anymore – 
they’re going onto YouTube watching celebrity gamers. Football clubs need to 
reach these fans.”

Until this year, Fifa was a minor player in an e-sports world dominated by 
titles such as League of Legends and Call of Duty. In December 2015, however, 
EA announced the EA Competitive Gaming Division, dedicated to organising 
official worldwide tournaments with prize pools over more than $1m. It is this 
formalisation that has attracted real-world clubs to the sector.

“E-sports is a market worth of $700m a year, there’s real potential there,” 
says Bytheway. “It’s a no-brainer for clubs to get involved. There are whole 
new groups of fans that teams can be attracting.

Electronic Arts’ Rutter adds: “There was some research in the US a little 
while ago that told us 50% of Fifa fans in the States become interested in 
football after they play the video game.

“I don’t think I will ever get used to watching the game become increasingly 
embedded in the sport and culture, like seeing it on TV, or hearing and meeting 
all of the musicians that play the game, seeing it trend worldwide on Twitter, 
or hearing from NBA and NFL athletes who want to get their copy early.”

Most of all, Electronic Arts has been smart about hijacking the football 
conversations in playgrounds around the country. Since 2008, the game has 
included an Ultimate Team mode, which operates like a digital version of the 
old Panini football sticker album – fans buy randomised ‘packets’ of players 
via an online store and use these cards to build their own fantasy football 
squads for use within the game. Comparing decks with friends and improving 
their teams is now a key part of the game; earlier this year, EA CFO Blake 
Jorgensen revealed to investors that Ultimate Team alone was generating around 
$650m a year for the company.

But it is also the main focus for Fifa YouTubers who make videos about their 
best cards and teams. One of those YouTubers, KSI,has 15m subscribers 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCVtFOytbRpEvzLjvqGG5gxQ> and many of his 
videos follow him as he opens new digital packs. Last year, he was in the top 
five YouTube highest earners making $4.5m from advertising and sponsorship on 
his channel.

Once again, through Ultimate Team-obsessed YouTube stars, Fifa is creating 
synergies between different fanbases and bringing football to new audiences. 
“Someone doesn’t have to be a massive football fan to be into Fifa,” says 
YouTuber Jack54HD, who has more than half a million subscribers. “They may see 
their favourite YouTuber making videos about the game and get an interest from 
there. Fifa has opened football up to a whole new market.”

For Generation Z, a demographic brought up on the internet, social media and 
online channels, football the sport has just become another part of their 
online digital consumption. Jack54HD is certain that if you ask certain 
teenagers who their football heroes are, they are now just as likely to name a 
Fifa YouTuber as they are an actual athlete.

“Take these big YouTubers like The Sideman, Spencer FC,” he says. “They’re 
running these charity matches at massive football stadiums and they’re getting 
20,000-30,000 fans coming along, purely to see them playing. Your readers might 
not have heard of them, but for the younger generation, these YouTubers aren’t 
just celebrities – they’re becoming role models.”
 