
No one saw it coming. But on a Sunday, word came that the US Army Corps of 
Engineers waswithdrawing permission to build the Dakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
 under the Missouri river, just above the Standing Rock Sioux reservation.

What do you do with a victory? Many on social media cautioned that this was 
not the Santa-is-real everything-is-OK-forever victory and we should not 
celebrate. If we waited for that kind of victory, we’d never celebrate. But the 
people most involved seemed to realize that this is not necessarily the end of 
the road, but a really great milestone.

Standing Rock activists stay in place, fearing pipeline victory was a 'trick'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/dakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-protest-trump>
It is not a final victory, and if pipeline investor Donald Trump is 
inaugurated according to plan on 20 January, he’ll surely do his best to make 
sure that this and every other pipeline is built. But it might be a really big 
victory, and mid-January might be too late to salvage some of what the frenzied 
pipeline builders were hoping for as they raced toward their deadlines.

The Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis notes in a study 
issued last month: “The broader economic context for the project has changed 
radically since Energy Transfer Partners first proposed it, in 2014. Global oil 
prices began to collapse just a few months after shippers committed to using 
DAPL, and market forecasters do not expect prices to regain 2014 levels for at 
least a decade. As a result, production in the Bakken Shale oil field has 
fallen for nearly two consecutive years…” The profit in the pipeline was to 
come from shippers who were locked into 2014 prices if the project was 
completed by 1 January.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsaudi-artist-shows-solidarity-with-the-standing-rock-protesters-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saudi%20artist%3A%20Standing%20Rock%20protesters%20are%20warning%20us%20to%20save%20what%20we%20can%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsaudi-artist-shows-solidarity-with-the-standing-rock-protesters-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saudi%20artist%3A%20Standing%20Rock%20protesters%20are%20warning%20us%20to%20save%20what%20we%20can%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsaudi-artist-shows-solidarity-with-the-standing-rock-protesters-video&media=>
Saudi artist: Standing Rock protesters are warning us to save what we can 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2016/dec/06/saudi-artist-shows-solidarity-with-the-standing-rock-protesters-video>
Which this gift from the US Army Corps makes quite unlikely. The report 
concludes: “If production continues to fall, DAPL could well become a stranded 
asset – one that was rushed to completion largely to protect favorable contract 
terms negotiated in 2014.” That’s really nice news (if you’re not an investor).

There’s a lot to learn from the beautiful struggle at Standing Rock, though 
everyone will draw their own conclusions. Mine include the importance of 
knowing that we don’t know what will happen next and have to live on 
principles, hunches and lessons from history. False omniscience is a habit that 
makes people as politically destructive as they are personally annoying, and 
plenty of people made pronouncements about what was going to happen and what 
would never happen at Standing Rock that turned out to be wrong.

Another is standing up for what you believe in, even when victory seems remote 
to impossible. Sunday was the pipeline victory. Monday was the 61st anniversary 
of the beginning of the Montgomery bus boycott. What did those black Americans 
living under Jim Crow hope for? Surely more than integrating the public transit 
system. They could hardly have expected that they would help launch a movement 
that not only changed the nation and led to national legislation, but offered a 
toolbox of nonviolent strategies and visions to the world, used in South Africa 
and Egypt, in Czechoslovakia and the Philippines. They bet that the future 
would be different than the past and did everything to make it so. This is a 
moment when thecivil rights movement’s victories seem to be in jeopardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/12/voting-rights-act-barack-obama-congress>
 – but that is all the more reason to remember that they were victories, and 
they were achieved in blood and pain and dedication when victory was far from 
sight.

And that’s another thing that matters. Consequences are often indirect. The 
movement at Standing Rock may yet stop a pipeline. Whether it does or not, it 
has brought together perhaps the greatest single gathering of native North 
Americans (from Canada as well as the United States) ever, and that has been a 
profound and moving watershed for the affirmation of cultural identities and 
political rights. It has demonstrated yet again that the environmental movement 
and human rights campaigns are often inseparable, reminded us that worldwide, 
indigenous people are in the forefront of the climate movement. Many things we 
cannot foresee may come of this gathering and its vision, tactics and power.

In this moment of rightwing and white supremacist triumphalism, we are hearing 
a lot about hate crimes: beatings, insults, swastikas, threats and the rest. 
But also rising into view is another America: the people who stand up for 
racial justice, for the vulnerable, for women and LGBT people, for science, for 
nature and for democracy. Standing Rock prefigured and modeled those 
possibilities and was radiant with this beauty.

I went to Standing Rock in early September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/12/north-dakota-standing-rock-protests-civil-rights>
, when the weather was delightful and the landscape green. The people who 
persevered into this brutal winter were heroic, enduring harsh conditions and 
risking bodily safety for the wellbeing of the river, the tribal rights and 
their principles.

Standing Rock reminds us, finally, that we are very powerful when we come 
together to defend our ideals, sometimes only in indirect ways – modeling the 
possibilities, providing hope and moral reinforcement for what comes later or 
elsewhere. Sometimes in direct ways, when we remake history. Five centuries 
into the dispossession and dehumanization of native North Americans, this 
moment when 2,000 veterans of the US military came to stand with them, when 
they won something big, when the world’s eyes were turned to one of those 
places where crimes and depredations are too often invisible: it mattered. And 
on Sunday the people there and those protesting in banks, writing letters, 
sending donations, organizing marches around the country won something worth 
celebrating. We are facing a lot of trouble on all fronts. Standing Rock 
reminds us to come together and stand up to it.
 