
How can a landlord expect to receive rent if the sanction for refusing to pay 
it isn’t eviction?

A small good thing happened last week, but in a context of such stupidity and 
unfairness that it only brought home to me more strongly all that stupidity and 
unfairness, so I’d almost rather it hadn’t happened at all. The good thing was 
that the train operator “Great Western Railway”, which is owned by FirstGroup 
plc, wasbanned by the Advertising Standards Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/30/train-operators-adverts-banned-owned-by-public-gwr-great-western-railway>
 from putting up any more posters implying it’s publicly owned. Specifically, 
posters that read: “The railway belongs to the region it serves”.

There’s a tiny bit of justice in that decision, but so tiny it insults the 
very concept. Only a homeopath could believe that such a microscopic quantity 
of justice could have any beneficial effect. It’s like hearing that, though a 
serial killer will walk free, the judge has ruled, after a desperate appeal by 
the prosecution, that he will no longer be given free biscuits at the public 
expense. Hooray! No more biscuits for the Kensington Ripper! Maybe he’ll leave 
fewer crumbs around his next eviscerated victim!

You may be wondering why I’m getting so worked up about this that, in bad 
temper, I’ve allowed the imagery of violent mutilation to invade my discussion 
of transport infrastructure. You may be wondering it in exactly those words. If 
you wonder in words. Perhaps thoughts come to you as shapes or colours – with 
me, it’s like a typescript in 12-point Courier. Serves me right for not doing 
art GCSE.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Ffirstgroup-great-western-railway-advertising-standards-poster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b1c5ebf237984746d239d9181c72e8952d4fc1e%2F0_0_3312_1609%2F3312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20train%20company%20that%20has%20ideas%20above%20its%20station%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Ffirstgroup-great-western-railway-advertising-standards-poster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20train%20company%20that%20has%20ideas%20above%20its%20station%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Ffirstgroup-great-western-railway-advertising-standards-poster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b1c5ebf237984746d239d9181c72e8952d4fc1e%2F0_0_3312_1609%2F3312.jpg>
 The offending poster from Great Western Railway. Photograph: ASA/PA 
The root cause of my anger is that the posters’ slogan is factually correct. 
The railway, on whichFirstGroup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/firstgroup> currently operates services 
under the name “Great Western Railway”, does indeed belong to the region it 
serves, if you take “the region” to mean Britain. All of our national railways 
– the tracks, bridges, cuttings and tunnels – are owned by Network Rail, which 
is owned by the government.

In modern times, private investment hasn’t really taken off in the 
track-maintaining part of the railway business. Investors prefer to limit their 
liabilities to the trains, ticket machines and refreshment carts – the bits for 
which passengers pay money – and leave the bits that cost money to be paid for 
by the state. It’s an incredibly astute move on the investors’ part and is 
doubtless further proof to the likes of George Osborne of the genius of the 
private sector when compared with the doltish bridge-and-tunnel-maintaining 
public one, which just burns money on boring infrastructure (in the case of 
tunnels), but lacks the wit even to extort £3 per extremely unpleasant 
croissant from the thousands regularly held temporarily but hungrily captive 
thanks to the failure of its own signals.

Companies like FirstGroup never take direct responsibility for anything as 
headachy as maintaining hundreds of miles of undulating track. They’re just 
tenants – they rent use of the lines from the government, from us. So we’re not 
just FirstGroup’s customers – it’s also ours. And it’s been quite demanding 
over the years.

In 2011 it announced it was pulling out of its 10-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/mar/13/firstgroup-may-abandon-first-great-western-franchise>
 three years early – a presciently negotiated “break-clause” allowed this. 
Unfortunately for us, of the £1.13bn of rent it was contracted to pay over the 
decade, £826m was due over the last three years, the three years the company 
adroitly opted out of.

This left the landlord, which is us, which is the government, in an awkward 
position. Does it look for a new tenant who might pay the £826m, or something 
approaching it, instead? That’s what it ought to do. Otherwise, what force does 
any future government franchise contract have? How can a landlord expect to 
receive rent if the sanction for refusing to pay it isn’t eviction?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Ffirstgroup-great-western-railway-advertising-standards-poster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd08cd7552a1c2fbbd49e40461b3ba0cfb812e27%2F0_0_2418_3916%2F2418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20train%20company%20that%20has%20ideas%20above%20its%20station%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Ffirstgroup-great-western-railway-advertising-standards-poster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20train%20company%20that%20has%20ideas%20above%20its%20station%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Ffirstgroup-great-western-railway-advertising-standards-poster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd08cd7552a1c2fbbd49e40461b3ba0cfb812e27%2F0_0_2418_3916%2F2418.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. Illustration: David Foldvari 
Unfortunately, the government’s most recent attempt to negotiate a major new 
rail franchise is universally known as the “west coast mainline fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2013/nov/13/west-coast-mainline-how-to-avoid-fiasco>
”. The Department for Transport, shaken by cuts and new rules, totally screwed 
it up, and its decision was effectively reversed after a legal challenge by the 
incumbent franchisee.

So, rather than get into all that again, the government basically told 
FirstGroup it could stay put. After all, its stuff was everywhere – an eviction 
would have been an admin nightmare. Or maybe the minister had just seen an 
upsetting news report about homelessness. Instead of the £826m under the 
original contract, the company agreed to pay£32.5m for a 23-month extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/03/first-group-great-western-franchise-32m-pounds>
, a sum which economists have described as “massively less”.

I’ve been miserably aware for years that this sort of crap went on. The 
contrast between extortionate and unreliable trains and the jaunty corporate 
slogans with which private operators daub their dirty carriages and demoralised 
staff has always made me resentful. The discovery that what the private sector 
lacks in willingness to maintain a rail network it makes up for in the ferocity 
of its bargaining with exhausted and under-resourced civil servants is not a 
very surprising one.

But the rebranding <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-34292550> of 
FirstGroup’s rail services (last autumn, after it had just been granted a 
further four-year franchise extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/23/first-group-great-western-trains-four-more-years>
) as “Great Western Railway” added insult to ongoing and repetitive injury. For 
me, that really was the shit the burglars did in your bed. The adoption of the 
name of Isambard Kingdom Brunel’s famous company, which actually built the 
railway, by one which merely profits from it is an act of breathtaking cheek. 
It’s up there with Mussolini appropriating the trappings of the Roman Empire.

The Advertising Standards Authority has said nothing about that, merely that 
the firm mustn’t imply public ownership. The company has escaped official 
censure for another advert, which described Brunel as “our illustrious 
founder”. He is no such thing. The company Brunel founded was bought in 1948 by 
the British state, a purchaser that continues to own and maintain the railway 
he designed.

Meanwhile the owner of this reproduction GWR grew out of the merger of some 
post-privatisation bus companies in the late 80s. FirstGroup plc doesn’t build 
things – that’s risky and expensive, as Brunel discovered on many occasions. 
Its mode of business is to profit from state enterprises thrust into private 
hands by Tories for ideological reasons.

Were it not for the availability of public assets at a bargain price, and 
state subsidies when returns disappoint – and if it actually had to build a 
railway in order to operate one – FirstGroup might find it tricky to give 
shareholder value. But, like a sewer rat, it’s perfectly evolved for the 
conditions in which it exists. Which is fine, I suppose. Right up until the rat 
tries to claim he designed the sewer himself, because his main aim in life has 
always been cleanliness.
 