 The centre cannot hold, and that's the good news in the United States these 
days. Quietly, doggedly, cities, regions, counties and states have refused to 
march to the Bush administration's drum when it comes to climate change, the 
environment and the war. Some of the recent changes are so sweeping that they 
will probably drag the nation along with them - notably efforts by Vermont, 
Massachusetts and California to set higher vehicle emissions standards and 
generally treat climate change as an environmental problem that can be 
addressed by regulation. The Bush administration has notoriously dragged its 
feet on doing anything about climate change, and it will now be dragged along 
by the states, themselves prodded forward by citizens.
It wasn't supposed to work that way. States' rights was a rallying cry for 
conservatives for much of the 20th century, first in allowing segregation and 
racial discrimination across the south and then in allowing environmental 
destruction around the west. Rightwingers have usually believed in a weak 
federal government - except when they run it; and that weakness, or rather the 
strength of the local, has been one of the bright spots during the seven bleak 
years of life under Bush.

The changes operate on all scales. Across the country, quite a lot of cities 
and towns have passed measures condemning the Iraq war or calling for the 
troops to be brought home. A handful of California counties have banned GM 
agriculture, and others have tried but been defeated by industry money - but 
may try again. North Dakota farmers created so powerful a pact against the use 
of Monsanto's GM wheat that the corporation eventually gave up on 
commercialising the invention worldwide.

My own city, San Francisco, has made plans to issue identity cards to 
undocumented immigrants, attempted to legalise same-sex marriage a few years 
back, and as of November 20 2007 banned plastic grocery bags in supermarkets 
and pharmacies as a step towards banning them altogether. San Francisco, which 
is as much a peninsular republic unto itself as an irritation on the left edge 
of the superpower, has also gone for solar energy in a big way, kerbside 
compost pick-up as part of a successful programme to radically reduce landfill, 
and various other green programmes (though affluence itself is environmentally 
devastating, and we also have lots of big cars and air traffic). We are also 
trying out a universal healthcare plan.

Since a 2005 national mayors' conference, more than 500 mayors from around the 
country have vowed to make their cities comply with or exceed the Kyoto 
accords, even while the federal government stalls. Any bleak picture you may 
have of the American hinterland as a vast sprawl of big-box stores, soulless 
suburbs and mindless consumption isn't wrong, but is incomplete. Eating 
locally, starting community gardens in the inner city, supporting and spreading 
farmer's markets, growing organically, promoting bicycle use, creating denser, 
more alternative, transport-friendly housing, increasing solar and wind 
technology, and building greener are all proliferating parts of the 
contemporary landscape too. Portions of New Orleans, for example, are being 
rebuilt to be energy efficient, use alternative energy and generally be green. 
Detroit is full of community gardens and experiments with local economies. As 
Los Angeles becomes a more and more Latino city, it develops more 
neighbourhoods of small businesses and lively pedestrian life.

From abroad, viewers mostly see this country as its federal government, the 
government that brought on a belligerent foreign policy while refusing to 
address the crises of climate change. It's more than fair to say that the 
federal government could not behave this way without implicit consent from the 
majority of the governed. And from afar, it's hard to see how tacit that 
consent is, or how much dissent is part of the landscape - it's a big part, 
especially on climate change.

Alexis de Tocqueville noted about 160 years ago that Americans had a talent 
for congregating in groups and organisations, so there's nothing new about the 
way that existing environmental groups and new grassroots organisations have 
taken up that issue. But it is exciting. Last year in Vermont the environmental 
writer Bill McKibben and a few college students started a walk across the 
state, something that grew into a thousand-person march to demand positive 
action on climate change. This push went for federal legislation to stipulate a 
reduction of 80% in climate-change gases by 2020, a far more radical standard 
than most have yet broached. A weaker federal bill is under consideration, and, 
pushed by his constituents, the Vermont senator, Bernie Sanders, continues to 
work towards far tougher regulations. However, the big changes may be made by 
an end run around the federales.

Since 2002, California has been battling the federal government for the right 
to set emissions standards for vehicles within the state. Since more than 10% 
of the nation's population lives in California, any such regulation could 
change the face of the domestic auto industry, and so both car-makers and the 
White House have tried to defeat the measures. Happily, they have lost.

One step came when Massachusetts sued to get the Environmental Protection 
Agency to stop saying that it didn't have the power to regulate greenhouse gas 
emissions; the state won in the supreme court in the autumn of 2006. Another 
landmark came in November when a federal circuit court for the west struck down 
national vehicle mileage standards that increase efficiency by one mile per 
gallon, which California's attorney general called "pathetic". Soon afterwards, 
the attorney general joined 16 states in demanding that Congress prevent the 
Bush administration from blocking its 2002 motor vehicle greenhouse-gas 
emissions law. Change for the better largely comes from the bottom up, and in a 
decentralised country it doesn't always have to reach the top to matter. These 
changes that are afoot across the US suggest that the federal government may 
become increasingly irrelevant on many issues.

The centre cannot hold, Yeats wrote; his next line is "Mere anarchy is loosed 
upon the world". Anarchism in the contemporary sense of decentralised direct 
democracy is on the loose, and that's the rest of the good news. Globally, as 
the nation-state becomes increasingly less meaningful - a provider of positive 
goods and more and more just an army and some domestic enforcement - people are 
withdrawing to shape and support more localised forms of organisation and 
power. To the extent that it's part of that civilised and localising world, the 
same is true of the US.

Â· Rebecca Solnit is the author of Hope in the Dark: The Untold History of 
People Powercomment@theguardian.com <mailto:comment@theguardian.com>
 