
This is by no means a definitive list of the worst misses in Europe this 
season, merely some of our favourites. Please post your suggestions below and 
we will run a poll to determine who will be voted as your No1 miss from a final 
shortlist next Wednesday.

Alexander Soderlund (HAUGESUND v Viking) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iwR4XSZNIOs>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiwR4XSZNIOs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiwR4XSZNIOs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiwR4XSZNIOs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Haugesund charge forward and the ball lands at Norway international striker 
Alexander Soderlund's feet. Soderlund blasts the ball over the bar but the most 
charming part of the clip comes from the commentary: a quick, prescient cry of 
"YouTube hit" emerging amid the quick-fire Norwegian.

Edgar Prib (GREUTHER FURTH v Eintracht Frankfurt) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yyf7RPSrZ1k>

Do all the hard work, and then …

Lorenzo Insigne (PESCARA v Gubbio) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PabhzGFNT_4>

Insigne scored three in four during his time with Italy Under-21s. We're 
guessing he was in better form than in this clip. To miss an open goal from 
eight yards out is bad enough but this one is pretty much on the goalline.

Roman Shirokov (ZENIT ST PETERSBURG v CSKA Moscow) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gU08bKNFtYI>

Two positives from Shirokov here. First, he has to twist slightly to get his 
abysmal header and second, he doesn't crumple to the pitch but has another go 
once the ball rebounds off the post. And doesn't score that time either.

Ramon Lopez (VOLYN v Zarya) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bj7tJ6KwGQE>

Maybe Lopez foresaw the doom to come because he appears to hop out of the way 
of his "shot" before it plops apologetically over the bar.

Daniel Sikorski (POLONIA WARSAW v GKS Belchatow) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iBbO_iHVFFI>

Sikorski is actually in a fairly tough position, and the goal isn't completely 
unguarded, but we like this one because it's doesn't hit the post, clear the 
crossbar or go agonisingly wide. Instead it shoots off for a throw in.

Mirnes Sisic (OFI CRETE v Panseriakos) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GkavA2l8c44>

Perfect passing in the build-up. Imperfect finish.

Robbie Findley (NOTTINGHAM FOREST v Leicester City) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LzDTih9xteQ>

Shanking the ball over an open goal from two yards out is never a good thing, 
especially when it's away at local rivals with an FA Cup replay finely poised.

Luiz Adriano (SHAKHTAR DONETSK v Metalurg) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4HU9TYhQjqw>

Put. Your. Foot. Through. It!

Lens Annab (WESTERLO v TPS Turku) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LHbeu9VBg2E>

Europa League gold, especially when unselfishness is rewarded in such farcical 
fashion.

And a bonus entry …

Pixote (JOINVILLE v Ibirama) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OzvIxUdtyMU>

OK, it's futsal rather than football but this still has to make the shortlist. 
Not only is it an inch or so from the line, Pixote doesn't even touch the ball 
instead producing the grandaddy of all air-shots.
 