
RED YAWN

So it turned out that there were more entertaining ways to spend a Monday 
evening – that black stuff that seems to be creeping into the grouting round 
the bathroom taps isn’t going to clean itself and who knows when you’ll next 
have chance to alphabetise your tinned goods. The titanic clash at Anfield wasa 
joyless, goalless affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, failing to disappoint only those for whom anticipation is merely the 
amuse-bouche of misery. And we all know who’s to blame.

Not Jürgen Klopp, of course, despite his Liverpool side displaying all the 
poise, composure and passing ability of a zoo on fire for much of the contest. 
No, José Mourinho, he’s the one. He’s the coward that set up his Manchester 
United team to nullify the league’s form side on their own turf. He’s the 
spoiler. He’s the one who ruined Monday Night Football, the evening that has 
given us timeless classics already this season like Burnley 2-0 Watford and 
Sunderland 0-3 Everton. There is no gibbet high enough from which to string him.

José Mourinho criticises ‘cautious’ Liverpool after bore draw at Anfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/jose-mourinho-liverpool-anfield-manchester-united-jurgen-klopp>
Now, usually The Fiver, contrary beast that it is, would happily defend 
Mourinho for the remainder of its 
four-or-five-paragraphs-or-the-minimum-we-can-get-away-with. But he doesn’t 
half make it hard. There’d have been some credit in coming out afterwards with 
a little smirk and a ton of braggadocio and pointing out that the game had gone 
almost exactly to his masterplan, that United were a work-in-progress but had 
got exactly what they came for against a side who were supposed to wipe the 
floor with them. But no. Post-match Mourinhotook a leaf out of Donald Trump’s 
playbook of criticism deflection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/jose-mourinho-liverpool-anfield-manchester-united-jurgen-klopp>
. “Yes, I said bad things but look at what Bill Clinton did,” became: “Yes, we 
had our lowest possession percentage since Opta began compiling statistics in 
2003 but look at what Liverpool did with their 65%.” The José continued: “How 
many shots on target did Liverpool have on target today? Two. Two shots on 
target with 65% of possession, you have to be critical of Liverpool. It is 
their problem, not our problem.”

And the general sense that Mourinho had set up United to prevent free-flowing 
attacking trendsetters Liverpool from being free-flowing attacking trendsetters 
Liverpool? Couldn’t be further from the truth, reckoned Mourinho. In fact, 
Klopp had prevented free-flowing attacking trendsetters Liverpool from being 
free-flowing attacking trendsetters Liverpool. “They played [Emre] Can and 
[Jordan] Henderson for some reason and they did that for 90 minutes when they 
normally project more players in attack,” trumped Mourinho. “They were very 
cautious.”

Credit where credit is due, José. It was awful. Own it.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join John Ashdown from 7.45pm BST for hot MBM coverage of Leverkusen 1-2 
Tottenham, while Gregg Bakowski will be on hand for Leicester 2-0 FC Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“It’s a society thing. I don’t like the amount of time people spend on their 
phones around the football club. [The players] don’t talk and then they expect 
to go into an environment where you have to talk and it will just happen. I 
think all of us, we’re all guilty. We get lost in this technology world now and 
we forget the actual core values of human beings” – Mansfield manager Adam 
Murraysees Pep Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/pep-guardiola-internet-manchester-city-training-ground-sergio-aguero>
 and raises him by banning his playersfrom using phones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/mansfield-town-manager-adam-murray-bans-mobile-phones>
 at the club.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and co for the latest thrilling instalment of Football Weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/oct/17/bournemouth-hit-hull-for-six-as-champions-league-returns-football-weekly>
.

FIVER LETTERS

“People hail Pep Guardiola as a tactical genius but would he have ever thought 
of getting two full-backs and two wing-backs into the same formation as José 
Mourinho did last night?” – Matt Keeler.

“Re: expanding the World Cup (Fiver letters passim). India v Indonesia in 
Indianapolis? Or stretching this to the infamous 39th game, a few of these 
could take place in New York state: West Ham v West Brom in Westchester? 
Southampton v Northampton in Midhampton? Think the only place for Sunderland v 
Hull is the Championship, though” – Ian Sargeant.

“Is Derby County’s new/old manager now Second Chance Steve? I know it’s been 
over a week since he was appointed, but I figured you wouldn’t mind being on 
the receiving end of some less-than-timely attempts at humour for a change” – 
Neil Goodall.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is… Ian Sargeant.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

Merstham look nailed on for a valuable TV outing after drawing Oxford United 
at homein the FA Cup first round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/fa-cup-first-round-draw-merstham-westfields>
, while ninth-tier Westfields landed a home tie with Curzon Ashton. “Getting 
this far is a huge bonus,” cheered the Hereford club’s Andy Morris. “We have 
earned enough money so far to get us through this season and keep us going into 
next season.”

In further feelgood news, Manchester City trousered a record £391.8m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/manchester-city-record-income-2015-16-season>
 – a profit of £20.5m – in 2015-16.

Real Madrid have extended Luka Modric’s contract until 2020.

Internazionale insist their Ultras-bothering forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/mauro-icardi-v-inters-ultras-an-unhappy-chapter-in-his-ongoing-san-siro-saga>
 Mauro Icardi will remain as captain. Unsurprisingly, the Ultras aren’t having 
any of it. “Icardi is not our captain, not now or ever,” sniffed a statement. 
“Inter need us.”

And Arsène Wenger claims he never thought about ushering Theo Walcott out of 
the Emirates door marked Do One over the summer. “I was not ready to let him 
go,”he swooned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/18/wenger-theo-walcott-completely-different-player-this-season-arsenal-video>
. “I always wanted to keep him. What I’ve seen of him is that he lets the 
passion for the game come out of his body. That’s what you want from him.”

STILL WANT MORE?

Claudio Ranieri’s Be Here Now moment, Bob Bradley’s comedy buddy movie hit 
potential and Richard Scudamore in meltdown – all are crowbarred expertly into
David Squires’ cartoon on the return of the best league in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/oct/18/david-squires-on-the-return-of-the-best-league-in-the-world>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united-jozzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0076adef8c7087af9795a8c868589dcd1b754092%2F948_1754_1037_622%2F1037.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20The%20amuse-bouche%20of%20misery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united-jozzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20The%20amuse-bouche%20of%20misery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fthe-fiver-liverpool-manchester-united-jozzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0076adef8c7087af9795a8c868589dcd1b754092%2F948_1754_1037_622%2F1037.jpg>
 Ah, you were saying … Illustration: David Squires for the Guardian 
“I never wanted to be a football manager,” humble-brags Bayer Leverkusen boss 
Roger Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/bayer-leverkusen-roger-schmidt-tottenham-mauricio-pochettino-champions-league>
 as he and his team prepare to lock horns with Tottenham in Big Cup.

Talking of Big Cup, Martin Laurence of Who Scored? is on hand to tell you 
where this week’s big games will be won and lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/oct/18/champions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs>
.

You want to read more about Liverpool v Manchester United, don’t you? Oh. Ah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/18/jose-mourinho-liverpool-manchester-united-klopp-tactics>
.

The draw for next year’s Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon takes place on 
Wednesday, but political unrest following August’s presidential elections is 
casting a shadow,reports Jonathan Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-gabon-draw-football>
.

Proper Journalism’s David Conn reckons MPs failed to hit the target when they 
grilled FA suits in parliament.He explains why here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/damian-collins-mp-parliamentary-privilege-neil-warnock>

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

19%
 