
“There’s one other person in town with a Clinton sign,” Link Oberg, 30, said, 
staring across the main street in Downsville,New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, at a phalanx of yard signs 
promoting Donald Trump’s presidential campaign and Republican John Faso’s 
congressional re-election campaign. “Did you talk to her?”

I am in Downsville, population 633, where the motto is: “The best town on a 
dam site!” and where Trump signs dot the well-kept yards. (One Trump supporter, 
though, inked out the “T” and the “P” on one of the signs, offering neighbors 
the slogan “RUM: Make America Great Again”. It stood next to aGadsden-inspired 
flag <http://www.dailydot.com/unclick/dont-tread-on-me-snake-parodies/> 
advocating for gun rights.)

Oberg, who answered the door in a throwback Army of Darkness T-shirt, grew up 
in a liberal household. “The sign was my mother’s idea,” she said of the 
family’s Clinton-Kaine yard sign, adding she was of the “anyone-but-Trump 
mindset. But no one’s harassed us about it or anything.”

Up the road in the town of Walton, Jody Jamieson’s house had signs both for 
Clinton and for Faso’s opponent, Zephyr Teachout, in the yard of her house on a 
corner far from main road. “I’m not particularly a Clinton supporter,” she 
said. “But I’m voting against Donald Trump.”

Two doors down, her neighbors had a Trump-Pence flag where their American flag 
used to be; on that main road, Delaware Street, a cash-for-gold business 
proudly displayed the candidate’s signs out front.

Jamieson, who is 60, moved to Walton from Oklahoma with her husband, a native 
of the town who had moved away to attend college, where they’d met. Like Oberg, 
she said she was one of two Clinton supporters in her town of 5,484 residents.

The other is her son.

The Clinton yard sign represents something of a shift for Jamieson, who has 
been a registered Republican for 30 years. “I can no longer identify myself as 
a member of the Republican party that nominated Donald Trump,” she said. After 
the election, she plans to change her party registration to Democrat; under New 
York state law, one must file notice of intent to change parties 25 days before 
a general election, and it only goes into effect after election day. “It took 
Donald Trump to do that.”

East of Walton, there are more Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> in the village of Delhi 
(pronounced “dell-high” by locals) than some of the other places in Delaware 
County. The village, population 3,023, is home to the State University of New 
York at Delhi, a 2,000-student school with a focus on technological academic 
programs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnew-york-hillary-clinton-trump-support-upstate-voters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52101012060cbc9ab816d373192ae1e612c5d065%2F0_155_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Clinton%20minority%3A%20upstate%20New%20York's%20Democrats%20keep%20support%20low%20key&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnew-york-hillary-clinton-trump-support-upstate-voters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Clinton%20minority%3A%20upstate%20New%20York%27s%20Democrats%20keep%20support%20low%20key&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnew-york-hillary-clinton-trump-support-upstate-voters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52101012060cbc9ab816d373192ae1e612c5d065%2F0_155_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 A rare sighting in this area of New York. Photograph: Megan Carpentier for the 
Guardian 
Roger and Susan Hillstrom, who are in their mid-70s, moved to Delhi nearly 30 
years ago from New York City (and aren’t yet considered true locals). But 
they’ve found the village welcoming and many of their friends and neighbors are 
fairly liberal, even if there aren’t as many Clinton signs on display in the 
village as in their yard.

“Most of our street is Democratic,” said Roger. “And in 2008 and 2012, 
President Obama carried this town” – though he noted that registered 
Republicans outnumber registered Democrats in the county. (Statewide about 30% 
of New Yorkers don’t register with a party affiliation.)

“We have a strong Democratic group in this town,” added Susan, who said 
another woman organized it to support Kirsten Gillibrand’s first Senate 
campaign. Now they get together regularly to talk about candidates – they’ve 
helped elect two Democrats to the village board – and register voters.

“I wouldn’t say we’re super organized,” said Roger, “but we do get together 
and support candidates.”

They haven’t heard much from their neighbors about their Clinton and Teachout 
yard signs. “Nobody’s defaced them,” said Roger, sounding horrified by the idea.

“I’ve heard about vandalism,” said Susan. “But I’m not sure I believe it.”

Both Hillstroms have friends who are supporting Trump, some vociferously, as 
well as those supporting Clinton. “This is a good community, Delhi, in 
supporting each other on a personal level,” said Susan. “It’s strong that way 
and maybe it kept us from being too terrible.”

Added Roger: “We all have the politeness not to go crazy with each other.”
 