
“The Comedian’s Guide to Survival doesn’t exist, you know,” we’re told towards 
the end of anew British movie of that name 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f6p8rEx1b_A>. “You can’t succeed in comedy by 
guides and rules. It doesn’t work like that.” The speaker is Dustin Stratford 
(played by Vas Blackwood), one of the biggest comics in the world. He’s talking 
to James Mullinger, a semi-fictional character based onthe UK standup of the 
same name <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wMdafuwbBLY> and played by The 
Inbetweeners’ <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-inbetweeners> James 
Buckley. The film – which is entertaining, not subtle and intriguing for 
standup fans – dramatises Mullinger’s dog days as an aspiring but failing 
comedian, and (notwithstanding Stratford’s cautionary advice) proposes itself 
as a primer on making it in comedy. So, what does it have to teach us?

The first thing you’ll notice is: life as a struggling club comic is nicer 
than you might think. Mullinger spends the opening half-hour schlepping between 
unlovely standup venues in a shared car. (His companions are real-life comics
Luisa Omielan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/29/luisa-omielan-destinys-comic> 
and Richard Sandling.) OK, so he pisses himself on stage, gets booed and pelted 
with soft fruit. But look at that lovely house! Our hero is clearly punching 
well above the average standup’s financial weight, which may be due to his day 
job writing for GQ, here reimagined as COQ – one of the droller instances of 
schoolboy humour in a film that’s full of it. (Memo to the film-makers, 
however: journalism is almost as penny-pinching as club comedy.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhaHiNmgdb1A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhaHiNmgdb1A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhaHiNmgdb1A&media=>
 Watch the trailer for The Comedian’s Guide to Survival 
Dancing to the whim of a cartoonishly monstrous editor (Paul Kaye), our hero 
is commissioned to interview famous comedians for the magazine – which is both 
degrading and an opportunity to harvest career tips. After offering the usual 
if-at-first-you-don’t-succeed encouragement, Omid Djalili (playing himself) 
finally advises Mullinger that “if [failure] happens repeatedly, then life is 
telling you to stop”. Which sounds like good sense – but the film disagrees. 
It’s structured as a series of humiliations for Mullinger, and judges him on 
his ability to pick himself up, dust himself down and keep “chasing the dream”. 
This is not a movie that excuses quitters. You earn a career in comedy, it 
seems, by persisting in the face of evidence that you have no comic talent 
whatsoever.

That’s a flaw in the film, which withholds any sense of even a kernel of 
comedic talent, as Mullinger lurches from one on-stage indignity to the next. 
It doesn’t help that Buckley isn’t a standup comedian: it’s all too easy to 
believe in his ineptitude, but his abilities as a standup are harder to detect. 
One epiphany comes when Mullinger – having been robbed and abandoned in the 
Californian desert – lets off steam in a far-flung diner, inadvertently amusing 
fellow customers. Later, his audience bellows with laughter at an impromptu 
corporate gig in LA. On neither occasion does Buckley’s delivery suggest a 
comic, although in the latter instance, his duff material (about his 
father-in-law mistaking dildos for microphones) doesn’t help. (The film’s 
funniest moments feature real-life comedianKevin Eldon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/mar/13/kevin-eldon-bridesmaid>, 
playing Mullinger’s American chauffeur.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcomedians-guide-to-survival-standup-james-buckley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F812452d7433f4960d6c22e0f3824404bdee3d009%2F0_96_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Comedian's%20Guide%20to%20Survival%3A%20can%20you%20really%20learn%20to%20be%20a%20standup%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcomedians-guide-to-survival-standup-james-buckley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Comedian%27s%20Guide%20to%20Survival%3A%20can%20you%20really%20learn%20to%20be%20a%20standup%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcomedians-guide-to-survival-standup-james-buckley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F812452d7433f4960d6c22e0f3824404bdee3d009%2F0_96_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
 Living the dream … Vas Blackwood as Dustin Stratford and James Buckley as 
James Mullinger. Photograph: FH Studio/GSP Studios/Solar Productions 
This LA trip is at the behest of GQ/COQ – like the real-life Mullinger, our 
hero gets his break at Montreal’s Just for Laughs festival while on 
journalistic duty. It’s fascinating what, throughout this sequence, success in 
comedy represents to Mullinger: not (just) entertaining people, but the 
trappings that come with it – bikini-clad models lounging by swimming pools 
prominent among them. (In the film, comedy is a conspicuously male activity.) 
This film couldn’t have been made pre-2000, when comedy wasn’t aspirational; 
indeed, was seldom considered a career. Now it’s a means of becoming a god, as 
the final frames demonstrate. Mullinger’s apotheosis isn’t making people laugh, 
it’s simply standing on a huge stage in front of 6,000 of them. It’s the 
transcendent feeling of escaping one’s insignificance, of being elevated, gazed 
at, chosen.

Of course, comedy here is a proxy for whatever dream the film’s audience may 
be chasing. Whether you want to be a comic, or an astrophysicist, or the prime 
minister, the film’s keep-the-faith message should apply. But Mullinger’s lack 
of apparent comic flair undermines that optimism, at least as it applies to 
standup. It prompts the question: is doggedness and self-beliefreally enough, 
in the face of the fundamental inability to make people laugh? To what extent 
can you learn to be a comedian, and to what extent are you born that way? 
Djalili’s provocation apart, The Comedian’s Guide to Survival has little to say 
on whether, without the talent to cultivate in the first place, you’ve any 
chance whatsoever of surviving.

Three to see

Sofie Hagen: Shimmer Shatter

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcomedians-guide-to-survival-standup-james-buckley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c3122585c5762c1b6540c150166337fcdc6777a%2F0_1305_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Comedian's%20Guide%20to%20Survival%3A%20can%20you%20really%20learn%20to%20be%20a%20standup%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcomedians-guide-to-survival-standup-james-buckley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Comedian%27s%20Guide%20to%20Survival%3A%20can%20you%20really%20learn%20to%20be%20a%20standup%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcomedians-guide-to-survival-standup-james-buckley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c3122585c5762c1b6540c150166337fcdc6777a%2F0_1305_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Shimmer Shatter … Sofie Hagen. Photograph: Anders Dahl Tollestrup 
The follow-up to Hagen’s 2015 Edinburgh best newcomer award-winner Bubblewrap, 
Shimmer Shatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/sofie-hagen-edinburgh-festival-review-shimmer-shatter>
 – now touring – similarly interweaves stories of anxiety, depression and 
indignity from the Danish comic’s present and past. It’s beautifully done, and 
there’s steel beneath the sweetness.

The Stand, Newcastle upon Tyne 
<http://www.thestand.co.uk/show/27647/sofie_hagen_-_shimmer_shatter>, 28 
October. Box office: 0844 693 3336.Merlin theatre, Frome 
<http://www.merlintheatre.co.uk/whats-on/performances/sofie-hagen-shimmer-shatter/>
, 30 October. Box office: 01373 465949.Then touring <http://www.sofiehagen.com/>
.

Angelos & Barry: The New Power Generation


Having podcast together since 2014, the ex-Shooting Stars man Angelos 
Epithemiou (AKA Dan Renton Skinner) and Alex Lowe’s geriatric alter ego Barry 
from Watford – a social misfittery double-whammy – embark on their first as a 
twosome.

Harlequin Theatre, Redhill 
<http://www.harlequintheatre.co.uk/whats-on/on-stage/angelos-and-barry-the-new-power-generation/>
, 28 October. Box office: 01737 276500.Cheltenham Town Hall 
<http://www.cheltenhamtownhall.org.uk/event/angelos-and-barry-131553/>, 29 
October. Box office: 0844 576 2210.Then touring 
<http://www.livenation.co.uk/artist/angelos-and-barry-tickets>.

Daphne’s Second Show


The sketch act hit Soho for an extended run. Slave-driving Willy Wonkas, 
inappropriate house hunters and a grotesque Frasier parody feature in a
sophomore show from the trio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/14/daphne-edinburgh-festival-review-comedy-pleasance-courtyard>
 (Jason Forbes, George Fouracres, Phil Wang) who consolidate their debut 
without quite making a great leap forward.

Soho theatre, London 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/daphneandrsquo-s-second-show>, from 25 
October to 5 November. Box office: 020-7478 0100.
 