
We live in an age when many Olympic and elite sporting feats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> are greeted with suspicion. 
Consciously or not, when something spectacular is achieved, there lingers 
scepticism. The seed of doubt has already been sown in the minds of many 
observers thanks to the misdemeanours ofthose that have gone before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lance-armstrong>.

Incidents of doping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/the-guardian-view-on-the-russian-doping-scandal-no-place-in-rio-for-cheats>
 become conflated. Some perceive that everyone must be cheating. Arguments are 
made in favour of doping deregulation: scrap rules regarding banned substances 
and permit a free-for-all, to ensure a level playing field across sport.

Pathetic, faceless hackers are trying to drag me and other athletes through 
the mud | Sam Quek
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/20/sam-quek-fancy-bears-wada-hacking-scandal-hockey-gold-team-gb>
It is this endemic suspicion that the Fancy Bears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/fancy-bears-hackers--russia-wada-tues-leaks>
 hacking group have fuelled. The last week has providednumerous headlines about 
high-profile athletes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/mo-farah-named-fancy-bears-leak>
, many of them British, after cyber-hackers with links to Russia illegally 
obtained details of therapeutic use exemptions (TUEs) from an extensive World 
Anti-Doping Agency (Wada) database.

TUEs allow athletes to use banned substances because of illness or 
longstanding conditions such as asthma and allergies. The private records of 
many British athletes have been leaked – includingSir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins>, Mo Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah>, Nicola Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicola-adams>, Chris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> and Laura Trott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/laura-trott> – as have exemptions obtained by
Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/wada-hacking-abuse-debate-theraputic-use-drugs>
 andRafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal>.

There is no suggestion that those named have done anything wrong, as all the 
TUEs publicised by Fancy Bears have been granted approval by anti-doping 
authorities, yet it has opened up a serious ethical debate about the use of 
such exemptions and their timing.Wiggins, in particular, has had his record 
scrutinised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
 and was forced to deny that the controversial Belgian doctorGeert Leinders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/bradley-wiggins-denies-doctor-geert-leinders-gave-banned-steroid-tue>
 was involved.

Exemptions are undoubtedly an area worthy of further investigation, yet in an 
existing climate where distrust of star athletes already hangs like a miasma, 
where reputations are on the line and the very integrity of professional sport 
is up for debate, this illegal hack could have a dangerous effect. On the Fancy 
Bears website, snippets of text read: “We stand for fair play and clean sport. 
We are going to tell you how Olympic medals are won … We go on exposing the 
athletes who violate the principles of fair play by taking doping substances.”

An altruistic claim, but it is western athletes who have been targeted 
following a period of 18 months when state-sponsored doping in Russia has been 
brutallyexposed by two independent reports, commissioned by Wada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/russia-doping-scandal-five-things-wada-report>
. It is impossible to equate the Russian scandal with the current leak. That 
may be the intention of Fancy Bears, or it may not, but when global suspicion 
is ubiquitous, there is a risk that casual observers lump both issues together 
as one and the same.

The difference could not be more distinct. An extensive report by the 
respected Canadian lawyer Richard McLaren in July found that the Russian 
government, security and sporting authorities colluded to allow doping across a 
“vast majority” of winter and summer sports.

Bradley Wiggins faces a fight for his reputation in wake of Wada hack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
The detail was stunning – including the swapping of positive urine samples 
with clean ones at a laboratory in Sochi to avoid detection before the 2014 
Winter Games and a comprehensive cover-up during the 2013 world championships 
in Moscow – and resulted inRussia’s track and field athletes being banned from 
the Rio Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/17/russia-rio-olympics-ban-doping-iaaf-sebastian-coe>
, with theParalympic team being banned in its entirety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/russia-banned-paralympics-doping-ban>
.

The Russian sports minister, Vitaly Mutko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/09/fifa-ethics-committee-vitaly-mutko-russia-world-cup-2018>
, has challenged Wada to prove a link between the Fancy Bears hack and his 
country – “You blame Russia for everything, it is very in fashion now” – while 
in the aftermath of the leak the Russian embassy in the UK has been vociferous 
on Twitter.

Last Thursday it tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/RussianEmbassy/status/776414080387026944>: “hacking: there 
should be nothing private about doping files of participants of Olympics,which 
are a very public affair” and “Some are more equal than others?” OnFriday it 
said <https://twitter.com/RussianEmbassy/status/776721269962240000>: “53 
British athletes had@wada_ama <https://twitter.com/wada_ama> approval to use 
banned drugs. What George Orwell would say?” Fancy Bears have also made 
inflammatory statements that Wada is “corrupt and deceitful” and that TUEs are 
“licences for doping”.

Yet with every medical record leaked, every star name’s private exemptions 
flashed on TV and documented in print, the subliminal message that filters down 
is one of athletes attempting to exploit a loophole in the system for personal 
gain. TUEs and the process of obtaining them do need examination. But any 
comparison with mass doping is unhealthy.
 