
Never mind The Play That Goes Wrong, the longest running farce in London is 
playing in the east rather than the West End. The Olympic Stadium Mystery took 
another twist this past week when it emerged that not only had the overall cost 
of converting the venue to (supposedly) make it suitable for football as well 
as athleticsrisen further to £323m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/02/west-ham-olympic-stadium-deal-explained-london-mayor-sadiq-khan>
 but that it wasunlikely to make an operational profit for many years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/west-ham-stadium-losses-retractable-seating-problems>
 to come – if ever.

The Observer understands West Ham United’s new home, now renamed the London 
Stadium until a long delayed and increasingly elusive naming rights deal can be 
struck, was originally projected to be making a seven-figure operational 
surplus by the time it reached a “steady state” in 2018-19. It was on those 
projections that the case for the £752m stadium was made – that even at the 
favourable terms awarded to West Ham, the plan was the best way of ensuring the 
venue did not have to be subsidised by the taxpayer in perpetuity.

But at the point at which the bill for moving the so-called retractable seats 
to host athletics and concerts in the summer rose from £300,000 to a staggering 
£8m per year, all those sums went out of the window. And at no point did those 
in charge give any indication to the wider world of the scale of the problem – 
or, indeed, that the “retractable” seating solution chosen was not a 
state-of-the-art arrangement of rollers and air beds but literally rested on 
scaffolding and breeze blocks.

Under the deal, signed in 2013 but revealed in full only 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/west-ham-olympic-stadium-club-pay-per-season-rent>
 this year following a dogged freedom of information campaign by a coalition of 
fan groups, West Ham agreed to pay £15m towards the overall conversions costs 
plus £2.5m in rent a year. The costs of the conversion have rocketed as the 
scale of the architectural challenge has become clear.

Initially the cost of installing a new roof to replace the temporary canopy in 
place for the Games and putting in those 21,000 “retractable” seats was slated 
at £95m. It then rose to £160m, before shooting up to £272m and now £323m. 
Those huge increases, largely requiring the stadium to be essentially rebuilt 
from the inside out on a site and foundations that were not designed for the 
purpose, will form part of theinquiry announced last week by Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/sadiq-khan-mayor-london-west-ham-stadium-inquiry>
, Boris Johnson’s successor as London mayor.

It is worth noting that when the £272m figure was published, in the final 
months of the Conservative Johnson’s tenure, there would have been a desire to 
keep the figure as low as possible, while the motivation of Labour’s Khan may 
have been to ensure it was as high as possible.

One overlooked factor is the extent to which that original stadium, which 
eventually cost £429m, was to all intents and purposes entirely temporary, 
storing up trouble for the future. Even the white struts that appear to have 
remained from the old design had to be taken out and replaced, because they 
were not strong enough to support the new design.

The only bit that remained was the part that was supposed to be temporary – 
the so called “demountable” upper tier that under the original plans was due to 
be removed to leave behind an athletics stadium with a capacity of 25,000.

Year zero for any serious analysis of what went wrong is the decision in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/feb/01/Olympics2012.politics> not to 
consider a football future for the stadium, though it is possible to pull the 
lens back further and return to earlier schemes to make a joint-use stadium in 
the east end a centrepiece of any Olympic bid. Once the decision was made to 
press ahead with a stadium that could be converted into a smaller athletics 
venue but would be hugely challenging as a football arena, partly because of 
distaste at the idea of Premier League clubs getting their hands on a public 
asset for nothing but also the promises made to the International Olympic 
Committee to win the bid, the die was cast.

Andrew Boff, the Tory London Assembly member who has been a critic of the 
handling of the stadium saga throughout, says: “At the end of the day this all 
boils down to one political objective – and that was to keep the running track 
at theOlympic Stadium <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-stadium>. If 
we’d said we weren’t going to keep the running track, this could all have been 
avoided. Instead we have hundreds of millions of pounds of taxpayers’ money 
being burned in front of Londoners’ eyes.

“We ended up with something that was neither fish nor fowl and suited to 
neither, desperately throwing taxpayers’ money at it to cover the arse of some 
bad political decisions.”

Aside from the consequences that flowed from that original decision, 
hamstringing the revolving cast of executives who would be charged with making 
a success of a flawed concept, there is plenty else for Khan’s review to chew 
over. At regular intervals the goalposts have shifted at the behest of the 
politicians directing traffic – most obviously when Johnson became mayor in 
2008, resolving to make the stadium work at a larger capacity and signalling a 
shift in strategy for the wider project.

The entire history of the stadium is studded with disharmony, taking in 
sackings, resignations, industrial espionage and mud throwing. But it is 
impossible to overstate the levels of discord that still exist among the 
various bodies involved.

It is hard to blame West Ham for behaving exactly as you would expect a modern 
Premier League club to. But it is also impossible not to wonder whether West 
Ham’s vice-chair, Karren Brady, in her sharp-elbowed drive to get the best 
possible deal for the club, did not also sow the seeds for the dysfunctional 
state of their marriage of convenience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fwest-ham-fans-give-their-verdict-clubs-new-stadium-premier-league-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%20fans%20give%20their%20verdict%20on%20the%20club's%20new%20stadium%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fwest-ham-fans-give-their-verdict-clubs-new-stadium-premier-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%20fans%20give%20their%20verdict%20on%20the%20club%27s%20new%20stadium%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fwest-ham-fans-give-their-verdict-clubs-new-stadium-premier-league-video&media=>
West Ham fans give their verdict on the club’s new stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/25/west-ham-fans-give-their-verdict-clubs-new-stadium-premier-league-video>
Yet there are pressing questions for all those others, too, who have slipped 
seamlessly from one senior position to another at the alphabet soup of bodies 
responsible, since 2005, for delivering the Olympics and their legacy. And for 
those politicians at national and local level driven by often competing 
priorities to the detriment of the whole. For those left to make sense of 
operating the stadium, the huge cost of moving the retractable seats in and out 
– and the fortnight it takes to do so – makes an already headache inducing game 
of 3D chess immeasurably harder. It is hard to see how either the West Ham 
tenancy or the 50-year agreement with BritishAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> can be unpicked.

As for what happens now, some have begun to wonder whether there might be a 
Millennium Dome style exit strategy – finding a private operator to take it off 
their hands and find a way to make sense of it. But the only likely buyer would 
be West Ham themselves – which would reignite criticism at an even greater 
ferocity.

All parties are locked in their awkward embrace and must try to make it work – 
unless, that is, David Gold and David Sullivan do eventually sell up, as they 
have repeatedly insisted they will not.

In her incomplete but often instructive account of being a fly on the wall, 
the anthropologist Dr Gillian Evans observes how the shifting political tides 
led to a constant turnover of senior staff and shifting sands. “Rather than 
watching people pushing a boulder up the mountain, studying the Olympic legacy 
is suddenly beginning to feel a bit like watching a surreal game, in which 
serious-minded people are trying desperately to construct a new piece of city 
on top of a merry-go-round that turns violently with each change in the 
political landscape,” she notes in her recently published bookLondon’s Olympic 
Legacy: The Inside Track.

It is probably a forlorn hope, given the desire to heap blame on Johnson’s 
regime, but it would be a pleasant surprise if Khan’s review also shed light on 
how political interference in major projects such as this warps priorities and 
how a combination of lack of transparency and overweening bureaucracy bends 
even the best intentions out of shape in the often opaque world of local 
government, quangos and development zones.

On the one hand the London Legacy Development Corporation (which co-owns the 
stadium 65/35 with Newham council) is presented as eminently accountable – its 
website is full of varnished minutes of official meetings. Yet it battled for 
two years at huge cost to keep its contract with West Ham secret and any search 
will be in vain for mention of the problems that have sent costs to the 
taxpayer soaring.

The LLDC occasionally, and largely in vain, tries to shift the focus to those 
areas of the Olympic Park where it believes praise is due for progress made. 
But when such chaos envelops its centrepiece it is little wonder that the 
stadium, more money pit than white elephant, continues to grab all the 
attention – for all the wrong reasons.
 