
The floor of the XL Center is a blur of pint-sized pre-teens wrapped in 
brightly colored leotards taking turns on various gymnastics apparatuses – 
swinging from the uneven bars, pirouetting on the balance beam, surging down 
the carpeted run and exploding off the vault. A Patton-sized American flag 
overlooks the arena seats that are nearly empty with doors still two hours 
away. It’s a Friday morning in June ahead of the Secret US Classic, a 
qualifying meet for the national championships and a tune-up ahead of the next 
month’s Olympic trials in San Jose, where the five-person US women’s team will 
be finalized. The opening ceremony of the Rio Games is two months away.

Sign up to our daily Olympics briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/sign-up-to-our-daily-olympics-briefing>
I’ve come to Hartford for an audience with the best athlete in America today: 
a 4ft 8in, 105lb sprite from suburban Houston. When I spot her, she’s seated on 
the edge of the competition podium in a black Nike tank top that exposes her 
muscular arms and conforms neatly to her chiseled abs. Her hair is pulled back 
in a high ponytail with a colored bow and her legs dangle several feet from the 
floor. The megawatt smile that’s separated a flock of Madison Avenue 
speculators from their quarterly budgets disarms onlookers from her casual 
perch.

Anyone with even a passing interest in gymnastics has known about Simone Biles 
for years. Although she’s yet to compete in an Olympics – she was born three 
months short of the age cutoff for London 2012 – the 19-year-old has already 
been widely hailed as the most talented gymnast in history. Last year Biles 
became the first woman ever tocapture a third straight world all-around 
championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/29/simone-biles-gabby-douglas-third-straight-world-gymnastics-championship>
, finishing an eye-popping 1.083 points ahead of her team-mate and reigning 
Olympic champion Gabby Douglas. She’s won 14 overall medals at worlds, 
including 10 golds, and is the first woman since 1974 to win four consecutive 
all-around titles at US nationals. It’s been three years since she entered an 
all-around competition and didn’t walk away the winner.

Four years ago Douglas arrived in London without a single endorsement, burst 
from relative obscurity to win the all-around title and flew home with 
corporate sponsors in frenzied pursuit. By contrast, Biles, whosigned with Nike 
<https://twitter.com/Simone_Biles/status/664181734569717760> last year, already 
has deals withHershey’s <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iSWnAqhhQ-Y>, Procter 
& Gamble <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uRdleKwYeAY>, Kellogg’s 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s8y2dDlZwTw>, United Airlines 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o9lXgzEFkuo>, Coca-Cola 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=23MqItjA-Hg> and GK Elite Sportswear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2PHDVEbBYqI>. A personalized emoji keyboard 
app cheekily namedSimoji <http://www.simojiapp.com/> launched this week. It’s 
the sort of portfolio built not on promise alone but preordination. Indeed, 
Biles is not only the overwhelming favorite to win the all-around Olympic 
title, but could bring home as many as five gold medals from Rio to cement a 
legacy that for years has seemed a foregone conclusion. Already a superstar in 
the parochial world of gymnastics, Biles will soon be a household name.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpW-XSVepe0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpW-XSVepe0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpW-XSVepe0&media=>
They’re the sort of impossible expectations that for an ordinary athlete might 
presage disaster. But Biles is not an ordinary athlete.

“It’s pretty easy,” she says of the pressure that’s only redoubled with each 
appearance during an unbeaten run spanning three years and 12 competitions. 
“Because for you guys watching it’s different than me doing the gymnastics. 
When I’m out there I’m not thinking, ‘Oh my gosh, I have so much pressure,’ 
because I’m the one doing it. It’s easier doing it than watching it.”

What separates Biles is not the boundary-pushing blend of speed, power and 
strength that makes observers feel like they’re gazing into a wormhole, the 
routine conjuring of leap-forward moments that are the stock-in-trade of 
once-in-a-generation talents: the Bo Jacksons, LeBron Jameses and Manny 
Pacquiaos. Nor is it her otherworldly consistency and perfection, the way she 
seemingly always manages to stick the landing no matter how preposterous the 
maneuver. Rather it’s a blankness of mind seemingly tailor-made for a sport 
that will break those prone to self-conscious fear. To behold this brilliance 
in the flesh here in Connecticut after years of tracking her ascent on 
television and YouTube is stirring enough, though surely it will pale in 
comparison to the moment when she makes her date with destiny in Rio.

***

Biles’ backstory is a departure from the saccharine, soft-focus features 
typically associated with American gymnasts. She was born in Columbus, Ohio, 
and placed into foster care amid her mother’s struggles with drugs and alcohol. 
The rambunctious toddler was adopted when she was five with her younger sister 
by her biological grandparents – Nellie, a former nurse, and Ron, an air 
traffic controller – and relocated to Spring, Texas, just outside Houston.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fsimone-biles-gymnastics-america-rio-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb58bf7bc76352ea9340e3526d88dc5659d2fd442%2F0_397_5244_3148%2F5244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20extraordinary%20Simone%20Biles%2C%20the%20best%20athlete%20in%20America%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fsimone-biles-gymnastics-america-rio-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20extraordinary%20Simone%20Biles%2C%20the%20best%20athlete%20in%20America%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fsimone-biles-gymnastics-america-rio-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb58bf7bc76352ea9340e3526d88dc5659d2fd442%2F0_397_5244_3148%2F5244.jpg>
 Simone Biles competes on the balance beam at the US Olympic trials in July. 
Photograph: Ezra Shaw/Getty Images 
Her introduction to gymnastics was accidental. When a planned field trip to a 
ranch with her day-care class was canceled due to an oppressive heatwave, the 
group was instead taken to Bannon’s Gymnastix. She returned home that day with 
a note that suggested her parents enroll the six-year-old in lessons. Two years 
later Biles was discovered at the Houston gym by Aimee Boorman, a then-neophyte 
to the world of elite gymnastics who remains her coach and surrogate mom today.

The youngster’s route to the top was not a straight shot. She battled 
flexibility issues in the junior ranks and endured a string of poor results. As 
she approached the senior level the 14-year-old faced a choice: withdraw from 
public school and increase her practice regimen – which today consists of 32 
hours of training over six days a week – or enjoy the life of a regular 
teenager and remain on the outside of the elite ranks.

Biles opted for home-schooling and the monastic life of a champion gymnast, 
initially prompting hard-won progress in her results. But she reached a nadir 
at the 2013 Secret US Classic, where she fell on the uneven bars, nearly 
toppled off the beam and botched her floor exercise before Boorman withdrew her 
from the vault.

That’s when Biles’ parents enlisted a sports psychologist to help the teenager 
work through her nerves. Soon after she received an invitation from legendary 
national team coordinator Martha Karolyi to train at the Karolyi Ranch, the 
fabled training center for the US team. The results were immediate. By the end 
of her rookie campaign as a senior Biles had finished second at the American 
Cup, outduelled compatriot Kyla Ross for a breakthrough all-around national 
title, then followed it up with a world championship six weeks later in 
Antwerp. From then on it’s been a meteoric rise.

She trains a short 10-minute drive from home at the World Champions Centre, a 
56,000 sq ft gym commissioned by her parents as a retirement venture shortly 
after her breakout 2013 season. By now she is a megastar in the siloed world of 
gymnastics. She recalls a story at this year’s Pacific RimGymnastics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gymnastics> Championships – one of the few 
meets she’s entered during a stripped-down schedule designed for her to peak in 
Rio – where she skipped the event finals after a strong day one and watched the 
second day from a box. After a group of young girls noticed her, Biles said she 
had to call security to keep them from climbing into the suite.

The inevitability of Biles’ coronation is not simply a product of her ability, 
but of the scoring system that has governed the sport for the past decade. Back 
in 2006, gymnastics abandoned the perfect-10 system for an open-ended model. 
Today’s competitors are scored relative to each skill’s degree of difficulty 
with deductions taken for imperfections. Biles’ start values are so far beyond 
her rivals that she effectively enters competitions with a full point 
advantage. The value of that insurance policy could be seen in November, when 
she overcame a mistake on thebalance beam 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fBDq5fXVieM> and a step out of bounds on floor 
exercise <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kKZprJD-4eI> to still win by the 
biggest margin of her three world championships.

Critics bemoan the emphasis on power and athleticism at the expense of the 
balletic artistry favored in the past, but there’s no questioning the physical 
asks it demands of today’s top flight. The trend has not advanced without 
resistance. When Carlotta Ferlito finished 11th behind Biles at 2013 worlds, 
the Italian gymnast’s frustrationboiled over into racist invective 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/sports/breaking/chi-italian-gymnast-federation-spokesman-apologize-for-racial-insensitivity-20131009-story.html>
: “I told [team-mate Vanessa Ferrari] that next time we should also paint our 
skin black, so then we could win too.”

Under the new system there have been countries who aim for more scaled-back 
routines and simply look to stick them, then others who push the envelope for 
difficulty and roll the dice for bigger scores. Then there’s Biles, who dials 
up the most difficult programs of all – and seldom ever misses.

“Just when we thought we were at the physical limit of the sport, then here 
comesSimone Biles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/simone-biles>,” the 
beloved 1984 Olympic all-around champion Mary Lou Retton told a gaggle of 
reporters at the US Olympic gymnastics team trials this summer. “She’s the best 
I’ve ever seen.”

***

In countless interviews Boorman has praised Biles’ “air sense”, the inimitable 
presence of mind and knack for 360-degree balance when her body is mid-air. But 
when striving to understand what truly sets Biles apart, a friend of mine and 
an former elite-level gymnast characterizes her as “super surface” and “not a 
deep thinker” – descriptions that might sound like slights but within context 
embody the nature of Biles’ true brilliance. Many gymnasts spent the hours, 
minutes and seconds before a routine in reveries of intense self-reflection, a 
desperate search for quietude amid tumult often these days between the refuge 
of Beats headphones. Not so for Biles, who is laughing it up and joking around 
with team-mates until the very last second.

“I love to see her mindset going into things,” Douglas said in Hartford. 
“Sometimes you just watch her on the side because she’s so calm with 
everything. And I think that’s how everybody needs to be. So calm, so 
confident. She’s an amazing competitor. She really is.”

Perhaps that blankness is what separates Biles from her rivals as much as any 
physical superiority. As wrote David Foster Wallace in 1994: “The real secret 
behind top athletes’ genius, then, may be as esoteric and obvious and dull and 
profound as silence itself. The real, many-veiled answer to the question of 
just what goes through a great player’s mind as he stands at the center of 
hostile crowd-noise and lines up the free-throw that will decide the game might 
well be:nothing at all.”

Behold the Amanar vault that she stuck at last year’s US nationals with 
computerized precision. Or the signature move of her floor routine, a maneuver 
so difficult it is known simply as The Biles. Originally devised to alleviate 
persisting pain from a bone spur in her ankle, it consists of two backward 
flips with her body fully extended followed by a half-turn that enables a 
forward-facing landing.

Beyond the technical splendor Biles performs with an exuberance that’s been 
missing a sport that’s leaned self-serious of late. There’s something about her 
stature: she’s so small but stands so tall. When she captured her fourth 
consecutive national title last month in St Louis with a career-high score 
(125.000) nearly four points ahead of second-place finisher Aly Raisman, Biles 
spotted 2008 Olympic gold medal winner Shawn Johnson in the stands and 
punctuated a movement with a cheeky wink.

Yes, @simonebiles we caught the wink ;) hahaha love it! Check out the full 
video on YouTube! Link in bio above ☝🏻️#stlouis2016 #olympics #gymnastics 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BHN-opchZCY/>

A video posted by Shawn Johnson East (@shawnjohnson) on Jun 28, 2016 at 5:33pm 
PDT

The priority for Biles during the run-up to her long-awaited Olympic debut has 
been remaining healthy, a concept she laughs at. “Literally anything can happen 
at any time,” she says. “But it’s not like I walk into the gym every day and am 
like, ‘Oh my gosh, I need to stay healthy’ like everyone else telling me. How 
does onestay healthy? I know I come in and train but you can’t just force it 
upon me. I think I do a pretty good job but it’s not something you can control.”

Said Karolyi during a conference call last week: “She’s very talented, she’s 
physically explosive, and she knows how to come out from those very difficult 
skills. She brought gymnastics up a level with very difficult skills made to 
look like they’re executed easily. Besides this great talent, behind the 
performance, it’s a very regimented and dedicated work. Nobody can become a 
world champion just because they’re born with talent.

“She is in a very good training system, she regularly comes to camps here, 
doing the pre-Olympic training focusing on details and refining things. She is 
a big contender to be on top at the Games if everything goes in the direction 
we’re going right now.”

***

Two days after the shortest member of US Olympic delegation marches into the 
Maracanã alongside her 554 team-mates in Friday’s opening ceremony, Biles will 
finally make her Olympic debut when the gymnastics competition gets underway at 
the Arena Olímpica do Rio. She’s favored to win no less than four gold medals: 
Biles is a longshot only in the uneven bars, where the smart money is on 
American team-mate Madison Kocian and China’s Fan Yilin to jockey for gold.

When I’m out there I’m not thinking, ‘Oh my gosh, I have so much pressure,’ 
because I'm the one doing it

“She faces the same pressure as anyone going to the Olympic Games,” says 
Karolyi. “We had to make sure that they don’t feel outside pressure – it should 
be coming from inside, making sure that they do their best performance and if 
they do their best performance, what they’re capable of and prepared for, 
everything will be OK. They don’t need to put any other pressure, and we talk 
about this very often. The person you want to please is yourself, and if you 
set high standards for yourself and you put the work behind it, you will be 
happy regardless of the outcome. You’re not thinking of the outcome, but of the 
process. If it’s done correctly, you will be satisfied.

“Simone’s in a good place.”

Born on an inconvenient temporal fault line for Olympic purposes, Biles is 
non-committal about whether this year’s Games would be her final competition – 
“I haven’t thought about it yet” – but at least acknowledged the possibility 
that she may never grace this stage again. That means her first appearance on 
the sport’s grandest platform may also be her swansong, only dialing up the 
pressure. Not that it bothers her much.

“How can great athletes shut off the Iago-like voice of the self?” Wallace 
asked. “How can they bypass the head and superbly act?”

The answer, to hear Biles tell it, is as elementary as a front somersault: by 
just doing it.

“That our job,” she says. “We’re not supposed to make anything look hard.”

• This article was amended on 4 August 2016. An earlier version called Shawn 
Johnson the 2008 Olympic all-around champion. Johnson won silver in the 
all-around, and gold in balance beam.
 