
The details shocked. Shackled prisoners were treated like cattle, watched by 
theirCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> interrogators. Testimony 
from one observer stated that men blindfolded and tied “were made to run down a 
steep hill, at the bottom of which were three throws of concertina barbed wire. 
The first row would hit them across the knees and they would plunge head first 
into the second and third rows of wire”.

This wasn’t CIA torture after the September 11 attacks, exposed in detail in a 
recentSenate report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/09/cia-torture-report-worst-findings-waterboard-rectal>
, but the Phoenix programme, instituted by the CIA and US, Australian and South 
Vietnamese militaries in Vietnam between 1965 and 1972 to “neutralise” the 
Vietcong. The result was more than 60,000 people tortured and killed. No senior 
politicians, generals or decision-makers were prosecuted for these crimes. A 
culture of immunity, despite occasional media and public outrage, thrived 
across the US.

Questioned before a US House operations subcommittee in the late 1960s to 
investigate widespread Phoenix-inspired torture, future CIA head William Colby 
used language that sounds familiar today. It’s just the official enemy that has 
changed. The “collateral damage” was justified, he said. Phoenix was “an 
essential part of the war effort … designed to protect the Vietnamese people 
from terrorism.”

In 2007, decades after its cessation, the CIA was still worried 
<https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/vol51no2/a-retrospective-on-counterinsurgency-operations.html#pgfId-1047812>
 that the public felt Phoenix was an “unlawful and immoral assassination 
programme targeting civilians.” Instead, they claimed, it was “pacification and 
rural security programmes”.

Compare this to today’s CIA head, John Brennan, who defends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/11/john-brennan-defends-cia-torture-report>
 his agency’s behaviour in the “war on terror” as doing a “lot of things 
right.” This arrogance only exists in an environment that doesn’t punish those 
who sanction abuses at the highest level and a mainstream media that givesequal 
time <http://fair.org/take-action/action-alerts/equal-time-for-torturers/> to 
torturers while virtually ignoring the victims. American torture’s grim legacy 
inAfghanistan 
<https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/the-other-guantanamo-11-bagram-closes-cia-torture-revealed-us-to-be-held-to-account/>
 is one of the least reported aspects of the last decade.

While it was the French who first introduced electrical torture to Vietnam, it 
was the Americans, writes journalist Mike Otterman in his bookAmerican Torture 
<http://www.americantorture.com/>, who advised the Vietnamese “how to make the 
torture more painful and effective. Under American supervision, Vietnamese 
interrogators often combined electrical torture with sexual abuse”.

Otterman reminds us that US torture wasn’t an invention after the terror 
attacks of 2001 but part of a continuum of unaccountable US cruelty from Latin 
America to Asia, the Middle East and beyond. It’s revealing that this pedigree 
is so rarely explained or investigated in the rush to condemn (or praise, 
depending on your worldview) Washington-directed brutality under George W. Bush 
andBarack Obama 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/161936/cias-secret-sites-somalia>. 

This history is relevant during the current debate over post September 11 
torture. The Senate report is an important contribution to the public record 
but the lack of any prosecution, censure or official condemnation goes to the 
heart of modern political culture. Obama has acquiesced in this position. The 
effect, writes journalistAndrew Sullivan 
<http://dish.andrewsullivan.com/2014/12/10/why-arent-the-torturers-in-jail/>, 
is that America has ensured that these crimes will occur again: “That will be 
part of his legacy: the sounds of a torture victim crying in the dark, and 
knowing that America is fine with it.”

A culture that celebrates 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/sirajdatoo/tv-shows-like-homeland-are-making-torture-acceptable>
 television shows such as 24, Homeland and Spooks, where torture is central to 
capturing the bad guys and glamorises its use, makes real-life torment easier 
to justify or ignore. An Amnestypoll <http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-27387040> this 
year found 29% of Britons, higher than in Russia, Brazil and Argentina, 
believed torture could be justified to protect the public.

A Washington Post-ABC News poll 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/new-poll-finds-majority-of-americans-believe-torture-justified-after-911-attacks/2014/12/16/f6ee1208-847c-11e4-9534-f79a23c40e6c_story.html?Post+generic=%3Ftid%3Dsm_twitter_washingtonpost>
 taken after the release of the Senate torture report found that 59% of 
Americans felt that the CIA’s treatment of suspected terrorists was justified. 
This is in spite of the fact that one of the key findings in the US Senate 
report was that CIA torture was ineffective 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/cia-torture-report/senate-report-finds-cia-interrogation-tactics-were-ineffective-n264621>
 in hunting down extremists. Evidence from a US Senate armed services committee 
report into torture in 2009 found that such abuses were only guaranteed in 
bringingfalse confessions 
<http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2014/12/doesnt-mainstream-media-discuss-torture-issue.html>
.

The Senate torture report has brought a handful of politicians demanding full 
transparency of their government’s role since 2001. The head of Britain’s 
Commons intelligence and security committee, Sir Malcolm Rifkind, wants 
Washington torelease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/13/britain-link-cia-torture-us-senate-unredacted-report>
 all documents showing London’s role in the CIA’s rendition programme though 
it’s sad he acknowledges London’s relativeweakness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/14/british-mps-redacted-material-senate-torture-report>
 when “requesting” the USA to hand over the details.

The silence has been deafening in Australia with no major politicians 
demanding openness from Canberra on its role under former prime minister John 
Howard in sanctioning the illegal incarceration ofDavid Hicks 
<http://www.theage.com.au/national/revealed-how-the-us-and-uk-tried-to-spin-the-david-hicks-case-20141213-124z5k.html>
 and Mamdouh Habib. Independent MP Andrew Wilkie is one of the few modern 
politicians with a history of questioning the pernicious role of group-think in 
government. In 2004, he published a searing book,Axis of Deceit 
<http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2004/06/25/1088144972828.html>, on Australia’s 
real reason for overthrowing Saddam Hussein, and it wasn’t weapons of mass 
destruction. Thus far Wilkie has not commented on the CIA report, although he 
hasaccused 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/editorials/liberal-left-still-in-denial-despite-terror-in-sydney/story-e6frg71x-1227161182557?login=1>
 the Abbott government of crimes against humanity for its treatment of asylum 
seekers.

The failure to punish torturers in the US fits neatly into a wider social 
malaise. The powerful don’t go to jail; it’s the weak that suffer for their 
foibles. The lack of any substantial prosecutions for Wall Street illegality is 
symptomatic of the rot inside the political class. Rolling Stone’s Matt 
Taibbi’s shows in his bookThe Divide 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/13/books/review/the-divide-by-matt-taibbi.html> 
how this occurs. “Obsessed with success and wealth and despising failure and 
poverty”, he argues, “our society is systematically dividing the population 
into winners and losers, using institutions like the courts to speed the 
process.”

When “we” break the law, it’s with benign intent and good intentions (an 
editorial 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/editorials/flaws-in-cia-torture-report/story-e6frg71x-1227155862085>
 in the Australian makes this spurious case). But when “they” do it, they’re 
criminals who should be punished. Elites protect elites. Where was the outcry 
when the CIAhired 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2012/07/the-terrifying-background-of-the-man-who-ran-a-cia-assassination-unit/259856/>
 private mercenary company Blackwater after 9/11 to assassinate “enemies” in 
Afghanistan?

Instead of trials for those accused of endorsing torture, we’re left with 
articles, essays and works likeThe Trial of Donald Rumsfeld 
<http://ccrjustice.org/trialofrumsfeld>, “a prosecution by book”, written by 
the Centre for Constitutional Rights’ Michael Ratner. It’s a solid tome but 
desperately short of what’s required in a healthy democracy for individuals at 
the highest levels of government who order harsh crimes.

The ability of the state to retroactively justify 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/13/us/politics/documents-shed-new-light-on-legal-wrangling-over-spying-in-us-.html?_r=0>
 illegal behavior when caught is a feature of every nation on earth, not just 
the US. But demanding other countries abide by international law, when western 
nations so blatantly ignore it, is the height of hypocrisy. The shocking 
details in the US Senate report demand accountability but there’s little public 
appetite for it.

Retired Navy JAG John Hutson warned 
<http://www.mcclatchydc.com/2008/12/19/58210/did-bush-officials-commit-war.html>
 in 2008 against trials for post 9/11 crimes because “people would lawyer up”, 
a tacit admission that the legal system is gamed by the wealthy and powerful to 
escape justice. There’s hardly a more illustrative example of the modern 
state’s failure.
 