
What happened at the supreme court?

The court ruled on seven cases 
<https://www.supremecourt.uk/cases/uksc-2016-0029.html>, each of which had 
challenged housing benefit regulations underpinning the bedroom tax on the 
basis that they discriminated against the claimants’ right to family life. The 
claimants also contended that the regulations were in breach of public sector 
equality laws.

Families win supreme court appeals over 'unfair' bedroom tax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/09/families-win-supreme-court-appeals-over-unfair-bedroom-tax-jacqueline-carmichael>
Remind me, what is the bedroom tax?

The bedroom tax, introduced in April 2013, is effectively a cap on the housing 
benefit payable to tenants in social housing deemed to be under-occupying their 
home or, in other words, are considered to have more bedrooms than their 
household needs. Those affected lose between 14% and 25% of their housing 
benefit, depending on how many “excess” bedrooms they have. Around465,000 
households 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/areas-of-britain-most-affected-by-bedroom-tax-are-hardest-to-downsize-in-research-finds>
 are affected nationally. Studies found the bedroom tax triggered poverty, debt,
isolation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2015/mar/16/in-tenants-own-words-why-the-bedroom-tax-makes-you-ill>
 andill-health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/16/tenants-hit-by-bedroom-tax-suffer-range-of-health-problems-study-shows>
 in some of those affected.

Who were the claimants, and what were their circumstances?

Six of the claimants (Rourke, Drage, JD, Daly, Carmichael and the Rutherford 
family) either had a disability themselves or lived with family members who had 
a disability. They claimed they needed an “extra” bedroom to enable them to 
cope with the health and medical consequences of the disability, and that the 
bedroom tax therefore unfairly discriminated against them. The seventh claimant 
was a single parent (“A”) who as a consequence of being assaulted and raped had 
had a bedroom in her home specially converted into a secure “safe room”. She 
claimed that the bedroom tax – which financially penalised the safe room – 
discriminated against women like her who live in “sanctuary scheme” homes.

Why were Carmichael and the Rutherfords successful?

The judges agreed that there were unreasonable differences in the way housing 
benefit regulations treated adults and children. It was unfair that Jacqueline 
Carmichael, whose medical condition required her to sleep in a different bed to 
her husband, was hit by the bedroom tax while households where children needed 
separate rooms for reasons of disability were not. Likewise, while adults who 
needed an extra room for an overnight carer were exempt from the bedroom tax, 
children – such as Paul and Susan Rutherford’s grandson Warren, who has a rare 
genetic disorder and is unable to walk, talk or feed himself – were not. These 
anomalies, the judges ruled, were “manifestly without reason”.

Why did the other claims fail?

The judges dismissed the appeals by Rourke, Drage, JD, and Daly. They accepted 
that while the bedroom tax had had a discriminatory effect on the claimants, 
there was no direct connection between their or their family member’s 
disability and the need for an extra bedroom. Theirs was a social need, rather 
than a medical one. In theory, therefore, their needs could be met by applying 
for financial support to their local authority’sdiscretionary housing payment  
<http://www.cpag.org.uk/content/supreme-court-decide-unlawful-bedroom-tax>
scheme. In A’s case, the judges found by a majority of 5-2 in favour of the 
government. They ruled while A must continue to receive the protection of the 
sanctuary scheme, that did not automatically require her to have an extra 
bedroom, therefore the bedroom tax did not discriminate against women.

What happens next?

As a result of their victory, the Carmichael and the Rutherford households are 
now exempt from the bedroom tax. The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) 
says it will “take steps to ensure we comply with the judgment in due course”. 
This means housing benefit regulations will be changed to ensure households in 
similar positions are also exempted. It is not known precisely how many 
households will be exempt, but estimates put it in the low thousands. 
Households who do not get exemption will have to continue apply for 
discretionary help to pay their rent. These locally administered funds will be 
increasingly stretched as a result of theextended benefit cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/extended-benefit-cap-hit-116000-families-housing-experts>
. The failure of A’s case means that for now there will be no formal exemption 
for the estimated 281 women in sanctuary schemes who are affected by the 
bedroom tax. Lawyers for A intend to challenge the ruling at the European court 
of human rights.

Do the rulings damage the bedroom tax as a policy?

The rulings do not challenge the legality of the bedroom tax as a whole. The 
DWP, which chose to emphasise that its lawyers had been successful in five out 
of the seven cases, points out that the policy and regulations remain in place 
for now. But the judgment remains a blow to the government, which says it is 
“considering the implications of the judgment for the legislation”. Many people 
will find it extraordinary, given the specific household needs and 
circumstances of theRutherfords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/27/disabled-childs-family-mad-angry-over-tories-bedroom-tax-appeal>
, the Carmichaels and “A”, that they were subject to the bedroom tax in the 
first place, and that ministers invested so much time and public money doggedly 
fighting the cases all the way to the supreme court. The bedroom tax is already
unpopular with the public 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2014/07/18/bedroom-tax-divisive-ever/> and 
Wednesday’s ruling may only serve to underline that unpopularity.
 