
This is surely what the internet is for: among the most truly wonderful four 
hours, 13 minutes and 28 seconds there are in the world, is this:apparently 
unedited conversations between John Cage and Morton Feldman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5bW2Q1i5Yik>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5bW2Q1i5Yik&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5bW2Q1i5Yik>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5bW2Q1i5Yik&media=>
It’s a compilation of four open-ended conversations between the two at the 
studios of radio station WBAI in New York, produced between July 1966 and 
January 1967 (they were alsopublished as a book 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Radio-happenings-I-V-John-Cage/dp/398031510X/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1439376307&sr=8-3&keywords=cage+feldman+radio+happenings>
). The effect is of eavesdropping on two of the most brilliant minds and 
personalities of the 20th century talking about the ideas, music, people, 
philosophy, art – and much, much more – that matter to them.

It’s also a record of a deep friendship that began (as you can hear about 1hr 
50mins in <https://youtu.be/5bW2Q1i5Yik?t=1h50m45s>), as Cage says, with 
Webern, when “we both walked out of a Philharmonic concert in which Webern had 
just been played, and we shared the desire not to hear anything else because we 
had been so deeply moved”.

Listening to them, the effect is of spending precious hours in the unmediated 
company of people who just happen to be two of the most probing minds in 
musical history. As well as meditations on “intrusion” – Cage wants Feldman to 
accept unintended sounds in his music and in his life, or how to approach 
composition for the harpsichord, or whether Varèse is as equivalently or 
differently influential as Webern, you also hear the pauses, tics, and 
mannerisms in the way both of them talk. Listen to Feldman’s New York drawl, 
and his striking of match after match for the cigarettes he chain-smokes, or 
Cage’s gently but firmly interrogative “mmm?” at the end of many of his 
sentences, and their infectious laughter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Finternet-john-cage-morton-feldman-conversation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439808148931%2Fd18e6421-fbed-477a-98ee-e06d45f288d3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wonders%20of%20the%20internet%20%E2%80%93%20listen%20to%20John%20Cage%20and%20Morton%20Feldman%20in%20conversation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Finternet-john-cage-morton-feldman-conversation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wonders%20of%20the%20internet%20%E2%80%93%20listen%20to%20John%20Cage%20and%20Morton%20Feldman%20in%20conversation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Finternet-john-cage-morton-feldman-conversation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439808148931%2Fd18e6421-fbed-477a-98ee-e06d45f288d3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘I never heard anybody boo a transistor radio’ … Morton Feldman. 
Unlike the more formal records of Feldman or Cage speaking or writing, you’re 
privy in these conversations to the two men working ideas out rather than 
presenting finely worked philosophies or arguments. It’s like being given 
access to their combined creative process at a key moment in both of their 
musical lives. Both were on the cusp of some of their most important creative 
periods (Cage was in his mid-50s, Feldman in his early 40s). It’s one of those 
rare things where you feel you’re actually in the company of the speakers, and 
the half-century between us and them disappears when you’re listening. I urge 
you to play it and spend an afternoon with John and Morty. It’s an experience 
that will change you.
 