
Just because it’s quieter doesn’t make it any smarter.

Black protester detained after being sucker-punched at Trump rally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/black-protester-punched-donald-trump-rally-north-carolina>
Thursday night’s Republican presidential debate in Miami – one of what physics 
tells us could theoretically be millions – was a subdued affair, especially 
compared to the flailing, hair-pulling, spitball-shooting daycare fight of last 
week. But the best thing you can say about it is that a controlled and 
even-toned insane statement can be just as menacing and just as insane.

The immediate concern for the other Republican candidates is that the beast 
seems to be learning. Donald Trump’s opening statement actually sounded as if 
it had beenprepared and considered, a disciplined departure from his previous 
free associations about winning, doing the opposite of not-winning, then 
getting sick of it. Now that the finish line is in sight, the raw, ravening 
animal that is the spirit of the Trump campaign appears willing to play at 
looking tame if it will snooker more squares on the way to the ballot box.

It doesn’t mean it’s any less threatening. When questioned on a recent 
incident in which a Trump fan at a rally in North Carolinasucker-punched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/black-protester-punched-donald-trump-rally-north-carolina>
 a black protester in the face, Trump expressed dislike for the incident. But 
he understood. His supporters “have anger that’s unbelievable. They love this 
country. They don’t like seeing bad trade deals. They don’t like losing their 
jobs.”

Then he defended violent statements he’d made about protesters in the past by 
talking about “some protesters who are bad dudes … they are swinging, they are 
really dangerous … We had a couple big powerful strong guys doing damage to 
people.” Bottom line: these sorts of things are bad, but when they happen, the 
protesters have it coming.

A decent chunk of the debate audience cheered, by the way.

That’s an important thing to remember, because the rest of the GOP field would 
prefer voters to think that the Trump campaign is a recent, invasive violent 
species in their ecosystem, rather than a more aggressive mutation of the same 
species. Demonizing the left, minorities and foreigners as a mortal cancer 
growing unchecked within the American body politichas pretty much been the 
playbook since 1968 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/05/trump-reagan-nixon-republican-party-racism>
. Angrily rejecting them is not only necessary but a constitutionally protected 
right for the good sorts of Americans.

American crossroads: Reagan, Trump and the devil down south
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/05/trump-reagan-nixon-republican-party-racism>
And if that observation seems a little abstruse, then there was Ted Cruz to 
clarify it for you. You see, he understands the anger of people at Trump 
rallies because Barack Obama is an imperial president and “Washington isn’t 
listening to people”. He understands violence, because he can pivot it to his 
brand: #MakeDCListen. And as for Trump, Cruz,Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> in general – they don’t need 
to take steps to condemn violence themselves, because curbing it is impossible 
anyway. It’s Obama’s fault. We just have to wait out the clock on his 
hate-inspiring dystopia.

Things did not get any more sensible on foreign policy. When asked to defend 
his previous statements about going after terrorists’ families and killing 
them, which is a war crime, Trump said that the United States cannot be 
hamstrung by laws. Isis can drown people in cages, but we can’t waterboard. 
Solution: “We have to obey the laws, but we have to expand those laws, because 
we have to be able to fight on somewhat of an equal footing”.Addington, Bybee 
and Yoo <http://www.salon.com/2009/05/18/torture_25/> would be proud. 

When asked for comment, Marco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> distanced himself from Trump 
by essentially saying the exact same thing. We will not go after the families 
of terrorists, just the terrorists themselves. We will do that by expanding the 
army, navy and air force – three notoriously pinpoint-precise entities that 
historically exhibit near priest-like restraint and never kill things in the 
same vicinity as terrorists, like families. He also repeated his call to take 
terrorists to Guantánamo and do everything we can to find out everything we 
know. It’s a cute allusion to indefinite detention and torture, which is a war 
crime.

Ted Cruz <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> did not repeat his 
earlier calls to carpet bomb areas of the Middle East where Isis hides – which 
would not only be just as futile as every other historical incidence of carpet 
bombing, but would also be a war crime. His followers have probably not 
forgotten, though.

Ben Carson to endorse Donald Trump before crucial Florida primary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/donald-trump-endorsement-ben-carson-florida-primary>
If you want to round out the depressing tour of insanity, there was also Marco 
Rubio’s statement on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/republican-debate-miami-climate-change-question>
, which breaks down to these component parts:

 * America is not a planet.

 * Our doing things does not stop others from doing things, so all action is 
futile.

 * Renewable energy will only ever cost more money that fossil fuels, and 
asking people to pay more on their electric bill now will be much more ruinous 
than, say, relocating tens of millions of Florida residents to high ground 
later.

 * He lives in Miami, and it is built on a swamp.

Singling out Rubio might seem unfair, like physically kicking a rejected 
contestant out the door, but his responses to what even the American military 
and intelligence committee considers a massive coming global security and 
economic crisis are no more or less intelligent than anyone else’s, except 
Kasich, who matters almost as little.

If there is any lesson here, it is that a measured professional-sounding set 
of stupid ideas is no less dangerous than one screamed from a step-pyramid of 
upended shopping carts. It just makes it easier for people enamored of 
unreasonable things to subscribe to such stupid ideas in public.

That’s a lesson Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
has learned, and he ended the evening with a Bernie Sanders-esque sales pitch 
about all the new voters he’s attracting. “Embrace these people, who for the 
first time ever love the Republican party,” he said. “Be smart and unify.”

He just may make it happen.
 