 The word "will" comes up constantly in the Lower Ninth Ward. "We Will Rebuild" 
is spray-painted on empty houses. "It will happen," one organiser told me. Will 
itself may achieve the ambitious objective of bringing this destroyed 
inner-city African-American neighbourhood back to life, and for many New 
Orleans citizens a ferocious determination seems the only alternative to being 
overwhelmed and becalmed. But the fate of the neighbourhood is still up in the 
air, from the question of whether enough people can and will make it back, to 
the nagging questions of how viable a city they will be part of. The majority 
of houses in this isolated area are still empty, about a tenth of the residents 
are back - some already living in rehabilitated houses, some camped in stark 
white trailers, some living elsewhere while getting their houses ready.
The place has come a long way already. Even seven months after the storm it 
was spookily unpopulated and almost untouched since the catastrophe. Cars that 
had been flipped and tossed by the waters still stood up against buildings, 
hung over fences and laid on their backs. Houses that had been shoved by the 
force of the water into the middle of the street or that had been smashed into 
splinters looked untouched, except by sardonic graffiti: "Thanks for Nothing 
Fema", was the message to the national emergency agency on one dislodged 
building; a simple "Baghdad" was emblazoned on another. Debris was everywhere.

Today, two years after Hurricane Katrina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hurricane-katrina>, the wrecked cars, 
smashed houses and debris are gone, for the most part, and a lot of the 
remaining houses look pretty good. People have made their own street signs, 
further evidence of social strength and institutional weakness. Nena, the 
Neighbourhood empowerment network association of the Lower Ninth, keeps a map 
in its office with a green pin for every returnee. The green dots are scattered 
everywhere, though they represent only a small percentage of homes and 
residents.

A lot of outside organisations are here, but locals lead most of the efforts. 
I asked Linda Jackson, a Nena member, how the community felt about the 
assistance pouring in from around the world. She replied: "They're stunned. 
They never thought the world would reach out the way they did ... We say: You 
know what, if these people can come down here and take off work, drop out of 
school for a couple weeks, there's no way, there's just no way we can have a 
negative attitude. These people feel this way, that's something worth fighting 
for."

The list of who came to help sounds like the setup for a joke: A Black 
Panther, an accountant, a bunch of Methodists and the mayor of Portland walk 
into a bar. Or, if you prefer, Brad Pitt, some graduate students and lots of 
young anarchists. No one yet has assessed the scale of the volunteer influx. 
It's a safe understatement to say that more than 100,000 volunteers have come 
from out of town, and they have done everything from medical care, food 
preparation, demolition and construction to helping with red tape and planning.

Unlike mostly middle-class, white Lakeview, or New Orleans East, home to many 
Vietnamese-Americans, the Lower Ninth is not a new neighbourhood nor one on 
exceptionally low ground, and its ecological precariousness is relatively 
recent. There were inhabitants here in the early 19th century, long before the 
Industrial canal cut off the Lower Ninth along its western edge from the rest 
of the city. This canal, dug in the 1920s to provide a direct waterway between 
Lake Pontchartrain and the Mississippi river, which forms the neighbourhood's 
southern border, is penned in by levees that had failed catastrophically 
before, in Hurricane Betsy in 1965.

Another watery border, this time in the bayou to the north, was gouged out in 
the 1960s and named the Mississippi river Gulf Outlet canal, or MR-GO. It 
created a shorter route for shipping traffic - and for storm surges, 
salinisation and the loss of some 27,000 acres of wetlands, making yet another 
unnatural edge of vulnerability for the place. Breaches of the MR-GO canal's 
levees were responsible for much of the flooding of the Lower Ninth in 2005, 
and water that surged up this "hurricane highway" may have been responsible for 
the even more devastating breaches of the Industrial canal. It is a murderous 
piece of engineering, and even its builders, the US army corps of engineers, 
agreed that it should be closed.

Restoring the wetlands at the Lower Ninth's northern edge is a challenge that 
has been taken up by a local neighbourhood association, with the University of 
Wisconsin's water resources management doing the research. One of the first 
facts that emerged is that a forest had died there, in Bayou Bienvenue. The 
cypress forest that could still be seen in photographs from the 1950s died of 
the salinity from the MR-GO canal, and with it went one layer of protection 
against storm surges. A forest buffers a storm surge, and trees would help hold 
the wetlands as land rather than open water.

These are only small pieces of the large puzzle of restoring one tiny area of 
the Gulf Coast. The army corps of engineers is rebuilding New Orleans's levees 
to withstand a Katrina-level event, not a category-5 hurricane. The ocean is 
rising. The wetlands farther out to sea are eroding. New Orleans had been in 
steady economic decline since the 1960s, and nothing suggests that's about to 
turn now. Regeneration of this one neighbourhood could be undermined or 
sabotaged by these larger forces. But the Gulf Coast will also be rebuilt one 
piece at a time, and this piece doesn't lack the powerful tools of will, vision 
or love.

Â· Rebecca Solnit is the author of Hope in the Dark: The Untold History of 
People Power, and Wanderlust: A history of walking. A longer version of this 
article is in the latest edition of the Nationcomment@theguardian.com 
<mailto:comment@theguardian.com>.
 