
The good ... Comedy Bang! Bang!

Hidden away at 1am on SBS2 is the enjoyably farcical Comedy Bang! Bang! hosted 
by US writer and comedian Scott Aukerman (co-creator ofBetween Two Ferns 
<http://www.funnyordie.com/between_two_ferns> with Zach Galifianakis). Deadpan, 
awkward and perfectly timed, this anti-chat show provides blessed meta-relief 
from the tide of men-behind-desk shows (sent up excellently byAmy Schumer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNfBbJ0pzbA>), as well as existing in its own 
right as a petri dish of sketches and characters.

Playing the role of tortured guest on Friday 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/47907907534/Weird-Al-Yankovic-Weras-A-Hawaiian-Shi-weird-Al-Yankovic-Wears-A-Hawaiian-Shirt>
 was Weird Al Yankovic. Personally I prefer the episodes where there’s a 
straight character to play off Aukerman’s entirely unsuitable host, as withJon 
Hamm 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/38173763973/Comedy-Bang-Bang-Jon-Hamm-Wears-A-Light-Blue-Shirt-And-Silver-Watch>
 in the previous week, but things are still reliably offbeat and hilarious 
here. The entire episode is worth it for the inventive commitment to the green 
screen gag alone.

The bad ... MasterChef

The opening credits to MasterChef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masterchef> always seem rather out of 
place, with their happy montage showing chefs chasing their “food dreams” at 
Katy Perry’s poppy behest. Really what they’re doing is suffering under the 
sullen tutelage of Marco Pierre White, part chef, part spirit of a Dickensian 
orphanage.

These shows become insufferable when they are overtaken by the reality format 
tropes. Unfortunately MPW is an enabler in that respect: he talks in quiet, 
deliberate sentences packed with dramatic pauses, making his recipe suggestions 
sound like a bedtime story read out by Hannibal Lecter. “Toss the salad. Season 
lightly. Then walk past the babbling brook to where the Gubbles live … and eat 
their faces.” Likewise he delivers positive feedback with all the joy of 
someone who has just witnessed a puppy dropped into a bucket of pythons.

Tuesday’s episode 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/masterchef/season-7/episode-13> tried as 
hard as it could to make an egg exciting, requiring much crash-zooming on the 
inert little bugger which failed to do anything dramatic like detonate, or 
hatch into a dragon. “It’s fine!” I yell at the television. “Just show us what 
they’re doing and explain what it means. I’ll honestly enjoy it!” All the whip 
pans and pumping, nervous breakdown-inducing music made this bloody egg seem 
like it was the star in a movie produced by Jerry Bruckheimer.

During the life-or-death ordeal, a contestant remarks: “It’s hard to believe 
cooking one egg could be so intense.” Really? You’ve obviously never watched 
MasterChef then.


And the soon-to-be-extinct

What could be the final series of Top Gear  
<http://www.9jumpin.com.au/show/topgear/episodes/season-22/episode-1/episode-1/>
is currently airing on Channel Nine. Thursday’s episode saw Clarkson and 
friends (not a bad name if they come back with a new show: Clarkson, May and 
Hammond sounds like a pet food brand) ruining St Petersburg. Clarkson got 
behind the wheel of a hovervan and, in what could be the best televisual 
re-enactment of the current government, terrorised people on the water, lost 
all control and ended up driving through a garden and crushing a tree.

Without Top Gear <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> we’ll now 
have to get by creating our own pointlessly wacky stunts. Perhaps I could hire 
a tractor and drive through the Louvre, or race a baby’s pram against a 
penny-farthing through an Apple store. Nah, it wouldn’t quite be the same 
without Jeremy Clarkson muttering something mildly offensive.
 