
Fashion may be quixotic, but there are some things you don’t argue with: Mrs 
Prada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/17/miuccia-prada-i-hate-the-idea-of-being-a-collector>
’s genius,Karl <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/karl-lagerfeld>’s Edwardian 
collar preference and the stone cold rightness ofNova magazine 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nova_(UK_magazine)>. In a prescient editorial 
printed in January 1969 with the headline, “What are you trying to hide?” the 
mag declared that the only response to worrying that your underwear would be 
visible beneath your clothes was to turn a wardrobe vice into a virtue. “Show 
that you mean it,” it declared. “Don’t count on your underclothes not showing, 
choose them so if they do, it doesn’t matter.” Accompanied by a model shot and 
clothes credited to Woolworths – an arch styling move if ever there were one – 
it documented a pivotal moment in the fashion history of underwear as outerwear.

Forty-five years later and the concept of the blurred line between public and 
private fashion – what ought to be concealed or revealed – is still being 
played out on the catwalk. For spring 2016, the debate began in September at 
the Givenchy show – a visiting dignitary at New York fashion week for one 
season only – where designerRiccardo Tisci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/riccardo-tisci> riffed on a slip dress 
theme with chemises, wispy lace and silk slips. At Calvin Klein, creamy 
ankle-length slip dresses with misbehaving slovenly-cum-sexy straps were worn 
with minimal trainers and recalled the 90s. It was an echo of the brand’s 
heyday, a moment of nostalgia for those whose love affair with fashion began 
when a doe-likeKate Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss> 
defined the brand. In London,Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> continued the theme, 
showing silky flowing slip dresses with utilitarian rucksacks and contrasting 
chunky sandals. Was Christopher Bailey submitting to his inner grunge rocker?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28c59d17f66153beda60d63d30a36ebbb04f75f1%2F0_0_2838_4256%2F2838.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28c59d17f66153beda60d63d30a36ebbb04f75f1%2F0_0_2838_4256%2F2838.jpg>
 Balenciaga S/S 16. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb801bb6ffda0c6c807b553d8814d6ebef900e67%2F0_0_3465_5258%2F3465.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb801bb6ffda0c6c807b553d8814d6ebef900e67%2F0_0_3465_5258%2F3465.jpg>
 Courtney Love in 1994. Photograph: Tony Mottram/Getty 
As you might expect, the underwear-on-display look was especially prominent in 
Paris, spiritual home of the cinq à sept.Alexander Wang’s swan song at 
Balenciaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/03/alexander-wang-balenciaga-paris-fashion-week>
 was filled with tryst-worthy clothes, all white silk nighties and hotel 
slippers, a romanticised room-service look. AtCéline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/celine> the trend crystalised. Phoebe Philo
 <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/phoebe-philo> isn’t known for pushing 
overt sexiness, and her lace-trimmed slips with intentional creasing weren’t 
presented that way. But in the hands (sorry, on the boobs) of a woman with 
curves – as evidenced byDakota Johnson on the cover of Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2016/01/04/february-british-vogue-cover-reveal-dakota-johnson>
 – their sensuality is hard to ignore.

But it was Hedi Slimane <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/hedi-slimane> who 
really spelt it out, with a Saint Laurent finale celebrating grunge. Slip 
dresses withCourtney Love <https://www.theguardian.com/music/courtney>-worthy 
tiaras and explicitly bare backs that felt more backstage pass than boudoir 
summed up the allure: despite its flimsy fabric, a slip dress can multitask, 
representing both sex and rebellion at the same time.

A quick skirt through the history of the slip dress backs up this theory. Fans 
of the style include, in no particular order:Kate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss>, Michelle Pfeiffer’s Elvira 
Hancock in Scarface 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=scarface+elvira+hancock&biw=2217&bih=1116&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&sqi=2&ved=0ahUKEwjClq-27tbKAhUEAxoKHRQ9C20Q_AUIBigB>
 (come on, in fashion terms she is real),Elizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/elizabethtaylor>, Rihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna>, Madonna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna>, Drew Barrymore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/drew-barrymore>, Courtney Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/courtney>, Veronica Lake 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000043/bio> and Princess Diana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/diana>. Women who share, if not a style, then a 
kind of sartorial irreverence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc152653613dd874a1d1d2f081886cb6f966fa1f6%2F0_141_2576_1546%2F2576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc152653613dd874a1d1d2f081886cb6f966fa1f6%2F0_141_2576_1546%2F2576.jpg>
 Céline S/S 16. Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
In its basic form the slip dress, with its spaghetti straps, silky fabric and 
often lacy trim, mirrors underwear, but also wants to be seen.Undressed: A 
Brief History Of Underwear 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-undressed-a-brief-history-of-underwear/>
, an exhibition opening in April at London’s V&A, examines the relationship 
between underwear and fashion. Its curator, Edwina Ehrman, sums up the wearing 
of underwear as outerwear as “a way of challenging contemporary morality. It 
represents the difference between what should be public and what should be 
hidden, and the breaking down of those barriers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c10401145c9a019d8c4d3ee1310a35f88002325%2F294_193_1111_2317%2F1111.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c10401145c9a019d8c4d3ee1310a35f88002325%2F294_193_1111_2317%2F1111.jpg>
 Princess Diana in Dior at the 1996 Met Ball. Photograph: New York Daily News 
via Getty 
As far back as the late 18th century, fashion leaders such as the Duchess of 
Devonshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/sep/12/deborah-duchess-of-devonshire-chatsworth>
 and Marie Antoinette were wearing fine muslin dresses with a sash around the 
waist. Not so shocking now, but to their contemporaries it would have looked as 
if they were wearing their underwear. Ehrman claims that the classicJane Austen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten>-style dresses of the early 1800s 
were an even earlier example of this. To underline her point, the curator has 
chosen to exhibit aPride And Prejudice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/26/pride-prejudice-200th-anniversary>
-type dress next to her own favourite underwear as outerwear dress: a John 
Galliano for Givenchy slip, cut on the bias and owing much to the 1930s slip 
dress trend. A newly single Princess Diana wore another Galliano dress – this 
one for Dior – to the Met Ball in 1996 just a few months after her divorce. Bet 
she was feeling sexy and rebellious that night.

For Bay Garnett <https://www.instagram.com/baygarnett/?hl=en>, contributing 
fashion editor at Vogue and slip dress styling aficionado, it all depends on 
context. “You can have such different perceptions of the slip dress – in a 
tacky situation it looks terrible, but it can look incredible, too. Either East 
Hampton or totally grunge. To me the appeal is to deconstruct the sexiness, to 
subvert it. The genius of Courtney Love in a slip dress was that she turned an 
essentially conservative and conventional item on its head. It’s the ultimate 
punk thing to lampoon something so commercial.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faed3224466c79964e536fb5307477b39cf33d4ad%2F0_0_2327_3483%2F2327.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faed3224466c79964e536fb5307477b39cf33d4ad%2F0_0_2327_3483%2F2327.jpg>
 Givenchy S/S 16. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a5762e54993c955768da0bed24bd7509a04a10%2F259_0_1645_3472%2F1645.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20big%20reveal%3A%20deconstructing%20the%20slip%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-big-reveal-deconstructing-the-slip-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a5762e54993c955768da0bed24bd7509a04a10%2F259_0_1645_3472%2F1645.jpg>
 Kate Moss in Liza Bruce in 1993. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex/Shutterstock 
Like many, the slip dress that most resonates with me belonged to Kate Moss in 
1993. Wearing a transparent silver slip by Liza Bruce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jan/14/kate-moss-most-stylish-moments-40th-birthday>
 to a model agency party, Moss accessorised with an almost empty beer bottle 
and a Marlboro Light. The dress hides nothing and highlights what look like 
knickers from a multipack of pants. What is shocking is not that you can see 
the moles on her breasts but just how nonchalant she is about the whole thing. 
It’s a display of pure casual rebellion. Ehrman, who has included the original 
Bruce dress in the exhibition, agrees that the moment was “so natural, like 
she’s just pulled it on”.

In today’s post-Kimoji 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/23/kim-kardashian-emoji-app-kimoji-apple>
 age, where catwalks are live-streamed on Grindr and naked penises swing on the 
runway, the idea that underwear as outerwear might shock seems almost quaint. 
So what is the appeal of the slip dress now? Overt sexiness is not the 
prevailing mood in fashion, but we are enjoying yet another 90s revival. From
Christopher Kane <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/christopher-kane> and 
Vetements’ grown-up grunge to the minimalism of brands such asthe Row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/19/how-the-olsen-twins-won-over-the-fashion-world>
 andJoseph <https://www.joseph-fashion.com/>, the style imprint of that decade 
is hard to ignore. The slip dress is mercurial in this context – it can be a 
grunge-worthy charity shop find, sleek and minimal, or sexy, depending on your 
shoes and hair.

Add in a trim of lace, known among high-end fashion buyers as “retail gold”, 
and the slip dress represents the perfect fashion storm. It pushes style 
boundaries and cash registers in a louche, dishevelled way. It speaks of punk 
and grunge and sex – but all in the most casual fashion.

• This article was amended on 10 March 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that the V&A exhibition included the John Galliano for Dior navy 
lace-trimmed slip dress that Princess Diana wore to the Met Ball in 1996.
 