
Attendances

There is no greater indicator of what has at best been apathy but has mostly 
been outright hostility to the changes than the numbers going through the 
turnstiles – or, more accurately, the numbers not going through the turnstiles.

Most of the lowest attendances have involved the visit of the Premier League 
and Championship sides. Only 392 fans were at Highbury for Fleetwood’s game 
against Blackburn. A hardy 457 were in The Hive for Barnet against Norwich. 
Swansea played in front of 461 at AFC Wimbledon. The attendances at Stevenage v 
Brighton (486), Grimsby v Leicester (609), Morecambe v Stoke (686), Cambridge v 
Middlesbrough (693) and Colchester v Southampton (791) demonstrate the lack of 
appetite fans of lower league clubs have for the introduction of the kids from 
the top two tiers. Portsmouth recorded their lowest crowd of the post-war era – 
1,355 – when Reading visited, Port Vale had the second-lowest crowd in the 
club’s history (1,025) for Mansfield’s visit last month.

New EFL Trophy sparks withdrawals, anger and apathy before a ball is kicked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/new-efl-trophy-premier-league-academy-teams-fans>
On Tuesday Bristol Rovers visit Pompey in Southern Section Group A. Both sides 
still have a live chance of reaching the next round. This week lack of interest 
meant Bristol Rovers Supporters Clubcancelled their away coach service for the 
match for the first time in almost 40 years 
<https://bristolroverssc.co.uk/2016/11/02/coach-cancelled/>. Rovers have had 
some pretty dark times in those 40 years – not least their relegation out of 
the Football League in 2013-14 and subsequent season in the Conference – but 
not in all that time have they cancelled their away travel service.

It is true that previous attendances in the early stages of the competition 
were not exactly stellar – in the very first edition in 1983-84 just 403 turned 
out to see Halifax v Darlington in the first round – but they have surely never 
been this consistently low.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fefl-trophy-football-league-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c84aed16432038fb27d808883d4a3931dac291f%2F429_36_3850_2311%2F3850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revamped%20EFL%20Trophy%20is%20a%20complete%20and%20utter%20failure%20%E2%80%93%20and%20here%E2%80%99s%20why%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fefl-trophy-football-league-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revamped%20EFL%20Trophy%20is%20a%20complete%20and%20utter%20failure%20%E2%80%93%20and%20here%E2%80%99s%20why%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fefl-trophy-football-league-failure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c84aed16432038fb27d808883d4a3931dac291f%2F429_36_3850_2311%2F3850.jpg>
 Bristol Rovers have cancelled their away coach service for Tuesday trip to 
Portsmouth. Photograph: Stephenson/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
Criteria confusion

There has been some confusion as to the exact nature of the Premier League and 
Championship sides involved. Leicester (and others)list their fixtures under 
Development Squad <http://www.lcfc.com/fixtures-results/development_squad.aspx>
, while Stoke City (and others) place theirCheckatrade Trophy results in their 
Under-23 section <http://www.stokecityfc.com/fixtures-results/under23s/>. Derby 
County are among several teams wholist their Checktrade Trophy fixtures 
entirely separately 
<http://www.dcfc.co.uk/fixtures-results/checkatrade-trophy-fixtures/>. The EFL, 
meanwhile, lists all teams as under-21s in their results 
<http://www.efl.com/checkatrade-trophy/results/>.

The age-qualification criterion is perfectly clear – Premier League and 
Championship sides must name six players in their starting XI who were under 21 
at the end of June – but it does differ from that for Under-23/Development 
squad football, which those players play week-to-week. It is a mess in part 
born out ofchanges to Premier League youth football made in the summer 
<https://www.premierleague.com/premier-league-2-explained>. And, of course, the 
fact that the rules allow a largely “Under-21” side to end a game with eight 
players in their 30s on the pitch.

Selection issues

Thanks to the difference in criteria, the Premier League and Championship 
sides taking part exist only for this tournament and their strength relies on 
the individual club’s approach to the competition. Norwich’s Under-23s, for 
example, are bottom of Premier League Two, Division Two, but their Checktrade 
Trophy team have won their two games 6-1 and 5-0.

The 25-year-old Portugal international striker Nélson Oliveira was among their 
goalscorers in the 5-0 win against Barnet, while the Canaries have also used 
the opportunity to blood the goalkeeper Paul Jones, a 30-year-old veteran of a 
mere 370 league appearances. Two of their goals in the 6-1 win over 
Peterborough were scored by the 28-year-old French midfielder Tony Andreu.

Reading have benefited from goals in both their fixtures so far from the 
25-year-old French striker Joseph Mendes. Stoke’s only goal in the competition 
was scored by that young whippersnapper and top prospect for the future Charlie 
Adam, 30.Yohan Benalouane, a 29-year-old £6m signing from Atalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/03/leicester-city-sign-ngolo-kante-caen>
, has started both of Leicester’s games. Quite how that fits into the pledge of 
the EFL chief executive, Shaun Harvey, that the changes to the competition 
would “help us deliver more and better home-grown players which will deliver 
benefits to the national team and domestic league football at all levels” is 
anyone’s guess.

Other sides – notably West Ham, Middlesbrough and Chelsea – have named 
exclusively youth XIs. All three are already eliminated and face dead rubbers 
this week.

One rule for some …

The rules for team selection are contradictory. Teams from Leagues One and Two 
must name a minimum of five “first team” players in the starting XI – five who 
played in the team’s last league match, five who will play in the next league 
game or the club’s five highest appearance-makers of the season.

So one set of teams is required to start with young players, another set faces 
punishment – a £5,000 fine – if they do so. Luton could face such a fine after 
making 11 changes to their side for both Checktrade Trophy games. The EFL have 
told the club they will “consider the matter after the group stage has been 
completed”. The Hatters manager, Nathan Jones, has said he will stump up the 
cash himself if needs be. “If anyone wants to fine us for that group of 
youngsters, I’ll pay the fine myself, because it would be an absolute 
disgrace,” he said after the 2-0 win over West Brom.

The daftness of the rules – which, it should be pointed out, are not new this 
season – leads to situations such as Bradford City substituting their 
goalkeeper Colin Doyle after three minutes of their game against Bury. “I 
thought he had a poor 45 seconds,” said the Bantams’ assistant manager, Kenny 
Black.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fefl-trophy-football-league-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d91c3b51dcaee0e0e945da90115f57096a4dcdb%2F0_160_3312_1987%2F3312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revamped%20EFL%20Trophy%20is%20a%20complete%20and%20utter%20failure%20%E2%80%93%20and%20here%E2%80%99s%20why%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fefl-trophy-football-league-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revamped%20EFL%20Trophy%20is%20a%20complete%20and%20utter%20failure%20%E2%80%93%20and%20here%E2%80%99s%20why%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fefl-trophy-football-league-failure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d91c3b51dcaee0e0e945da90115f57096a4dcdb%2F0_160_3312_1987%2F3312.jpg>
 The Bradford goalkeeper Colin Doyle is replaced by Rouven Sattelmaier after 
three minutes against Bury. Photograph: ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
It’s an insult

This is the kicker. League One and Two clubs and their fans quite rightly do 
not consider themselves second-class citizens of the football world. This 
format treats them as such.
 