
The purpose of leaks by “credible sources” is to manage expectations for the 
public. So the leak indicating that the Department of Justice will likely not 
pursue federal civil rights charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/22/no-civil-rights-charges-darren-wilson-ferguson-michael-brown>
 against Darren Wilson for the shooting death of Michael Brown is likely a 
trial balloon to see how the public will react.

I hope that one of those reactions is a demand for police reforms across the 
board, imposed not only from the top down but also from within.

Justice – which we believe embodies accountability, blame, the restoration of 
equality, and a repair to some awful wrong between the aggrieved and the 
aggressor – loses its meaning in circumstances like this. Darren Wilson will 
probably never have to publicly account for his actions. And this may be a 
singular setback for the Brown family, even if they can steel themselves to 
pursue acivil suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/22/michael-brown-family-suit-darren-wilson>
 for the wrongful death of their son .

No federal charges against Darren Wilson for killing of Michael Brown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/22/no-civil-rights-charges-darren-wilson-ferguson-michael-brown>
We all had grander hopes for US attorney general Eric Holder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/eric-holder> and Civil Rights Division of 
the DOJ – among them, that they would resolve our lingering questions from the 
August shooting that set off 168 days of continuous protests in Ferguson and 
nationwide. In past high profile cases, DOJ was able to secure convictions for 
the LA cops who beat Rodney King and the NYPD officers who assaulted Abner 
Louima – although both these men lived to tell their side of the story. And we 
had a lot of grand hopes for this administration. Holder’s hands-on approach 
and his initiatives to address mass incarceration and commutations of sentences 
for nonviolent offenders offered promise, yet remain unfulfilled.

There were murmurs as early as late August – shortly after the DOJ announced a 
separate investigation – that it would always end up this way. The way the law 
is crafted creates a pretty steep burden for the federal government to prove 
that Wilson knowingly violated Brown’s civil rights, and that he did so with 
malice when he shot Brownat least six times 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/10/22/justice/ferguson-michael-brown-autopsy/>, 
including two shots to the head. Intent is hard to prove because of optics of 
the shooting – black body, blue uniform. All a police officer has to say isI 
stopped a fleeing suspect and I feared for my life, as we already saw in the 
officer-involved killings ofGarner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/03/eric-garner-grand-jury-declines-indict-nypd-chokehold-death>
,Crawford 
<http://colorlines.com/archives/2014/09/no_indictment_for_officers_involved_in_john_crawfords_killing_at_walmart.html>
,Hunt 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/11/03/darrien-hunt-shooting-jus_n_6097096.html>
 andHamilton 
<http://www.jsonline.com/news/milwaukee/former-officer-wont-be-charged-in-fatal-shooting-of-dontre-hamilton-b99398655z1-286559211.html>
 that resulted in zero indictments.

I don’t know the depth of the disappointment Leslie McSpadden or Michael Brown 
Sr must feel, nor that of some of the activists and protesters in Ferguson who 
have fought so long for justice for Brown and for us all. I do hope that they 
remain resolved in their efforts to push their community – and by extension, 
our society – for sweeping reforms in every level of our legal system. The 
story doesn’t end here. The struggle doesn’t end here.

Traditionally, we look to the federal government to be the intercessor, the 
deliverer of equitable justice where states and municipalities fail. Reforms in 
the 21st century must be more meaningful than lip service and scrambling by 
municipalities facing federal oversight. It really means doing and being the 
things you said you’re going to do and be: train your police in non-racist 
practices; recruit people to reflect the plurality of your community; find 
alternative revenue streams for your municipality that don’t exploit your most 
vulnerable citizens.

There is some comfort in knowing that the Justice Department’s wider 
investigation of police practices in the St. Louis County area is ongoing. And 
we’ve got good reason to find faith in this effort. In 2012, the Justice 
Department began a 16-month longinvestigation of the Albuquerque Police 
Department 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/04/the-brutality-of-the-albuquerque-police-department/360514/>
 , and last summer, DOJ and the city of Albuquerque reached an agreement on a 
set of police reforms; Wednesday, they named a DOJ monitor to oversee the 
reforms.
 A mourner looks at a program during the funeral service for Tamir Rice in 
Cleveland, Ohio, 3 December 2014. Photograph: Aaron Josefczyk/Reuters 
The Justice Department reached a similar accord 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/cleveland-police-tactics-violated-rights-of-citizens-justice-department-probe-finds/2014/12/04/db93f0e0-7bfd-11e4-b821-503cc7efed9e_story.html>
 with Cleveland days after the fatal shooting of Tamir Rice. DOJ’s 
investigation of the Cleveland PD and mandated reforms would have been pivotal. 
It could have meant relieving Timothy Loehmann of duty before he could even 
pull the trigger ending Rice’s short life.


The struggle between theory and practice comes into play here for me. I 
believe in the rule of law, though I know it’s applied inequitably. And yet, I 
don’t want to imagine what it means when we can’t look to the federal 
government to fix systemic abuses when the law falls short of justice. My faith 
in the law, as it’s applied in theory, is too strong for me to want to consider 
any alternative.

I question the mindset of people who apply the law; I challenge them to be 
mindful of biases and aware of structural inequalities. That blind spot is 
where we see patterns of abuse that inevitably require federal intervention.

The feds may be able to compel corrections for St Louis County, but they’d 
likely have to begin inquests in nearly every municipality to root out all the 
injustice. We can hope that the scrutiny that Albuquerque and Cleveland have 
endured will be a signal to other municipalities to preemptively address their 
patterns of abuse, and directly deal with issues of racism internally.

But is it too late? Last week, a Florida family discovered that a mugshot of 
their child and other black men were being used as targets to train police 
officers. How does a police administrator account for that? How do you fix a 
culture that allows that?

Apologizing isn’t enough. A ban of the use of those images for target practice 
is a step in the right direction, but a placebo. For officials to claim that 
this was an error in policy or judgment and not recognize the racism at work is 
disingenuous. Police managers must address racism from within their departments 
if they want to maintain our trust.

We’re still watching and waiting. But we won’t do either silently any more.
 