
Here’s our reality: white women’s votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/white-women-donald-trump-victory>
 helped lead Donald Trump to victory.

'Birth control is a political act': the pre-Trump contraception rush starts now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/14/birth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds>
We can expect, in the days ahead, to see Republicans pointing to these votes 
as proof that women love Trump, and that the openly misogynist president-elect 
really does have their best interest at heart. What will make this placation 
dangerous is that the incoming administration has a ready-made symbol to prop 
up their lie: Ivanka Trump.

Trump’s dutiful daughter brands herself as a sort of Sheryl Sandberg-lite: she 
launched a Women Who Work campaign <http://www.ivankatrump.com/womenwhowork/>, 
was thecatalyst behind her father’s vague maternity leave proposal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-trump-plan-will-help-working-mothers-1473803187>
, and carefully curates her social media accounts to present herself as a 
glamorous but accessible working mom. And now, with a role on Trump’s 
transition team, Ivanka will continue to be presented as a salve for her 
father’s overt sexism and racism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz7NM9gMu_zg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz7NM9gMu_zg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz7NM9gMu_zg&media=>
 Ivanka Trump’s video for her Women who Work campaign. 
In a moment when the mainstream understanding of feminism is less about 
politics than it is the nebulous idea of “empowerment”, this diversion could 
very well work.

In the last 10 years, feminist rhetoric has become popular enough to co-opt – 
from conservative organizations that claim women “deserve better” than abortion 
to “you go girl” campaigns that sell cellulite cream.


When I spoke to Ronnee Schreiber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/07/anti-feminist-women-hobby-lobby-decision-great>
, author ofRighting Feminism: Conservative Women and American Politics 
<http://www.amazon.com/Righting-Feminism-Conservative-American-Politics/dp/0195331818>
, about the phenomenon in 2014, she told me that for conservative women, using 
gender as an outreach strategy is “an identity politics angle that they often 
criticize but often invoke”. In other words, feminism is bad unless someone who 
doesn’t actually believe in feminism is touting it.

Conservative women using gender as a strategy is an identity politics angle 
that they often criticize but often invoke

This watering down of the movement – not just by conservative women but 
through commercialization – is what could very well allow Ivanka to create a 
smokescreen around her father’s dangerous views on women.

Indeed, for most of the presidential campaign, Ivanka functioned as a 
telegenic, articulate shield against accusations of misogyny leveled against 
Trump. She touted his female-friendly bona fides by talking about all the women 
he had hired over the years, mentioned the way he supported her career –she 
even called him a feminist. 
<http://time.com/4392409/ivanka-trump-donald-trump-feminist/>

Peak marketplace feminism

Andi Zeisler, author of We Were Feminists Once: From Riot Grrrl to CoverGirl, 
the Buying and Selling of a Political Movement 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25898263-we-were-feminists-once> and 
co-founder of Bitch magazine, says Ivanka is “peak marketplace feminism”.

“She’s among the many people who have opportunistically grasped at the label 
as a means of trying to appear relevant to women,” she says.

Even when the New York Times ran a story about Trump’s sketchy history with 
women 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/15/us/politics/donald-trump-women.html?_r=0>, 
Ivanka insisted her father was“not a groper” 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/card/ivanka-trump-my-father-not-groper-n576026>. That 
statement would come back to haunt Ivanka after a video of her father bragging 
about sexual assault was released, followed by more than a dozen women coming 
forward to accuse Trump of groping them.

Still, Ivanka continued to have his back. She released a statement calling his 
comments “inappropriate and offensive”, but said she was glad he apologized. In 
a later interview, she dismissed the tape as“crude language” 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/19/politics/ivanka-trump-donald-trump-crude/> and 
claimed his words didn’t match up with the man she knew.

But as her father’s campaign seemed to unravel and Ivanka’s own brand took 
hits – there was awidespread boycott of her clothing line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/ivanka-trump-boycott-clothing-line>
 – having a stylish working mother as a surrogate served Donald Trump well.

At the Republican convention, Ivanka’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/21/ivanka-trump-speech-republican-convention-women-gender-pay-mothers>
 – in which she described her father as a champion of women – was widely 
lauded, despite the obvious ironies. “You felt like she was introducing Betty 
Friedan or Gloria Steinem, not Donald Trump,” says Debbie Walsh, director of the
Center for American Women and Politics at Rutgers University 
<http://www.cawp.rutgers.edu/>.

Ivanka’s continued support, combined with her Teflon-like public image, 
convinced many women that Trump must be a good person despite all evidence to 
the contrary. Anne Helen Peterson at Buzzfeed dubbed them the“Ivanka voters” 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/annehelenpetersen/meet-the-ivanka-voter?utm_term=.pqPRpK4eo#.qhAzm3Og1>
: “‘If Trump produced someone that classy, that’s a testament to something,” 
one woman told me. Ivanka, then, as Trump launderer: a sanitized, assuring, 
classy Trump who makes it less troublesome to vote for her father.”

For some women on the right, Ivanka was more than a symbol of conservative 
femininity – she was permission to vote for a monster: the face of a distorted 
“feminism” that helped to usher in 53% of white women’s votes.

“Maybe [the thinking is] if she can respect him and think he’s a good guy, he 
can’t be that bad,” Walsh says. Still, Walsh tells me, we confused some 
Republican women’s dislike of Trump with the idea that their distaste would 
change their vote. “Research has always shown us that people vote their party,” 
she says.

That anything having to do with women can now be positioned as “empowered” 
will only help Ivanka keep up her feminist facade – not just among voters, but 
in a mainstream culture and elite class eager to embrace women’s rights so long 
as they’re depoliticized.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fivanka-trump-donald-women-republican-national-convention-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ivanka%20Trump%20tells%20RNC%3A%20my%20father%2C%20Donald%20Trump%2C%20supports%20women%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fivanka-trump-donald-women-republican-national-convention-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ivanka%20Trump%20tells%20RNC%3A%20my%20father%2C%20Donald%20Trump%2C%20supports%20women%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fivanka-trump-donald-women-republican-national-convention-speech-video&media=>
Ivanka Trump tells RNC: my father, Donald Trump, supports women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/22/ivanka-trump-donald-women-republican-national-convention-speech-video>
It wasn’t that long ago, after all, that the TEDWomen conference (with its 
$1,000 ticket price) told me itwouldn’t feature any talks on abortion 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/ted-backpedals-abortion-stance-after-outrage/>
 because it was a “topical issue we wouldn’t take a position on”. Various 
women’s conferences have come under fire 
<http://mashable.com/2015/05/28/ted-women-turns-away-mother/> for not allowing 
women tobring their breastfeeding infants 
<https://twitter.com/gemmahartley/status/792192337027792896>, and the panoply 
of women’s rights 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/18/fashion/how-womens-conferences-can-be-a-business.html>
 gatherings that have come out of the corporate world – from Thrive and Women 
in the World to MAKERS and SHE Summit – skew more toward feelgood talks about 
asking for more money in job negotiations or stopping yourself from saying 
“sorry” than they do toward changing politics and systems.

How long until Ivanka is headlining one of these conferences? If Trump’s 
first-born daughter is able to come out of this election with her reputation 
and brand unscathed, invited to women’s events under the guise of “diversity of 
thought”, the future of feminism is at risk.

With Bannon, Trump’s signed up the meme-makers of misogyny | Suzanne Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-trump-misogyny-roe-v-wade-threat>
What comes next for Ivanka, and by proxy her father’s message to women, is 
very likely to be a continuation of what we’ve already seen happen to feminism 
– the polite (and incorrect) belief that women’s rights are a bipartisan 
affair: that so long as it has the sheen and language of women’s empowerment, 
it’s good for women.

During our interview, Schreiber, the expert on conservative women, explained 
how the conservative skewing of feminism was based on the notion that if women 
behaved properly, we would be fine.

“The idea is that men will treat women better if we present ourselves 
respectfully,” she said.

It’s a sentiment we’re already seeing directed at the left: calls for 
reconciliation and acceptance even as white nationalism and hate crimes sweep 
the nation. But feminists know – especially as Ivanka is propped up as the 
“respectable” and docile conservative ideal of white womanhood – that there is 
little more dangerous to their rights than acting respectably.
 