
Esteban Girón, an organiser with the Crown Heights Tenant Union 
<http://www.crownheightstenantunion.org/>, is sitting in a Dunkin Donuts on 
Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn just before closing time. Employees mop the floors, 
look at the clock and try not to glare.

At this time of day, there are two nearby bars he could have been hanging out 
at instead – shabby-chic fascimiles of industrial-town dives, except for the $8 
beers – but he and his husband won’t go in them. In fact, he has already told 
one of the bar owners that he’s planning a protest with his neighbours against 
them.

Like the rest of the tenant union organisers, Girón volunteers his time to 
help this three-year-old group fight to keep long-time tenants in their homes. 
It’s a deceptively simple assignment – but here, in Crown Heights, it might 
just be the key to stopping yet another episode in New York’s ongoing history 
of social cleansing.

“All the other organising strategies have been tried in Bushwick,” Girón says. 
“They basically pit the landlord against the tenant against the quote-unquote 
gentrifiers. And when you do that, you’re not going to win anything.”

Indeed, in the great war against gentrification throughout New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City, most of the battles have 
been losses. The formerly low-income and heavily minority neighbourhoods of 
Williamsburg, Bushwick and Bedford-Stuyvesant have already, for all intents and 
purposes, heavily gentrified.

Next in the crosshairs is Crown Heights, which used to be almost exclusively 
peopled by African Americans and Hasidic Jews. It is now the last line of 
defence for ‘affordable’ Brooklyn, where,according to a new report 
<http://www.realtytrac.com/news/company-news/q3-2016-home-affordability-index/>
, the average resident must now spend 124% of their wages to meet the monthly 
payments on a median-priced home – the highest figure in the the country.

Brooklyn lawmakers enter gentrification feud over Crown Heights neighborhood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/19/brooklyn-gentrification-crown-heights-bedford-union-armory>
A quarter of a century ago in 1991, this neighbourhood was the the site of 
riots 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/brooklyn/crown-heights-erupts-days-race-riots-1991-article-1.2750050>
 after a Jewish man killed a black seven-year-old in a grisly car accident. But 
today,both communities 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/brooklyn/brooklynites-25-years-crown-heights-riots-article-1.2760065>
 face the same problems: rising rents.

The story is the same as it was in Bushwick or Bed-Stuy: as renters get priced 
out of the rest of New York, many landlords in Crown Heights are trying to 
chase out long-time and rent-stabilised tenants, so they can charge more to new 
renters or sell buildings to developers; the developers, meanwhile, are 
building more luxury units in the neighbourhood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44b3dc7b1b89741ab27ec7ff543135066895e72c%2F0_125_3495_2097%2F3495.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America's%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America%27s%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44b3dc7b1b89741ab27ec7ff543135066895e72c%2F0_125_3495_2097%2F3495.jpg>
 A police car overturned by rioters during the Crown Heights unrest of August 
1991. Photograph: David Burns/AP 
The losers? Residential tenants who can’t afford the new normal, and small 
neighbourhood businesses.

The CHTU has seen it happen elsewhere in Brooklyn, and is determined Crown 
Heights won’t end up like the rest. The organisation fights on several levels: 
it looks to rack up wins for residents through individual tenant assistance, 
lobbying in Albany for better state laws, and direct action – such as when, on 
the coldest day of the winter, tenants in one buildingfound themselves without 
any heat 
<http://equalityforflatbush.tumblr.com/post/107729746082/7pm-tonight-emergency-crown-heights-tenants-rally>
 and a landlord that wasn’t responsive.

“We rushed the lobby and we sat there until the heat came on,” Girón recalls – 
and that only happened when the union called local media. “It was the first 
time I realised the immediacy of having not just an organisation that’s in the 
neighborhood, but actual neighbours.”

The CHTU approach is straightforward. “We have to disrupt the landlords’ 
business model by helping tenants remain in their apartments,” Girón says. 
There are two keys: building community, then educating tenants about their 
rights and how to enforce them.

Twice a week, Girón accompanies tenants to housing court, to prevent 
intimidation and show landlords the CHTU is firmly on the tenants’ side. He 
also helps tenants figure out who actually owns their buildings: some landlords 
attempt to obscure their involvement to avoid bad publicity about their tactics 
or housing conditions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d9ddfb78f3201f6f97069629ee277f90c807153%2F0_134_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America's%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America%27s%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d9ddfb78f3201f6f97069629ee277f90c807153%2F0_134_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 A defaced poster showing an impending Crown Heights development 
What Crown Heights has learned from other neighbourhoods is that while big 
fights might seem unwinnable, small victories can lead to bigger ones. For 
example, one hold-out tenant can be enough to prevent a developer from buying a 
building; keeping tenants in place can disrupt the whole cycle of 
gentrification.

One example of this is sitting across the table from us: Marcia Louisy. Girón 
says: “The only way to put a pause on this [gentrification] is when the Marcias 
of the world hold it down.”

Louisy is a transplant from Jamaica. Eighteen years ago, she moved into a 
rent-controlled, three-bedroom apartment in Crown Heights. She pays roughly 
$1,000 a month; the neighbours upstairs pay $4,500. Her apartment could clearly 
fetch thousands more on the open market, and her landlord has already offered 
her $250,000 to move.

That sounds like a lot of money, but it would be subject to significant taxes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/21/realestate/rent-stabilized-apartments-buyouts-application-fees.html?_r=0>
, and probably wouldn’t even buy her a small condominium further out in the 
borough. She’s holding out, and not just because of the money. “That’s my 
apartment,” she says. “My kids were born in that apartment, they’ve grown up in 
that apartment.”

According to Girón, many tenants in the area are harassed and intimidated into 
taking buyouts, or driven out by crumbling apartments and a lack of repairs. 
The goal is the same: get rid of rent-controlled tenants with, in many cases, 
generational rights to remain.

Total disrespect

Vaughn Armour, a 17-year resident of Crown Heights, is also facing down a 
landlord trying to buy him out. His long-time girlfriend, Barbara Simmons, who 
lived in the same apartment for 42 years, passed away over Labor Day weekend. 
Before her memorial service, the landlord went to the apartment to encourage 
Armour and Simmons’ son to leave.

“She’s not even buried yet, and [the landlord] had the audacity to offer my 
stepson $5,000 for the apartment,” Armour says. “That is total disrespect.

“He don’t realise that I’m a member of New York Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> for Change, and I know when 
it comes to written laws and guidelines that I don’t have to go nowhere. We 
have succession rights. I’ve been there for 17 years, a New York 
state-recognised common-law husband, and her son’s been there for 33 years. The 
only thing this guy can do is give us the succession papers to sign, and a new 
lease.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bd6385371de74041e26ae112b622e28764ac485%2F0_109_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America's%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America%27s%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bd6385371de74041e26ae112b622e28764ac485%2F0_109_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Vaughn Armour, a Crown Heights resident of 17 years, is facing down the 
landlord who wants to buy him out. Photograph: Tim Knox for the Guardian 
New York Communities for Change <http://nycommunities.org/> is another of the 
groups in Brooklyn fighting to help low- and moderate-income tenants stay in 
their homes. Like the CHTU, they educate tenants about their rights, advocate 
for laws that help tenants, and try to help people have a voice in the myriad 
approval processes that govern development in the city. Armour says the brush 
with his landlord has spurred him to further action with NYCC.

“We need to get out and start talking to tenants in the buildings, and tell 
them: ‘As long as you’re paying your rent and you’re not destroying their 
property or being a nuisance to other neighbours, you shouldn’t be harassed,’” 
he says. “It works, too.”

Helping renters stay in their homes, though, is only half the gentrification 
fight. Developers are also tearing down old buildings to erect luxury 
apartments that few locals could afford, in a city where rents have risen twice 
as fast as incomes.

As Armour puts it: “Developers shouldn’t be able to come in and build 
something that no one who lives here can afford.”

New buildings in neighbourhoods like Crown Heights must usually set aside a 
certain number of ‘affordable’ units, although many people can’t afford even 
those. “Especially around this area – Lefferts, Albany, Kingston – the average 
salary per year is $23,000,” says Armour, adding that the ‘affordable housing’ 
in some of the new apartment buildings doesn’t reflect that. “Family of four, 
$31,000 and up. Who really could afford that from my community?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ee04f74a6e66d69b0590dbd0917faee5e4d324f%2F0_0_1817_1090%2F1817.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America's%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America%27s%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ee04f74a6e66d69b0590dbd0917faee5e4d324f%2F0_0_1817_1090%2F1817.jpg>
 The city-owned Bedford-Union Armory building is slated for sale and 
redevelopment. Photograph: bedfordcourts.com 
The biggest new construction project to rile up activists and residents is the 
Bedford-Union Armory. It’s a city-owned buildingslated for sale and 
redevelopment 
<https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20151217/crown-heights/city-unveils-design-for-bedford-union-armory-redevelopment-crown-heights>
 as a 13-storey building with 300 rental apartments and 24 condominiums, along 
with a state-of-the-art recreational centre that,until recently 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/brooklyn/carmelo-anthony-drops-support-crown-heights-armory-deal-article-1.2791283>
, was receiving support from New York Knicks basketball star Carmelo Anthony’s 
foundation. (Protests andobjections 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/brooklyn/activists-call-foul-carmelo-backed-brooklyn-development-article-1.2744655>
 from NYCC and the CHTU, among other groups organised by theReal Gentrifiers 
<http://www.therealgentrifiers.org/> campaign – which opposes for-profit 
development of affordable housing – reportedly led Anthony to quietly end his 
association with the project.)

Gentrification is a global problem. It's time we found a better solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/gentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright>
There will be 67 “affordable” rental units <http://bedfordcourts.com/faq.html> 
in the building, set at 40% and 50% of average median income (or AMI, whichNew 
York City designates as about $90,000 
<http://www.nychdc.com/pages/Income-Eligibility.html> for a family of four). 
The remaining 263 units will either be pegged to slightly above AMI, or for 
rent on the free market.

Since the city accepted a joint bid from two companies, Slate Property Group 
and BFC Partners, to redevelop the site, activists have tried to force a 
renegotiation through protests and publicity – with some success. “It was the 
same developer that was tangled up in the Rivington House scandal,” Girón says, 
“so we totally used that.”


Rivington House 
<http://www.politico.com/states/new-york/city-hall/story/2016/03/nursing-home-deal-and-city-hall-response-raises-questions-032985>
 was a non-profit nursing home for Aids patients on the gentrifying Lower East 
Side. It was purchased in February 2015 for $28m by the healthcare company 
Allure. Deed restrictions required that the site be operated as a non-profit 
facility, yet two months later, Allure successfully petitioned the city to lift 
those restrictions – for a fee of $16m – and thensold it to Slate 
<http://ny.curbed.com/2016/8/1/12343706/rivington-house-city-hall-scott-stringer-report>
 in May for $116m, making a hefty profit.

Slate’s plans to turn the property into market-rate condominiums became public 
<http://ny.curbed.com/2016/2/29/11134516/rivington-house-lower-east-side-condos>
 on 29 February of this year, touching off a wave of bad publicity, an
investigation 
<https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20160406/lower-east-side/compensate-lower-east-side-for-rivington-house-sale-local-pols-demand>
 by the state’s attorney general andthe city’s comptroller 
<http://comptroller.nyc.gov/newsroom/comptroller-stringer-releases-investigative-report-on-removal-of-deed-restrictions-at-rivington-house/>
, and a denouncement from New York City mayor Bill de Blasio.

Because of the Rivington debacle, De Blasio announced 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/brooklyn/de-blasio-reconsiders-rivington-house-developer-job-article-1.2746624>
 he was reconsidering allowing Slate’s participation in the Armory as well. The 
companysold its shares 
<https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20160824/crown-heights/controversial-developer-backs-out-of-bedford-union-armory-project>
 in the project to its partner, but anti-gentrification advocates want more: to 
kill the whole thing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79ae787931f88e7a7d6d03a77d0c390cb8819b54%2F0_269_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America's%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20last%20battle%20for%20Brooklyn%2C%20America%27s%20most%20unaffordable%20place%20to%20buy%20a%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Flast-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79ae787931f88e7a7d6d03a77d0c390cb8819b54%2F0_269_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Ayanna Prescod: ‘People ring [my grandmother’s] doorbell and say: “We’ll take 
your house for cash.”’ Photograph: Tim Knox for the Guardian 
Evelyn Tully Costa, chair of the Crown Heights South Association 
<http://www.chsa20.com/> and a 10-year resident of the neighbourhood, thinks 
she’s found the way to do that. In place of a residential development on the 
Armory site, the CHSA is promotinga plan <http://www.chsa20.com/our-armory> to 
designate the building with landmark status. They would then redevelop it as a 
community space with athletics and arts facilities, restaurants, community 
spaces and a rooftop urban farm. “We can and should do better than three 
basketball courts and five janitor jobs,” Costa says.

Instead, they want to go one step further: they’re proposing landmark status 
for the whole neighbourhood of Crown Heights.

“If you landmark, developers hate it – bottom line,” Costa says. Because much 
of New York’s residential zones are already built on, developers look for small 
buildings they can tear down – which is difficult if a neighbourhood has 
landmark status, and nearly impossible if a specific building does.

Could it work in Crown Heights? There are 33 landmarked or “historical” 
districts in Brooklyn, including three in north Crown Heights, whichprotect 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/lpc/downloads/pdf/LPC_oks_crown_heights.pdf?__hstc=33344033.aa22575b8aac9596dfdcbfa0820b194b.1474910644189.1474910644189.1474910644191.2&__hssc=33344033.1.1474910644191&__hsfp=3315528439>
 1,752 buildings and sites.Any new construction 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/lpc/html/faqs/designation.shtml> or alterations are 
subject to review by the Landmarks Commission. These are often approved, but 
must beaesthetically compatible 
<https://www.6sqft.com/historic-districts-and-landmarking-what-they-mean-and-how-they-could-affect-you/>
 with the neighbourhood – a fact that has often been used to limit the height 
of new buildings <http://www.carnegiehillneighbors.org/landmarks/> or kill 
projects 
<http://gothamist.com/2013/12/17/historic_greenwich_village_to_be_la.php> 
entirely.

But the process takes time. And gentrification can transform a neighbourhood 
more quickly than many people can react.

Has Vancouver found the solution to a super-heated housing market?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/30/vancouver-canada-house-prices-solution-super-heated-housing-market>
Ayanna Prescod is watching it happen. She was born in Crown Heights, as was 
her mother and her mother’s parents too: Prescod’s grandfather bought his house 
as a wedding gift in the 1950s for $15,000. The house next door recently sold 
for $1.8m.

Sitting in Lula Bagel, a pricey coffee shop whose proprietors started with an 
espresso bar in Williamsburg 
<https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20130711/crown-heights/lula-bagel-gives-nostrand-ave-newcomers-reason-get-up-morning>
, she explains over blaring reggae music that her grandmother gets daily 
inquiries about selling up. “We get a lot of cards. Some people are very bold 
and ring the doorbell, saying: ‘We’ll take your house for cash.’ But, like, 
there’s people living here.”

Prescod, a young entrepreneur who founded the local news blog OurBKsocial 
<http://ourbksocial.com/>, says she considers educating her neighbours to be 
part of her community duty. “Brooklyn is now themost expensive place to live in 
America 
<http://patch.com/new-york/brooklyn/brooklyn-housing-market-named-least-affordable-america>
, which is ridiculous. Making sure people know about that – that’s what I can 
do.

“Williamsburg and Bushwick, to me, are gone – forget it,” Prescod says. “The 
neighbourhood is totally gone. At least with Crown Heights, we still have the 
neighborhood feel. I hope it doesn’t go away.”

Are you experiencing or resisting gentrification in your city? Share your 
stories in the comments below,through our dedicated callout 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/cities/2016/sep/19/city-resist-gentrification-displacement>
, or on Twitter using #GlobalGentrification
 