
In a much-critiqued 
<http://jezebel.com/the-new-york-times-shonda-rhimes-how-to-get-away-wit-1636868442>
 review of the new TV series How to Get Away with Murder, New York Times 
television critic Alessandra Stanleyintroduced 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/21/arts/television/viola-davis-plays-shonda-rhimess-latest-tough-heroine.html?_r=0>
 award-winning super-producer Shonda Rhimes by suggesting that she should call 
her autobiography “How to Get Away With Being an Angry Black Woman”. Theclichéd 
<http://www.vox.com/xpress/2014/9/19/6537495/clair-huxtable-feminist-new-york-times>
 piece, which Stanleylater said 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/jaimieetkin/shonda-rhimes-response-to-angry-black-woman#488zdow>
 was intended to “praise Shonda Rhimes for pushing back so successfully on a 
tiresome but insidious stereotype”, wasmisguided and tone-deaf 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/09/19/shonda_rhimes_an_angry_black_woman_wrong_new_york_times_she_is_so_much_more.html?wpsrc=sh_all_mob_tw_top>
 – but Stanley is hardly the first (and probably won’t be the last) white woman 
to demean a black woman with back-handed praise.

In a 2012 Oscar roundtable discussion 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kOOS77gowlg> about the lack of roles for black 
actresses, Viola Davis, who stars in the upcoming Rhimes show, spoke to the 
perception that she is automatically less attractive than women who “look like 
Halle Berry” – women with lighter skin or more loosely curled hair. It was a 
candid reflection on the way white supremacy manifests itself in the industry: 
Eurocentric beauty standards simply drive Davis (and people who look like her) 
out of the competition for roles for which they are qualified because decision 
makers think a “whiter” look is more relatable or desireable. Actress Charlize 
Theron then interrupted Davis’s complex critique of the political nature of 
beauty standards to say simply, “You’re hot as shit”– failing to process any 
deeper meaning whatsoever. The moment was not, as Theron seemed to understand 
it, about Davis having low self-esteem or seeing herself as less beautiful than 
Berry, but about understanding how the Hollywood system both fails to create 
roles for black women – especially those with dark skin – and see black women 
inhabiting roles not specifically created for them.

The dearth of black women in influential Hollywood roles, and Theron’s failure 
to understand the gravity of a critique of the driving force thatimpacts 
employment prospects 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/14/magazine/viola-davis.html?referrer=&_r=0>, 
and Stanley’s disaster of a review, by no means exist independently of one 
another, and none of them need be actively malicious in order to cause harm. 
They are all bound together by a unifying thread: the inability or 
unwillingness to see black women as fully human, fully women and worthy of 
complex, multi-faceted characterizations on screen that reflect the full 
spectrum of our lives and our emotions.

Black women are more than props and more than interchangeable stock images 
employed to convey a sassy reaction to a white star’s plotline. We experience 
love, grief, anger, frustration and joy just like everyone else. Except that, 
when expressing those emotions, black women are policed, caricatured, judged 
and dismissed. We aren’t allowed to be situationally angry at the appropriate 
moments and have other emotions at other times: we are instead tasked with 
embodying a singular emotion (like anger) to the point of caricature.

Humanity is a luxury routinely denied to black women both within media and 
outside it. Indeed, it is the inability to see black women outside pre-packaged 
narratives that leads to reviews that call Shonda Rhimes angry, Olivia Pope a
modern-day Jezebel <http://thefeministwire.com/2013/02/10180/> and Viola Davis 
– who was nominated for an Oscar for her role as a maid in The Help – “less 
classically beautiful 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/21/arts/television/viola-davis-plays-shonda-rhimess-latest-tough-heroine.html?_r=0>
”.

The New York Times review comes at a time when television is grappling with 
the obvious fact thatdiverse shows attract more viewers 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2014/02/12/275907930/redefining-hollywood-diversity-makes-more-money>
. As a result, the networks are finally investing in shows with people of color 
in leading roles outside of Shondaland, including, but not limited to: State of 
Affairs on NBC (Alfre Woodard); Stalker (Maggie Q) on CBS; Empire (Terrence 
Howard, Taraji P Henson and Gabourey Sidibe), Sleepy Hollow (Orlando Jones and 
Nicole Beharie), Brooklyn Nine-Nine (Terry Crews, Andre Braugher, Melissa 
Fumero and Stephanie Beatriz), Red Band Society (Octavia Spencer) and The Mindy 
Project (Mindy Kaling) on Fox; and Selfie (John Cho), Cristela, and Fresh Off 
the Boat on ABC.

This impressive tilt toward showcasing a diversity of stories and faces in 
television, has been dubbed“the Scandal effect” 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/kateaurthur/how-the-scandal-effect-has-changed-television#488zdow>
, a nod to the huge success of Rhimes’s addictive political drama (and the 
first network television drama with a black female leadsince 1974 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/05/21/primary-colors>). Olivia Pope, 
played by Kerry Washington, is complicated: she is a brilliant workaholic with 
a messy love life who runs a tight ship in the office but occasionally succumbs 
to the weight of countless emotional burdens. She is intelligent and inspiring, 
flawed and frustrating.

She is like all of us: human, not a flat stereotype or a sidekick in someone 
else’s story. That is the success of the Shonda Rhimes model: finding a way to 
make space for black women’s multitudes without constraining us – or herself – 
to one dimension.
 