
In the immortal words of Clint Eastwood 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A732Cuuo2tI>, “You’ve gotta ask yourself one 
question: ‘Do I feel lucky’?” If the British feel lucky we will trust Boris 
Johnson and Nigel Farage. We will agree with them that the economists warning 
of recession, the trade unionists warning of an attack on workers’ rights, and 
the Nato allies warning of threats to the unity of the west are wrong. All 
wrong.

What am I saying – “wrong”? The Brexiters can never concede that a bearer of 
unwelcome arguments is debating in good faith. They are not just wrong. Wrong 
is too weak a word. They are lying. They are corrupt. No critic, however 
outwardly pure, is free of a sickly compulsion to deceive us.

After the Institute for Fiscal Studies said leaving the EU would damage the 
public financesso badly <http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8296> it would 
extend austerity, Vote Leave did not attempt to dispute its figures. I have 
always found the institute to be the most fastidious organisation in British 
public life. But Vote Leave knew better. It could see through the mask of 
impartiality to the rottenness below. The IFS was the “paid-up propaganda arm 
of the European Commission”, engaged in a conspiracy to mislead the British 
people for the most base of motives.

The conspiracy it has joined includes so many, it is amazing that it has been 
able to work in secret for so long, The governor of the Bank of England is in 
on it.Mark Carney  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bank-of-england-warns-brexit-could-do-serious-harm-to-uk-economy>
 warned about a collapse in the pound and a fall in investment. His forebodings 
appeared reasonable. Britain is knitted into the EU. Leaving would require an 
unravelling of relationships in every area of economic, constitutional, 
diplomatic and cultural life. Questions from whether we will need visas to 
visit the continent to whether foreign firms would continue to invest demand 
urgent answers. But Vote Leave offers only threats and conspiracy theories.

Jacob Rees-Mogg, a boorish know-nothing, whom the British in their class 
deference treat as an affable gent, revealed his true authoritarian self when 
he called for the governorto be fired 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/pa/article-3585874/Immigration-UK-high-EU-rules-says-Boris-Johnson.html>
. Iain Duncan Smith told the BBC that Carney used to work for Goldman Sachs, 
and the bank was the secret force behind the Remain campaign. “We see Goldman 
Sachs running all the way through this,” he confided, darkly. The way he is 
heading we will soon see Duncan Smith wandering the streets in his pyjamas 
shouting about the Bilderberg Group.

Obama is urging us to stay because he is a part-Kenyan with an ancestral 
dislike of the British empire

Perhaps not. Perhaps we will be lucky, and this apparently raging and 
incontinent fantasist will be revealed as a truth teller. Maybe, too, Dominic 
Cummings, the director of Vote Leave, is not wholly enclosed in the prison of 
rightwing ideology. He certainly gives every appearance of being the political 
equivalent of a cultist. To his fevered mind, criticism of his one, true faith 
can only come from polluted sources. Facing hard questioning from Andrew Tyrie, 
of the Commons Treasury committee, Cummings did not accept that anyone 
proposing a revolution in his country’s relations with the rest of the world 
must expect scrutiny. Instead, he snapped that Tyrie was biased because he had 
been a “very firm supporter of the euro and the ERM”.

Tyrie told him that he had supported neither 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/treasury-committee/the-economic-and-financial-costs-and-benefits-of-uks-eu-membership/oral/32135.html>
. “But do not let it worry you, Dominic. It sounds as if you are as fast and 
loose with those facts as you are with all of the other facts that you have 
provided so far.”

Everyone who has raised doubts about disruption to trade and a flight of 
investment has been accused of ulterior motives. The International Monetary 
Fund had no right to “interfere in our democratic debate”. The CBI should stay 
silent because it has receivedgrants 
<http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/revealed_the_cbi_receives_millions_from_the_eu_and_public_bodies>
 from the EU. Obama is not urging us to stay because he is our ally but because 
he is some kind of Mau Mau with a “part-Kenyan president’s ancestral dislike of 
the British empire”.

When ITV said it would host a debate between Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> and David Cameron, Vote 
Leave, the official campaign no less, sounded like a Russian gangster 
threatening a dissident journalist when it warned the broadcaster: “There will 
be consequences for its future – the people in No 10 won’t be there for long.”

I never thought I would see a Britain where political hacks could threaten to 
punish broadcasters for organising a debate. “I want my country back,” I 
thought to myself. But as significantly, the attempt at censorship also 
revealed the hatreds on the right. Vote Leave hates Leave.EU and so wants 
Farage off air. If they lose, there will be civil war as Farage damns Cummings, 
Carswell damns Farage and everyone damns Johnson. But what if Leave wins? 
Presumably Johnson will be prime minister. Presumably a squabbling gang of 
Brexiters, who hate each other as much as they hate the EU, will have to form a 
government, and face a crisis that will go far beyond the economic.

They show no sign of being ready for it. When Scottish nationalists say that 
they would seize the chance to hold a second referendum, our patriots do not 
worry that their defence of Britain will lead to the break up of Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/26/alex-salmond-scottish-independence-vote-likely-brexit>
. They are as silent on the consequences of rebuilding a border on the island 
of Ireland – even though no one with a knowledge of history thinks of messing 
with the Good Friday agreement.

“Progressives” seduced by denunciations of neo-liberal Brussels must hope 
their luck holds too. They must trust that a triumph for Johnson, Farage, Gove 
and Duncan Smith will not lead to an assault on the workers’ rights the EU 
guarantees, even though these gentlemen have spent their political lives
denouncing 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/eu-brexit-uk-referendum-leave-employment-rights-disaster-explained-a6921126.html>
 workers’ rights as red tape that destroys competitiveness.

There are dozens of good reasons for leaving the EU. Before endorsing them you 
should ask, do you feel that the Institute for Fiscal Studies, Bank of England, 
IMF, OECD and the hundreds of economists we survey this week are all lying? Do 
you feel that all our allies who are begging us to stay wish to lead us to our 
ruin? Do you feel thatBoris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>
 is fit to be prime minister or any kind of minister for that matter? Do you 
feel that Scotland won’t leave? Do you feel that Irish politics won’t darken? 
Do you feel that Putin won’t rejoice? Do you feel the Leave gang will find 
answers in June to the questions it cannot answer in May?

In short, you’ve gotta ask yourself one question: do I feel lucky?

Well, do ya, punk?
 