
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has distanced 
the UK from Washington over John Kerry’s condemnation of Israel, in comments 
that appear to be designed to build bridges with the incoming Trump 
administration.

Kerry, the outgoing secretary of state, delivered a robust speech  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/kerry-defends-us-decision-to-not-veto-un-condemnation-of-israeli-settlements>
this week that criticised Benjamin Netanyahu’s government as the “most 
rightwing coalition in Israeli history” and warned that the rapid expansion of 
settlements in the occupied territories meant that “the status quo is leading 
toward one state and perpetual occupation”.

The prime minister’s spokesman said May thought it was not appropriate to make 
such strongly worded attacks on the makeup of a government or to focus solely 
on the issue of Israeli settlements.

“We do not believe that it is appropriate to attack the composition of the 
democratically elected government of an ally,” he said. “The government 
believes that negotiations will only succeed when they are conducted between 
the two parties, supported by the international community.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Kerry%3A%20Israel%20must%20adopt%20two-state%20solution%20for%20lasting%20peace%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Kerry%3A%20Israel%20must%20adopt%20two-state%20solution%20for%20lasting%20peace%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video&media=>
John Kerry: Israel must adopt two-state solution for lasting peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/28/john-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video>
The UK backed the UN resolution passed last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/uks-key-role-in-brokering-un-resolution-on-israeli-settlements-confirmed>
 that condemned the continued expansion of settlements. But May’s spokesman 
said she was concerned about the language Kerry had used.

The Guardian view on the US and Israel: late, but necessary | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/the-guardian-view-on-the-us-and-israel-late-but-necessary>
“We continue to believe that the construction of settlements in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territories is illegal, which is why we supported UN security 
council resolution 2334 last week.

“But we are also clear that the settlements are far from the only problem in 
this conflict. In particular, the people ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> deserve to live free from the threat 
of terrorism, with which they have had to cope for too long.”

However the US state department last night reacted with some bluntness to 
May’s statement.

A spokesperson said: “We are surprised by the UK Prime Minister’s office 
statement given that Secretary Kerry’s remarks—which covered the full range of 
threats to a two state solution, including terrorism, violence, incitement and 
settlements—were in-line with the UK’s own longstanding policy and its vote at 
the United Nations last week.”

The statement also said: “We are grateful for the strongly supportive 
statements in response to Secretary Kerry’s speech from across the world, 
including Germany, France, Canada, Jordan, Egypt, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, 
the United Arab Emirates and others.”

Barack Obama, who will hand over to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> in January, has taken a 
series of steps in his final days in the White House to secure a foreign policy 
legacy, including backing the UN resolution which the White House hopes could 
give legal grounds for future action by other governments. Kerry made resolving 
the deadlocked Israeli-Palestine conflict a central aim of his tenure as 
secretary of state, but has made little progress.


Trump, who made stridently pro-Israel comments during the election campaign, 
responded angrily to the resolution, claiming: “The big loss for Israel in the 
United Nations will make it much harder to negotiate peace. Too bad, but we 
will get it done anyway!” Israel reacted furiously to Kerry’s comments, with 
Netanyahu calling them “skewed”.

May is known to be keen to kindle a close relationship with the Trump White 
House. The UK’s ambassador, Sir Kim Darroch, has even said he hopes it will 
emulate the rapport between Margaret Thatcher and her US counterpart Ronald 
Reagan.
 