
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> could face a 
diplomatic row with China at the G20 summit as she arrives for her first 
meeting with Xi Jinping, without having approved Beijing’s involvement in UK 
nuclear projects.

The prime minister is set to meet the Chinese president on Monday after the 
summit in Hangzhou, where she will also have a press conference with the US 
president, Barack Obama, and hold a meeting with the Russian president, Vladmir 
Putin, on Sunday.

It is May’s biggest outing to date on the world stage, but her visit threatens 
to be overshadowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/01/g20-china-expected-press-theresa-may-hinkley-nuclear-plant>
 by the lack of a decision on whether to proceed with the proposed Hinkley 
Point C nuclear power station in Somerset, apparently caused bysecurity 
concerns over Chinese involvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/may-urged-to-pull-plug-immediately-on-hinkley-c-over-spying-allegations>
 in Britain’s nuclear industry. She is travelling to China on Saturday.

The £18bn project was due to be approved for construction by French company 
EDF, with a £6bn investment from China, before Mayplaced the project under 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/hinkley-point-c-to-go-ahead-after-edf-board-approves-project>
 in July.

A UK official downplayed the importance of Hinkley Point as an issue at the G20
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> summit, insisting that the bilateral 
meeting with Xi was about a much broader set of topics.

“They will talk about a range of issues,” the official said. “We have set out 
the government’s approach to Hinkley, which is that we are currently 
considering all the component parts. We have said we will make a decision this 
month. That remains the plan. I do not expect one in the next few days. I don’t 
think our Chinese or French partners are expecting one in the next few days.”

Chinese officials have given a series of veiled warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/08/china-warns-uk-relations-historical-juncture-hinkley-point-liu-xiaoming>
 in recent weeks that Britain halting their investment in UK nuclear would be 
seen as a snub and a sign that a golden era of relations between the two 
countries had lost some of its sheen.

Hinkley Point was raised last week when Lucy Neville-Rolfe, the energy 
minister, made a low-profile trip to China connected with her second brief of 
intellectual property. However, UK government sources insisted that Lady 
Neville-Rolfe would have only reiterated the official position on Hinkley that 
Britain isconsidering all the component parts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/29/hinkley-point-c-why-has-government-delayed-final-approval>
 of the project.

There has been speculation that May could be happy to allow China to proceed 
with its Hinkley investment, but does not want Beijing to be involved in 
building a plant at Bradwell, Essex, or helping develop one at Sizewell, 
Suffolk. This suggestion is not understood to have gone down well in Beijing, 
which could abandon plans for the entire nuclear sector if the UK demands to 
decouple Hinkley from the other two projects, in whichChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> would have a more active involvement.

On Friday night, the Financial Times reported that a senior figure at EDF has 
said the Treasury or another investor may have to step into save the deal 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/0b80e672-70ea-11e6-a0c9-1365ce54b926.html#axzz4J7PthMxN>
, although the company denied that this was the official position.

It is understood that executives from EDF met Greg Clark, the business, energy 
and industrial strategy secretary, on Thursday to press the case for Hinkley to 
be built.

Barry Gardiner, the shadow energy secretary, said: “I don’t think [May’s] 
going to allow the Chinese to do Sizewell and Bradwell. I think she would be 
happy to have them involved in the financing of Hinkley, but I think informal 
soundings with the Chinese have come back and said: ‘Don’t even think about 
offering us that. Do you think we are interested in this for the return on a 
poxy £6bn? We are a Chinese state company and what we’re really interested in 
is being able to build 2.5 nuclear reactors in the most stringent regulatory 
regime in the world’.


“They are so angry about this and apoplectic about what she is proposing. I 
think we will see a very clear slapdown from president Xi and an end of the 
golden era that was supposed to start last year.”

Gardiner said May had a tricky decision to make over Hinkley, given that it 
was a bad value deal, buttrade with China is crucial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/09/china-uk-investment-key-questions-following-hinkley-point-c-delay>
 as Britain negotiates its departure from the EU.

“The point is that we should be investing in our own future infrastructure. We 
have an opportunity to do it at the lowest possible cost. I believe that if she 
does ditch the Chinese deal, at least have the common sense for the Treasury to 
put in the money ourselves if she believes that project needs to be delivered,” 
he said.

The prevarication over Hinkley threatens to undermine May’s message at the 
summit that the UK intends to be “open for business ... [and] will continue to 
be a strong and dependable partner [after the Brexit vote]”.

Other topics to be discussed at the summit include global growth, 
counter-terrorism and international free trade.


May is expected to stress that militants must be prevented from gaining a 
foothold in sub-Saharan Africa, away from territory in Syria, Iraq and Libya.

The prime minister, who turned down an invitation for her husband, Philip, to 
attend the summit, is expecting to take the opportunity to have face-to-face 
encounters with other world leaders in bilateral meetings and “brush bys”.
 