
Where was the champagne at the Vote Leave headquarters? The happy tears and 
whoops of joy? If you believedBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> and Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, the Brexit vote was a 
moment ofnational liberation <http:>, a day that Nigel Farage said our grateful 
children would celebrate with an annual bank holiday.

Johnson and Gove had every reason to celebrate. The referendum campaign showed 
the only arguments that matter now in England are on the right. With the Labour 
leadership absent without leave and the Liberal Democrats and Greens struggling 
to be heard, the debate was between David Cameron and George Osborne, defending 
the status quo, and the radical right, demanding its destruction. Johnson and 
Gove won a dizzying victory with the potential to change every aspect of 
national life, from workers’ rights to environmental protection.

Yet they gazed at the press with coffin-lid faces and wept over the prime 
minister they had destroyed. David Cameron was “brave and principled”, intoned 
Johnson. “A great prime minister”, muttered Gove. Like Goneril and Regan 
competing to offer false compliments to Lear, they covered the leader they had 
doomed with hypocritical praise. No one whoops at a funeral, especially not 
mourners who are glad to see the back of the deceased. But I saw something 
beyond hypocrisy in those frozen faces: the fear of journalists who have been 
found out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fboris-johnson-no-need-for-haste-in-leaving-eu-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%3A%20no%20need%20for%20haste%20over%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fboris-johnson-no-need-for-haste-in-leaving-eu-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Johnson%3A%20no%20need%20for%20haste%20over%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fboris-johnson-no-need-for-haste-in-leaving-eu-video&media=>
Boris Johnson: no need for haste over Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/boris-johnson-no-need-for-haste-in-leaving-eu-video>
The media do not damn themselves, so I am speaking out of turn when I say that 
if you think rule by professional politicians is bad wait until journalist 
politicians take over. Johnson and Gove are the worst journalist politicians 
you can imagine: pundits who have prospered by treating public life as a game. 
Here is how they play it. They grab media attention by blaring out a big, 
dramatic thought. An institution is failing? Close it. A public figure 
blunders? Sack him. They move from journalism to politics, but carry on as 
before. When presented with a bureaucratic EU that sends us too many 
immigrants, they say the answer is simple, as media answers must be. Leave. 
Now. Then all will be well.

Boris Johnson. Liar, conman – and prime minister? | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/26/boris-johnson-mendacious-eu-referendum-next-prime-minister>
Johnson and Gove carried with them a second feature of unscrupulous 
journalism: the contempt for practical questions. Never has a revolution in 
Britain’s position in the world been advocated with such carelessness. The 
Leave campaign has no plan. And that is not just because there was a shamefully 
under-explored division between the bulk of Brexit voters who wanted the strong 
welfare state and solid communities of their youth and the leaders of the 
campaign who wanted Britain to become an offshore tax haven. Vote Leave did not 
know how to resolve difficulties with Scotland, Ireland, the refugee camp at 
Calais, and a thousand other problems, anddid not want to know either.

It responded to all who predicted the chaos now engulfing us like an 
unscrupulous pundit who knows that his living depends on shutting up the 
experts who gainsay him. For why put the pundit on air, why pay him a penny, if 
experts can show that everything he says is windy nonsense? The worst 
journalists, editors and broadcasters know their audiences want entertainment, 
not expertise. If you doubt me, ask when you last saw panellists onQuestion Time
 who knew what they were talking about.

Naturally, Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, 
formerTimes columnist, responded to the thousands of economists who warned he 
was taking an extraordinary risk with the sneer that will follow him to his 
grave: “People in this country have had enough of experts.” He’s been saying 
the same for years.

If sneers won’t work, the worst journalists lie. The Times fired 
<https://next.ft.com/content/f5b6a84a-263c-11e3-8ef6-00144feab7de#axzz48X3KNmCZ>
 Johnson for lying to its readers. Michael Howard fired Johnson forlying to him 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1476560/Howard-sacks-devastated-Boris-Johnson-over-affair.html>
. When he’s cornered, Johnson accuses others of his own vices, as unscrupulous 
journalists always do. Those who question him are the true liars, he blusters, 
whose testimony cannot be trusted because, as he falsely said of the impeccably 
honest chairman of the UK Statistics Authority, they are“stooges” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/16/boris-johnson-statistics-authority-labour-stooge>
.

The Vote Leave campaign followed the tactics of the sleazy columnist to the 
letter. First, it came out with the big, bold solution: leave. Then it 
dismissed all who raised well-founded worries with “the country is sick of 
experts”. Then, like Johnson the journalist, it lied.

On Friday, Johnson and Dan Hannan said that in all probability the number of 
foreigners coming here won’t fall

I am not going to be over-dainty about mendacity. Politicians, including 
Remain politicians lie, as do the rest of us. But not since Suez has the 
nation’s fate been decided by politicians who knowingly made a straight, 
shameless, incontrovertiblelie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/uk-statistics-chief-vote-leave-350m-figure-misleading>
 the first plank of their campaign. Vote Leave assured the electorate it would 
reclaim a supposed £350m Brussels takes from us each week. They knew it was a 
lie. Between them, they promised to spend £111bn on the NHS, cuts to VAT and 
council tax, higher pensions, a better transport system and replacements for 
the EU subsidies to the arts, science, farmers and deprived regions. When 
boring experts said that, far from being rich, we would face a £40bn hole in 
our public finances, Vote Leave knew how to fight back. In Johnsonian fashion, 
it said that the truth tellers were corrupt liars inBrussels’ pocket 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36371700>.

Now they have won and what Kipling said of the demagogues of his age applies 
to Michael Gove,Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> and 
Nigel Farage.

I could not dig; I dared not rob: 
Therefore I lied to please the mob. 
Now all my lies are proved untrue 
And I must face the men I slew. 
What tale shall serve me here among 
Mine angry and defrauded young?


The real division in Britain is not between London and the north, Scotland and 
Wales or the old and young, but between Johnson, Gove and Farage and the voters 
they defrauded. What tale will serve them now? On Thursday, they won by 
promising cuts in immigration. On Friday, Johnson and the Eurosceptic ideologue 
Dan Hannan said that in all probability the number of foreigners coming here
won’t fall <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t5jTRoySFfo>. On Thursday, they 
promised the economy would boom. By Friday, the pound was at a 30-year low and
Daily Mail readers holidaying abroad were learning not to believe what they 
read in the papers. On Thursday, they promised £350m extra a week for the NHS. 
On Friday, it turns out there are “no guarantees”.

If we could only find a halfway competent opposition, the very populist forces 
they have exploited and misled so grievously would turn on them. The fear in 
their eyes shows that they know it.
 