
For the 18th year in a row Australia is commemorating National Sorry Day 
<http://www.nsdc.org.au/>. 


It has grown from the May 1997 Bringing Them Home report to federal parliament 
about the stolen generations of Indigenous children often forcibly removed from 
their parents.

It's not 'politically correct' to say Australia was invaded, it's history | 
Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/mar/30/its-not-politically-correct-to-say-australia-was-invaded-its-history>
For Indigenous people, Sorry Day remains an important moment of public 
mourning, an acknowledgment of the profound wrong of one policy of 
assimilationism – a malignant British colonial ideology that assumed black 
Australians were lower than Caucasians on some arbitrary human scale.

Assimilationism was freighted with the worst evils of eugenics, Darwin’s 
racial scaling and the voodoo science of phrenology.

Despite the insistence of some reactionaries that the stolen generations is a 
“myth” <http:// 
http://blogs.news.com.au/heraldsun/andrewbolt/index.php/heraldsun/comments/column_how_the_stolen_generations_myth_kills/>
, the trauma of the taken children reverberates today (along with so much other 
colonial and post-federation violence against Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander people) through families and individuals who lost their kin, land and 
their identities.

It’s why so many black and non-Indigenous Australians mark Sorry Day. It’s why 
Kevin Rudd’s apology (underwritten with deliberate legal caution to avoid 
reparation) in 2008 has come to be regarded as such a moment in a continent 
that’s barely made baby steps towards a reckoning between the wrongs of 
invasion and “settlement”, and the present inequity in Indigenous Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fthere-are-lots-of-ways-to-say-sorry-but-indigenous-australians-need-a-treaty-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31cf9281da63ff206200c82916964b993007b26f%2F0_555_2824_1694%2F2824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There%20are%20lots%20of%20ways%20to%20say%20sorry%2C%20but%20Indigenous%20Australians%20need%20a%20treaty%20now%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fthere-are-lots-of-ways-to-say-sorry-but-indigenous-australians-need-a-treaty-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%20are%20lots%20of%20ways%20to%20say%20sorry%2C%20but%20Indigenous%20Australians%20need%20a%20treaty%20now%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fthere-are-lots-of-ways-to-say-sorry-but-indigenous-australians-need-a-treaty-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31cf9281da63ff206200c82916964b993007b26f%2F0_555_2824_1694%2F2824.jpg>
 Paul Keating in Redfern, Sydney, in 1992: ‘We took the traditional lands and 
smashed the traditional way of life.’ Photograph: The Sydney Morning 
Herald/Fairfax Media via Getty Images 
The stolen generations make up just one of innumerable malevolent consequences 
for Indigenous Australians of British colonial assimilationism – underpinned, 
as it was,by the intent to breed colour from this continent’s Indigenes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/dec/04/marriage-equality-in-australia-is-a-final-step-in-a-long-march-from-1788>
.

The others include the murders of tens of thousands of Indigenous people and 
often the simultaneous theft of those children not slaughtered at the massacre 
sites (the first of the stolen generations, really). The crime scenes are, like 
brush daubs on a western desert painting, dotted all over this continent, the 
traditional lands having been stolen and renamed – Butcher’s Creek, Skull Hole, 
Skeleton Creek, Convincing Ground, Murdering Island, Poison Waterhole Creek, 
Massacre Bay – not to commemorate the dead, but the very acts of slaughtering 
them.

The theft of unknown thousands of Indigenous ancestral remains 
<https://meanjin.com.au/essays/restless-indigenous-remains/> for 
anthropological, museum and medical collections, adds to the lingering trauma.

Any reckoning between this historical truth and a mainstream cultural and 
political acknowledgment of it, is long overdue.

 An apology for all of that might be a starting point. 

 The only politician who’s come close to that was Paul Keating at Redfern in 
1992 
<https://antar.org.au/sites/default/files/paul_keating_speech_transcript.pdf>: 
“It begins, I think, with that act of recognition … that it was we who did the 
dispossessing. We took the traditional lands and smashed the traditional way of 
life. We brought the diseases. The alcohol. We committed the murders. We took 
the children from their mothers. We practised discrimination and exclusion.”

There’s always a lot of talk by white politicians about “reconciliation” at 
times like Sorry Day. But it’s hard to reconcile without an initial 
conciliation that, in Australia’s case, has never been.

The basis of genuine conciliation is disarming truth – historical, current. 
And that comes back to land; who owned it, who stole it – and the way forward 
when it comes to reparation.

Commonwealth and state government politics has long obfuscated on these 
historical truths.

And now bipartisanship has delivered us Recognise 
<http://www.recognise.org.au/>. It is a multimillion-dollar campaign to 
positively acknowledge (precisely how remains unformulated) Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander people in the constitution.

Recognition is supposedly going to referendum in 2017 – an absurd proposition 
in my view, not least because the Australian Electoral Commission estimates 
only 58% ofIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> are on the 
electoral roll (compared with 94% of the population).

Informal voting – both intentional and due to far higher illiteracy rates, 
especially in remote Indigenous communities – is also believed to be more 
pronounced among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.

In remote Indigenous Australia, indeed within urban Aboriginal communities, 
you don’t hear talk of Recognise.

 Megan Davis, a member of the panel appointed to consult Australia on 
Recognise, candidly summed up the problem with Recognise and mainstream media’s 
failure to grasp it,in a recent Griffith Review essay 
<https://griffithreview.com/articles/listening-but-not-hearing/>.

 “Social media captured the overwhelming rejection of the campaign for 
recognition, and the growing resistance to being ‘recognised’ by the settler 
state. Oblivious to this or not, the mainstream media, by and large, 
uncritically report on referendum momentum and mostly obsess over any chinks in 
the bipartisan order of things. The subjects of recognition are all but erased 
from the process.”

Lachlan Macquarie was no humanitarian: his own words show he was a terrorist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/apr/05/lachlan-macquarie-was-no-humanitarian-his-own-words-show-he-was-a-terrorist>
 Little wonder, then, that the word being spoken is “treaty”. Treaties between 
First Nations and governments –as recognised by the Andrews government in its 
current negotiations with Victorian Aboriginal groups 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2016/05/16/victorias-treaty-talks-welcomed-congress>
 – are a fundamental priority for Indigenous Australia.

 Symbolism and gesture are important in conciliation and reconciliation. 
Genuine sympathy – or better, empathy – is part of that.

 Given the apparent Indigenous ambivalence about (or hostility to) the 
prospect of being recognised in the founding document of the “settler state” 
and their disenfranchisement from an electoral process that will decide the 
fate of Recognise, a couple of things stand out for me.

 Treaties represent the horse.

 Recognition is an optional cart.

 Obviously one comes before the other.

Ponder that this Sorry Day.
 