
A film about the rise of far-right populism has triggered outrage in France 
after its trailer appeared to showcase a character based onMarine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>, the president of the Front 
National and a candidate in France’s 2017 presidential election.

Chez Nous <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt6144536/> (AKA This Is Our Land) stars 
Émilie Duquenne as a nurse who becomes a political success in the 
Nord-Pas-de-Calais region after becoming involved with the Patriotic Bloc, a 
thinly disguised fictional version of the Front National. It is due for release 
in France on 22 February, two months before the first round of voting, and the 
trailer briefly features a character apparently modelled on Le Pen, played by 
veteran performer Catherine Jacob.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt7geYq0_jhI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt7geYq0_jhI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt7geYq0_jhI&media=>
Leading Front National figures have reacted with disdain 
<https://www.afp.com/en/news/206/film-featuring-le-pen-character-angers-frances-far-right>
, with the party’s vice-president, Florian Philippot, saying it was 
“scandalous” and “unacceptable” that a “clearly anti-Front National” film was 
being released so close to the election. “Having seen the trailer ... it looks 
like a real turkey,” he said.

Chez Nous is directed and co-written by Belgian film-maker Lucas Belvaux 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0069711/>, best known for the three-film 2002 
offering Trilogy.He was quoted by BFMTV 
<http://rmc.bfmtv.com/emission/le-front-national-scandalise-par-le-film-chez-nous-mon-film-n-est-pas-anti-fn-assure-lucas-belvaux-1076749.html>
 as saying: “Philippot has only seen the trailer so it’s a cheap controversy 
which avoids the debate about the message of the film.”

Belvaux added: “It’s not so much an anti-FN film as a film about the populist 
message and how people relate to politics. It’s voters that interest me, not 
political parties.”

Belvaux denied he was taking on the Front National’s politics. “It is not a 
militant film: it is a committed film, and a civic-minded film. It was made to 
provoke discussion, not to provoke the FN or fear of the FN,” he said.
 