
Sports Direct’s owner, Mike Ashley, chose a blustering man-of-the-people line 
whendefending his company’s working practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/sports-direct-agrees-back-pay-deal-with-hmrc-minimum-wage>
 before MPs on the business, innovation and skills select committee yesterday.

Sports Direct's Mike Ashley admits paying staff less than minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/sports-direct-agrees-back-pay-deal-with-hmrc-minimum-wage>
Here was a man who frequently eats in the staff canteen. He walks the shop 
floor every week to keep in touch with the workforce, flying in by personal 
helicopter. He looked wounded when challenged on the Dickensian conditions he 
has presided over, exposed in devastating detail by the Guardianlast year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 and furthercatalogued to the committee by the union Unite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
.

“I like to think I am kind to the right people,” Ashley told the MPs. Yet 
there had been 110 ambulance call-outs to his main warehouse site in just over 
three years as workers suffered chest pains, stroke, injury, and five births or 
miscarriages – including one woman delivering her baby in the toilet – such was 
the fear, according to the union, of losing your job if you took time off under 
Ashley’s six-strikes-and-you’re-out regime.

One of the two labour agencies Sports Direct uses for a permanent supply of 
3,000 temporary workers, employed effectively on zero-hours contracts, had 
already been prevented from operating in the food sector by the Gangmaster 
Licensing Authority. Yet Ashley was shocked by the allegations made that the 
time staff spent queuing to be partly strip-searched by security guards before 
leaving the factory had driven wages below the legal national minimum wage per 
hour, or that female workers were sometimes asked for sexual favours in return 
for longer hours.

That’s repugnant, he said, thumping the table. If Sports Direct was abusing 
workers in chasing named individuals over the public address system, it 
deserved the cane. Thump again. I’m just one human being; I’m not Father 
Christmas; the business has grown so big I can’t be all over the oil tanker; 
I’m not an expert in employment; be reasonable, he pleaded.

The agencies talked of the weekly ‘average attrition' in worker numbers, and 
the need for up to ‘four thousand heads'

Any sense that Ashley, the executive deputy chairman, accepted responsibility 
for the effects of his business model on those who worked for him appeared 
lacking. Absent too was any notion that they were people with rights; he had 
not met the union because he thought he could do a better job for employees 
than their own representatives.

It was a colourful performance. MPs gave him enough rope, and he hanged 
himself. But in a way, the language used by the directors of Sports Direct’s 
labour agencies, who appeared just before him, cut more chillingly to the core. 
They talked of the weekly “average attrition” in worker numbers, and the 
constant need for up to “four thousand heads”. Because in this brave new world 
of casualised work, ordinary people are dehumanised, reduced to disposable 
units of production.

Sports Direct could, like many other businesses with a need for a 
365-day-a-year, 24-7 workforce, employ most of its workers directly. But Ashley 
told MPs he would not do that. Outsourcing employment to agencies diffuses 
responsibility. Zero- or short-hours contracts guaranteeing only 336 hours a 
year keep workers under control. If you complain, there’s no need for 
disciplinary procedures: there may just be no more hours for you.

Competitive tendering in privatised public services has all too often had the 
same effect – a relentless driving down of costs that translates into fewer 
people doing more work for the same pay, in more precarious employment.

The model has spread, and unions warn that a similar deterioration in 
conditions can be seen across sectors from hospitality and catering to retail, 
transport, logistics and manufacturing.

It is possible to treat workers like this only if you stop seeing them as 
people and regard them as “other”.

At the same time, chief executives are now paid on average nearly £5m a year 
in the UK, or 183 timeswhat the average British worker receives 
<http://highpaycentre.org/pubs/new-high-pay-centre-report-executive-pay-continues-to-climb-at-expense-of-o>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fsports-direct-workers-unfairly-penalised-mike-ashley-tells-mps-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20workers%20unfairly%20penalised%2C%20Mike%20Ashley%20tells%20MPs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fsports-direct-workers-unfairly-penalised-mike-ashley-tells-mps-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20workers%20unfairly%20penalised%2C%20Mike%20Ashley%20tells%20MPs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fsports-direct-workers-unfairly-penalised-mike-ashley-tells-mps-video&media=>
Sports Direct workers unfairly penalised, Mike Ashley tells MPs – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/07/sports-direct-workers-unfairly-penalised-mike-ashley-tells-mps-video>
They expect to join the class of the super-rich – because they’re worth it – 
taking out of companies the sort of money that enables them to inhabit a 
chauffer-driven or helicopter-piloted bubble, insulated from the deprivations 
of those on the factory floor. In this narrative profits are the fruit of 
executive genius, to be offshored, rather than of a collective effort, to be 
equitably shared.

Sports Direct may be on one extreme – and by Ashley’s own admission 
inefficient, because it’s not yet fully automated – but it is not alone. The 
brutalisation of labour has been a defining characteristic of neoliberal 
economics. Workers in another retailer distribution centre have described to me 
being required to wear computerised wristbands that measure how many arm 
movements they make while picking goods for dispatch. Like electronic tags, 
these can detect when their strike rate falls below target, and send them an 
instant warning text.

In the US, Oxfam has recorded further indignities now being imposed in 
mainstream meat factories, where assembly lines run so fast that even a short 
toilet break disrupts production. Staff are meant to signal for a “floater” or 
relief worker to take their place before leaving to go to the toilet, but they 
told researchers they are often denied a break, so that some have taken to 
wearing Pampers in case theyneed to urinate or defecate 
<https://www.oxfamamerica.org/explore/research-publications/no-relief/> while 
on the line.

Revealed: how Sports Direct effectively pays below minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
This growing degradation of the workforce has not occurred in a vacuum. It is 
the flip side of the same coin that has flight of capital, tax-dodging and 
excessive executive pay stamped on its other side.

MPs wanted to know whether the law had been broken – and if so, why it wasn’t 
being enforced. The magnate promised to solve the problem of searching workers 
pushing them below the legal minimum wage by speeding up security, and perhaps 
even conceding people one free extra minute at the end of their day as if being 
paid to endure the indignity made it less intolerable.

But of course, important though employment law is, it has little to do with 
solving the real problem, which is about power relations that have become so 
skewed towards those at the top that almost anything goes for those at the 
bottom of the pile. The only way for workers to change that is to exercise 
collective muscle – which is perhaps why Ashley has declined to meet the union 
Unite, except at his company’s annual general meeting.
 