
Five of the best… theatre shows this week

1 Women’s Hour

Louise Mothersole and Rebecca Biscuit of Sh!t Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> send up the BBC format with this 
rough-and-ready and hugely likable agit-prop-style show which neatly considers 
many aspects of female experience, from the representation of women at the 
Oscars to the tampon tax. It’s a piece that pirouettes along the tightrope 
between sketch comedy and theatre but there’s plenty of craft operating beneath 
its apparently ramshackle exterior.

Warwick Arts Centre, Coventry, Tue & Wed 
<http://www.warwickartscentre.co.uk/whats-on/2016/womens-hour/>

2 Wrecking Ball

Referencing the Miley Cyrus song and its infamous video, Action Hero’s 
two-hander is a fascinating meditation on the responsibility we take for 
looking, and how as consumers we eagerly buy the images we are being sold. “I 
just want to be myself,” says a blonde celebrity on a photoshoot with a seedy 
photographer; but in a world where image is all, what does being yourself 
really mean?

The Place, Bedford, Tue; Axis Arts Ctre, Crewe, Thu; touring to 30 Nov 
<http://www.actionhero.org.uk/projects/wrecking-ball/>

3 1984

Big Brother is only in control until next Saturday at the Playhouse, where 
Robert Icke and Duncan Macmillan’s superb version of the George Orwell novel 
has been enjoying a third West End run. It is not an easy watch, but it is a 
terrifyingly effective one that constantly reminds how willing we are to give 
away our information – and with it our freedom.

Playhouse Theatre, WC2, to 29 Oct 
<http://www.playhousetheatrelondon.com/1984-play/>

4 Bright Colours Only

Pauline Goldsmith’s wonderful show brings audiences closer to death as they 
gather around a coffin and mourn. It is part of Summerhall’s Festival Of Ian 
Smith: A Celebration Of Death which was conceived as a tribute to Smith (of 
theatre company Mischief La Bas), who died in 2014. Alongside performances 
exploring grief, there is a glimpse of a new piece from Victoria Melody called 
Ugly Chief (29 Oct), about how she set about organising her own father’s 
funeral when he was misdiagnosed with a terminal illness.

Summerhall, Edinburgh, Fri & 29 Oct 
<http://www.summerhall.co.uk/2016/bright-colours-only/>

5 Harrogate

Al Smith recently had a hit with Diary Of A Madman, and now this one he made 
earlier arrives at the Royal Court for a week before touring the south east and 
eastern counties. It’s a slippery little number, a chamber play looking at 
relationships, memory and family, that hones in on male sexuality and one 
father’s inappropriate relationship with his daughter.

Royal Court, SW1, to 29 Oct; touring to 16 Nov 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/harrogate>

LG

Three of the best… dance shows this week
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fthis-weeks-best-theatre-and-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5ad1dd40944adaac75e18f0e4755fb4af84b30%2F0_398_4137_2482%2F4137.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%E2%80%A6%20theatre%20%26%20dance%20performances&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fthis-weeks-best-theatre-and-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%E2%80%A6%20theatre%20%26%20dance%20performances&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fthis-weeks-best-theatre-and-dance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5ad1dd40944adaac75e18f0e4755fb4af84b30%2F0_398_4137_2482%2F4137.jpg>
 Fractus V. Photograph: Filip Van Roe 
1 Anastasia

The Royal Ballet presents Kenneth MacMillan’s ambitious retelling of the last 
days of the Romanovs and the story of a woman who believed she was the Grand 
Duchess Anastasia.

Royal Opera House, WC2, Wed to 12 Nov 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/anastasia-by-kenneth-macmillan>

2 Fractus V 

Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui makes one of his increasingly rare appearances on stage, 
in this all-male piece (pictured) inspired by the writings of Noam Chomsky.

Sadler’s Wells, EC1, Thu & Fri 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/eastman-sidi-larbi-cherkaoui-fractus-v/>

3 Stepmother/Stepfather

The reliably deviant Arthur Pita promises gruesome tales of unnatural 
parenting in this latest work for the HeadSpaceDance company.

Jerwood DanceHouse, Ipswich, Fri & 29 Oct 
<https://www.danceeast.co.uk/performances/stepmother-stepfather/>

JM
 