
More than 3,500 churches across Britain have moved their electricity supply to 
renewables, or are planning to do so, according to data released on Thursday.

Those switching away from fossil fuels include the majority of the Salvation 
Army’s sites, about a third of Quaker meeting houses, and about 2,000 churches 
belonging to 16 Catholic dioceses which are running entirely on renewable 
energy.

The number represents a relatively small proportion of the 50,000 Christian 
churches estimated to be active across the UK 
<http://faithsurvey.co.uk/download/csintro2.pdf>.

Fitting churches with renewable energy generation devices, such as solar 
panels, mini wind turbines and ground or air-source heat pumps, is often 
difficult, owing to the expense and fact that many are listed buildings. 
However, parishes can also opt to buy their electricity from green suppliers. 
Much of the energy used by churches is for heating.

The move follows an increasing focus on climate change and the environment in 
recent years, and the data publication is timed for theWorld Day of Prayer for 
the Care of Creation 
<http://catholicclimatemovement.global/world-day-of-prayer/>, which takes place 
on Thursday.

Many of the Catholic dioceses making the switch were influenced by the Pope’s 
encyclical last year,Laudato Si 
<http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco_20150524_enciclica-laudato-si.html>
, in which the pontiffexpressed his concerns over global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/18/popes-climate-change-encyclical-calls-on-rich-nations-to-pay-social-debt>
 and the harm that our activities are bringing to the natural environment. Pope 
Francis has beenparticularly concerned over the plight of poor people around 
the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/18/guardian-view-on-laudato-si-pope-francis-cultural-revolution>
, who are among themost vulnerable to climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/climate-change-poor-suffer-most-un-report>
, and has called on the rich to provide assistance.

John Arnold, bishop of Salford, which is one of the dioceses, called on other 
churches to follow suit in moving to renewable power: “There are many ways in 
which we respond to the threat and reality of climate change. Adopting 
renewable energy for our church buildings must be a priority [and by doing so] 
we will directly help people threatened, and already most severely affected, by 
climate change.”

Others have signed up through the www.bigchurchswitch.org.uk 
<http://www.bigchurchswitch.org.uk> website, the brainchild of the Christian 
Aid and Tearfund charities.

The new day of prayer for creation has been designated as the start of the 
“Creationtide” 
<https://www.churchofengland.org/media/.../creationtide_and_environment_resources....>
 season, running from 1 Septemberto 4 October this year, which will incorporate 
the traditional - and more familiar to many - festivals to celebrate the 
harvest, which often involve gifts of farm produce to the poor in parishes 
throughout the UK.

Nicholas Holtam, bishop of Salisbury, and the lead for the Church of England 
on environmental issues, said: “Celebrating Creationtide marks a shift in the 
Christian understanding of our relationship to creation under God. The 
consequences of teaching over recent centuries that humanity has been given 
domination over creation are clear in the complex environmental crises we now 
face. It is important that Christians rediscover older traditions of a godly 
relationship of humanity to the wider created order.”

He called on people to consider using renewable energy in their homes, schools 
and communities at large.
 