
 Five years into the war that is tearing their country apart, 75% of Syrians 
believe a political solution stands the best chance of ending the crisis - 
while 25% say that military action is the way forward - according to a new poll.

In other fragments of good news from the world’s worst humanitarian crisis, 
60% of Syrians feel the influence of Isis (Islamic State) in the country has 
decreased over the last six months. But there has also been a drop in the 
numbers who think Syrians can put their differences aside and live side by 
side, down to 61% from 69% in July 2015.


Independent polling by ORB International <http://www.opinion.co.uk/> across 
all of Syria’s 14 governorates showed 59% of Sunni Muslims and 68% of Alawites 
and Shia Muslims felt they could be reconciled in the future. According toone 
estimate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/report-on-syria-conflict-finds-115-of-population-killed-or-injured>
, some 470,000 people have been killed since the conflict erupted in March 
2011. Millions have been made homeless.

ORB said the wish to see a negotiated end to the conflict had been reflected 
in focus groups it has conducted in Aleppo, Idlib and Hassakeh and with recent 
refugees from the Isis-held areas of Raqqa and Deir el Zor (conducted in 
southern Turkey).


Participants in the groups urged international powers to find common ground- 
one man from Deir el Zor calling on the US and Russia to apply pressure to 
President Bashar al-Assad to step down.This week’s Vienna meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/syria-vienna-meeting-agrees-aid-airdrops-but-fails-to-set-date-for-talks>
 of the International Syria Support Group conspicuously failed to raise the key 
question of Assad’s future. Nor did it name a date for the resumption of the 
stalled Geneva peace talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/syria-peace-talks-flounder-after-dispute-over-transitional-government>
.


The partial cessation of hostilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/22/us-and-russia-agree-to-enforce-new-syria-ceasefire>
 agreement forged by Moscow and Washington at the end of February had “breathed 
a new lease of life” into Syrians - though it is now estimated by the UN to be 
only 50% effective. “The ceasefire has given people the chance to come out in 
the streets again,” said a young man from Aleppo. “It makes us think of the 
beginning of the revolution. Syrians are active people and we will be able to 
rebuild the country.”

Western media and governments were “fixated” with Isis and following a 
strategy to“degrade” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/06/obama-statements-isis-timeline>
 it, ORB said. “But with the exception of areas Isis controls or have attacked 
recently, the general perception across Syria is that the group’s influence has 
decreased over the past six months.

“Though the narrative in the west is that they have been hit hard by falling 
oil prices and continued airstrikes, when individuals from Isis-held areas are 
asked, opinion is more divided over whether their reported economic problems 
are reality.

“We have seen that they have halved salaries for fighters, and sometimes they 
are paid late,” said a man from Raqqa. “However, I don’t think they are having 
economic problems because they have taken over more oil wells and they are 
increasing..taxes”.

The survey also found that 51% had felt a decrease in the influence of 
Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shia militia organisation that is fighting with the 
Assad government and which works closely with Iran. The influence of the Nusra 
front, al-Qaida’s Syrian affiliate, had also decreased, 47% of respondents 
believed.

ORB’s trained Syrian pollsters, operating with the permission of the 
authorities in each area, interviewed a nationally representative sample of 
1981 adults in January and February. The firm has conducted research throughout 
the country since 2013. It describes itself as “a market leader in high quality 
research in fragile and conflict environments” and has also operated in Iraq, 
Somalia, Afghanistan, Libya and Mali.
 