
The National Crime Agency has arrested three employees from blue-chip banks as 
part of a major UK insider trading investigation linked to thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama-papers>.

The arrests, which were made in recent months and first reported on Friday, 
are the latest development in an operation led by City watchdog the Financial 
Conduct Authority (FCA). Its existence was disclosed by ministers this week.


After the leak of a cache of data from the Panama based law firm Mossack 
Fonseca by the Guardian and other media in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, the UK government 
ordered the creation of a multiagency Panama Papers taskforce with funding of 
£10m.

On Tuesday, the chancellor and the home secretary revealed the taskforce had 
been working on“a major insider-trading operation” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/taskforce-launches-criminal-and-civil-investigations-into-panama-papers>
. The investigation began before the publication of the Panama Papers but it 
has been given new impetus by the release of the biggest-ever leak of 
confidential tax haven data.

New leads are understood to have come from information obtained by the UK 
taskforce, with ministers saying it had acquired “high-quality, significant and 
credible data on offshore activity in Panama”.

A spokesman for the National Crime Agency, which tackles serious and organised 
crime, said: “We have nothing to add to the written ministerial statement 
released earlier this week.” The FCA declined to comment.

The financial news service Bloomberg reported 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-11/three-bank-employees-said-arrested-in-u-k-insider-trading-probe>
 claimed the operation could be one of the largest UK insider trading 
inquiries. It said more arrests were planned, and that officers from the NCA 
were assisting with covert surveillance. Neither those detained, nor their 
employers, have been named.

The Panama Papers taskforce 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-launches-cross-government-taskforce-on-the-panama-papers>
 was announced in April, one week after the simultaneous publication of the 
first leaked files by media outlets in more than 80 countries. It brought 
together investigators, compliance specialists and analysts from HM Revenue and 
Customs, the NCA, the Serious Fraud Office and the FCA.

This week ministers told parliament that civil and criminal investigations 
into 22 individuals suspected of tax evasion had been opened. They said the 
taskforce has identified nine professional enablers of economic crime, all of 
whom have links with known criminals. Forty-three high-net-worth individuals 
have had their tax status placed under special review. And officers have 
uncovered 26 offshore companies holding UK property whose owners have been 
linked to suspicious financial activity.

The German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung obtained 11.5m leaked documents from 
an anonymous whistleblower calling themselves John Doe, and the International 
Consortium of Investigative Journalists in Washington shared the information 
with media outlets around the world.

The ICIJ has declined to show the leaked documents 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/blog/20160406-FAQs.html> to any government, 
saying it is not an arm of law enforcement and its policy is not to turn over 
such material.

UK regulators have been flexing their muscles on insider trading, with a 
number of high-profile court cases and investigations. Operation Tabernula 
culminated this year when a jury convicted former Deutsche Bank corporate broker
Martyn Dodgson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/painstaking-investigation-deutsche-bank-insider-trading>
 of insider dealing. Dodgson, who advised the government on its stakes in Royal 
Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Banking Group, was sentenced to four and a half 
years in prison.

Last week a former manager at BlackRock, the investment firm, admitted to 
improperly trading shares and other investment products in the run-up to public 
announcements.Mark Lyttleton 
<https://www.ft.com/content/a75616e6-a0e5-11e6-891e-abe238dee8e2> was arrested 
by City of London police in April 2013 and has pleaded guilty in a case that 
involved the use of a Panamanian-registered company to carry out trades.

 