
Melbourne has suffered what appears to be the most lethal episode of 
thunderstorm asthma on record. Withat least four deaths and more patients left 
in intensive care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2016/nov/24/melbourne-thunderstorm-asthma-kills-four-people-with-seven-in-intensive-care>
, the storm has served as a grim reminder that the seasonal weather occurrence 
can have tragic knock-on effects for human health. “This is an extraordinary 
event,” said Prof Anthony Seaton, who has worked on thunderstorm asthma at the 
University of Aberdeen. “I don’t know of any event as severe as this.”

Three still in critical condition after Melbourne 'thunderstorm asthma'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2016/nov/24/melbourne-thunderstorm-asthma-kills-four-people-with-seven-in-intensive-care>
Thunderstorm asthma has been studied for more than 30 years. Since the early 
1980s <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2862383>, rapid spikes in sudden 
asthma attacks have been linked to thunderstorms in the UK, Australia, Italy 
and the US, but they no doubt occur in other countries. “The evidence for the 
connection is pretty robust,” said ProfAziz Sheikh, co-director of the Asthma 
UK Centre for Applied Research, a collaboration between 14 universities.


The largest known outbreak <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26765082> of 
thunderstorm asthma previously coincided with a heavy thunderstorm in London on 
24 June 1994. In a 30-hour period which started at 6pm that evening, 640 
patients with asthma or other breathing problems overwhelmed hospital emergency 
departments. Under normal conditions, the staff would have expected only 60 or 
so asthma patients. More than 100 were admitted, and five ended up in intensive 
care. In Melbourne, two consecutive thunderstorms saw a five to ten-fold rise 
in asthma cases in1992, a report <http://europepmc.org/abstract/med/1603007> 
from the city’s Monash medical centre found.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thunderstorm%20asthma%3A%20what%20causes%20it%20and%20why%20is%20it%20so%20dangerous%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thunderstorm%20asthma%3A%20what%20causes%20it%20and%20why%20is%20it%20so%20dangerous%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer&media=>
Thunderstorm asthma: what causes it and why is it so dangerous? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/nov/26/thunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer>
But while scientists broadly agree that thunderstorms can unleash dramatic 
asthma outbreaks, the precise causes of the epidemics are less clear. One 
leading theory is that during thunderstorms, certain types of pollen grains are 
drawn up to the humid cloud base where they rupture and shed much finer highly 
allergenic granules into the atmosphere. When broken open, each pollen grain 
can release more than 500 allergy-causing granules. These fall back to the 
ground in cold downdrafts and, because they are much smaller than pollen 
particles, can be inhaled deep into the lungs. There, the particles may bring 
on severe asthma attacks in people who suffer from pollen allergies.


As a working theory it makes sense. Thunderstorm asthma coincides with high 
pollen counts and affects people who have hay fever. Those with pollen 
allergies who stay indoors and shut the windows during thunderstorms do not 
seem to suffer. But scientists have so far failed to prove the theory. Prof 
Jeroen Buters at Technical University Munich’s Center of Allergy and 
Environment monitored pollen allergens in the air for 24 hours a day over six 
years. He found no spike in the fine particles spewed out of rupturing pollen 
particles. But the measurements are hard to do. Pollen rupturing may occur only 
very briefly during a storm and could simply be missed in experiments. Another 
headache is that the filters used to monitor the air capture diesel particles 
too, which absorb pollen allergens on contact. “It’s a sexy theory,” said 
Buters. “But we have not found these small particles in ambient air in real 
life.”


The fact that most thunderstorms, and even those in the high-pollen season, do 
not unleash asthma epidemics makes it clear that scientists are missing 
something. In Melbourne, pollution is unlikely to play a role in the latest 
deaths. But thunderstorms suck up everything from pollen and fungal spores to 
bacteria and dust before they dump it back down in cold streams of air.

In a report published this year <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26765082>
, doctors in Napoli warned that climate change is predicted to ramp up the 
frequency of storms, which could lead to more cases of thunderstorm asthma. 
“There’s an argument for public health advice,” said Seaton, “People with 
asthma, with allergy to pollen, should take precautions if a thunderstorm 
occurs.”
 