
Luke Donald believes “mental anguish” could be behind the decision of Tiger 
Woods topull out of his comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/tiger-woods-calls-off-safeway-open-comeback>
 at the Safeway Open.

Woods has had three back operations in the space of 19 months and the former 
world No1 has not played competitively since August last year. He had planned 
to play in California this week and in the Turkish Airlines Open on the 
European Tour in November, but said on Monday he was not ready to compete. “My 
health is good and I feel strong but my game is vulnerable and not where it 
needs to be,” Woods said on his website.

Donald, who had a career-threatening wrist injury in 2008, said: “It sounds 
like clinically he feels fine. He’s just not quite ready to tee it up from a 
mental standpoint perhaps. That’s certainly what I gathered from his comments. 
There’s a lot of mental anguish when you take time away. I think obviously 
Tiger’s got very high standards and expectations.

Tiger Woods has to be careful over this comeback as there will not be another 
| Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/tiger-woods-comeback-golf-last-chance>
“I think that you have to weigh that up with that feel of almost failure or 
fear or anxiety of not performing well. IfTiger Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> is healthy like he says he is, 
that’s probably what he’s weighing out right now, just feeling comfortable. 
It’s really hard to get comfortable unless you actually put yourself through 
it. At some point he’s got to jump in, and if he messes up, he’s got a good 
opportunity to get better the next time he plays.”

England’s Chris Wood saw Woods during the Ryder Cup when the 40-year-old was 
one of Davis Love’s vice-captains and hopes this latest setback does not mark 
the end of Woods’s career.

“He seemed fine at the Ryder Cup, but you never know with Tiger,” Wood said. 
“It’s really disappointing because I was ready to watch it and it would have 
been great for the European Tour for him to play in Turkey in his second event 
back.

“It is really disappointing for myself as a golf fan to not be able to sit 
down and watch him play, because he was my golfing hero. He won the Masters 
when I was 10 years old, so from that point on he’s the only guy I’ve ever 
looked up to really. And he doesn’t deserve for his career to come to a finish 
in this way. He deserves to go out in all the style that his records still 
deserve.”
 