
Never before has the imminent appearance of the world’s 898th-ranked golfer 
caused such a stir. Finally, aftera series of false starts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/25/tiger-woods-masters-augusta-golf>
 and more than 460 days, Tiger Woods will return to competitive action at the 
Hero World Challenge in the Bahamas on Thursday.

The ranking – Woods is behind such unknowns as Max Rottluff, Brad Shilton and 
Curtis Thompson – provides one element of context. The other was once visible 
to the naked eye as Woods battled severe woes of fitness and form when last 
involved in tournament play. His absence led onlookers to wonder whether the 
14-time major champion would ever be seen again in a competitive environment. 
Barring something late and completely unforeseen, Woods will indeed take his 
place in the 18-man field for the event which also raises money for his charity 
foundation.

Tiger Woods to make comeback at Hero World Challenge in December
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/tiger-woods-comeback-golf-hero-world-challenge>
“I’m not dead, I’m ready to go,” said Woods, before admitting to an element of 
trepidation. “I’m nervous for every tournament I play in whether it’s after a 
lay-off or six in a row or a major.

“I care. If I care, I’m nervous. And it’s good to be that way. To have that 
nervous energy and channel it into aggression, into focus, concentration, 
that’s good stuff. If I wasn’t nervous, that would mean I didn’t care. I don’t 
want to be out there flat. I want to be out here so bad; and now I am.”

Woods had previously entered for the Safeway Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/tiger-woods-calls-off-safeway-open-comeback>
 and Turkish Airlines Openbefore withdrawing from both 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/tiger-woods-luke-donald-golf>, 
citing a “vulnerable” golf game. The move triggered speculation that he only 
initially stipulated he would play in the tournaments because of commercial 
obligations.

“It was a good decision in the end,” Woods said. “The competitor inside me 
wanted to go so badly and was itching to go. I had been playing at home. I 
thought if I only have a few shots, it’s good enough to get it around. I had 
played feeling worse.

“But what’s the point in rushing back when I’ve waited over a year to begin 
with? I’ve waited this long, it’s not going to hurt to wait just this much 
longer.

“I have way more shots now because I’ve played way more golf. I only had a 
handful of shots back then. I can hit all the shots now, on call.”

Australia makes strong case as World Cup of Golf searches for a home | Charlie 
Happell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/australia-makes-strong-case-as-world-cup-of-golf-searches-for-a-home>
Woods will be joined in the Bahamas by Dustin Johnson, Henrik Stenson, Justin 
Rose, Jordan Spieth and Patrick Reed. That group will probably be delighted 
with the level of focus which will inevitably shift towards one member of the 
field. Bookmakers are unconvinced by Woods, though; he is a general 40/1 to win 
for the first time since 2013 when, as is often forgotten, he secured five 
victories.

After multiple back surgeries, Woods insisted walking is now “easy” and that 
he can “run with my kids now”. He added: “It’s a five-mile walk. You forget 
what it feels like to be in golf shoes versus tennis shoes, to be on an uneven 
lie versus a flat lie. I can walk for two or three hours on a treadmill and 
it’s not the same as walking on a golf course. It’s so different, the standing 
around.

“The rhythm of playing in a golf cart versus walking and playing. I had 
forgotten that because I had been away for over a year.”
 