
Tiger Woods’s career outlook has taken its latest bleak turn with confirmation 
that he will not, as announced, return to competitive action at this week’s 
Safeway Open in California. Woods has also pulled out of November’s Turkish 
Airlines Open, citing the “vulnerable” state of his game.

“This isn’t what I wanted to happen but I will continue to strive to be able 
to play tournament golf,” said Woods. “I’m close and I won’t stop until I get 
there.”

The 14-time major winner, who has suffered from recurring back injuries over 
the past two years, has not played on the USPGA Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pga-tour> since August 2015. Woods had 
announced in early September that he would make his comeback at the Safeway 
Open.

That was a major boost to the event, with ticket sales doubling and interest 
rocketing. Woods was due to partner Phil Mickelson in rounds one and two having 
confirmed his entry at the end of last week. Woods also said he would feature 
in Turkey, alongside the likes of Rory McIlroy.

However, in what seems to be a sudden change of heart, the 40-year-old will 
continue his sabbatical from the game. Woods has admitted that previous returns 
following surgery have been too soon for his long-term health but insists that 
this time fitness is not the issue. “After a lot of soul-searching and honest 
reflection, I know that I am not yet ready to play on the PGA Tour or compete 
in Turkey,” Woods added. “My health is good and I feel strong, but my game is 
vulnerable and not where it needs to be.

“When I announced last week I was going to Safeway, I had every intention of 
playing, or I wouldn’t have committed. I practised the last several days in 
California but after a lot of hours, I knew I wasn’t ready to compete against 
the best golfers in the world.”
 