
Tiger Woods, beset by injuries and the decline of his playing career, appears 
to have at least one person who still believes in him. And that person isTiger 
Woods <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods>. In an interview with 
Charlie Rose on PBS on Thursday night, the former world No1 said he is 
targeting an imminent return to golf as well as more victories in the majors.

Woods has not played competitively since August 2015 after three separate 
operations on his back, andpulled out of a planned return earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/tiger-woods-luke-donald-golf> 
after describing his game as “vulnerable”. But he told Rose on Thursday that he 
is “hoping to come back in December”. Rose then asked Woods if he expected to 
equal Jack Nicklaus’s record total of 18 majors. “No … I’ve accepted I’m going 
to get more,” Woods replied. Woods’s last victory in a major was at the 2008 US 
Open, the 14th major title of his career.

Woods also described his respect for Nicklaus’s achievements. “I looked up to 
him, I looked at his record. ... I wouldn’t say I lusted for his record. I just 
think that was the gold standard because he had won the most majors and the 
second-most Tour events. And here he is at 18.”

Tiger Woods ditched comeback due to ‘mental anguish’ says Luke Donald
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/tiger-woods-luke-donald-golf> 
 Woods also said he missed competing against his fellow professionals. “Do I 
miss it? Absolutely, 100%. And to be at my age now, at 40 years old … I’m the 
first one to admit: I can’t do the things I used to be able to do. Most people 
can’t at my age, versus when they were younger. I have to find different ways 
to go about it.”

At his peak, Woods was arguably the most famous athlete in the world and he 
spoke about the pressures that came with that tag. “Well, it’s a burden in … 
the amount of obligations that I have at a tournament. The anonymity that was 
lost … if you look back, the only regret I have in life is not spending another 
year at Stanford [where Woods attended college], and I wish I would’ve had one 
more year.”
 