
Tiger Woods <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> failed to turn a 
brilliant start into a round which would have put him in contention at the Hero 
World Challenge in the Bahamas, but there were more positives signs as he 
continued his competitive comeback.

Having shot an impressive 65 on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/tiger-woods-hero-world-challenge>
, the 14-time major winner picked up where he left off with four birdies in the 
first five holes of his third round to get to 11 under for the tournament, 
which he is hosting.

Related: Tiger Woods rolls back the years with seven-under-par second round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/tiger-woods-hero-world-challenge>

However, his game fell away on the back nine as trouble off the tee – he found 
sand with his final five shots with driver or three wood – led to him falling 
back to eight under, 11 shots behind the leader Hideki Matsuyama. It was a 
disappointing finish to a round which began so promisingly and even included 
some of the old Tiger magic as he holed a bunker shot on the 5th for birdie.

With a three-putt at the next he registered his first bogey in 24 holes but he 
immediately got the dropped shot back at the next and turned in 32 at 10 under, 
which was improved by a birdie at the 11th. Things started to go awry from 
there as bogeys at the 13th and 14th brought his momentum to a shuddering halt 
and, even when he sank a lengthy birdie putt at the penultimate hole, he 
double-bogeyed the 18th for the second time in three attempts after going in 
the water, this time with his approach.

“For three straight days I’ve got off to great starts – two of the days I 
didn’t continue it but I am so happy to be out here. I missed it,” Woods told 
theGolf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Channel after a round of 70.

“One thing I’ve been good at over the years has been eliminating the noise, 
trying to keep that at bay, and coming back for this one in particular there 
was a lot and I had to stay focused on what I needed to do. My mind was able to 
switch over in competitor mode again and that felt great.

“The plan is to get back playing a full schedule. Every day this week I have 
felt better and that is exciting because I didn’t know what that would feel 
like.”

Matsuyama shot his second 65 of the week to lift him to 19 under and open up a 
seven-stroke lead over the Open champion Henrik Stenson, whose 66 catapulted 
him into a share of second place with the US Open champion Dustin Johnson, who 
carded a disappointing 72.
 