
The human rights commissioner Tim Wilson has resigned to seek Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> preselection in 
Andrew Robb’s Victorian seat.

Wilson, a former Institute of Public Affairs (IPA) policy director whose 
appointment to the Human Rights Commission attracted controversy, announced the 
decision on Monday.

He is seeking to contest the seat of Goldstein after Robb, the outgoing 
minister for trade,decided to retire from politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/trade-minister-andrew-robb-to-retire-from-politics-as-truss-considers-future>
 at this year’s election.

Tim Wilson: government should apologise over sacked Nauru Save the Children 
staff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/20/tim-wilson-government-should-apologise-over-sacked-nauru-save-the-children-staff>
Wilson, who is just two years into his five-year term at the commission, said 
he was “very proud” of his work including boosting the profile and importance 
of free speech and religious freedom.

“The role of Australia’s human rights commissioner is to start these 
conversations. It is up to the parliament to finish them,” he saidin a statement
 <http://www.timwilson.com.au/news/statement-of-resignation>.

“It’s also the role of the parliament to deal with many other issues that I am 
passionate about. That’s why I am announcing today my intention to resign the 
office of Australia’s Human Rights Commissioner effective from Friday, 19 
February, to seek preselection to be the Liberal party’s candidate for the 
federal electorate of Goldstein.

“This is a tough decision for me, but the right one. The people of Goldstein 
deserve someone who will fight for them.”

Wilson said parliament needed people who were prepared to take responsibility, 
make tough decisions and work to fix problems.

“This is not a time to be timid. It’s a time to be bold,” he said. “Our 
country faces big challenges: debt and deficits, high taxes and youth 
unemployment, to name a few.”

Robb said last week he hoped there would be a strong female candidate in the 
race to succeed him because “the country needs more strong female candidates in 
the parliament” - a comment that was seen as a strong endorsement of Georgina 
Downer, the daughter of former foreign minister Alexander Downer.

The attorney general, George Brandis, appointed Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/17/thinktank-director-tim-wilson-appointed-human-rights-commissioner>
 as the so-called “freedom commissioner” to a five-year term shortly after the 
2013 election, saying the Human Rights Commission had been taking “a narrow and 
selective view of the statutory function and failed to give sufficient 
attention to freedom as one of the most fundamental human rights”.

Respecting religious freedom has become more complex, Tim Wilson says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/04/respecting-religious-freedom-has-become-more-complex-tim-wilson-says>
Wilson resigned from the IPA and as a member of the Victorian division of the 
Liberal party when he took up the position.

His appointment drew criticism because the IPA had previously called for the 
abolition 
<https://www.ipa.org.au/publications/2146/ipa-australian-human-rights-commission-should-be-abolished>
 of the Human Rights Commission.

On Monday, Brandis said the Australian people owed Wilson “a huge debt of 
gratitude for his passion and commitment”.

“In just two years, Tim Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tim-wilson> has single-handedly 
reshaped the human rights debate in Australia. He has restored balance to a 
debate which had previously been dominated by the priorities and prejudices of 
the Left,” Brandis said.

“On behalf of the Government I thank Mr Wilson for his work and wish him well 
in his future endeavours.”

In a Senate estimates committee hearing last week, Labor asked Wilson to rule 
himself out of any preselections while he occupied his current role. “I will 
not engage in hypotheticals about what I would do in the future,” he replied.

Labor’s shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said Wilson had “certainly done 
the right thing in completely resigning from his very high office”.

Together with Labor’s disability reform spokeswoman, Jenny Macklin, Dreyfus 
called on the government to re-appoint a full-time disability discrimination 
commissioner. They said this would “give people with disability the strong 
voice they once had at the Human Rights Commission”.

Graeme Innes’s term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/02/disability-discrimination-commissioner-criticises-lifters-not-leaners-slogan>
 as the disability discrimination commissioner expired in July 2014 and the 
responsibilities wereadded to the portfolio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/01/outgoing-disability-discrimination-commissioner-hails-first-year-of-ndis>
 of the age discrimination commissioner, Susan Ryan.

Innes said his dedicated position was not filled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/27/ruddock-asked-me-to-do-my-job-without-fear-or-favour-brandis-ended-that-tradition>
 because the commission’s resources were stretched by Brandis’s decision to 
appoint Wilson.
 