
People are surprised when I express support for Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>. My economic politics are 
hard to the left and, unlike hers, explicitly socialist. But it’s entirely 
because my analysis of inequality is economic that I endorse Clinton – not as a 
least-worst option, not even due to the nature of her opponent, but on her own 
terms as a leader pledged to the material improvement of women’s economic and 
social reality.

This is a structurally radical framework for broad-based American change. Yet 
over the course of many a bleating bro-beating on the internet, the dread 
realisation has landed with me that among too many men who identify themselves 
as on the left, notions of what constitutes social progress and radical redress 
of inequality are gendered concepts – with the result that Clinton’s activist 
leadership is wilfully dismissed.

Time magazine may have called Clinton a “cultural revolutionary” 
<http://time.com/4550665/why-people-hate-the-clintons/>, but the Bernie Bros 
are having none of it. If you’re a woman who’s supported Clinton online at any 
point you’ll know which bros I mean.

Stop right there: assuming a Hillary Clinton victory is downright dangerous | 
Kate Aronoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/28/hillary-clinton-poll-assuming-win-is-downright-dangerous>
They’re the self-proclaimed progressive gentlemen who insist that Bernie 
Sanders was robbed of the Democratic nomination, despite hisloss by more than 
2.5m votes in the primaries 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/democratic_vote_count.html>
. Whether“brogressives” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/06/he-says-hes-progressive-but-is-he-really-a-brogressive>
, “brocialists” or “manarchists”, they denounce Clinton’s claim on American 
left leadership despite her popular nomination, policy, activist record, her 
spoken statements or her trouncing of Donald Trump in three debates.

There must be scrutiny of any candidate for office but it comes with an 
obsessional viciousness towards Clinton in these mannish parts of the left. The 
Australian writerJane Caro described an experience of praising Clinton 
<http://thebigsmoke.com.au/2016/08/01/phenomenon-silent-hillary-clinton-supporters/>
 and being “abused, sneered at, patronised (oh my God, how you will be 
patronised) and sent endless propaganda purporting to prove she’s corrupt, a 
criminal, a murderer, a warmonger etc”.

I’ve received this propaganda too. Clinton’s critics cite unstructured blog 
posts about petrodollars, blame her for the US mire in the Middle East, and 
post links to rough-edit YouTube videos proclaiming her ownership by the banks.

The alpha-bro outfit WikiLeaks has fuelled some old-school conspiracy theories 
by tweeting sly suggestions that she’sa puppet of the Rothschilds 
<http://www.thetruthseeker.co.uk/?p=136983>. There are those who – unbelievably 
– insist she’s“just as bad” as Trump 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/election-us-2016-35422862>.

 Such ardent behaviour is global, and unrestricted to those US citizens who 
can determine the election. It’s been described by female writers across the 
world as they simultaneously explain the phenomenon of“silent Hillary 
supporters” 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2016/04/20/many_hillary_clinton_supporters_in_new_york_kept_their_allegiances_quiet.html>
. Since the primaries exposed this behaviour, vast communities have formed of 
women organising secret Facebook groups so they can praise, analyse and debate 
concerns about the Clinton candidacy without abuse. I’m in two of them – an 
Australian and American one – there are thousands more, and various groups run 
into memberships of thousands.

It’s not just leftwing women, either. An article in Marie Claire 
<http://www.marieclaire.com/politics/a23149/the-secret-hillary-clinton-voters/> 
observed the phenomenon of evangelical women in conservative communities 
secretly organising for Clinton as well.

Why there’s open hostility by certain men towards Clinton as well as how her 
female voting base is locked down in their support for her is simplistically
explained as an act of and response to sexism 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/entry/joe-biden-double-standard_us_58160212e4b064e1b4b3059b>
. But there are more complex and nuanced elements here that apply to a broader 
western conversation about policy priorities.

Problems of pay inequality, parental leave and access to affordable childcare 
exist across the western world because of the scarcity within political 
leadership of those who fight for women’s causes beyond lip service and make 
actual legislative change.

Fighting inequality in the US – and global – context has defined Clinton’s 
political engagement for her entire career. Her campaign is unashamed in its
commitment to women’s policy 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.com/politics/a3864300/donald-trump-sexist-rosie-o-donnell-2016-presidential-debate/>
. As an Australian, I look upon the opportunity Americans have to exercise a 
vote for her with envy.

The hatred of Clinton from the testosterone left is a dangerous, 
self-defeating omission from those who insist theirs is a project of fairness. 
Clinton has progressed from community activist to presidential candidate with 
relentless dedication to equality causes.

Entirely because of her own redefinition of the first lady role, it’s hard to 
imagine now how groundbreaking it was when shetold the UN 
<http://www.un.org/esa/gopher-data/conf/fwcw/conf/gov/950905175653.txt> “that 
it is no longer acceptable to discuss women’s rights as separate from human 
rights” in Beijing in 1995; or when she published It Takes a Village, arguing 
that childcare is a collective social responsibility, in 1996; or that she is
credited with the creation of an office on violence against women at the 
Department of Justice 
<http://www.usnews.com/opinion/leslie-marshall/2014/02/19/hillary-clintons-accomplishments-speak-for-themselves>
.

In her busy senatorial career, she championed access to contraception as a 
women’s rights issue, fought for the Paycheck Fairness Act andco-sponsored the 
Lilly Ledbetter bill for fair pay 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/01/29/equal-pay-litigant-lilly-ledbetter-endorses-clinton/>
, as well as campaigning for paid parental leave for US public servants.

Her tenure as secretary of state was characterised by her unprecedented 
centralisation of gender equality strategies to foreign policy, creating a 
structure for participation of women in peace processes andrecognition of rape 
as a weapon of war 
<http://www.pbs.org/wnet/women-war-and-peace/features/our-interview-with-secretary-of-state-hillary-clinton/>
, which was subsequently adopted by the UN.

Let's learn from the mistakes that created US poverty, not copy them | Van 
Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/lets-learn-from-the-mistakes-that-created-us-poverty-not-copy-them>
Her nuanced understanding and dogged defence of women’s autonomy and the right 
to choose has been hailed as“glorious” 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2016/06/10/hillary_clinton_proved_her_reproductive_rights_chops_in_a_glorious_planned.html>
 given the dangerous polarisation of the abortion issue in the US. She’s never 
abandoned her dedication to improving access to childcare –it is a central 
feature of her present campaign 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2015/06/18/conservatives_hate_it_takes_a_village_hillary_clinton_embraces_it_by_endorsing.html>
 – and her candidacy for president has beenmarked by her advocacy  
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/04/more-than-just-a-symbol/476490/>
for fairness for women and children, equal pay, reproductive rights, health 
equality and family and carer’s leave.

While women fight these ongoing battles for recognition and redress of our 
structural disadvantage, it exposes the privilege of cabinet ministers, 
WikiLeaks wannabes and Bernie Bros alike that they can trivialise, minimise or 
ignore them.

There is more at stake in the US election than one candidate’s victory and 
another’s defeat, far more than who should gain the levers of an economy – far 
more even than who deserves access to the US armoury.

Clinton is not just the most qualified candidate for election. Not only does 
she have a singular, expert history of activism, leadership and service that 
recommends her on her own terms. She’s a candidate whose policy, practice, life 
and very person are inextricable from the political cause of equality.

In a democratic choice reduced to two options, to reject her for her opponent 
amounts to a rejection of equality as a political project. For those of us who 
lack the privileges conferred on others at their birth, should Clinton lose 
it’s not only the result that will be devastating, but the consequences, too.
 