
Tony Abbott has called for nets to be put in place to protect beachgoers in 
regional New South Wales, saying he is on the side of people rather than 
sharks, aftera teenager was bitten while surfing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/26/teenage-surfer-attacked-by-shark-at-ballinas-lighthouse-beach>
.

The former prime minister has argued that it was unfair nets were in place off 
metropolitan beaches but not regional ones.

“I’m lucky to surf on Sydney beaches and beaches in Sydney, Newcastle and 
Wollongong, [which] since the 1940s have been protected by mesh,” he told 3AW. 
“Now if it’s good enough for Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong, for the life of 
me, I don’t know why it’s not good enough for the north coast of NSW.”

Teenage surfer attacked by shark at Ballina's Lighthouse beach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/26/teenage-surfer-attacked-by-shark-at-ballinas-lighthouse-beach>
Abbott said a commercial shark fishery should be considered for the area.
“I don’t know why we don’t have a commercial shark fishery up there because, 
frankly, if it’s a choice between people and animal, I’m on the side of the 
people every time,” he said.

His comments are in direct contrast to his state counterpart and occasional 
former surfing buddy Mike Baird, the premier of NSW, who has resisted putting 
shark nets in the area, saying they are not necessarily suitable for the rugged 
northern NSW beaches.

The call for nets has been renewed after a teenager was attacked at Lighthouse 
Beach in Ballina, the 11th attack in almost two years on a 70km stretch of 
beach in northern NSW. Cooper Allen, 17, is recovering in hospital after being 
bitten on the torso by an unidentified shark – though a 3.5m great white was 
seen in the area afterwards.

“We need to continue to do exactly what we’re doing and that is a whole range 
of technologies we are trialling,” Baird said on Monday. “There is already 
drone technology that is working … and we’ll look to get that there which will 
provide increased surveillance.

“We can’t guarantee, clearly, at any beach, that people will be safe. But 
we’ll do everything we can to ensure that we do that.”

Baird held a “shark summit” last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/29/shark-summit-examines-new-and-old-deterrents-after-spate-of-attacks>
 to investigate shark deterrents for various NSW beaches but a trial of an eco 
barrier at Lighthouse beach was pulled in August because surf conditions were 
too rough for it to work.

A five-year $16m shark strategy was announced last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/25/shark-strategy-nsw-to-spend-16m-on-sonar-buoys-surveillance-and-science>
, which consisted of the eco barriers as well as increased helicopter 
surveillance and other technologies.
 