
David Cameron is under pressure to justify Zac Goldsmith’s London mayoral 
campaign, after the leader of MuslimConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> called it a disgusting and 
risible attempt to smear Labour’s winning candidate, Sadiq Khan.

Mohammed Amin, the chair of the Conservative Muslim Forum, joined other senior 
Tory figures in condemning the attacks on Khan by Goldsmith.

In an article for ConservativeHome 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/05/mohammed-amin-im-a-conservative-and-voted-for-zac-but-i-was-disgusted-by-his-repeated-risible-attempts-to-smear-khan.html>
, Amin objected to Goldsmith’s efforts to paint Khan as a “closet extremist” 
and said the attempts to smear him had “probably increased our risks of 
suffering terrorism”.

Michael Fallon declines to confirm London is ‘safe’ under Sadiq Khan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/michael-fallon-sadiq-khan-mayor-decline-answer-question-london-safe>
“Isis [Islamic State] are perpetually seeking to radicalise and recruit young 
British Muslims to their cause. At the margin, I believe there is a risk that 
young impressionable British Muslims who witnessed Khan being smeared in this 
manner will thereby be made more vulnerable to radicalisation”.

Amin said he voted for Goldsmith by post a week before polling day because he 
disliked Khan’s transport policies, but he could not bring himself to campaign 
for the Tory candidate.

“I was disgusted (I considered milder words, but decided to be frank) with the 
tone of his campaign and his repeated and risible attempts to smearSadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>,” he wrote. “My wife, who has 
been a Conservative party member for about 10 years and attends each party 
conference with me, was if anything even more outraged. She could not bring 
herself to vote for Zac at all, and exercised her democratic right to vote for 
Khan. She did, however, vote Conservative for the Greater London assembly.”

Labour had repeatedly claimed the attacks on Khan were dog-whistle racism 
aimed at suggestingLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> was not safe 
in the hands of a Muslim mayor.

Cameron himself joined in with Goldsmith’s attempts to link Khan to alleged 
Islamist extremists with whom he had shared a platform while working as a human 
rights lawyer.

The politics of fear and division isn't dead quite yet in Sadiq Khan's London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/the-politics-of-fear-and-division-isnt-dead-quite-yet-in-sadiq-khans-london>
Many Conservatives kept quiet about their concerns until after the polls 
closed but, as it became clear Khan was going to win by a landslide, a string 
of senior figures spoke out.

Sayeeda Warsi, the former Tory co-chairman, said it was “appalling”, while 
Andrew Boff, the leader of the Conservatives in the London assembly, and Roger 
Evans, the deputy mayor to the outgoing Boris Johnson, raised concerns it could 
set back community relations in London. Ken Clarke, the Conservative former 
chancellor, said it was now clear the campaign was a mistake.

Michael Fallon, the Tory defence secretary, defended Goldsmith’s campaign on 
Saturday morning, saying it was part of the “rough and tumble” of politics.

However, that is unlikely to be enough to insulate Cameron from questions 
about why he and Goldsmith were drawn into a campaign to paint Khan as a 
security risk.

Speaking on the Today programme, Fallon pointedly refused to say London would 
be safe in the hands of Khan, simply stressing that it would be fine being run 
by a Conservative government alongside a Labour mayor.

Sadiq Khan’s victory won’t end Islamophobia, but it offers hope | Homa Khaleeli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/sadiq-khan-victory-islamophobia-mayor-london>
Concerns about whether Goldsmith’s campaign was attempting to divide 
communitiesfirst arose over leaflets targeting Hindu voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/16/zac-goldsmith-leaflet-british-indians-heirlooms>
 suggesting that Khan would tax jewellery.

As it progressed, Goldsmith repeatedly questioned Khan’s judgment in 
associating with alleged extremists before he became an MP.

He was particularly criticised for an article in the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3567537/On-Thursday-really-going-hand-world-s-greatest-city-Labour-party-thinks-terrorists-friends-passionate-plea-ZAC-GOLDSMITH-four-days-Mayoral-election.html>
 illustrated with a
picture from the 7 July 2005 bombings and headlined: “Are we really going to 
hand the world’s greatest city to a Labour party that thinks terrorists are its 
friends?”


The tactics appeared to backfire when the prime minister linked Khan to a 
Muslim man called Suliman Gani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/20/mps-shout-racist-at-cameron-after-comments-on-sadiq-khan-in-pmqs>
, claiming he supported Islamic State. Ganiturned out to be a Conservative 
supporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/25/imam-labelled-isis-supporter-cameron-invited-recruit-muslim-tories>
 who had shared platforms with leading Tories as well, and who has threatened 
to sue anyone repeating the claims outside the House of Commons. He is on 
record as supporting an Islamic state, not the terrorist group of that name.

After Fallon repeated Cameron’s claims on Radio 4, Gani tweeted on Saturday 
<https://twitter.com/sulimangani/status/728904937338474496>: “I am seeking 
legal action against the defence secretary and would like a public retraction 
of his comments.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sadiq%20Khan%3A%20London's%20new%20mayor%20-%20video%20profile&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sadiq%20Khan%3A%20London%27s%20new%20mayor%20-%20video%20profile&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile&media=>
Sadiq Khan: London’s new mayor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/07/sadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile> 