
It was shunned by film studios and plagued by Pokémon, but now Oliver Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oliver-stone> will finally premiere Snowden, 
his biopic of the National Security Agency whistleblower, at the Toronto 
international film festival in September.

The film, which stars Joseph Gordon-Levitt as Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/22/edward-snowden-comic-con-oliver-stone-film>
, is based partly on a book by the Guardian journalistLuke Harding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lukeharding> and follows the former 
security analyst from his time in the US military to his exile to Russia after 
he leaked thousands of classified documents.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsnowden-new-trailer-for-oliver-stones-thriller-starring-joseph-gordon-levitt-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Snowden%3A%20new%20trailer%20for%20Oliver%20Stone's%20thriller%20starring%20Joseph%20Gordon-Levitt%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsnowden-new-trailer-for-oliver-stones-thriller-starring-joseph-gordon-levitt-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Snowden%3A%20new%20trailer%20for%20Oliver%20Stone%27s%20thriller%20starring%20Joseph%20Gordon-Levitt%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsnowden-new-trailer-for-oliver-stones-thriller-starring-joseph-gordon-levitt-video&media=>
Snowden: new trailer for Oliver Stone’s thriller starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/22/snowden-new-trailer-for-oliver-stones-thriller-starring-joseph-gordon-levitt-video>
Clips of the film were shown at San Diego Comic-Con last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/22/edward-snowden-comic-con-oliver-stone-film>
, where the director said the major studios’ wariness over the film had “almost 
killed” the project. He also attackedPokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go>, criticising the level of 
data collection intrinsic to the world’s most popular mobile game by describing 
it as “surveillance capitalism”.

Toronto film festival 2016: full line-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/26/toronto-film-festival-2016-full-line-up>
Other high-profile films making their debut in Toronto also take their notes 
from news headlines:Deepwater Horizon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/29/deepwater-horizon-mark-wahlberg-in-disaster-movie-trailer-video>
, directed by Battleship’s Peter Berg and starring Mark Wahlberg, will tell the 
story of the 2010 oil rig disaster that lead to BP paying out thelargest 
environmental fine in US history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/02/bp-will-pay-largest-environmental-fine-in-us-history-for-gulf-oil-spill>
. Meanwhile, The Journey will focus on how an unlikely friendship developed 
between Northern Ireland’s late Democratic Unionist party leader Ian Paisley 
and his deputy Martin McGuinness. Colm Meaney is McGuinness, while Timothy 
Spall will play Paisley.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSAAqiO_Z9Vs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSAAqiO_Z9Vs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSAAqiO_Z9Vs&media=>
Spall also stars in Denial, an account of American historian Deborah E. 
Lipstadt’s legal battle against writer David Irving who took her to court after 
she accused him of denying the Holocaust. With libel courts in the UK putting 
the burden of proof on the accused, it was up to Lipstadt to legally prove that 
the Holocaust happened. Directed by The Bodyguard’s Mick Jackson, it stars 
Rachel Weisz as Lipstadt.

A fleet of UK films travel to Toronto this year. Among them is Adam Smith’s 
Trespass Against Us, which stars Michael Fassbender and Brendan Gleeson as two 
generations of a warring crime family. Also arriving will be Lone Scherfig’s 
Their Finest, previously known as We Happy Few. Set during the second world 
war, it follows a gang of film-makers (lead by Gemma Arterton) making a 
patriotic film to boost morale during the blitz. Another Brit in attendance 
will be Amma Asante, whose A United Kingdom tells the story of the 1948 
interracial marriage between Seretse Khama (David Oyelowo), the first president 
of Botswana and Ruth Williams Khama (Rosamund Pike), who was an English bank 
clerk.

Noel Clarke will bring Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/13/noel-clarke-kidulthood-trilogy-followup-brotherhood>
, the culmination of his London crime trilogy, while Ewan McGregor will make 
his directorial debut with American Pastoral. Based onthe Philip Roth novel of 
the same name <https://www.theguardian.com/books/1997/may/25/fiction.philiproth>
, it stars Jennifer Connelly and Dakota Fanning, with McGregor himself as 
Seymour “Swede” Levov, whose life is thrown into turmoil when his daughter 
explodes a bomb to protest against the Vietnam war.

 Director Denis Villeneuve. Photograph: Sarjoun Faour Photography/WireImage 
Canadian director Denis Villeneuve, currently filming the Blade Runner reboot, 
will bring Arrival, a sci-fi adventure in which a team of linguists, lead by 
Amy Adams, must decipher the desires of visiting aliens. Meanwhile, Rob Reiner 
will bring LBJ, a biopic of Lyndon B Johnson, the 36th president of the United 
States. Woody Harrelson plays the man thrust into the highest office after the 
assassination of John F Kennedy.

Festival fever: 40 films we predict will premiere at Venice, Toronto and 
Telluride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jul/20/40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals>
Violence comes to the fore in two of the other American offerings. Catfight 
will star Sandra Oh and Alicia Silverstone as members of a scrap-happy 
sorority, while Miles Teller will take to the ring as struggling boxer Vinnie 
Paz in Bleed for This. On the more sedate end of the scale, Eleanor Coppola, 
the wife of Francis, will introduce Paris Can Wait, a romantic comedy starring 
Diane Lane as the wife of an inattentive Hollywood producer (Alec Baldwin), who 
finds herself on a journey of discovery while driving from Cannes to Paris. 
It’s the 80-year-old documentarian’s feature debut.

Classy kids fare headed for Canada includes Sing, director Garth Jennings’ 
musical comedy about a koala (voiced by Matthew McConaughey) who holds a 
singing competition in order to save his theatre from closure. Reese 
Witherspoon, Scarlett Johansson and Taron Egerton provide backing vocals as a 
warbling pig, an alt-rock porcupine and a soulful gorilla, respectively. Also 
for younger viewers, JA Bayona’s A Monster Calls will introduce Conner O’Malley 
playing a boy dealing with his mother’s terminal illness by confiding in a 
talking yew tree (voiced by Liam Neeson).

Jonathan Demme, who famously caught a classic Talking Heads show on tape with 
Stop Making Sense, will press play on JT and the Tennessee Kids, a Justin 
Timberlake concert film. Also on rotation is The Rolling Stones Olé Olé Olé! 
– A Trip Across Latin America, directed by Paul Dugdale and following the 
veteran rockers on their recent tour.

The Toronto international film festival runs from 8 to 18 September, opening 
with Antoine Fuqua’s remake of The Magnificent Seven and closing with The Edge 
of Seventeen, a high school romance in which Hailee Steinfeld’s awkward teen is 
mentored by Woody Harrelson.
 