
December 2013

Media reports suggest the Abbott government will establish a royal commission 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/abbott-government-to-launch-royal-commission-into-union-slush-funds-20131211-2z76h.html>
 to investigate allegations of union “slush funds”, following revelations about 
practices at the Australian Workers Union (AWU) and Health Services Union.

February 2014

The government confirms the establishment of the commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/10/abbott-announces-terms-reference-corruption-inquiry>
, names retired high court judge Dyson Heydon as commissioner and sets out 
terms of reference. It names five unions that will come under particular 
scrutiny. ACTU secretary Dave Oliver says Tony Abbott is determined to “smear 
and damage unions rather than get to the bottom of any genuine issues of 
corruption”.

April 2014: the first session


Heydon insists in his opening remarks that the commission’s “terms of 
reference do not assume that it is desirable to abolish trade unions”. Rather, 
“they assume the desirability of unions having legitimate functions within the 
law”.

Jeremy Stoljar, counsel assisting the commission, makes his opening statement 
against the background of the Julia Gillard/Australian Workers’ Union (AWU) 
affair; the saga of Kathy Jackson, Craig Thomson and the Health Services Union; 
andthe CFMEU-Grollo conflict 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/its-personal-the-union-hothead-and-grollo-heir-20120828-24yxb.html>
 in Victoria.

He says the commission will examine union “slush funds” and “whether persons 
associated with unions have engaged in activities which could involve 
wrongdoing or corruption”.

Final trade union royal commission report condemns 'louts, thugs, bullies, 
thieves'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/30/trade-union-royal-commission-recommends-new-body-curb-corruption>
May–June 2014

Former AWU official Bruce Wilson and his sidekick Ralph Blewitt appear to 
answer questions about the AWU’s Workplace Reform Association “slush fund”, 
which Blewitt describes as a “vehicle” to raise money for elections. 
Renovations to Gillard’s house are also the subject of scrutiny, as is 
Blewitt’s statement to police.

Kathy Jackson denies using HSU money for personal expenses and says she was 
admitted to a psychiatric hospital in 2011 after finding a shovel on her 
doorstep in an apparent death threat.

July 2014

All federal departments and agencies are asked to disclose every contact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/27/disclose-contact-unions-royal-commission-federal-departments>
 with any trade union for any reason for the past decade, to identify 
“potential areas of exposure” to the royal commission into union corruption, 
Guardian Australia reveals.

August 2014

Jackson is cross-examined by a former partner Mark Irving now the barrister 
for the HSU. She describes him as a “charity shag” and the ongoing legal 
scrutiny of her use of union funds as “judicial gang rape”.Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, Jackson alleges, is 
part of a “corrupt little gang” that tried to put the union into administration 
as part of a vendetta against her.

Shorten says the royal commission has become “a platform for people to settle 
scores” and declines to comment further.

September 2014: Julia Gillard gives evidence


Gillard appears at the commission to answer questions about the AWU “slush 
fund” and whether any money from it was used to renovate her house. As Guardian 
Australia political editor, Lenore Taylor,writes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/09/julia-gillard-set-to-retell-an-old-and-twisty-tale-at-trade-union-inquiry>
, they are:


allegations that have followed her for more than two decades. They involve a 
colourful cast of characters – an ex-lover, his former mate and “bagman”, 
lawyers and politicians, and a truckload of tradesmen including Bill “the big 
Greek bullshit artist” and a woodworker called Athol James.

In the wash-up, we learn very little that’s new. Taylor again: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/10/julia-gillard-surely-union-corruption-saga-must-now-move-on>

After a whole day under oath we learned precious little more about the former 
prime minister’s involvement in the “slush fund scandal” other than some detail 
of her displeasure upon coming home from holidays in Queensland to find that 
her boyfriend had demolished her ugly red and yellow bathroom and the 
astonishing fact that she received invoices from tradesmen before she paid 
them, and then afterwards, receipts.

October 2014

Stoljar says Gillard did not commit a crime, but recommends Jackson and CFMEU 
Victorian secretary John Setka both be charged with offences including 
corruption, blackmail and embezzlement.

Tony Abbott – then PM – and Denis Napthine –then Victorian premier – announce 
a police taskforce into unions. George Brandis, the federal attorney general, 
extends the commission’s reporting date until December 2015 at a cost of $8m.

“There are dimensions of criminal conduct revealed by the evidence thus far 
suggesting that a more thorough examination … is desirable,” commissioner 
Heydon says. Legal scholars say the federal government won’t get any “political 
paydirt”, even with an extension.


November–December 2014

Gillard hits back at the commission, saying the claim of unprofessional 
conduct made by counsel assisting Stoljar “lacks real substance”. She later 
calls for an apology from Coalition members for the sake of “decency”.

The commission’s interim report is released on 19 December, to little fanfare; 
most of the major developments will be left to 2015. Industrial relations 
reporter Paul Karpwrites in Comment is Free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/22/the-trade-union-royal-commission-hasnt-packed-the-punch-abbott-might-have-hoped-for>
 that it “caps off ... a stagnant year for the federal government in terms of 
industrial relations achievements”.

February-May 2015

Documents show Jeremy Stoljar is paid $3.3m for two years’ work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/19/lead-lawyer-for-trade-union-royal-commission-paid-336m>
 at the commission. Questions areraised about the relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/27/no-records-nsw-labor-loan-etu-unions-inquiry>
 between the Electrical and Trades Union and the Labor party. Karp saysthe 
commission is in murky territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/01/if-the-trade-union-royal-commission-investigates-labor-its-in-murky-territory>
, in another piece for the Guardian: “is it possible for Turc to make a 
judgement about union members’ interests, without also judging the probity and 
effectiveness of the ALP?”


June–July 2015: Bill Shorten gives evidence

Shorten offers to be questioned by the commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/12/bill-shorten-offers-to-be-questioned-at-trade-union-royal-commission>
 as his time as AWU Victorian state secretary comes under scrutiny in the 
media. At issue is whether deals made by Shorten with bosses primarily 
benefited the AWU – and strengthened the power of its leaders – rather than 
workers.

Bill Shorten and the Australian Workers' Union – the allegations explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/24/bill-shorten-and-the-australian-workers-union-the-allegations-explained>
Abbott says Shorten has questions to answer “about whether – when he was the 
leader of the Australian Workers’ Union – deals were done which ripped off the 
workers to advantage the union”. Shorten calls it a smear and challenges Abbott 
to“make my day” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/11/bill-shorten-invites-tony-abbott-to-make-my-day-over-union-deals>
 at a town hall debate about workers’ rights.

A 2005 deal in which a Melbourne building firm Winslow Constructors paid the 
AWU for workers’ union memberships comes underparticular scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/14/bill-shorten-attacked-from-both-sides-over-deals-done-while-union-secretary>
. Abbott says Labor faces an “existential crisis” because of allegations raised 
at the commission.

Labor frontbencher Brendan O’Connor says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/02/labor-frontbencher-attacks-unions-inquiry-before-bill-shorten-appearance>
 the commission is feeding unsubstantiated claims to the media and denying 
people “natural justice”.

It has acted in a sensational manner about matters that are not proven, it has 
made findings against people who have not been called and has not made findings 
against those where there is damning evidence already given ...

A camera phone video somehow makes its way to the media the day before Shorten 
is to appear at the commission. In the video, he gives a stump speech to a 
cheering crowd at a pub, covering a range of issues from marriage equality to 
university fees and ending with the hope Australians can live in a country 
“where people can organise to have a strong minimum wage and will not be 
subject to a royal commission.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fbill-shorten-pub-rowdy-supports-labor-speech-sydney-royal-commission-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436241997930%2FBill-Shorten-pub-003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fired-up%20Bill%20Shorten%20tells%20rowdy%20pub%20crowd%20what%20he%20stands%20for%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fbill-shorten-pub-rowdy-supports-labor-speech-sydney-royal-commission-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fired-up%20Bill%20Shorten%20tells%20rowdy%20pub%20crowd%20what%20he%20stands%20for%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fbill-shorten-pub-rowdy-supports-labor-speech-sydney-royal-commission-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436241997930%2FBill-Shorten-pub-003.jpg>
Fired-up Bill Shorten tells rowdy pub crowd what he stands for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jul/07/bill-shorten-pub-rowdy-supports-labor-speech-sydney-royal-commission-video>
Shorten appears at the commission and has his “credibility as a witness” 
called into question by Heydon:

A witness who answers each question ‘yes’, ‘no’, ‘I don’t remember’ or 
clarifies the question and so on gives the cross-examiner very little material 
to work with. It’s in your interest to curb these, to some extent, extraneous 
answers.

Guardian Australia’s deputy political editor, Katherine Murphy’s analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/10/bill-shorten-at-the-royal-commission-no-killer-blow-but-now-for-the-aftermath>
:

Obviously Shorten’s objective was not full and frank disclosure of events long 
past, his objective was to get through the process without the commission being 
able to land any killer blows. It was a rational objective, and Shorten 
succeeded. There really wasn’t a killer blow, despite what you might read in 
some publications.

The net result was that Shorten reinforced his status as a “hollow man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/26/bill-shortens-crisis-of-confidence-how-poll-frontrunner-became-hollow-man>
”, an “uninspiring andslightly shifty bureaucrat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/10/do-we-really-need-to-pretend-were-shocked-by-shortens-sweetheart-deals-with-bosses>
”, and “theman from nowhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/21/david-marr-on-bill-shorten-can-the-man-from-nowhere-go-all-the-way>
”. Shorten described himself as a“consensus builder” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/16/im-a-consensus-builder-shorten-tells-business-as-he-tries-to-limit-union-fallout>
.

More allegations of corruption and intimidation are made against the CFMEU, 
which boycotts hearings in Canberra.

August 2015: Dyson Heydon scandal

Commissioner Heydon is revealed to have been booked to speak at a Liberal 
party fundraiser. Labor and the ACTU call for the inquiry to be shut down and 
threaten boycotts. Brandis recommends Dyson’s “absolutely stainless reputation 
for punctilious integrity”.

The ACTU threatens to take Heydon to the high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/16/actu-considers-taking-dyson-heydon-to-the-high-court>
; the commissioner claims he “overlooked” the link between the Sir Garfield 
Barwick lecture and its Liberal party organisers.

After delays, Heydon rejects calls to disqualify himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/31/dyson-heydon-rejects-call-to-disqualify-himself-from-union-royal-commission>
 for apprehended bias. His reasons, Richard Ackland writes, “involve various 
definitional refinements, akin to a delicatessen slicing the prosciutto very 
finely”. Labor floats a motion in the Senate to press the governor general to 
get involved, whichsinks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/08/labor-fails-in-senate-motion-calling-for-governor-general-to-sack-dyson-heydon>
. The ACTUbacks off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/13/actu-calls-off-legal-challenge-to-dyson-heydon-as-head-of-unions-inquiry>
 too.

September–November 2015

He's staying! No-bias Dyson Heydon slices his reasons deli-thin | Richard 
Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/31/hes-staying-no-bias-dyson-heydon-slices-his-reasons-deli-thin>
The commission announces it has no intention to call Shorten for further 
hearings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/24/trade-union-inquiry-no-plans-to-recall-bill-shorten-as-a-witness-at-this-stage>
 despiteallegations about an election worker  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/16/bill-shorten-election-worker-not-declared-donation-union-royal-commission>
being raised. He is later “cleared of wrongdoing” in alate-night release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/07/trade-unions-inquiry-defends-late-night-release-bill-shorten-labor>
 from the commission.

The commission is accused of “modern-day McCarthyism” by Victorian Labor after 
an order is given to produce members’ details, which is later dropped. A week 
later Victorian Labor suspends internal elections after claims of 
branch-stacking using prepaid credit cards.


More hearings are held about the CFMEU, regarding documents shredded and 
thrown on bonfires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/23/union-documents-were-thrown-on-bonfire-official-tells-royal-commission>
, abad tattoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/10/union-bosss-tattoo-of-parents-was-paid-for-with-work-credit-card>
 paid for with a union credit card and donations taken from Chinesedevelopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/01/unions-inquiry-hears-allegations-cfmeu-took-donations-from-chinese-developer>
. CFMEU official John Lomax iscleared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/19/union-member-lomax-to-consider-legal-action-after-blackmail-charges-dropped>
 of blackmail.

Claims of corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/09/daniel-andrews-says-no-comment-on-cesar-melhem-until-union-inquiry-ends>
 are made against Victorian MP and former AWU secretary Cesar Melhem. Premier 
Daniel Andrews reserves judgment until the conclusion of the commission.

Kathy Jackson’s home is raided by police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/07/police-raid-former-health-services-union-official-kathy-jacksons-home>
. It is announced that complaints against her partner, fair work commissioner 
Michael Lawler, will be independentlyinvestigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/12/complaints-against-michael-lawler-to-be-subject-of-independent-investigation>
.

December 2015: the final report

Setka and deputy Shaun Reardon are arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/06/victorian-cfmeu-boss-and-deputy-charged-with-blackmail>
 and charged with blackmail, sparking massive protests in Melbourne. Shorten 
announces new uniongovernance rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/07/shorten-unveils-tough-union-governance-measures-ahead-of-royal-commission>
 ahead of the release of the commission’s final report.

The commission releases its final report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/30/trade-union-royal-commission-recommends-new-body-curb-corruption>
, recommending that a regulator similar to the Australian Securities and 
Investments Commission be established to stamp out union corruption. Jackson is 
found to have “lied repeatedly”. She and Melham are both referred for 
prosecution, as are others.

The commission, which started hearing evidence in March 2014, has cost $45.9m 
– coming in under the $53.3m allotted to it in the 2014 budget.

In all, it received evidence from 505 witnesses over 189 days of hearings, 
held in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth and Canberra.
 