
Across the road from the new bus station in the north Nottinghamshire town of 
Mansfield stands a recently erected retail and office development. The facility 
houses modern bars and restaurants on the ground floor, while white collar 
workers tap away on computers on the storeys above.

Revealed: how Sports Direct effectively pays below minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
For some, the zone is viewed as an uncontroversial symbol of how the town is 
emerging from the depression that afflicted the area following the bitter 
miners’ strike of the mid 1980s and the subsequent closure of the local pits. 
Yet inside this new facility is one of 100 regional offices of a once-obscure 
employment agency, which after years of operating in relative anonymity is 
suddenly becoming significantly better known.

Transline Group supplies temporary workers to some of the UK’s best-known 
brands – from Amazon to Argos. But it is its relationship with Sports Direct – 
serviced from that office in Mansfield – that has made the group’s name.

Last year, an undercover Guardian investigation exposed how workers at Sports 
Direct’s warehouse in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
Shirebrook, Derbyshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 were being paid less than the legal minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
. The exposé resulted in the sports retailer and its employment agencies – 
Transline as well as its rival, The Best Connection – being forced intomaking 
backpay of around £1m to short-changed minimum wage workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
, as well as some of the main protagonists being hauled in front of a 
parliamentary select committee hearing.

Many of the MPs’ conclusions were contained within a damning report on the 
working practices at Sports Direct that was published in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse%20%20https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay%20%20https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/sports-direct-to-ditch-zero-hours-contracts>
. But on Tuesday the parliamentarians added that Transline hadnot been candid 
when giving evidence to the committee and that the retailer should end its 
relationship with the agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/sports-direct-should-cut-ties-with-warehouse-worker-agency-mps-shirebrook-transline>
.

In a letter to Mike Ashley, Sports Direct’s majority shareholder, Iain Wright, 
the chairman of the Commons business, innovation and skills (BIS) select 
committee, said: “We ask you to think seriously about continuing to use 
Transline, a company that treats their workers and conducts its business in a 
way that is inconsistent with your own aspirations for Sports Direct to be on a 
par with likes of Selfridges and John Lewis.”

The BIS committee also warned Transline that it was considering reporting to 
the Commons that the company’s directors were not fit to run the company 
because of concerns about its dealings with Gangmasters Licensing Authority 
(GLA), which regulates agencies supplying staff to the food and drink 
processing sector.

So what is this company and who are these directors?

Transline was co-founded in 1989 by Paul Beasley, 49, and Jonathan Taylor, 48 
<http://www.transline.co.uk/who-we-are/>, who, along with a third director, 
48-year-old sales boss Mark Elms, each own 5% of the company.

The remaining 85% of the equity in the business, which is registered as 
Qualitycourse Ltd, is held by another director Colin Beasley, 72. The company 
refuses to explain what the relationship is between Paul and Colin Beasley.

The group’s growth has been against a backdrop of many major employers 
outsourcing the hiring of much of their workforce, thereby eradicating costs 
such as having a human resources department.

However, the arrangements have been heavily criticised, with workers and 
unions frequently complaining that they allow companies to bypass employment 
rights – while workers often seem to fear instant dismissal.

However, the structure appears to work well for some. Between them, the four 
Transline shareholders received dividends of £100,000 in 2014 and £117,000 in 
2013, with the highest paid director – presumably one of the joint chief 
executives Paul Beasley or Taylor – earning £177,942 in 2014 and £575,862 in 
2013.

In 2014, the most recent year for which Transline accounts are available, the 
company made a pre-tax profit of £675,000 on a turnover of almost £180m.

The year before, it booked profits of £1.7m on revenues of £110m and sales 
appear to have risen again in 2015. At the select committee hearing in June, 
Transline’s representatives told MPs that it charged Sports Direct “in excess 
of £20m” – which it said accounted for about 10% of its revenues.

All of which represents a decent business for Transline, based in Halifax, 
West Yorkshire.

The accounts show that Paul Beasley had loans from the company totalling 
£692,000 at the end of 2014, while Taylor was in debt to his own firm by 
£448,000.


But while those years look good from an accounting perspective, they were less 
so for the group’s reputation. It is the events of that period that have landed 
Transline in trouble with MPs.

During the parliamentary hearings, a 2013 failure to renew its licence with 
the GLA was described by Transline finance director Jennifer Hardy as a 
voluntary move, as the company had ceased to supply the sector.

The GLA disputes Hardy’s version of events, however, claiming Transline 
directors were not “fit and proper” and that the company had traded without a 
licence during 2013.

Furthermore, as part of its investigations, the GLA examined the payslips of 
six Transline workers, whichshowed that they were paid less than the hourly 
national minimum wage (NMW) rate before the Sports Direct scandal was exposed.

In a letter sent to Transline in March 2014, which was titled “Licence 
Application Decision”, the GLA said: “Of these six workers on the scheme five 
have received under the NMW some of them significantly so.”

The employment agency argues the select committee was biased against Transline 
and said it was “astounded and extremely saddened” to read what it said were 
inaccurate critical comments about its operation and evidence.

A Transline spokesperson said: “We have always provided accurate information 
to the select committee and are focused on supporting Sports Direct in 
reviewing and implementing recommendations and actions from the working 
practices report. We will continue to offer clarity and any further information 
necessary to the committee.

“Obviously we find Iain Wright MP’s statements and summary disappointing, 
however we will prioritise responding to the latest correspondence in a full 
and concise manner, within the requested timescale.

“It is inappropriate and unjust to make such statements [about directors not 
being fit and proper], which is why Transline is taking legal advice”.
 