
The Treasury is proposing new rules to punish offshore tax evaders who fail to 
come clean about their finances before September 2018, with fines of up to 200% 
of the amount owed.

Can Theresa May get the wheels of British business turning again?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/16/can-theresa-may-get-wheels-british-business-turning-industry>
Published on Wednesday 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/tackling-offshore-tax-evasion-a-requirement-to-correct>
, the measures represent thesecond government consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/firms-giving-advice-on-aggressive-tax-avoidance-could-face-large-fines>
 in two weeks on sanctions against tax cheats.


The prime minister, Theresa May, promised to be tough on tax evasion and 
avoidance last month during her campaign to become leader of the Conservatives. 
The Treasuryhas acted swiftly to signal a tougher stance with greater powers 
for tax inspectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/16/can-theresa-may-get-wheels-british-business-turning-industry>
.

The “requirement to correct” measure will apply to individuals and 
corporations. Those owing UK tax will be penalised and potentially named and 
shamed if they fail to declare all the relevant information to HM Revenue & 
Customs.

Jane Ellison, financial secretary to the Treasury, said: “For too long it has 
been too easy for people to hide their money overseas to evade tax. We are 
changing that.”

The penalties range between 100% and 200% of the undeclared tax, and those 
caught may also have to forfeit a percentage of their assets. The rates are 
higher than existing fines, which can be reduced to zero for those who come 
forward and have been careless rather than deliberately dishonest.

Ellison said the Treasury will be able to come down harder on evasion because 
tax inspectors will soon have greater access to information on assets held 
offshore. This will begin next year with the introduction of the “common 
reporting standard”, an agreement between 100 countries to automatically share 
information about bank accounts belonging to individuals, companies, trusts and 
foundations.

The UK is among a group of 54 early adopters who will start sharing this 
information by 2017, as are some of the better-known tax and secrecy havens, 
including theBritish Virgin Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/british-virgin-islands>, Cayman Islands, 
Luxembourg, Liechtenstein, the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey.

Proposal to fine tax avoidance enablers lacks teeth, campaigners say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/proposal-to-fine-tax-avoidance-enablers-lacks-teeth-campaigners-say>
Switzerland, the Bahamas and Singapore will be involved by 2018, along with 
Panama. The Central American country had previously refused to join the 
initiative but international condemnation afterthe publication of the Panama 
Papers <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> led to an about 
turn.

The US, where bank regulation is divided between federal and state agencies, 
has still not signed up to the initiative.

Last week the Treasury published a consultation on new laws to punish the 
facilitators of tax avoidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/proposal-to-fine-tax-avoidance-enablers-lacks-teeth-campaigners-say>
. It targets the accountants, lawyers, financial advisers and banks who market 
schemes that fall foul of the tax tribunals.

The measure will seek to discourage enablers of schemes such as the £290m 
structure in which the radio presenter Chris Moyles and hundreds of others 
tried to save tax by claiming losses incurred as secondhand car dealers.

This week’s measure – first announced by the then chancellor, George Osborne, 
in the 2015 autumn statement – is likely to be introduced as part of the 2017 
finance bill.

Under “requirement to correct” HMRC will be able to fine tax avoiders for 
incorrect statements going back between four and 20 years, depending on whether 
the avoidance was deliberate or not.
 