
No one is ever going to accuse reigning PDC world darts champion Gary Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/03/adrian-lewis-v-gary-anderson-pdc-world-darts-championship-final-live>
 of hyping up the film he’s more or less the hero of. “It’s not as bad as I 
thought it would be,” he says, when asked what he thinks of House of Flying 
Arrows, a documentary that follows his progress through the 2016 world 
championships. “I mean, I never watch myself play darts or anything. So, you 
know, it was bit strange to sit there, actually watching myself for a change. 
To sit and listen to myself talk. My God, no … ”

The voice of the man who the late Jocky Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/mar/25/jocky-wilson-dies> nicknamed The 
Flying Scotsman trails off. Then he brightens. “But I quite enjoyed it. It 
turned out all right.” It certainly did. On the face of it, darts seems a 
fairly improbable subject for a feature-length documentary. This is, after all, 
a sport in which, as co-director Daniel Mendelle admits, “People essentially 
stand in the same position repeating the same action over and over again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5feac94fbbe8d3a794d1f9a439c90df8b1537bc%2F0_196_4832_2898%2F4832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Treble%20top!%20The%20film%20that%20captures%20the%20party%20power%20of%20darts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Treble%20top%21%20The%20film%20that%20captures%20the%20party%20power%20of%20darts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5feac94fbbe8d3a794d1f9a439c90df8b1537bc%2F0_196_4832_2898%2F4832.jpg>
 ‘People go along to have a party’ … a fan at the 2016 PDC World Championships. 
Photograph: Steve Paston/PA 
It’s also a sport in which extravagant showmen (such as world No 5 Peter Wright
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/jan/03/five-things-we-love-about-the-pdc-world-darts-championship-2016-in-pictures#img-5>
, who has a large snake painted on the shaved sides of his head in tribute to 
his love of lethal tipple snakebite) are vastly outnumbered by self-effacing 
everymen like Anderson who, as he puts it, “class ourselves as ordinary 
working-class people who just play darts”.

And yet House of Flying Arrows is a fascinating film. Quite aside from the 
stuff you might expect to see in a documentary about darts (Eric Bristow 
reminiscing about the old days, footage of Bobby George in his youth, when the 
self-styled King of Bling looked both like a surrogate member of the Clash and, 
as a female friend of mine noted, “as hot as the Earth’s core”), its 90 minutes 
variously deal with psychology, neurology, class and mathematics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddbc76fb337602947f0e5280736dcdb75223ea74%2F0_255_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Treble%20top!%20The%20film%20that%20captures%20the%20party%20power%20of%20darts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Treble%20top%21%20The%20film%20that%20captures%20the%20party%20power%20of%20darts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddbc76fb337602947f0e5280736dcdb75223ea74%2F0_255_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 ‘We’re no superstars’ … Gary Anderson in action. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for 
the Guardian 
In one brilliant sequence, it shifts from an interview with a former Countdown 
champion who now uses his skills as a darts referee, via an academic explaining 
the intricacies of mental arithmetic, to some frankly jaw-dropping film of 
former player and latterday commentator Wayne Mardle reeling off the maths 
behinddifferent finishes <http://www.darts501.com/Check.html> at incredible 
speed.

“One of the things we hope we’re doing is changing the way people look at 
darts,” says the film’s other co-director, Guardian sports writerDaniel Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/danielharris>. “Not just in a classist 
way, although there is, for sure, a lot of class snobbery about darts. We’re 
just trying to present darts in a different way, saying, ‘What haven’t people 
seen before? What haven’t they thought about before?’”

Anderson is so crippled by nerves, he vomits before games

In addition, it has the gripping air of a documentary whose storyline quickly 
ran out of its makers’ control. At the outset, the directors clearly expected 
the 2016 championships to play out as a battle between reigning champ Anderson 
and world No 1Michael van Gerwen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-van-gerwen>, who present an 
intriguing study in contrasts. The former is shy, haunted by a period during 
which the deaths of his father and brother caused him to start missing doubles, 
and so crippled by nerves that he vomits before games. The latter is an 
ebullient, charismatic Dutch skinhead with what Harris calls “an amazing face 
for cinema”, who claims he never actually aims his darts and seldom misses an 
opportunityto inform the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/09/michael-van-gerwen-darts-world-championship-pdc>
 of his nonpareil genius.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F696bd2e5a7fb0a3eda5ebcd9ef7ca4aee0f6a636%2F1237_0_2330_2912%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Treble%20top!%20The%20film%20that%20captures%20the%20party%20power%20of%20darts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Treble%20top%21%20The%20film%20that%20captures%20the%20party%20power%20of%20darts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftreble-top-how-house-of-flying-arrows-caught-the-party-power-of-darts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F696bd2e5a7fb0a3eda5ebcd9ef7ca4aee0f6a636%2F1237_0_2330_2912%2F2330.jpg>
 ‘He throws his darts like they’re flaming javelins’ … Michael van Gerwen. 
Photograph: Peter Cziborra/Reuters 
But it didn’t work out like that. Shortly after telling the cameras that his 
current form represents “the greatest darts ever seen on television” (albeit 
not without reason: in July this year, he scored the highest average ever 
recorded in a televised match), Van Gerwen is knocked out in the third round. 
“He throws his darts like a flaming javelin,” says Harris. “That average he got 
in July, it’s hard to believe a human being can get much better at darts than 
that. You’d probably struggle to construct a robot that could do better. But I 
think his opponent just handled the pressure better. One of the things that’s 
fascinating about darts is the pressure, and how players cope with it, which is 
why we’ve got a neuroscientist who specialises in pressure explaining what’s 
actually going on.”

As the finals progress, you find yourself increasingly rooting for Anderson 
despite, or perhaps because of, his often visible discomfort at being filmed. 
Indeed, there’s a sense that the film might reach its climax not with the final 
itself, but just before, when Anderson finally tires of the crew’s presence: 
about to walk on stage, he looks directly into a camera, smiles, and quietly 
but firmly tells them to fuck off.

Meanwhile, a raft of other players are introduced, almost all of them 
fascinating in their own way, but none more so than the drily funny, very 
eloquentJames Wade <http://jameswade.co.uk/>: a man diagnosed with ADHD, 
bipolar disorder and autism, who used to have Dizzee Rascal’s Bonkers as his 
walk-on music. It explores their peculiar brand of fame: on the one hand, 
there’s big money to be made as a professional, as you might expect, given that 
the Premier League tournament can fill out every arena in Britain, from the 
London O2 to the Glasgow Hydro; on the other, even the biggest stars will turn 
up at exhibition matches and play local players and members of the audience, 
the equivalent of Jamie Vardy or Cesc Fabregas arriving at a provincial Sunday 
league pitch for a kickabout.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOPACWnJWGU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOPACWnJWGU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOPACWnJWGU&media=>
House of Flying Arrows Trailer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iOPACWnJWGU> 
Then there’s the curious relationship between darts fans and their sport. It 
starts, says Harris, from an unusual premise: “If you go to watch darts, you 
can’t actually see the action. You can’t really see the dartboard unless you 
watch it on the screens, so people go along to have a party. People dress up in 
fancy dress. One guy we met while filming at the championships started 
explaining that by talking about Guy Debord andThe Society of the Spectacle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/14/guy-debord-society-spectacle-will-self>
.”

Five things we love about the PDC World Darts Championship 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/jan/03/five-things-we-love-about-the-pdc-world-darts-championship-2016-in-pictures>
Harris frowns at the mention of the French Marxist theorist and his 
influential work. “I think we disagreed about that a little. I think it’s more 
like a fancy dress party. They behave differently to the way they normally 
would because they’re drinking and they’re in fancy dress. But it’s all in a 
really non-threatening way: it’s not partisan, there’s none of the needle you 
get in football. People might have their favourites, but everyone cheers 
everyone. I don’t want to sound soppy, but it’s quite a beautiful thing to see.”

There's no luck, no tactics, no team-mates to save you

Harris always thought a big-screen documentary about darts would work. 
“Obviously, it doesn’t have the aesthetic beauty of boxing or tennis or 
football or cricket, but it’s just got a special kind of drama. No other sport 
shows simultaneous action and reaction. No other sport deals in such close-up 
images. That gives the human story a unique intensity. One of the things about 
sport is that you’re basically voyeuristically watching someone live out the 
most exhilarating, demoralising moments of their life – and nothing gives you 
that with the same level of intensity as darts. There’s no luck or tactics 
involved, there’s nothing players can do to affect one another, and if you’re 
in trouble, no team-mate can save you. You can’t roll, cover up, or block a 
few. It’s a simple game, but there’s an incredible amount going on.”

Although Gary Anderson didn’t always enjoy being filmed away from the oche 
(“There’s days when you get home and you just want a bit of peace and you’ve 
got a wally with a camera there”), he does agree that the film has captured 
something of the game: “It shows people what we’re like. I mean, I keep saying, 
we’re no superstars, we’re just darts players. But,” he adds, “I thought it was 
quite good.”

• House of Flying Arrows is available on digital download from 31 October and 
on Blu-ray and DVD from 14 November.
 