
Trophy hunting could help conserve lions, according to the Oxford University 
scientist who had studiedCecil the lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/04/killing-of-cecil-the-lion-sparks-05m-in-donations-to-oxford-wildlife-researchers>
 for years before the animal was killed by an American dentist.


A new report by Prof David MacDonald for UK ministers concluded that strictly 
regulated hunting of lions could provide a financial incentive to protect areas 
of wild lion habitat from being destroyed, which is the biggest threat to the 
big cats. But MacDonald said the UK should ban the import of any lion trophies 
from hunts that failed to prove their sustainability.

The number of African lions left in the wild has plummeted in the last century 
and they have disappeared from more than 90% of their historic range. Just 
20,000 individuals remain, fewer than the number of rhinos inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

The killing of Cecil the lion in 2015 took place in contravention of Zimbabwe 
national park rules but criminalcharges have since been dropped 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/cecil-the-lion-court-drops-charges-theo-bronkhorst-walter-palmer-zimbabwe-dentist-trophy-killing-a7411381.html>
 against those involved.Macdonald said in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/cecil-the-lions-legacy-death-brings-new-hope-for-his-grandcubs>
 that Cecil’s killing was “heartbreaking”.

However, his new report, found there was little evidence that trophy hunting 
of lions harmed populations on regional or national levels, although it could 
do so at local levels.

Cecil the lion's legacy: death brings new hope for his grandcubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/cecil-the-lions-legacy-death-brings-new-hope-for-his-grandcubs>
“The big issue here is lion conservation and how it can realistically be 
achieved. Whether or not I personally like lion hunting is irrelevant,” he said.

“It is unfathomable to me that there could be joy in killing them, but for me 
the priority is halting, indeed reversing, their decline. Currently the 
evidence is that trophy hunting contributes to keeping hundreds of thousands of 
square kilometres available to lions and other wildlife.”

Macdonald said asking whether trophy hunting has the potential to help 
conservation is a very different question to asking whether it is ethically 
acceptable. “Of course I understand if people say there are simply no 
circumstances under which this will be acceptable to me,” he said.


“If so, then they have to look for a mechanism of replacing it with something 
that is acceptable,” Macdonald said. “That might be people putting their money 
where their mouth is, buying out the hunting interest and replacing it with 
some sort of international payment for conservation.”

Jeffrey Flocken, from the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), said: 
“While we don’t agree with all of [the report’s] conclusions, it is absolutely 
correct that we need better vetting of trophy hunting operations, better 
science, and much more transparency in this debate.”

IFAW opposes trophy hunting and wants the UK to ban such imports. An IFAW 
report in June found that1.7 million animal trophies had been exported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/14/millions-of-animal-trophies-exported-across-borders-figures-show>
 in the last decade.

Macdonald’s analysis reports that areas for trophy hunting of all animals 
cover 1.4m sq km in Africa, 22% more land than national parks. He said it would 
not be possible to convert all of this to safari-based eco-tourism, as some 
people advocate as an alternative to hunting.

Lions are hunted over an area of 500,000 sq km, the report found, representing 
about a third of the land where lions occur.


Trophy hunting is estimated to raise more than $200m a year across sub-Saharan 
Africa, with lion hunting probably accounting for 5-17% of that, depending on 
the country. About 450 lion trophies are exported each year, according to data 
from the Convention on the Trades in Endangered Species (CITES), though some of 
these may be heads, teeth or skins from the same animal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ftrophy-hunting-could-help-conserve-lions-says-cecil-lion-scientist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F704f855e6ef51af9766e5b020b7e084928afbbeb%2F0_0_3370_2246%2F3370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trophy%20hunting%20could%20help%20conserve%20lions%2C%20says%20Cecil%20the%20lion%20scientist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ftrophy-hunting-could-help-conserve-lions-says-cecil-lion-scientist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trophy%20hunting%20could%20help%20conserve%20lions%2C%20says%20Cecil%20the%20lion%20scientist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ftrophy-hunting-could-help-conserve-lions-says-cecil-lion-scientist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F704f855e6ef51af9766e5b020b7e084928afbbeb%2F0_0_3370_2246%2F3370.jpg>
 Trophy taxidermy stuffed by US and German hunters in a Namibian workshop. 
Photograph: Ton Koene/Alamy Stock Photo 
The report recommends that all hunts are overseen by expert and transparent 
committees that can assess the lion population and set quotas that would ensure 
the population is not harmed and, ideally, grows. It also said that regulations 
should ensure a significant amount of the money raised is used for conservation 
and that only accredited hunters should be used, to reduce the suffering of 
animals. Macdonald said some lion hunts were well managed, such as in Zimbabwe.

Flocken said: “Many of the recommendations, if implemented, would prove that 
the hunting industry has dictated policy based on inflated economic arguments. 
With trophy hunted species like lion and elephant populations crashing, we can 
no longer allow the killing of imperilled species for fun, based on blind faith 
that it’s for their own good.”

Only about three lion trophies are imported into the UK each year, but 
Macdonald said: “While the UK may be a very small player in this, if it is 
decided this was an opportunity to adopt a regulatory system which increased 
the likelihood of trophy hunting contributing to lion conservation, perhaps it 
could be a leader in encouraging other countries to do so as well.”
 