
Bullies have a habit of blaming their victims. So the American alt-right has 
blamed poor Mexicans for stealing US jobs with their cheap labour and illegal 
immigration, and Donald Trump won votes by promising torip up Nafta – the North 
American Free Trade Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/nafta-donald-trump-mexico-economy>
 – which has been so damaging to hard-working families. As with so much about 
this post-fact era, there is some truth in the argument. The problem is that it 
has been turned on its head.

Nafta was introduced in 1994 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/04/nafta-20-years-mexico-regret>
 and was the first trade agreement to merge the markets of two rich economies – 
the US and Canada – with a poor one: Mexico. By 2004 it had become clear that 
it was a disaster for many poor Mexicans and was driving them to emigrate. The 
country saw an overall decline in employment in both agriculture and 
manufacturing and a rapid increase in inequality. This is where you have to 
look if you really want to understand the drivers behind the spike in illegal 
immigration to the US over that decade.

There was growth initially in “assembly” manufacturing in Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> – the sector that has been blamed so 
much for undermining US factories – in which foreign companies were allowed to 
import materials duty- and tariff-free for processing in factories near the 
border with the US, before re-exporting them back to their originating country.

Trump's Nafta threats would severely harm US, Mexican chief negotiator says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/nafta-donald-trump-mexico-economy>
It made, and still makes, substantial profits for US corporations using the 
cheap labour, as the free trade agreement intended, but wages for those 
employed to do the work were insufficient to support a family. By 2001 Mexico 
was losing manufacturing jobs to China, with its even lower wages. It could 
only benefit if its own people’s wages remained impossibly low.

As with subsequent bilateral free trade agreements, this one was rigged 
in favour of American and Canadian business.An Oxfam analysis warned of this at 
the time 
<https://www.oxfamamerica.org/static/media/files/OA-Dumping_Without_Borders.pdf>
.

When Nafta was signed, around 18 million Mexicans depended on corn production 
for their livelihoods. Tortillas, made from corn flour, are the country’s 
staple food. In the two years after Nafta, imports of corn from the US doubled. 
The US continued to support its agribusiness heavily, with corn production 
alone accounting for about $10bn a year in government payouts and subsidies.

Free trade as negotiated by powerful developed countries has a habit of being 
lopsided like this, and not quite as free as it claims. So US exporters, 
dominated by a handful of giant grain traders, were able to sell corn on the 
newly liberalised Mexican market at artificially low prices, decimating three 
million local producers. In theory the fall in prices should at least have 
helped the mass of urban poor; but it didn’t. In fact tortilla prices went up 
sevenfold – as part of the agreed liberalisation the Mexican government was 
required to remove some of its supportsthat kept tortilla prices cheap in 
government stores. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/15/healthmindandbody.health>

The biggest beneficiaries of the fall in corn prices were the two large 
processors that dominated the Mexican market. American transnationals and local 
Mexican elites got richer. The poor got poorer. If the new trade had generated 
much greater tax revenues for the Mexican government, or indeed for the US 
government, they might have been able to mitigate the effects, but 
transnationals park their profits offshore in tax-haven subsidiaries.

Mexicans gave Donald Trump the hostile welcome he deserved | Vicente Fox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/mexicans-donald-trump-hostile-welcome-lies-mexico>
An estimated 1.3 million Mexicans were driven off the land by Nafta. The flow 
of illegal workers to the US increased dramatically. It is a bit rich, in other 
words, to attack Mexico and Nafta for one of the effects it was predicted it 
would have on poor Mexicans and migration.

This being the real world of complex social and economic interactions rather 
than Trumpland, the story has another side. The Mexican government was supposed 
to prepare for the shock of liberalisation on smallholders over a 10-year 
period, but failed. Mexico’s debt crisis and the devaluation of the peso played 
their part.

Large-scale migration from Mexico to the US of course began before Nafta. Some 
US sectors, such as agriculture, depend on it. Most US retailers, for instance, 
source significant volumes of fruit and vegetables from California. The state 
has used undocumented workers from Mexico for decades. There was a spike in 
numbers in the 2000s post-Nafta, however, so that by the end of that decade, 
70% of California’s agricultural workforce was foreign-born, most being from 
Mexico and half of them having arrived illegally.

They work for poverty wages in conditions local Americans will not tolerate. 
If Trump’sfamous wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/05/donald-trump-mexico-border-wall-plan-remittances>
 anddeportations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-deportation-immigration-criminals>
 come to pass, US farm companies will struggle to harvest their produce. Brexit 
Britain’s East Anglian farmers, dependent on EU migrants, fear a similar labour 
crisis.

1.3 million Mexicans were driven off the land by Nafta. The flow of illegal 
workers to the US increased dramatically

Nafta has brought some gains: Mexican mega-farms that live on exports have 
done well; cities in central Mexico with new manufacturing have seen an 
emerging new prosperous middle class. The flow of migration to the US slowed 
dramatically after the 2008 financial crisis. But as a development model it has 
failed. The poor remain poor. And, yes, ordinary American workers have lost out 
too.

But if there is to be a settling of bills, Mexicans would have cause to throw 
one the way of the US. For post-Nafta, its transnationals flooded Mexico with 
their calorie-dense, nutrition-light, processed foods and drinks, exporting 
their obesity epidemic too. Rates of diabetes associated with it have soared, 
just as the free trade agreement restricted the introduction of generic drugs 
and extended the patents of pharmaceutical companies, straining the health 
budget.

Similar free trade agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/ttip-what-why-angry-transatlantic-trade-investment-partnership-guide>
 have been pursued aggressively by the US and the EU in the last two decades as 
an alternative to the endlessly stalled World Trade Organisation talks. They 
give greatly increased intellectual property rights and patents to corporates, 
so that they may collect what amounts to a private tax on transactions. The 
balance of power in negotiations is always with the richer countries and with 
transnational corporations and elites.

People are angry, but they have been steered to the wrong target. Trump is 
right that the rules of trade need to be rewritten. They need to be recast not 
to give more power and money to tax-dodging big business, but to share profits 
more equitably to those pushed to the bottom of the pile, on either side of the 
border. Sadly nothing Trump has said in his rabid attacks on Mexican migrants 
suggests that, as he heads for the White House, he has any intention of doing 
that.
 