
Richard Wolffe: ‘The nicest thing you could say about Trump’s performance was 
that it was bonkers’

That banging sound you heard were the last nails being hammered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-women-comments-groping-apology>
 into the coffin of the Trump campaign. Or it might have been the thumping of 
Donald Trump as he stalked the debate stage.

Either way, the Republican nominee treated the notion of a contrite, humble 
performance with all the subtlety of a subway train. Not for him was the usual 
shame we associate with someone caught in a moment of sleaze.

He prowled around Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, looming behind her when 
she approached the undecided voters in the audience. He hugged himself and 
hooked his hands in his belt. He inhaled so sharply through his nose that he 
sounded like he was snorting his own insults.

Wounded animals behave in strange ways, and Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was nothing if not strange at 
the second presidential debate. He went far beyond barking his usual 
interruptions and conspiracies from the darkest corners of the internet: he 
answered a question from a Muslim voter by saying it was “a shame” there was 
Islamophobia. Then, two feet away from his questioner, he stoked Islamophobia 
as much as he possibly could: “We could be very politically correct, but 
whether we like it or not, there is a problem.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-behind-hillary-clinton-debate-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20stands%20behind%20Clinton%20during%20presidential%20debate%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-behind-hillary-clinton-debate-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20stands%20behind%20Clinton%20during%20presidential%20debate%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-behind-hillary-clinton-debate-video&media=>
‘Trump prowled around Hillary Clinton, looming behind her when she approached 
the undecided voters in the audience’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/10/donald-trump-behind-hillary-clinton-debate-video>
He blamed Hillary Clinton for allowing him to pay no taxes. “Of course I do,” 
he admitted, when asked if he took advantage of tax loopholes. “So do all of 
her donors or most of her donors.”

He blamed both Clintons for raising the issue of sexual assault, as if he was 
just a hapless victim. “I think it’s disgraceful and I think she should be 
ashamed of herself, if you want to know the truth,” he said.

In any normal presidential debate, a nominee would be embarrassed to say 
something that evoked Gerald Ford’s calamitous assertion that there was no 
Soviet domination of eastern Europe. But Trump bettered Ford by several 
thermonuclear warheads: “I know about Russia but I know nothing about the inner 
workings of Russia,” he said.

The nicest thing you could say about Trump’s performance was that it was 
bonkers. A Red Bull display of sheer madness all the way to the end, when 
Clinton complimented his children.

“I don’t know if it was meant to be a compliment,” he said. Donald Trump knows 
about elections but he knows nothing about their inner workings.

Jessica Valenti: ‘People will say that Trump won simply because he didn’t 
spontaneously combust on stage’

If there was a theme for Trump this evening, it would be aggressive 
desperation. Whether is was the skulking around in Hillary Clinton’s frame, his 
shots at her marriage or his inability to stop interrupting both Clinton and 
the moderators – it all came across as a last gasp.

Trump set out to defeat Clinton in the debate in the only way he knows how to 
deal with women – as asRebecca Traister put it 
<https://twitter.com/rtraister/status/785271407580221440> – by “sexualizing, 
degrading and humiliating her”. That’s why he trotted out a pre-debate panel of 
women who have accused Bill Clinton of various offenses, and it’s why he took 
aim at Hillary Clinton on the same topic at the start of the debate. But it 
didn’t land, because everyone is still talking about the video of his horrific 
comments on women.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump's%20sex%20boasts%3A%20'When%20you%20are%20a%20star%20they%20let%20you%20do%20anything'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%27s%20sex%20boasts%3A%20%27When%20you%20are%20a%20star%20they%20let%20you%20do%20anything%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fdonald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video&media=>
Donald Trump’s sex boasts: ‘When you are a star they let you do anything’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/08/donald-trumps-sex-boasts-when-you-are-a-star-they-let-you-do-anything-video>
I was glad that Anderson Cooper laid it plain 
<https://twitter.com/GMA/status/785296078048485377>; he asked Trump, “You 
bragged that you have sexually assaulted women. Do you understand that?” Trump, 
who later dismissed the tape as “just words”, doubled down on calling his 
comments “locker room talk”.

What made that non-apology even worse was the physical way Trump held himself 
in the debate. Perhaps if you’ve been embroiled in a controversy about groping 
women and bragging about groping women, you don’t skulk around stage behind a 
woman. (And maybe don’t threaten to throw her in a jail – a new low!)

I predict that on Monday there will be people saying that Trump won simply 
because he didn’t spontaneously combust on stage. Clinton was clearly more 
composed and knowledgable, while Trump did his usual word salad, ignoring 
questions and making the odd racist move of talking about inner cities to an 
undecided voter seemingly only because he was black.

But at the end of this strange event, I think the biggest loser was all of us 
watching.

Kenneth Pennington: ‘Trump is depriving Americans of robust national discourse’

Donald Trump lost tonight’s debate. His asinine attempts to dismiss his 
piggish behavior by distracting viewers with talk of Bill Clinton and Isis were 
a failure.

But the real losers in tonight’s debate, and in this election, are the 
American people. When Donald Trump answers a serious question about his (lack 
of) healthcare proposals, he says simply, “The plans are going to be so good.” 
When asked about his (lack of) morals, he says randomly, “I’m gonna knock the 
hell out of Isis.” He won’t answer questions.

Part of that is a deliberate diversion strategy. To avoid talking about the 
video clip where he appears to condone sexual assault, he slams Bill Clinton or 
resorts to fear-mongering. But most of Trump’s answers lack depth because he 
simply doesn’t know what he’s talking about. When Anderson Cooper pressed him 
on how he could possibly reconcile his policy on preconditions with a repeal of 
Obamacare, he had absolutely nothing to say. He just doesn’t know.

When it comes to the Syrian civil war and the millions of victims it’s 
claimed, his policy also remains to be seen. This is a man who decides 
consequential policy positions on the stage because he hasn’t thought of them 
ahead of time. When he threw Mike Pence under the bus on Syria, it appeared to 
be the first time he’d even considered the question at hand.

Sadly, his lack of depth means our country has lost a valuable opportunity to 
engage in a desperately needed public discussion about the differing viewpoints 
in America on consequential issues. America needs Hillary Clinton to face off 
with an opponent who will challenge her viewpoints, not a hollow-headed clown 
with zero depth.

How can we fight climate change, raise incomes for the middle class, reform 
our ailing democracy, educate our children or champion world peace without 
serious and deep debate? We’ll never make headway on our serious challenges 
without robust national discourse. Trump’s campaign is depriving us it.

Christopher R Barron: ‘Trump succeeded in recapturing the momentum’

After a poor first debate performance – and the Friday release of the Access 
Hollywoodtape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-tape-arianne-zucker-sexual-assault-groping>
 – Republican nominee Donald Trump needed to hit a home run Sunday night to 
change the narrative and recapture the momentum.

Trump succeeded, and he succeeded before the first question was even asked.

Trump’s pre-debate press event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/09/donald-trump-women-bill-clinton-sex-scandal-hillary-debate>
 with four women who have accused both Clintons of wrongdoing changed the 
conversation from what Donald Trump said in 2005 to what Bill and Hillary 
Clinton actually did.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-video-bill-clinton-women-accusers-press-conference&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Clinton%20accusers%20support%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-video-bill-clinton-women-accusers-press-conference>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Clinton%20accusers%20support%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-video-bill-clinton-women-accusers-press-conference&media=>
Bill Clinton accusers support Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/oct/09/donald-trump-video-bill-clinton-women-accusers-press-conference>
It is clear that Trump’s pre-game press conference not only got talking heads 
to change the conversation, but it got Hillary Clinton – once believed to be 
unflappable – off her game, in a big way.

If Clinton was prepared for whatever Trump threw at her, it certainly didn’t 
come across in this debate.

Gone was the happy warrior from the last debate; in its place was a new 
defensive Hillary Clinton.

Trump kept Clinton on her heels for the entire debate. Whether sparring over 
Obamacare or foreign policy or tax reform or job creation, he effectively kept 
hammering her on her 30-year record.

Instead of a debate that was focused on Trump’s vulgar comments, the debate 
was focused on policy issues, and despite all of Clinton’s “preparation” when 
it came to the nuts and bolts of policy, Trump managed to not only go 
toe-to-toe with Clinton, he often got the best of her.

Trump needed to win tonight to stay alive. Clinton did not. Trump won, and he 
lives to fight another day. This race is far from over.
 