
On Friday morning, the Trump campaign announced its latest round of potential 
supreme court nominees, raising to 21 the billionaire’s list of publicly named 
potential nominees to succeed Antonin Scalia, who diedin February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/13/supreme-court-justice-antonin-scalia-dead-at-79>
.

Trump may have had a specific reason for adding to the list of 11 potential 
nominees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/may/18/bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-california-donald-trump-live?page=with:block-573cc89de4b04a0378340dfb>
 he released in May. Last week, the Huffington Postreported 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/trump-peter-thiel-supreme-court_us_57d80d57e4b09d7a687f9b03>
 that the billionaire PayPal cofounder Peter Thiel – themoneyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/26/paypal-co-founder-peter-thiel-admits-bankrolling-hulk-hogan-gawker-lawsuit>
 who funded the Hulk Hogan lawsuit thatbankrupted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/15/peter-thiel-gawker-bankruptcy-lawsuit-hulk-hogan-sextape>
 Gawker Media – had been assured the nomination, a story both Thiel and the 
Trump campaigndenied 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/donald-trump-peter-thiel-supreme-court-2016-9>. 
Thiel, who has a law degree butonly practiced for seven months 
<http://abovethelaw.com/2016/09/report-donald-trump-would-put-peter-thiel-on-the-supreme-court-wait-what/>
, was not seen asa particularly conservative choice 
<http://thefederalist.com/2016/09/15/peter-thiel-would-make-a-great-supreme-court-justice/>
.

The latest list, probably designed to further assuage the concerns of 
conservatives over Trump’s judicial philosophy – both whether he has one and 
what it is – is not exactly a who’s-who of judicial superstars.

The legal analyst and political science professor Scott Lemieux said Trump’s 
nominees were “continuing his tradition of going with generic Federalist 
Society hacks,which is in fact the kind of judge he’d nominate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/18/donald-trump-supreme-court-list-conservative-judges>
”.

The Federalist Society is a conservative legal group 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/06/11/a-small-right-wing-conspiracy-the-federalist-society.html>
 that advocates for constitutionaloriginalism 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/02/14/466744465/originalism-a-primer-on-scalias-constitutional-philosophy>
,a philosophy which says 
<https://www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/new-originalism-a-constitutional-scam>
 questions of law should be decided solely on the basis of the words of the 
constitution and the intention of those who wrote it. Decisions that legalized
abortion 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/capitalbusiness/scalia-stands-by-his-originalist-views-on-constitution/2012/01/19/gIQA1Ny6IQ_story.html>
,consensual sex between same-sex couples 
<http://www.pbs.org/wnet/supremecourt/future/landmark_lawrence.html>, 
interracial marriage 
<https://verdict.justia.com/2012/10/12/was-justice-scalia-right-that-many-contentious-constitutional-issues-are-easy-to-resolve>
 and, arguably, eventhe desegregation of schools 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/scalias-contradictory-originalism> are 
not in keeping with this philosophy.

There are, however, some notable reasons that each Trump pick would be 
thrilling to conservatives and horrifying to liberals.

Utah senator Mike Lee

Cruz endorses Trump: 'He's the only thing standing in Clinton's way'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/ted-cruz-support-donald-trump> 
The only name on the list widely known outside legal circles, the conservative 
senator Mike Lee has made well-known his dislike of the party’s presidential 
nominee. That might not be a problem, though: Texas supreme court justice Don 
Willett, who made the first list,wasn’t exactly a card-carrying Trump supporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/may/18/bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-california-donald-trump-live?page=with:block-573cb634e4b04a0378340dd2#block-573cb634e4b04a0378340dd2>
.

Lee told Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/mike-lee-no-trump-supreme-court-228573> 
in a statement that he was not interested in a slot on the court. Still, the 
man who rode to the Senate on the Tea Party wave of 2010 has an extremely 
conservative legal philosophy, to the right of originalism. Lee is what is 
known asa “tenther” 
<http://prospect.org/article/rally-round-true-constitution-0>, adhering to a 
philosophy that holds that the 10th amendment of the constitution, which 
reserves for state government any power not allocated to the federal 
government, essentially makes much government regulation and spending 
unconstitutional. AsThinkProgress noted 
<https://thinkprogress.org/mike-lee-donald-trump-supreme-court-1bd71b76ea6f#.qa1artapl>
, Lee has said he believes federal laws prohibiting child labor, as well as 
laws establishing Medicare, social security and, of course, the Affordable Care 
Act (better known as Obamacare) are unconstitutional.

Neil Gorsuch

Gorsuch was appointed by George W Bush to the 10th circuit court of appeals, 
in Denver, Colorado, and is a frequent member of Republican-leaning supreme 
court shortlists.

His only book, The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/8317.html>, was intended to bolster the case 
against its legalization – its publisher called it his central thesis “the idea 
that human life is intrinsically valuable and that intentional killing is 
always wrong”. In 2012, Michael Fragoso,a longtime pro-life advocate 
<http://www.catholicvote.org/author/mfragoso/> and current counsel to Arizona 
senator Jeff Flake,called <http://www.thepublicdiscourse.com/2012/08/6086/> 
Gorsuch and other young Bush-era judicial appointees “as good a college of 
judicial cardinals as the conservative and pro-life movements have ever seen”.

Gorsuch has notably used his time on the federal bench to criticize  
<http://www.ca10.uscourts.gov/opinions/14/14-3243.pdf>the existing volume 
<http://blogs.reuters.com/alison-frankel/2016/08/24/is-court-deference-to-federal-agencies-unconstitutional-10th-circuit-judge-thinks-so/>
 of federal regulation as potentially unconstitutional on a variety of grounds, 
a point he has made in at least onepublic speech 
<http://rightoncrime.com/2013/11/judge-neil-gorsuch-on-overcriminalization/> as 
well.

Margaret A Ryan

Ryan, a US Marine Corps veteran who was deployed to Saudi Arabia during the 
first gulf war, is a civilian judge on the US court of appeals for the armed 
forces, a 15-year appointment made by Bush in 2006. The court on which she 
serves hears appeals under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, which is 
distinct from the laws that govern civilian life.


In that role, she presided over a case brought by, among others 
<http://ccrjustice.org/sites/default/files/assets/Complaint%20(as%20filed).pdf>
, the Center for Constitutional Rights and the former Guardian columnist Glenn 
Greenwald, in the Chelsea Manning trial, seeking access to court and trial 
documents to which the media was denied access. She sided withthe appeals 
court’s majority 
<http://www.armfor.uscourts.gov/newcaaf/opinions/2012SepTerm/12-8027.pdf>, 
which argued that it did not have jurisdiction to force a military court to 
make the disclosures requested.

That was not the only time Ryan ruled that the court on which she serves 
lacked the jurisdiction to overrule military judges. Ina 2013 case 
<http://washington.cbslocal.com/2013/04/30/military-court-reverses-suicide-attempt-conviction/>
 in which a marine private who attempted suicide pleaded guilty to trying to 
avoid service after not receiving mental healthcare, she dissented from the 
majority opinion that the judge had sentenced the marine improperly, arguing 
that the appeals judges lacked jurisdiction.

Though a military judicial record leaves less of a trail of opinions on hot 
button conservative issues, Ryan did clerk for the supreme court justice 
Clarence Thomas, an avowed conservative who is alsoprone to arguing 
<http://lawnewz.com/important/clarence-thomas-willful-blindness-reached-new-levels-in-race-discrimination-case/>
 that the court lacks jurisdiction.

Edward Mansfield

Mansfield is an Iowa supreme court justice appointed by the conservative 
governor Terry Bradstad in 2011 
<http://blogs.desmoinesregister.com/dmr/index.php/2011/02/23/branstad-taps-waterman-for-iowa-supreme-court-justice>
, after three of the justices who legalized same sex marriage in the state in 
2009 were voted out of office.

His first brush with national prominence came in 2012, when he authored the 
court’s majority opinion inan employment law case 
<http://www.cnn.com/2012/12/21/justice/iowa-irresistible-worker/>: Melissa 
Nelson, a dental hygienist, sued her boss, James Knight, for gender 
discrimination after he fired her supposedly for the sake of his marriage. 
Knight had suggested that Nelson wear less revealing clothing to the office 
because of his attraction to her, according to the decision, and at one point 
suggested her standard for what was too revealing be “if she saw his pants 
bulging”. Her firing, he said, was unrelated to gender. Mansfield and the court 
agreed, stating that “this conduct did not amount to unlawful discrimination”.

Richard Blumenthal: GOP 'destroying' supreme court with nomination limbo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/sep/07/richard-blumenthal-supreme-court-merrick-garland-republican>
In a May 2016 decision 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/28/us/life-sentences-juveniles-iowa-isaiah-sweet.html?_r=0>
, Mansfield dissented with the majority of the court that held that sentencing 
underage defendants to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole was 
unconstitutional. Mansfield wrote that “inherent uncertainty regarding future 
prospects for rehabilitation is simply an insufficient basis for supplanting 
the judgment of our elected representatives”.

Keith Blackwell

Blackwell is a Georgia supreme court justice best known in conservative circles
 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/bench-memos/303924/governor-deal-appoints-keith-blackwell-georgia-supreme-court-carrie-severino>
 for being the deputy special attorney general representing the state in its 
ultimately unsuccessful effort to have the Affordable Care Act declared 
unconstitutional. He is also a strong gun rights supporter,telling students in 
2013 
<http://www.mdjonline.com/news/olens-supreme-court-justice-give-insight-on-law-to-students/article_c9bf931c-7791-58c1-b002-dc631ef1125b.html>
 that the second amendment guaranteeing the right to bear arms was part of the 
writers’ intent to limit government because “there is only so much the 
government could do if the people are armed”.

Charles Canady
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-supreme-court-nominations-names%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7468faaddc703b5891cdc70d2bc06d8a7d21c81b%2F0_205_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20supreme%20court%20picks%3A%20from%20Tea%20Party%20senator%20to%20anti-abortion%20crusader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-supreme-court-nominations-names%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20supreme%20court%20picks%3A%20from%20Tea%20Party%20senator%20to%20anti-abortion%20crusader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-supreme-court-nominations-names%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7468faaddc703b5891cdc70d2bc06d8a7d21c81b%2F0_205_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
 Charles Canady speaks in Tallahassee, Florida in 2015. Photograph: Steve 
Cannon/AP 
Canady has served as a Florida supreme court justice since 2008, but his eight 
years as a conservative Congressman are probably more elucidating in terms of 
his judicial philosophy. He was one of the sponsors of the first federal “
partial birth abortion 
<http://www.npr.org/2006/02/21/5168163/partial-birth-abortion-separating-fact-from-spin>
” ban, which was vetoed by Bill Clinton but passed in 2003 and upheld as 
constitutional. (He was also one of the impeachment managers in the House,
strongly advocating 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/special/clinton/pdfs/canady.pdf> 
against the president anddefending the impeachment after the fact 
<http://www.fed-soc.org/publications/detail/some-reflections-on-impeachment-remarks-of-congressman-charles-t-canady-to-the-miami-lawyers-division-of-the-federalist-society>
.)

His other most notable legislative effort involved the Religious Liberty 
Protection Act 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/07/16/us/house-approves-measure-on-religious-rights.html?ref=topics>
, essentially a conscience clause designed to limit state and local statutes 
that interfere with people’s free exercise of religion. When civil liberties 
advocates attempted to insert an amendment that would create an exemption for 
people using religion as a reason to violate anti-discrimination laws, Canady 
and fellow Republicans rallied to defeat it. Canadytold the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/07/16/us/house-approves-measure-on-religious-rights.html?ref=topics>
 he opposed the amendment because “it would establish as a matter of 
congressional policy that religious liberty would have second-class status”. He 
denied it was an effort to allow discrimination against LGBT people in housing 
and employment.

Timothy Tymkovich

A colleague of Gorsuch on the 10th circuit court of appeals in Denver, 
Tymkovich is another Bush appointee and the chief justice on the court. Prior 
to that he served as Colorado’s solicitor general, where heunsuccessfully 
attempted 
<http://blogs.findlaw.com/tenth_circuit/2015/10/10th-circuit-welcomes-new-chief-judge-timothy-tymkovich.html>
 to defend the state’s constitutional amendment, passed by ballot initiative,
banning any attempt <http://web.law.duke.edu/voices/romer> to legislate against 
discrimination against LGBT people. The US supreme court ruled against him,
stating <https://www.oyez.org/cases/1995/94-1039> that the codification of 
discrimination was not a legitimate government interest.

More recently, Tymkovich found from the bench 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/27/us/justices-take-companies-cases-challenging-contraception-rule.html>
 that the company Hobby Lobbywas a person 
<https://www.ca10.uscourts.gov/opinions/12/12-6294.pdf> and thus subject to 
protection from laws forcing it to violate its religious beliefs: his ruling, 
which carved a huge hole in the contraception mandate of the Affordable Care 
Act, was upheld by the supreme court.

He has also openly questioned 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/law/2009/07/30/supreme-challenge-judge-calls-out-scalia-over-heller-language/>
 the constitutionality of bans on felons owning firearms.

Amul Thapar
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-supreme-court-nominations-names%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8da44a0e098a35a2104b4a01db3bcaea7d451ae0%2F0_393_2955_1773%2F2955.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20supreme%20court%20picks%3A%20from%20Tea%20Party%20senator%20to%20anti-abortion%20crusader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-supreme-court-nominations-names%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20supreme%20court%20picks%3A%20from%20Tea%20Party%20senator%20to%20anti-abortion%20crusader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-supreme-court-nominations-names%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8da44a0e098a35a2104b4a01db3bcaea7d451ae0%2F0_393_2955_1773%2F2955.jpg>
 Amul Thapar seen in 2006. Photograph: Ed Reinke/AP 
The first South Asian to serve as a federal appeals or district court judge, 
Thapar serves as a district (trial) court judge in the eastern district of 
Kentucky, where he once served as the US attorney. He too was appointed by the 
second President Bush.

Thapar is most famous for sentencing 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-security-nuclear-idUSBREA1H0SS20140219> 
three anti-nuclear activists, including an 84-year-old nun, to three years in 
prison for breaking into a Tennessee nuclear facility. He should be more famous 
foran opinion he authored 
<http://abovethelaw.com/2016/07/circuit-gives-us-bible-star-trek-and-bourbon-and-really-what-more-is-there-to-life/?rf=1>
 while visiting the 11th circuit appeals court in Florida, in which he threw 
out the convictions of a group of women charged with fraud for pretending to 
like men in order to run up their bar tabs. In the opinion, he said that a man 
gets what he bargains for when he buys a woman a drink: “the opportunity to buy 
a young woman a drink”.

Federico Moreno

Moreno is an unusual entrant in this list: George HW Bush appointed him to the 
district court in southern Florida in 1990 and then chose him for the 11th 
circuit court of appeals in 1992. Senate Democrats, however, never took up his 
nomination. He is also, in a sea of former prosecutors, a former federal public 
defender. In the early 2000s, hesided with a doctors’ class-action suit 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/10/business/judge-sides-with-doctors-over-insurers.html?ref=topics&_r=0>
 against managed care providers, attempting to prove that they had violated 
federal racketeering statutes. More recently, hesided with plaintiffs 
<http://legalnewsline.com/stories/510651652-airbag-recall-class-actions-to-continue-federal-judge-denies-companies-motions-to-dismiss>
 against Honda and Takata in a class-action suit over defective airbags subject 
to recall.

But, like Thapar, as a trial court judge, his job is to preside over cases and 
not to adjudicate the law itself. His rulings might have no bearing on his 
legal philosophy.

Robert Young

Republicans keep trying to block black votes. That's why fair judges are 
crucial | Scott Lemieux
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/01/republicans-block-black-votes-fair-judges-crucial>
An African American appointed to the Michigan supreme court in 1999, elected 
to fill a partial term in 2000, and then elected for eight-year terms in 2002 
and 2010, Young is that court’s chief justice and a conservative Republican. He 
identifies as a “judicial traditionalist 
<https://litigation-essentials.lexisnexis.com/webcd/app?action=DocumentDisplay&crawlid=1&doctype=cite&docid=33+Okla.+City+U.L.+Rev.+263&srctype=smi&srcid=3B15&key=b91addd453523f8768fd451460398df7>
”, a theoryslightly more centrist 
<http://www.libertylawsite.org/2016/02/04/comparing-traditionalism-and-originalism-ii/>
 than originalism but still opposed to the idea that the constitution is a 
living document.

In a 2007 decision <http://www.dailykos.com/story/2007/7/20/360246/->, he 
upheld Michigan’s 1996 voter identification law – which does offer voters the 
ability to sign an affidavit affirming their identity instead of showing photo 
identification – calling it a “reasonable, nondiscriminatory restriction” and 
arguing that identification did not, in fact, amount to a poll tax.

Of more interest to some conservatives, he also authored a 2004 decision 
<http://www.propertyrightsresearch.org/2004/articles7/landmark_eminent_domain_abuse_de.htm>
 that overturned the use of eminent domain for economic development in the 
state. In 2005, the US supreme courtruled 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/420144/kelo-eminent-domain-richard-epstein>
 in Kelo v City of New London that governments can, in fact, use eminent domain 
to take land from citizens and give it to private developers if there is a 
benefit to the community.

Opposition to the Kelo decision was part of the 2016 Republican platform 
<http://reason.com/blog/2016/07/20/republican-platform-denounces-kelo-the-e> – 
even though Donald Trump, rather infamously,attempted to use economic 
development eminent domain laws 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/volokh-conspiracy/wp/2015/08/19/donald-trumps-abuse-of-eminent-domain/?utm_term=.a15cbb5ababd>
 to his own benefit as a real estate developer.
 