
US President-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> called on Thursday for a 
strengthening of America’s nuclear weapons programme, throwing into doubt 
longstanding efforts to reduce its arsenal.


On Thursday, Trump tweeted: 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/811977223326625792> “The United 
States must greatly strengthen and expand its nuclear capability until such 
time as the world comes to its senses regarding nukes.”

It was unclear what prompted the comment on a medium that favours brevity over 
context. But it came on the same day that also President VladimirPutin 
addressed Russia’s nuclear capacity. 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/putin-calls-strengthening-russias-military-nuclear-potential-101800687.html>

Nuclear weapons: how foreign hotspots could test Trump's finger on the trigger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-foreign-policy-north-korea-iran-russia>
“We need to strengthen the military potential of strategic nuclear forces, 
especially with missile complexes that can reliably penetrate any existing and 
prospective missile defence systems,” Putin said.

Trump spokesman Jason Miller later issued a statement to NBC News 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/trump-tweets-apparent-call-more-us-nuclear-weapons-n699221>
, which did not add much clarity.

Miller referred “to the threat of nuclear proliferation and the critical need 
to prevent it, particularly to and among terrorist organizations and unstable 
and rogue regimes”.

Trump, Miller said, “has also emphasized the need to improve and modernize our 
deterrent capability as a vital way to pursue peace through strength”. Asked if 
this meant Trump was not in fact calling for more nuclear weapons, NBC 
reported, Miller did not respond.

There are more than 15,000 nuclear weapons in the world, 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/fact-sheet-who-has-nuclear-weapons-how-many-do-they-n548481>
 over 90% of which are in the US and Russia. Since the end of the cold war, the 
old rivals have worked to curtail production and then cut their nuclear 
stockpiles.

But relations have deteriorated significantly in recent years, while Trump’s 
freewheeling election campaign has shaken up many former certainties. In May, 
he suggested he could support South Korea, Japan and Saudi Arabia arming 
themselves with nuclear weapons for their own defence. “It’s going to happen 
anyway,”he told CNN. 
<http://cnnpressroom.blogs.cnn.com/2016/03/29/full-rush-transcript-donald-trump-cnn-milwaukee-republican-presidential-town-hall/>
 “It’s only a question of time.”

In a Republican primary debate, Trump seemed stumped 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/politics/2015/12/17/what-is-nuclear-triad-debate-sot.cnn>
 by a straightforward question about the nuclear triad. And in a presidential 
debate, he appeared to contradict himself over the policy of first use, 
eventually saying: “I can’t take anything off the table.”

During the campaign, Hillary Clinton hammered him as too erratic and volatile, 
saying more than once: 
<https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/758864218439286784> “A man you can 
bait with a tweet is not a man we can trust with nuclear weapons.” Ten former 
nuclear missile launch operators also wrote that Trump lacks the temperament 
and diplomatic skill to avoid nuclear war.

On Thursday the state department declined to comment on whether Trump’s tweet 
called his temperament into question. “Not for me to say,”spokesperson John 
Kirby said. 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/?420600-1/state-department-briefing&live> “I 
can’t speak for the president-elect’s nuclear views or policy going forward.”

Kirby was not aware of any countries expressing concern over the tweet, he 
added.

Trump’s transition website <https://greatagain.gov/> says he “recognizes the 
uniquely catastrophic threats posed by nuclear weapons and cyberattacks”, 
adding that he will modernise the nuclear arsenal “to ensure it continues to be 
an effective deterrent”.


But his latest statement appears to put him, once again, at odds with Barack 
Obama, who in a speech in Prague in 2009 outlined an aspiration for a planet 
without nuclear weapons while acknowledging it might not happen in his lifetime.

Obama has trumpeted the Iran nuclear deal but in April this year told his final
nuclear security summit <http://www.nss2016.org/> in Washington that terrorist 
“madmen” obtaining and using a nuclear weapon is one of the greatest threats to 
global security. Fifty world leaders attended but Putin was not among them.

Trump, who is at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida for the holidays, met 
incoming White House national security adviser Michael Flynn on Wednesday, 
along with a dozen Pentagon officials involved with defence acquisition 
programmes and chief executives of Lockheed Martin and Boeing, the country’s 
two biggest defence contractors.

US ballistic missile submarines, bombers, and land-based missiles – the 
nuclear triad – are expected to reach the end of their useful lives over the 
next decade. Maintaining and modernising the arsenal is expected to cost about 
$1tn over 30 years.
 