
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
and Bill Shorten have begun courting the five lower house independents who will 
be kingmakers if the 2016 election delivers another hung parliament, although 
the prime minister insists he is “quietly confident” of a narrow majority after 
postal votes are counted.


After suffering an unexpected nationwide 3.4% swing and losing 11 seats to 
Labor, with at least six more in doubt, Turnbull has begun contingency planning 
for the minority government he has long argued would be chaotic and disastrous 
for the nation.

While he insisted he was “quietly confident” of a majority Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> government, the prime 
minister – in a sharp contrast to his election campaign warnings about the 
dangers of a vote for minor parties – emerged on Sunday afternoon to promise to 
“work constructively” with the crossbench to deliver a stable government 
“without division or rancour”.

Shorten fought on policies. Turnbull sat back waiting for the people to elect 
him | Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/03/shorten-fought-on-policies-while-turnbull-sat-back-waiting-for-the-people-to-elect-him>
“It is very important to recognise that this is the people’s house, the people 
have chosen the members of the parliament, and we will work with all of them to 
deliver the stability and the leadership that Australians expect,” the Liberal 
leader said.

“We will work effectively, constructively, to ensure that we have a strong 
majority government, and we will work across the crossbenchers as well, if we 
need to do so.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Felection-results-the-story-of-australias-federal-election-night-vid&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Election%20results%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Australia's%20federal%20election%20night%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Felection-results-the-story-of-australias-federal-election-night-vid>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Election%20results%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Australia%27s%20federal%20election%20night%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Felection-results-the-story-of-australias-federal-election-night-vid&media=>
Election results: the story of Australia’s federal election night – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/03/election-results-the-story-of-australias-federal-election-night-vid>
Liberal strategists agreed it was possible Turnbull would fall short of a 
majority for the Coalition but said postal and absentee votes were favouring the
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>. Labor sources 
said they believed a hung parliament was now the most likely outcome.

Shorten, who polled better than expected especially in “battler” seats with 
lower average wages and higher unemployment, said he was ready to work with 
“people of goodwill in the parliament” and had also begun talking to the 
crossbench.

“I’ve spoken to some of the crossbenchers, not all, but I get the sense they 
want to be constructive.”

But neither leader can do anything definitive until clearer results are known 
after official counting resumes on Tuesday.

“I’m not sure who has finally won, we should now allow our professional 
Australian Electoral Commission to do their job and count the votes. What I’m 
very sure of is that while we don’t know who the winner was, there is clearly 
one loser, Malcolm Turnbull’s agenda for Australia and his efforts to cut 
Medicare,” Shorten said.

The surprise outcome has widespread ramifications for Australian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics>.

 * Even a slim lower house majority is a disastrous outcome for Turnbull’s 
authority. In the upper house it appears that for any legislation opposed by 
Labor and the Greens, the coalition will need the votes of three Nick Xenophon 
Team senators, two or three senators from Pauline Hanson’s One Nationincluding 
Hanson herself who returned to parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/pauline-hanson-set-to-return-to-parliament-as-queensland-senator>
, Jacqui Lambie and broadcaster Derryn Hinch. That result makes it highly 
unlikely the Coalition will be able to legislate the full program of company 
tax cuts that were its central promise in the campaign, nor the industrial 
relations laws that were the reason for calling the double dissolution election.
 * Recriminations are already starting from Coalition conservatives, who are 
demanding Turnbull reconsider his superannuation policy and restore his 
predecessor Tony Abbott to the frontbench, something Turnbull continues to 
insist he won’t do. 
 * Under Labor rules Shorten could also face a post-election leadership ballot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/bill-shorten-could-face-labor-leadership-challenge-from-anthony-albanese>
, with frontbencher Anthony Albanese the most likely challenger. Shorten said 
on Sunday he had “never been more certain of my leadership position than I am 
this morning.” A challenge would be almost impossible in a hung parliament 
outcome as it would leave the party leaderless for a month and after Labor’s 
unexpectedly strong result is considered unlikely. 
 * Business groups and economists expressed concern about the impact the 
political uncertainty would have on the economy, urging politicians to work 
together to deliver a clear outcome. 
A hung parliament would leave each leader seeking to form a government with 
some degree of backing from the five lower house independents – Victorian 
independentCathy McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan>, Andrew Wilkie, Bob 
Katter and the new Nick Xenophon Team MP, Rebekha Sharkie. Greens MP Adam Bandt 
has said he could not support the Coalition. It opens the prospect of a repeat 
of 2010 when Australia waited 17 days while Julia Gillard and Tony Abbott 
sought to form a government.


But this time neither leader would be able to allay concerns of instability by 
securing formal agreements from many on the crossbench, as Gillard did.

Wilkie and McGowan have said they will do no formal deal with either party, 
but have left open the prospect of agreeing to pass supply and allowing a 
government to function, unless the parliament saw reason to pass a vote of no 
confidence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20federal%20election%3A%20what%20just%20happened%2C%20and%20what%20comes%20next%3F%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20federal%20election%3A%20what%20just%20happened%2C%20and%20what%20comes%20next%3F%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video&media=>
Australian federal election: what just happened, and what comes next? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/jul/03/australian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video>
Speaking to reporters in Tasmania, where he easily retained his seat of 
Denison, Wilkie said: “The prime minister called me this morning, and there is 
actually no remarkable substance of that discussion to recount to you. It was 
ensuring that the channels of communication are open and I took the opportunity 
to tell him of my election commitment to the community about no deals, and he 
was quite understanding about that.

“I want to make it absolutely clear again today that I went to this election 
with a position that I would not enter into any form of agreement with any 
party to allow them to form government and nothing has changed,” he said.

“And no informal agreement either. To be absolutely clear, I will approach 
every item of parliamentary business on its merits, including budget supply, 
including confidence. That’s not to say that there isn’t a negotiation over 
every vote, over every bill, over every motion. There has to be.”

Turnbull also called McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan> on Sunday to 
congratulate her on her victory. She also told him she would do no formal deal. 
She has said she would look at every piece of legislation that comes up as she 
has done for the past two and a half years and consult her community.

Greens leader senator Richard Di Natale said on Sunday the Greens would now 
have to “sit down and have constructive negotiations with theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> to see what multiparty 
government looks like.”


But South Australian senator Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> sounded more willing 
to strike a deal with one or other leader, based on his policy priorities.

He also thought Turnbull would “just get across the line”, but if there was a 
hung parliament he and his party would “support the side that can form stable 
government”.

He said a “big factor” in deciding who to support would be which party had won 
the most seats. “You would be silly to ignore the weight of arithmetic,” he 
said.

Bob Katter <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bob-katter>, who was 
part of the 17 days of negotiations in 2010 when Gillard and Abbott sought the 
support of the independents but ultimately did not do a deal, said he was 
“already working on a list of demands”.

Liberals dress to impress but the voters poop the election party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/liberals-dress-to-impress-but-the-voters-poop-the-party>
“There will definitely be a very powerful position for Xenophon and myself to 
play and forAndrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>,” he said.

Katter’s demands in 2010 were sweeping 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/special-features/bob-katters-list-of-demands/story-fn5ko0pw-1225913732845>
 and covered almost every aspect of government policy.

Gillard eventually signed agreements with the Greens, and independents Rob 
Oakeshott, Tony Windsor and Andrew Wilkie. But the reality was not much 
different to a major party governing with only the basic assurances of supply 
and confidence. Wilkie ended the deal in 2012, the Greens ended theirs in 2013 
and the government continued.

During the election campaign both leaders signed a “solemn pledge” drafted by 
the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/federal-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-pledge-to-never-repeat-gillardgreens-experiment/news-story/c62ed14911e5c4b4933934586416adb6>
 ruling out a “deal or alliance” with the Greens, but neither entirely ruled 
out seeking to govern in the event of a hung parliament if enough of the 
crossbench agreed to the two basic prerequisites – to support the money bills 
needed for the government to function and not to support a no-confidence motion 
moved by the other side.
 