
STATEMENTS OF INTENT

Dammit man! Dammit! Sorry, reader, sorry. The Fiver doesn't usually like to 
start off its afternoon epistle in such an abrasive fashion but anger, searing, 
sizzling, scolding heat has got the better of your beloved today. Walls have 
suffered, oaths have been uttered and TVs have exited the window and met the 
pavement with the kind of force that makes a Karl Henry tackle look like a 
night out at the ballet. But what exactly has got the Fiver's pink and blue 
flowery numbers in a knot? Is it the 350 part-time workers deployed during the 
summer opening of Buckingham Palace who have no guaranteed work? Don't be 
silly. Those "desolate" north-east remarks from Lord Howell, former energy 
adviser to William Hague and George Osborne's father-in-law? Hello! Welcome to 
Snoozeville! Population the Fiver. That English football has been warnedthat 
Manchester City are being used as a 'branding vehicle' for the criticised Abu 
Dhabi regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/30/manchester-city-human-rights-accusations>
? You're having a laugh?

No, it's none of them. It's something far more serious than the "environment" 
or "human rights". Official. Club. Website. Statements. That's what it is. The 
Fiver doesn't ask for much – other than the three-digit number on the back of 
your debit card – but when yet another carefully diluted 400 words of 
nothingness [leave it – Fiver Ed] seep out to announce that 'The Club is 
delighted to confirm that blah blah blah has joined for yawn yawn yawn', well … 
that's when the walls and TV look at each other like they have been asked to 
spend a day in a stuck lift with Roy Keane and Mick McCarthy.

T1tfers tipped, then, to Torquay United, who trumpeted the arrival of Krystian 
Pearce at Plainmoor witha slightly immature, yet entertaining dig 
<http://www.torquayunited.com/news/article/krystian-confirmed-954211.aspx> at 
fans' messageboards and more. "Official site always gets there last … I get my 
info from the fans' forum or Bob in the pub … grumble, groan and moan," it 
parped. "Hang on a minute, briefly forgot where I was. We can now confirm that 
defender Krystian Pearce has passed his medical and signed all the paperwork on 
a two-year deal with the Gulls." Inevitably, Bob in the pub was unavailable for 
comment.

More of this please. Anything slightly different. More mock unveilings in the 
regal style of Alan Tate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/23/yeovil-announce-signing-using-easel>
, chairman Ron Martin being allowed to write every storyon Southend's website 
<http://www.southendunited.co.uk/news/article/240313-club-statement-731649.aspx?pageView=full#anchored>
. Just anything to end the tedium amid the ongoing misery that is Suárez to 
Arsenal, Bale to Madrid and no one to Manchester United. Then, perhaps, sources 
close to the Fiver will be able to tell you just how less funky the Fiver is.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

"I look at Southend Pier. It's a mile and a half long, right on the Thames 
Estuary. And I think, why do people do that? It's just to show what you can 
achieve. So we've been along the prom a couple of times. We've had walks and 
warm-downs. We've had training sessions on the beach. And I've enquired to 
Southend Council to see if we can get a free run along the pier – you have to 
pay about seven quid to get on it. So if we do a warm-down there it'll be a 
relaxing day, they'll go on a mile-and-a-half jog and end in the middle of the 
Thames Estuary. What's crazy about that? What's stunty about that? It's about 
using the local terrain" – soundthe Phil Brown interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/jul/31/southend-united-phil-brown-confident>
 alarm.

FIVER LETTERS

"It sounds to me as if Premier League bigwig Richard Scudamore is miffed that 
BT Sport has succeeded where he failed in terms of securing dressing room 
footage (yesterday's Fiver). He says he threw the idea into the mix, but it was 
a no-go area. If we have reached the point where the reject bin of Scudamore's 
innovations is the place to start rummaging for new ideas then surely it must 
be time to STOP FOOTBALL" – Dan Ashley.

"Laudable as the efforts of Liverpool are, I feel the pedants' duty to 
question the plans to 'eradicate any form of discrimination' (yesterday's 
Fiver). There is an important difference between discrimination and unfair 
discrimination. Discrimination only requires a degree of consideration to be 
given to a decision, such as deciding to wear matching socks, or deciding to 
moderate your language given the surroundings, or indeed deciding which South 
American news outlet to proclaim your desire to leave Merseyside to next before 
claiming to be misquoted. Unfair discrimination requires the unreasonable 
application of this ability, which is clearly A Bad Thing. But worth being 
clear on, and a discriminating audience is not one that is against Othello from 
the start" – Michael Hunt.

"Gmail categorised Tuesday's Fiver under 'Promotions' as a part of its new 
inbox tabs and categories feature. I think 'Relegations' would have been more 
appropriate" – Damien Neva.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. Also, if you've nothing better to do you can 
tweet the Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today's winner of our prizeless 
letter o' the day prize is: Damien Neva.

JOIN GUARDIAN SOULMATES

We keep trying to point out the utter futility of advertising an online dating 
service "for interesting people" in the Fiver to the naive folk who run 
Guardian Soulmates, but they still aren't having any of it.So here you go – 
sign up here to view profiles 
<https://soulmates.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=EMCSOULTXTCOS190> of the kind of 
erudite, sociable and friendly romantics who would never dream of going out 
with you.

BITS AND BOBS

Mr 15% Willie McKay says star client Joey Barton would join Everton in a 
heartbeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/31/joey-barton-salary-cut-everton>
, in return for hardly any money at all*. (*£35,000-a-week.) "Joey said there 
was only one club he would make a sacrifice for and it would be Everton," 
trilled McKay. "It's the club he loves."

Mike Ashley's zero-hours contracts may be hard on Sports Direct workers – but 
his frugal approach to billlionairing is even harder on Alan Pardew and his 
eight-year-contract. "Ithink we're still in the market," he sniffed after 
missing out on a string of slightly-too-expensive signings. "We will pay what 
we think is the right price."

Good news from Brendan Rodgers: Luis Suárez is happy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/31/luis-suarez-liverpool-brendan-rodgers>
. "He totally understands the club's point of view [about not selling him]. He 
hasn't been moping about," thrilled Rodgers. "The [squad] spirit is strong. 
Right across the club there is a one-club mentality."

Pepe Reina has clarified Monday's open letter on his website in which he 
revealedhow angry he is with Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/29/pepe-reina-disappointment-surprise-liverpool>
 over his abrupt Anfield exit. The key point: "I'm not angry with Liverpool – 
quite the opposite."

And Manchester United have named PepsiCo as Official Drinks Partner in 
Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos and Brunei, joining a 
family of partners including Official Manchester United Noodles Partner Mamee. 
Jumpers for goalposts, etc and so on.

STILL WANT MORE?

After four years of purgatory and dark farce, Pompey are back and look a 
decent bet for the play-offs,says Rob Bagchi in our League Two season preview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/jul/31/league-two-preview-season>
.

With the rise of Gareth Bale, Swansea and Cardiff, it's time for the English 
to take the Welsh game seriously,reckons Paul Wilson 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/football/blog/2013/jul/31/gareth-bale-wales-no-longer-joke>
.

And Sky Sports News' yellow Ticker of Truth is doing its best to wind up the 
Rumour Mill again.It's working 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/31/the-rumour-mill-joey-barton-everton>
.

SIGN UP TO THE FIVER

Want your very own copy of our free tea-timely(ish) email sent direct to your 
inbox? Has your regular copy stopped arriving? Click here to sign up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/signup/2010/mar/30/1>.

FAREWELL SWEET ESPN CLASSIC
 