
Austerity <https://www.theguardian.com/business/austerity> policies introduced 
into welfare and social care by the UK government amount to “systematic 
violations” of the rights of people with disabilities, a UN inquiry has 
concluded.

It says a range of measures aimed at reducing public spending since 2010, 
including controversial changes such as the bedroom tax, and cuts to disability 
benefits and social care budgets have disproportionately and adversely affected 
disabled people.

The highly critical report 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CRPD/Pages/InquiryProcedure.aspx>, published 
in Geneva on Monday afternoon, says the rights of disabled people to live 
independently, to work, and achieve an adequate standard of living have been 
negatively affected by austerity measures.

It makes 11 recommendations, including calling on the UK government to carry 
out a study of the cumulative impact of all spending cuts on disabled people, 
and to ensure the human rights of disabled people are upheld.

The Guardian view on austerity: reversing Robin Hood | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/the-guardian-view-on-austerity-reversing-robin-hood>
The report was welcomed by disability campaigners. Linda Burnip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/16/disability-un-investigation-uk-government-violations-human-rights>
, a founder ofDisabled People Against Cuts <http://dpac.uk.net/> (Dpac) said it 
“came as no surprise to anyone who has followed the stripping away of disabled 
people’s rights over the last six years.”

The UK government, however, rejected the UN report, saying in a formal 
response its findings presented an inaccurate picture of life for disabled 
people in the UK. “While the government continues to improve and build on the 
support available to disabled people, it stands by and is proud of its record.”

The report is withering about the manner in which ministers have conducted 
welfare and social care reforms, arguing that they pushed ahead with changes 
even when they knew they would have an adverse impact on disabled people.

Cuts such as those to personal independence payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/05/disabled-payment-delay-unlawful-judge-rules-iain-duncan-smith>
 and theindependent living fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/10/disaster-looms-people-severe-disabilities-independent-living-fund>
 had “hindered various aspects of [disabled people’s] right to live 
independently”, it says, making them more reliant on family and carers and in 
some instances forcing them into institutional care.

The bedroom tax and other cuts to housing support had led disproportionately 
to debt and eviction, it says. “Evidence indicates that persons with 
disabilities affected by cuts in their housing benefits have undergone high 
levels of stress anxiety and depression as a consequence of the shortfalls in 
their budget.”

It is highly critical of what it calls the “functional assessments” of 
disabled people who have applied for social security benefits, noting that 
their experience tended to be one where they were “merely processed rather than 
being listened to or understood”.

Luke can’t move, drink or use the loo. The council offered him a tea urn | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/14/independent-living-fund-dignity-safety-severely-disabled-people>
Government attempts to decrease the disproportionately high levels of 
unemployment among disabled people have had little impact, the report notes, 
while notorious “fit-for-work” tests were riven with flaws.

It noted that disabled people had suffered from a climate in which they were 
portrayed as “lazy and putting a burden on taxpayers”. They had continued to 
experience “increasing hostility, aggressive behaviour and sometimes attacks to 
their personal integrity”.

The report, issued by the committee on the rights of persons with 
disabilities, concludes: “There is reliable evidence that the threshold of 
grave or systematic violations of the rights of persons with disabilities has 
been met.”

The inquiry was triggered after campaigners, including Dpac, made a formal 
complaint to the UN in 2012 about alleged violations of disabled people’s 
rights. After two years of deliberations, the UN committee on the rights of 
persons with disabilities gave the green light to the inquiry in May 2014.


The inquiry report is based on an 11-day inquiry tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/20/un-inquiry-uk-disability-rights-violations-cprd-welfare-cuts>
 of the UK undertaken by two UN envoys in October 2015. The inquiry team met 
with more than 200 individuals, including officials and MPs as well as 
activists and academics.


The UK has been a signatory to the UN convention on the rights of people with 
disabilities 
<https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html>
 since 2007. The convention includes the right to live independently, to work 
and to enjoy social protection without discrimination on the basis of 
disability.
 