
A quarter of Britain’s trade with the EU, worth more than £90bn a year in 
imports and exports, depends on the Channel tunnel, according to a report into 
the economic benefits of the transport link.

 With Brexit negotiations expected to begin once article 50 is triggered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> next year, businesses are 
calling on the government to ensure that any new border controls – for customs 
or security – do not slow travel times and put jobs at risk.

The report into the Channel tunnel, conducted by the accountancy firm EY on 
behalf of the operators, saysthe 22-year-old link 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/may/28/cross-channel-flights-history> has 
fundamentally changed the way the UK does business and that 220,000 jobs now 
depend on the rapid transit of goods the tunnel enables.

UK trade deficit widens unexpectedly as exports fall despite pound drop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/uk-trade-deficit-widens-september-exports-fall-pound-drop>
Steve Hanley-Cook, an executive at parcel delivery service DHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/25/german-dhl-launches-first-commercial-drone-delivery-service>
, said: “Historically the tunnel has provided transit time advantages such as 
efficient border checks and customs controls. It is, however, important, in 
light of upcoming changes totrade relations between the UK and continental 
Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/29/german-business-leader-warning-brexit-trade-uk>
, that any agreement does not seek to dilute these advantages.”

About 30% of UK exports, worth £43.6bn, and 22% of imports from Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, worth £47.8bn, flow through 
the tunnel each year.

Supermarkets use the tunnel to receive multiple daily deliveries of fresh 
produce from the continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/03/brexit-could-herald-end-to-british-fruit-and-veg-sales-producers-warn>
, instead of warehousing the goods in the UK. Carmakers and plants that use 
iron and other metals rely on the tunnel to send and receive manufacturing 
components.

The West Midlands exports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/uk-exports-small-medium-sized-business-sme>
 the most using the tunnel, followed by the east of England. Scotland uses it 
to sell £300m of fish, fruit, vegetables and flowers annually.
 