
The UK has cut the number of Foreign Office staff working on climate change, 
despite ministers arguing the issue should be a top foreign policy priority.

The Liberal Democrats said it was “appalling” and sent “the wrong signals” to 
the world, after a minister revealed the figures in a recent parliamentary 
answer.

Experts said that with Donald Trump promising to roll back international 
climate efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/trump-break-from-paris-climate-deal-unfccc-exit>
 and with2016 set to be the hottest on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record-un-says>
, it was a bad time to cut back.

In London, the number of staff working full time on climate change is down by 
more than two thirds, from 26 in July 2013 to eight now. Overseas, the figure 
is down from 177 in March 2013 to 149 today.

The UK’s climate change diplomacy is respected internationally, and was seen 
as playing an important role in the run-up to the Paris agreement,which was 
agreed in France last year and recently came into force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/21/paris-climate-agreement-poised-to-come-into-force>
.

Baroness Anelay of St Johns, minister of state for the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office (FCO),said last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/24/g7-climate-change-global-warming-top-foreign-policy-priority-study>
: “Climate change is not only a threat to the environment but to global 
security and economic prosperity. That therefore makes it a top priority not 
only for environment ministers but foreign ministers too.”

Questions were raised by former ministers about the UK’s commitment to 
leadership on climate change when the Department of Energy and Climate Change 
(Decc)was abolished and merged into the business department in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/15/decc-abolition-major-setback-for-uk-climate-change-efforts>
, a move former Labour leader Ed Miliband branded “plain stupid”.

Lynne Featherstone, the Lib Dem environment spokesperson, said: “It’s 
appalling that the number of people working on climate change in the Foreign 
Office has been substantially reduced, especially now that the Decc has been 
disbanded.

“It sends all the wrong signals about this government’s commitment to tackling 
our biggest global threat, and undermines the work being done to encourage 
other nations to take action.”

British diplomatic efforts on climate change have in the past included trying 
to influence macro economic policy in China to encourage its economy to cut 
carbon, and pressing the US intelligence community on the risk global warming 
poses to security. But the Foreign Office’s prioritisation of climate change 
has been “chipped away” in recent years, say observers.

“This is not a good time to be cutting back on Foreign Office staff working on 
climate change,” said Tom Burke of thinktank E3G, who was adviser to the FCO’s 
top climate envoy until 2012.

“At a recent private meeting in the state department, the US climate envoy 
again emphasised how important Britain’s climate diplomacy was in driving 
forward ambition on climate change. As Trump turns the US back into a climate 
laggard, rather than the leader it has become, our role in building on Paris 
becomes essential.”

He said the UK’s leverage in international climate negotiations was a result 
of the Foreign Office’s capability to shape conversations on climate change in 
capitalcities around the world.

A government spokeswoman said: “The UK’s commitment and leadership on climate 
action, internationally and domestically, is as strong as ever and we are
recognised as the second best country in the world 
<https://germanwatch.org/en/download/13626.pdf> for tackling climate change.

“We take a whole of government approach to our climate change ambitions so 
that we can benefit from the low carbon transition in our industrial strategy 
as we deliver an economy that works for all.”
 