
Defense secretary Michael Fallon on Saturday announced a $125m (£100m) 
development deal with US arms manufacturer General Atomics under which the UK 
fleet of armed drones will double.


UK defence secretary tells US only Nato can deter Russian threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/03/uk-defence-secretary-warns-us-that-russia-is-threat-only-nato-can-deter>
The maker of the Predator and Reaper drones used widely by the US will provide 
10 drones to theRoyal Air Force <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/royal-air-force>
, bringing the fleet from 10 to 20, an increase announced last year by then 
prime minister David Cameron, as part of the strategic defence review.

The deal will also boost research into imagery and datalinks – communications 
from the ground with the drones.

Fallon described the deal as a major addition in terms of firepower, imaging 
and intelligence gathering. For the past two years, the UK’s drone arsenal has 
been centered on fighting Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

“Britain faces ever evolving threats and we must look at innovative solutions 
to stay ahead of our enemies,” Fallon said. “Doubling investment in our 
unmanned air fleet will substantially enhance both the intelligence gathering 
and firepower of the RAF.”

The drones will be variants of the Reaper, the more advanced version of the 
Predator. Test flights are slated for 2019 and, pending certification, the 
drones will be ready for integration into the British fleet in 2021.

The RAF will call the drone Protector instead of Reaper or Predator. It will 
be armed with the Brimstone 2, a UK-manufactured missile, rather than the 
Hellfire missile carried by its American cousin. It will also feature an 
automated takeoff and landing capability.

Fallon, in California for an annual defense conference at the Ronald Reagan 
Presidential Library, said he had met with Boeing, the aerospace giant, to 
impress upon the company a need to utilize British companies in its supply 
chain. He was scheduled to meet with another US defense giant, Northrop 
Grumman, on Sunday.

Fallon sounded highly positive notes about the announced appointment of his US 
counterpart, theretired US Marine Corps general James Mattis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/james-mattis-secretary-of-defense-donald-trump>
. Mattis, Fallon said, was “thoroughly welcome” to both the UK military and its 
defense establishment, as a known and trusted entity.

Fallon said his first priorities in working with Mattis would be to sustain 
“momentum” against Isis in Iraq and the Taliban in Afghanistan. Reforming Nato, 
the military alliance President-elect Donald Trump has called “obsolete”,will 
be a close second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/03/uk-defence-secretary-warns-us-that-russia-is-threat-only-nato-can-deter>
.

“That’s not our language, but we agree it needs reform,” Fallon told 
reporters. He also said he would encourage Mattis to continue the agenda set by 
the current US defense secretary, Ashton Carter, to push the Pentagon toward 
greater technical innovation and high-tech weapons purchases.

Critics say Trump's call with Taiwan may alter decades of foreign policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-taiwan-tsai-ing-wen-phone-call-foreign-policy>
With much uncertainty in Washington and abroad over Trump’s approach to Iran 
and the multilateral deal sealed by Barack Obama to block Iran’s path to a 
nuclear weapon, Fallon said the UK would seek to reassure Iran’s neighbors that 
the provisions of the deal were enforced.

He said the UK was looking to see “what the policy is”, rather than presuming 
Trump would govern with the incendiary approach that characterized his campaign.

“It matters to us, all your allies, that America remains an outward-looking 
nation,” Fallon said during a morning panel at the conference, emphasizing 
transatlantic defense ties.

Unity “sends a powerful message to potential adversaries like President 
Putin”, he said.
 