
The UK will fail to meet its targets on renewable energy generation, with 
take-up of clean fuels for heating and transport falling badly behind aims, MPs 
have warned.

The findings of the influential energy and climate change committee (ECC) show 
that ministers have little clear plan for meeting the 2020 target to meet 15% 
of energy needs from renewable sources.

This includes a target to generate 30% of electricity from wind, solar and 
other low-carbon sources by the end of the decade, and to generate 12% of 
heating energy and 10% of transport fuels from clean sources by the same date. 
The UK is not legally bound to meet the heat target, which is advisory.

These targets were set under the EU’s renewable energy plan, but ministers are 
still required to meet them despite the Brexit vote. The UK is faring best on 
renewable electricity, the target for which may be met if current trends 
continue, but the proportion of renewable energy used for transport has fallen 
in the last year, and heating remains a significant problem.

Angus MacNeil, the Scottish National party MP who chairs the committee, said: 
“The experts we spoke to were clear: the UK will miss its 2020 renewable energy 
targets without major policy improvements. Failing to meet these would damage 
the UK’s reputation for climate change leadership. The government must take 
urgent action on heat and transport to renew its efforts on decarbonisation.”

The report findings are the latest warning over the UK’s waning attractions 
for renewable energy investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/10/uks-attractiveness-for-renewables-investment-plummets-to-all-time-low>
.

Heating and transport fuels are particular problems because there are few 
options available other than fossil fuels. For instance, ground source heat 
pumps are difficult to install, biomass heating can produce soot particles, and 
biofuels – made from plants – are controversial as they can contribute to 
deforestation if not closely managed.

The MPs said that the rearrangement of government departments that has 
resulted in the closure of the Department of Energy and Climate Change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/15/decc-abolition-major-setback-for-uk-climate-change-efforts>
, with its responsibilities bundled into an enlarged Department for Business, 
Energy and Industrial Strategy, could be an opportunity for renewed focus on 
meeting the targets. However, they also warned thatthese priorities could be 
lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/24/uk-renewables-cuts-risk-slowing-shift-to-clean-energy>
 as ministers cope with the implications of leaving the EU.

Dr Robert Gross, director of the centre for energy policy and technology at 
Imperial College London, told the Guardian that even in electricity generation, 
the sector closest to meeting the 2020 targets, progress was slowing because of 
government policy.

He said the Conservative government’s decision last year to effectively end 
public support for onshore wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/18/tories-end-onshore-windfarm-subsidies-2016>
, which is the cheapest form of renewable energy generation, and to slash 
support for solar power and offshore wind, were making a major difference.

“Leaving the EU does not mean that the UK can simply forget these targets,” he 
said. “UK legislation is predicated on them. The UK still wishes to take a 
leading role in the climate debate, and backsliding on targets is not 
consistent with doing so.”

He said there had also been a lack of progress in constructing district 
heating systems, a feature of many continental European cities, whereby 
hundreds or thousands of homes are heated from a central source, often reusing 
the otherwise wasted heat that is a byproduct from fossil fuel power stations 
or rubbish incineration.

Sir Brian Heap, research associate at the centre for development studies at 
the University of Cambridge, called on ministers to take note. “More research 
and effective policy decisions are needed to achieve [the targets] which should 
be addressed urgently,” he said.

A government spokeswoman said: “Our priority is providing secure, affordable 
and clean energy.Renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/renewableenergy> already makes up 
about 25% of our electricity and we’re on track to hit our overall targets.”

The report by the ECC committee, which continues to operate as a select 
committee although the department it scrutinises has been reorganised, came as 
proponents of renewable energy celebratedthe installation of the UK’s first 8MW 
wind turbine, in Liverpool Bay 
<http://www.burbobankextension.co.uk/en/news/articles/successful-installation-of-world%E2%80%99s-largest-offshore-wind-turbine-at-burbo-bank-extension>
. Under construction by the Danish company Dong Energy, the Burbo Bank windfarm 
will eventually comprise 32 of the 195-metre giant turbines, each with blades 
80 metres long.


The blades in question are the first to have been manufactured for offshore 
wind turbines in the UK, made on the Isle of Wight andassembled in Belfast by 
MHI Vestas <http://www.mhivestasoffshore.com/burbo-bank-extension/>. When 
completed the windfarm will supply enough electricity to power 230,000 homes.
 