
Lord Stevens, the Ukip peer and former chairman of Express Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/express-newspapers>, has returned to the 
Richard Desmond-owned publisher as deputy chairman.

Northern & Shell, Desmond’s Express Newspapers parent company, confirmed on 
Thursday that Stevens was rejoining the business,after MediaGuardian reported 
that he had held meetings with executives about a senior position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/23/ukip-peer-senior-position-richard-desmond-express>
.

Stevens is also thought to have visited Northern & Shell with Ukip leader 
Nigel Farage.

He will take up his role immediately and report to Desmond, Northern & Shell 
chairman, with responsibility for the strategic direction and oversight of the 
Daily Express, Sunday Express, Daily Star andDaily Star Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-star-sunday>.

Desmond said: “Lord Stevens comes with a vast experience of the newspaper 
business. In challenging times for the media to have him working with us in 
this pivotal role is a huge asset.”

The 78-year-old fell out with the Tory party after he signed a letter 
supporting Ukip in 2004 but remained a “Conservative Independent” until 2012, 
when he became the party’s third peer in the Lords.

At the time of his defection to Ukip 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/346687/Top-Tory-quits-to-join-Ukip> Farage 
described Stevens as a “giant of Fleet Street and an immensely respected member 
of the House of Lords and a huge asset to Ukip”.

Stevens was chairman of United Newspapers, which acquired the publisher of the 
Daily Express,Sunday Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundayexpress>, 
Daily Star and Daily Star Sunday in 1985, from 1981 to 1999.

Desmond bought the titles from United Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> in November 2000 for £125m.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 