
Look out! The ultras are coming. Well, not quite. And definitely not those 
ones – although it depends on what your definition of an ultra is – but there 
are moves afoot in Britain to try to adopt a culture of support which often 
appears to bemore misunderstood than Mario Balotelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/oct/28/the-secret-footballer-mario-balotelli>
.

Whenever stories about European ultras penetrate British media they invariably 
come dripping with negative connotations of the fans involved: extreme 
violence, racist chanting,threats against players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/nov/01/petrolul-steaua-bucharest-romania-ultras>
 and other such depressing accounts that help portray these groups as a 
repugnant, oftenentitled, subculture within football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/06/marseille-ultras-rule-temptation-never-far-away>
.

Premier League should learn from Pep Guardiola, not pour scorn on him | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/21/premier-league-pep-guardiola-manchester-city-claudio-bravo>
So, yes, it is clear ultras have an image problem. Very rarely do we hear the 
stories about the cuddly types, such as those who build links with different 
ethnic groups within their club’s local community or the good work, such as 
that carried out by Bayern Munich fans,in which they organise trips to Auschwitz
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/12/bayern-munich-anti-nazi-history>
 to highlight the club’s Jewish history. But stories of do-goodery do not fit 
the stereotypical narrative of the ultra as the tooled-up smashing machine.

But there are ultras already walking among us, Crystal Palace’s Holmesdale 
Fanatics who, while not carrying the moniker ultras in their title (see above 
for why), are rightly praised for the noise and colour they bring to games. 
Their corner of Selhurst Park is an incessantly vibrant, effervescent antidote 
to the caravan-tradeshow atmosphere that is the norm for long periods of 
matches at many British stadiums, particularly in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>. They also rally behind 
supporter issues brought about by the commercialisation of football.

There have been attempts among followers of other British clubs to import a 
culture which at its heart is about intense organised backing of your team 
through colourful displays and noise on the terraces, not cracking skulls. 
Aston Villa’s Brigada 1874, Leicester’s Fosse Boys, Middlesbrough’s Red Faction 
and Celtic’s Green Brigade are among them and there have been movements at 
Ipswich Town andnon-league clubs such as Clapton FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/10/clapton-ultras-anti-fascist-essex-senior-league-football>
 and Dulwich Hamlet, whose support comes from a left-leaning, liberal platform 
as a counterpoint to the often contrary views on the terraces of British 
football’s past.

Kenny Legg, a football writer based in Berlin who is fascinated by German 
ultras, believes that for the UK to develop a similar scene fans need something 
to kick against, be it a political issue, exorbitant ticket prices or just the
perceived boredom of the modern football experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/aug/30/boredom-football-manchester-united-chelsea>
. “It has its roots in left-wing politics in Italy and the German ultras scene 
is heavily political, with groups often taking a stance on issues outside of 
football – refugees, racism, homophobia,” he says. “In Germany the ultras 
movement was often a reaction against the hooliganism that was still prevalent 
in stadiums in the early/mid-90s. Ultras groups, in some instances, took over 
the terraces and made them a fun, bright, colourful place for broad ranges of 
society, rather than a place to be feared.”

But Legg believes that, even as Britain stands on the verge of shrinking 
itself culturally as it prepares to pull the shutters down on Europe, young 
people here could never be as politically motivated as mid-90s 
post-reunification Germans, so any catalyst must come from somewhere else. It 
may be that British football, particularly the commercial juggernaut that is 
the English top flight, is immune to an ultras movement because of all-seater 
stadiums, a fear of hooliganism, ticketing, an ageing fanbase (try doing the 
Poznan for 90 minutes in your mid-50s) and years of gentrification.

David Mayor, a Manchester City season-ticket-holder of 30 years and writer for 
the sadly now defunct European Football Weekends website, fears the 
sanitisation of football in Britain – particularly the Premier League – has 
gone so far as to make developing an ultras scene almost impossible. “There’s 
more of a warming to the movement in Britain because of the internet and 
YouTube and also people travelling abroad more to watch games. But fans here 
might be worried about the consequences of being too exuberant or vocally 
critical of their club. The possibility of being thrown out might put them off.”

Fans in Britain do not really enjoy orchestrated singing or repetition – just 
ask the England band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/20/england-fans-great-escape-supporters-band>
. Nor do they take kindly to being told how to support their team. The
altercations that have broken out at West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/west-ham-watford-london-stadium-supporters-violence>
 in recent months are evidence of a divide that exists between those who see 
themselves as old-school supporters and those who are new to the game and 
perhaps a little wealthier and more passive. And it is not only a problem at 
West Ham. Some fans just want to watch the match and could not care less about 
the atmosphere – and would want to be near a flare only if they were bobbing up 
and down in the North Sea. That is fair enough – and in any case many ultras do 
not believe in the no pyro, no party ethos. There are many other ways to have 
fun at the match.

Legg says many normal fans were at first resistant to the ultras movement in 
Germany but, over time, grew to accept it and realise that it was a positive, 
harmless influence in grounds.

With safe-standing back on the agenda (Celtic have reintroduced it), 
discussions about how to breathe a little life back into British stadiums will 
inevitably be had among fans’ unions, of which there are many more than there 
used to be. If the word ultras is uttered, it need not be dismissed out of 
hand. Ultras groups might not be completely compatible with British football 
culture but they could help it get over what, at times, feels like a fear of 
atmosphere.
 