
The head of the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> climate science panel has 
declared it is still possible to avoid a dangerous 2C increase in global 
warming – despite more than a dozen record hot years since 2000. But the costs 
could be “phenomenal”, he said.

In an interview with the Guardian, Hoesung Lee, the leader of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ipcc>, defied the bleak outlook of 
climate scientists who warn the world is hurtling to a 2C rise far faster than 
anticipated.

Governments set 2C as the danger limit for global warming at the Paris climate 
conference last year – andagreed to work to limit warming to 1.5C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
.

Global average temperatures have already risen about 1C since the 
pre-industrial era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/09/worlds-climate-about-to-enter-uncharted-territory-as-it-passes-1c-of-warming>
 because of warming caused by greenhouse gas emissions.February’s hot 
temperatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/14/february-breaks-global-temperature-records-by-shocking-amount>
 stunned scientists, even after a string of record-breaking years.

But Lee insisted the 2C goal remained technically feasible, although it could 
become prohibitively expensive. “2C is achievable, and if we fail to act 
according to what the IPCC has been advising, the cost will rise phenomenally,” 
Lee said. “The sooner we act, we will be able to achieve 2C stabilisation 
cost-effectively,” he went on. “The longer we wait to take action, the cost 
will be a lot higher.”

See Earth’s temperature spiral toward 2C rise - graphic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/10/see-earths-temperature-spiral-toward-2c-rise-graphic>
An economist who began his career at ExxonMobil, Lee took over the UN climate 
panel last year after Rajendra Pachauri was forced to step down amidcharges of 
sexual harassment. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/24/ipcc-chair-rajendra-pachauri-resigns>

The UN panel, which produces exhaustive reports on climate science, agreed 
last month to study the feasibility of the aspirational 1.5C temperature goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/14/worlds-scientists-to-join-forces-on-major-15c-climate-change-report>
. Small island states at risk of being swallowed by rising seas argue they need 
the stronger target to help assure their survival. The IPCC is due to produce 
its special report on the goal by 2018.

But there have been multiple warnings from scientists, business leaders and 
campaign groups since Paris that even 2C is moving beyond reach. Christiana 
Figueres, one of the architects of the Paris agreement in her role as former UN 
climate chief, has called for a peaking of emissions by 2020 to keep the 2C 
limit within reach.

However, the IPCC chair insisted the temperature goal would remain technically 
possible if emissions continue to grow beyond 2020, or even 2030. “It is a 
daunting task, but the assessment clearly indicates that we have the technology 
and the means that will allow us to achieve that goal,” Lee said.

The commitments made so far under the Paris agreement would allow warming of 
close to 3C. Some scientists have called for the rapid deployment of 
technologies to suck carbon emissions from the air.

Lee, speaking on the sidelines of a gathering in Washington last week of 
business leaders and mayors, aimed at spurring investment in low-carbon 
technologies, said such investments needed to be ramped up fast to hold down 
the costs of the energy transition.

“Now the cost of meeting 2C in the most cost-efficient manner in terms of 
reduction of growth rate over the next seven or eight decades will be much less 
than one percentage point a year,” he said.

Delaying until the middle of the century would be ruinously expensive. “If we 
fail to act properly, then the emissions reduction will have to double to 
something like 6% a year, which is unprecedented in any experience.” Even then, 
however, Lee refused to rule out the feasibility of the 2C goal. “It is 
achievable if there is a drastic change in the way of doing business,” he said.

Scientists have also said that the world’s carbon dioxide concentration is now 
on the brink of neveragain dipping below the 400 parts per million (ppm) 
milestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/11/worlds-carbon-dioxide-concentration-teetering-on-the-point-of-no-return>
, as two important measuring stations, at Cape Grim in Australia and Hawaii’s 
Mauna Loa volcano, sit on the point of no return.
Global emissions graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/12/co2_world-zip/giv-257504kZfdHYHYyQk>
With the science on the causes of climate change now certain, and growing 
evidence in real time of its consequences, Lee said the time had come for the 
IPCC to focus more on solutions.

He said the next blockbuster report from the UN climate science panel – due to 
come out in three stages between 2020 and 2022 – would look more closely at 
policies for dealing with climate change. That could include studies of the 
relative effectiveness of carbon taxes in different economies, the impacts of 
technology standards, government funding for research and development, and 
policies for protecting cities and rural areas from climate change.

“We need to improve our understanding of the effectiveness of carbon pricing 
in the real world – not in the textbook,” he said. “We need to firm up our 
understanding of policy measures.”

 Lee said the IPCC should also be looking at geoengineering, or climate 
intervention on a planetary scale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/feb/18/geo-engineering>. He said 
he would like to see the climate panel explore the governance of 
geoengineering, and not just its technical aspects.
 