
Syria’s military command has denied it carried out airstrikes on a refugee 
camp near the Turkish border that killed at least 28 people, buta senior UN 
official 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/syrian-refugee-camp-bombing-airstrikes-sarmada-un-msf>
said initial reports suggested a government plane was responsible for the 
“murderous attacks”.

Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, said he was outraged by the incident 
and called for those responsible to be held accountable”. Ban urged the 
security council to refer the situation inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> to the international criminal court.

Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, the UN high commissioner for human rights said 
Thursday’s attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/airstrike-hits-refugee-camp-in-northern-syria-say-activists>
 were almost certainly a deliberate war crime. France described them as a 
“revolting and unacceptable act that could amount to a war crime or crime 
against humanity”.

Syria’s ally, Russia, insisted that none of its aircraft had flown over the 
camp at Sarmada, 20 miles west ofAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, the new focal point of the 
five-year-long war. Russia said fighters from the al-Qaida affiliate Nusra 
Front might have deliberately or accidentally fired on the camp.

Syria accused of airstrike on refugee camp as Assad pushes for 'final victory'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/airstrike-hits-refugee-camp-in-northern-syria-say-activists>
Denials from Damascus and Moscow came as a coalition of rebels including Nusra 
reportedly captured a strategic village from pro-government forces near Aleppo. 
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights (SOHR) said 43 rebels and 30 
pro-government troops had died since Thursday in the battle for Khan Tuman, 
which overlooks the main route from the capital.

Nusra and Islamic State have both been designated terror groups by the UN and 
were not included in the “cessation of hostilities” deal brokered byRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and the US that began in late 
February. Mainstream rebel groups that are supported by Arab and western 
countries often fight alongside Nusra – complicating the ceasefire efforts.

Al Hussein said: “Given these tent settlements have been in these locations 
for several weeks, and can be clearly viewed from the air, it is extremely 
unlikely that these murderous attacks were an accident.”

He too urged members of the UN security council to refer Syria to the ICC so 
that there would be “a clear path to punishment for those who commit crimes 
like these”. Efforts to do so before have been blocked by Moscow.

tent city graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/may/2016-05-06T14:53:39.html> 
Stephen O’Brien, the UN undersecretary general for humanitarian affairs, also 
demanded an immediate investigation. “If this obscene attack is found to be a 
deliberate targeting of a civilian structure, it could amount to a war crime,” 
he said.

Footage shared on social media showed rescue workers putting out fires which 
still burned among charred tent frames pitched in a muddy field. White smoke 
billowed from smouldering ashes, and a burned and bloodied torso could be seen.


Outrage over the Sarmada killings erupted shortly after a Russian orchestra 
held a celebratory concert in Palmyra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/palmyra-amphitheatre-hosts-russian-concert-after-recapture-by-syrian-forces>
, the ancient desert city liberated from Isis in a Syrian army offensive backed 
by Russian air power.

The performance prompted angry comments about Russian support for Bashar 
al-Assad’s forces in Aleppo and elsewhere. Philip Hammond, Britain’s foreign 
secretary, called it “a tasteless attempt to distract attention from the 
suffering of millions”.

The White House said the Sarmada attack was “indefensible”. The opposition 
Syrian National Coalition described it as an “appalling massacre by regime 
forces against civilians” and said it showed Assad was not a serious partner 
for peace.

Palmyra hosts Russian concert after recapture by Syrian forces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/palmyra-amphitheatre-hosts-russian-concert-after-recapture-by-syrian-forces>
Médecins Sans Frontières also condemned the attack. “It is extremely 
concerning … and a clear sign again that civilians are paying the price in this 
conflict,” said Sam Taylor, the MSF communications coordinator for Syria.

The International Rescue Committee called it “a disturbing new low in a war 
that has already shocked the world withroutine attacks against hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/maternity-hospital-aleppo-deadly-blast-syria>
, schools and bakeries”. It added: “There must be an end to the targeting of 
civilians, and renewed efforts to find a political solution that will bring 
this conflict to an end.”

On Thursday Russia blocked a British-drafted security council statement which 
would have condemnedthe surge in violence in Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/aleppo-fierce-fighting-shatters-syria-fragile-truce>
 and attacks against civilians. “There is one country that could not agree [to] 
it and it’s Russia,” Britain’s ambassador to the UN, Matthew Rycroft, told 
reporters. “That does speak volumes about their support for protection of the 
Assad regime.”


In a separate development on Friday, Syrian opposition sources reported that 
government troops had begun an assault on the central prison in Hama, where 800 
inmates, including political prisoners, had taken control of a section of the 
jail and were holding guards hostage. The authorities had cut electricity to 
the prison and were preventing food from getting in, said the SOHR.

The Sarmada attack highlighted the growing savagery of the conflict in the 
aftermath of the apparent collapse of the ceasefire. UN-organised peace talks 
in Geneva are deadlocked after an opposition walkout and the government 
delegation’s refusal to discuss a political transition that would see Assad 
eased out of power. The ceasefire was patchy from the start, but its fate was 
effectively sealed by the launch of the regime’s offensive last weekend in 
Aleppo.

No date has been set for a resumption of the Geneva talks, or firm 
arrangements put in place to facilitate deliveries of food and medicines for 
hundreds of thousands of Syrian civilians living in besieged areas.
 