
Want to know why the slogan “take back control” resonated so loudly with 
people voting for Brexit? One good place to look for the answer is in the 
Hermes parcel depot that delivers online orders for major retailers such as 
Next and John Lewis. Here, asthe Guardian revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/hermes-couriers-paying-staff-less-than-living-wage>
 on Monday, the couriers are paid piece rates – and fall into that category of 
people with supposed control over their lives known as the “self-employed”.

Revealed: delivery giant Hermes pays some couriers less than living wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/hermes-couriers-paying-staff-less-than-living-wage>
It is a status sold to recruits as offering attractive flexibility. For 
ordinary people juggling commitments, what could be better than deciding for 
yourself when you can and cannot work? Need to pick up the children from 
school, or pop to a hair appointment?No problem, you choose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/18/life-as-a-hermes-driver-they-offload-all-the-risk-on-to-the-courier>
. Except it’s a con of course, a new norm of the workplace that rigs terms in 
the interests of businesses while leaving workers increasingly insecure and 
powerless. No sick or holiday pay, no company contributions to national 
insurance or pensions. The burden of any downtime or unexpected hitches is 
transferred off the books and on to individuals, which is good for profits but 
leaves staff struggling to reach the hourly legal wage and highly stressed. 
This is not what real control of your life means. No wonder people are angry.

German-owned Hermes is not alone; it is just one of many companies that finds 
it convenient to depend on the self-employed“gig economy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/15/he-truth-about-working-for-deliveroo-uber-and-the-on-demand-economy>
. It is part of an apparently irresistible race to the bottom in employment – a 
trend encompassing outsourcing, subcontracting, agency working and zero-hours 
contracts – that has enabled employers to distance themselves from 
responsibility for the people on whom their businesses are built. It has given 
shoppers discount prices and new services that few other than the very rich 
dreamed of in earlier generations; but the cost has been transferred to those 
labouring at the bottom.

To add insult to injury, we are often told that British people don’t want 
these jobs, so employers have to bring in migrant workers. Really? Or is it 
that they want the work, but reject the precariousness, the health-destroying 
stress and the absence of basic rights and protections? Why should the 
vulnerability of migrants be exploited in this way?

When we were offered ease of services online, we did not ask that it be 
delivered to us on the back of exploitation

There ought to be a law against it, and in fact there is. It is not enough for 
an employer to pronounce a worker self-employed for them to become so. If in 
reality workers are closely directed by their company and have little autonomy 
over what they do, they can be ruled employees de facto.

A brave group will be testing that principle in court this week when a sample 
of Uber taxi drivers go before the London Central tribunal to claim that they 
are not“partners” as described 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/20/uber-pays-low-uk-corporation-tax>
 by their low tax-paying, Dutch-registered company, but in fact employees. 
Represented by theGMB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/04/gmb-union-criticises-uber-for-car-sharing-diktat>
 union and solicitors Leigh Day, they will argue that they have very little 
control over their hours of work, and face the threat of being removed from the 
platform if not available for too long – so they are entitled to employment 
rights. The control that self-employment gives them translates to many working 
60-70 hours a week to make ends meet, while struggling to reach the hourly 
legal living wage, according to the union.

The working conditions of thousands of people depend on this case. Companies 
who do still recognise that a share of profits should go to workers’ insurance 
and pensions will be able to compete on a fairer field.

Uber will fight it and defend itself as a young company investing heavily in 
technology and offering opportunities. If the drivers win, the cost of hailing 
an Uber cab will no doubt go up. If employment rights were extended to all 
those who prepare and deliver orders for us, we would have to pay more. But 
when we were offered the ease of services online, we did not ask that what we 
were buying should be delivered to us on the back of exploitation of others.
 