
The US and British governments fought bitterly over control of Iraq’s oil 
following the toppling of Saddam Hussein, the Chilcot papers show.Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> seemed more concerned than the 
Americans about any invasion being seen by critics as a war for oil, telling 
them it would be very damaging if the two countries were seen to “grab Iraq’s 
oil”.

What impact did the invasion have on Iraq - explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=chilcot_iraq>
But Sir David Manning, foreign policy adviser to Tony Blair, told Condoleezza 
Rice <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/condoleezza-rice>, the US national 
security adviser, in Washington on 9 December 2002 that Britain still wanted 
more of the spoils.


“It would be inappropriate for HMG [Her Majesty’s government] to enter into 
discussions about any future carve-up of the Iraqi oil industry,” he said. 
“Nonetheless it is essential that our [British] companies are given access to a 
level playing field in this and other sectors.”

UK government officials called in a team from BP for a briefing about the 
prospects for theIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> energy sector on 
23 January 2003, two months before the invasion, which ended in May.

Iraq invasion was about oil | Nafeez Ahmed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/earth-insight/2014/mar/20/iraq-war-oil-resources-energy-peak-scarcity-economy>
Later that year, the British oil company started a technical review of the 
Rumaila field, the second largest in the world. By 2009BP had won a service 
contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jun/30/bp-oil-contract-exploration-iraq>
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jul/31/bp-stranglehold-iraq-oilfield-contract>
to raise production on the field, which has 20bn barrels of recoverable oil.

Edward Chaplin, the British ambassador in occupied Iraq, talked of raising “BP 
andShell’s interests” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/dec/11/iraq-oil-auction-shell> when 
he held discussions with Iraq’s interim prime minister, Ayad Allawi, on 13 
December 2004.

Blair had told the US president, George W Bush, at a meeting mid-invasion on 
31 March 2003, that a clearer picture was needed of the shape of a post-Saddam 
Iraq to “sketch out a political and economic future and dispel the myth that we 
were out to grab Iraq’s oil”.

Yet a civil service briefing note in the same year for Geoff Hoon – then the 
UK defence secretary – before talks with his US counterpart, Donald Rumsfeld, 
discusses the need for “Level playing field: big contracts to rebuild Iraq. 
Putting UK lives on line. Expect level playing field for UK business in oil and 
other areas.”

BP 'has gained stranglehold over Iraq' after oilfield deal is rewritten
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jul/31/bp-stranglehold-iraq-oilfield-contract>
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, UK ambassador to the United Nations, identified 
budgeting and oil as the two clearest examples of issues on which the UK was 
not consulted by the US-run coalition provisional authority put in to run Iraq.

“We did not see anything whatsoever in the oil sector; they [the CPA] kept 
that very closely American, because they wanted to run the oil sector,” he told 
the Chilcot inquiry, and was quoted in the final report.

Meanwhile, a note between two British civil servants on 6 September 2004, 
headed “Energy strategy for Iraq”, highlighted that the UK was to take 
advantage of Iraq, which has some of the world’s largest oil reserves. It said: 
“Iraq’s energy sector development to be complemented by the increasing 
involvement of UK firms, leading to sustained investment over the next five to 
10 years and substantial business for the UK.”

BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> declined to comment.
 