
Ten of the 538 members of the electoral college who have the ultimate power to 
putDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> into the 
White House are demanding that intelligence agencies inform them of any ongoing 
investigations into alleged links between the president-elect and his coterie 
and Russian government attempts to sway the election in his favor.


The 10 electors are all Democratic bar one – Chris Suprun, the Republican from 
Texas who plans todefect from Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/faithless-electors-republican-electoral-college-trump>
. They include all four Democratic electors in New Hampshire, as well as 
Christine Pelosi from California, the daughter of the Democratic leader of the 
House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi.

First Republican 'faithless elector' announces intent to vote against Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/faithless-electors-republican-electoral-college-trump>
In a joint letter 
<https://medium.com/@electoralcollege16/bipartisan-electors-ask-james-clapper-release-facts-on-outside-interference-in-u-s-election-c1a3d11d5b7b#.iodi9k2q3>
 to the director of national intelligence, James Clapper, they argue that their 
duty as electors is not just to vote blindly according to their party decree 
when the electoral college convenes on 19 December. They also have the 
responsibility to question the winning presidential candidate’s fitness for 
highest office, they say, and to guard against any foreign interference in the 
process.

The authors quote Alexander Hamilton from the 1787 Federalist Papers in which 
the founding fathers stated that a key role of the electoral college was to 
prevent a “desire in foreign powers to gain an improper ascendant in our 
councils”. In their letter, which was first disclosed byPolitico 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/electors-intelligence-briefing-trump-russia-232498?cmpid=sf>
, the electors go on to say that they are facing precisely this duty in an 
election year in which the CIA has reportedlyconcluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 with “high confidence” that Russia conducted a covert effort to influence the 
US election.

“During the campaign Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> 
actively attempted to influence the election outcome through cyber attacks on 
our political institutions and a comprehensive propaganda campaign coordinated 
through WikiLeaks and other outlets,” the electors say.

Trump has dismissed the claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
 of Russian covert interference on his behalf as “ridiculous”.

The electors’ letter is the latest sign of an unprecedented level of unrest 
among the traditionally staid electoral college. So far,eight electors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/faithless-electors-republican-electoral-college-trump>
 around the country have indicated that they plan to vote against their party 
affiliation on 19 December as a protest statement against Trump, all but one of 
whom are Democratic.

 Several of those defectors have signed up to a new campaign called Hamilton 
electors <http://www.hamiltonelectors.com/>. It argues that the 538 members of 
the electoral college were invested by the founding fathers with the duty to 
block a demagogue or someone morally unfit for the presidency from gaining the 
White House.

Under the peculiarities of the US system of choosing presidents, the occupant 
of the White House is selected not by a direct popular vote of the American 
people but indirectly by electors who are in turn nominated by the winning 
party in each state.

This year Hillary Clinton conclusively won the popular vote, by some 2,654,600 
votes and counting. But she even more conclusively lost the electoral college 
by 306 electors to 232.

Clinton’s campaign chairman John Podesta said on Monday the Obama 
administration “owes it to the American people” to explain the extent of 
Russian interference in the US presidential election.

In a statement <https://twitter.com/johnpodesta/status/808398457140609024>, 
Podesta said the campaign fully supported the electors’ efforts, declaring that 
“never before in the history of our Republic have we seen such an effort to 
undermine the bedrock of our democracy”.

“The bipartisan electors’ letter raises very grave issues involving our 
national security,” said Podesta, whose personal email account was hacked and 
selectively published online by WikiLeaks. “Electors have a solemn 
responsibility under the Constitution and we support their efforts to have 
their questions addressed.”

The rebellion within the electoral college is a sign of the political mayhem 
that Trump’s victory on 8 November has unleashed, though few expect that this 
year’s rebellion will have any definitive impact on the outcome of the race. 
Should all eight electors who have announced they will defect go ahead with the 
promise, it would be the first time since 1912 that more than one elector has 
broken ranks with their party.

 