
The US military has formally admitted fault in a major September airstrike in 
eastern Syria that killed at least 15 fighters loyal to the regime of dictator
Bashar al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>.


US Central Command (Centcom), which both conducted and investigated the 17 
September strike, said the attack stemmed from a “good faith” mistake that led 
targeters to believe the Syrian fighters, whom Centcom said did not wear 
uniforms, were Islamic State (Isis) militants.

British, Australian and Danish warplanes also participated in the attack and 
released their weapons on the mistaken target, according to US air force Brig 
Gen Richard Coe, the investigating officer.

Coe stopped short of apologizing to the Syrian government, saying such a 
statement was beyond the purview of his six-week investigation.

The strikes occurred in the eastern province of Deir ez-Zor, where the US 
bombs Isis fighters and positions almost every day, and where known regime 
loyalists are relatively few. Due to the lack of observable insignia, Centcom 
would not say definitively that it had killed Syrian soldiers.

 “We made an unintentional, regrettable error, based on several factors in the 
targeting process,” Coe told reporters on Tuesday, who said he found “no intent 
to target Syrian [government] forces”.

Coe’s investigators were unable to access the scene of the strike, a few 
kilometers north of the Deir ez-Zor airfield, and the Russian military – which 
is supporting Assad’s campaign against Isis and rebel opposition forces – did 
not participate in the inquiry.

An initial report on the incident by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights 
suggested that 83 people had been killed. Coe said that on the basis of 
contemporaneous video evidence and interviews, he could only definitively 
determine 15 dead regime loyalists, but added that the death toll was likely to 
be higher.

Soon after the incident on 17 September, Centcom said that it had halted 
airstrikes in progress in Deir ez-Zor after speaking to Russian officials on a 
channel established todeconflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/01/deconflict-buzzword-to-prevent-risk-of-a-us-russian-clash-over-syria>
 the two countries’ air campaigns over Syria. In that conversation, the 
Russians informed their US counterparts that the targets of the strike were 
probably “part of the Syrian military”.

The conversation turned out to be crucial. A US military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> officer misidentified the 
coordinates of the targeted area, and presumed from the lack of Russian 
objection that there was no problem with the intended strike.

But Centcom said on Tuesday that the Russians made a “critical delay” before 
informing the US of the mistake, waiting 27 minutes for a “familiar US 
counterpart” to be reached.

During that time, 15 of the total 32 airstrikes occurred. Coe gave the 
Russians a measure of credit: “Without that call from the Russians, the strikes 
would have continued for longer than they did.”

Coe described the planning process for the strike unfolding over at least two 
days with “multiple, multiple” shift changes “in different parts of the globe” 
contributing to human error.

The intended strikes were substantial: warplanesand drones released 34 guided 
weapons and 380 rounds of 30mm ammunition on what Coe described as “defensive 
fighting positions, vehicles, tents, bed-down locations, tunnels and personnel”.

US Syria policy: signs of shift as Trump son meets pro-Russia Damascus figure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/donald-trump-jr-syria-russia-meeting-randa-kassis>
The presence of a tank tipped at least one intelligence analyst to conclude 
that the target was not Isis, but Coe said the analyst’s assessment was neither 
widely distributed nor fully accurate, as earlier airstrikes against Isis had 
hit tanks commandeered from the Syrian regime. The tank appears to have 
convinced strike planners that they had located a major Isis target, and what 
began as a deliberate strike expanded, blurring targeting procedures, as 
officers and analysts became convinced they had a major target of opportunity 
in their crosshairs.

 “Constantly challenging our own conclusions in these processes is something 
we need to do every time,” Coe said.

The admission of fault by the US military is the latest potential sign that 
the US under Donald Trump will acquiesce to aSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> under Assad’s rule.

Since his election, speculation has mounted that Trump will drop Barack 
Obama’s calls for Assad to relinquish power. Trump has expressed respect for 
Assad’s patron, President Vladimir Putin ofRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, and portrayed US support for the 
anti-Assad opposition forces as a disaster.

Earlier this month, Trump told 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-willing-to-keep-parts-of-health-law-1478895339>
 the Wall Street Journal that “Syria is fighting Isis”, indicating a lack of 
appetite for the US to undermine the enemy of its enemy.

Trump is unlikely to arm the Syrian opposition – a policy advocated by David 
Petraeus, whom Trump is considering for secretary of state – because “we have 
no idea who these people are”. He acknowledged to the paper: “I’ve had an 
opposite view of many people regarding Syria.”

Assad has sounded cautiously enthusiastic since Trump’s victory, describing 
the president-elect as “a natural ally 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/donald-trump-syria-bashar-al-assad-ally-fight-the-terrorists-russia-iran-a7419962.html>
” to Portuguese television.

Aleppo siege is 'war of extermination', says injured doctor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/aleppo-syria-siege-is-war-of-extermination-says-injured-doctor>
The US admission of error comes as Assad, backed by the Russian air force, is 
poised for a critical victory in the northern city of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/pro-assad-forces-seize-third-of-east-aleppo-in-rapid-advance-syria>
, a former center of manufacturing that years of war have turned into a 
graveyard. Tens of thousands of civiliansare fleeing Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/pro-assad-forces-seize-third-of-east-aleppo-in-rapid-advance-syria>
 in advance of a final bombardment that Russian leaflets reportedly describe as 
a pending “annihilation”.

Coe’s investigation also provided a new level of detail into the US-Russian 
“deconfliction” channel, established last year after the Russian air force 
entered the war on Assad’s behalf.

During the 17 September conversation with the Russians, the US delivered 
highly precise but ultimately mistaken coordinates for the intended attack, as 
an analyst miscommunicated. Coe said it was the “first time” that the US had 
called the Russians in advance of a strike with such precise location 
information.

“We would have a large number of aircraft operating in that small airspace for 
an extended period of time and we wanted to obviously notify the Russians so 
they’d be aware of our activities there,” Coe said.
 