
The US military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> has admitted 
culpability for killing approximately two dozen civilians in a July airstrike 
outside the Syrian city of Manbij, then the scene of fierce fighting with 
Islamic State militants.


By the Pentagon’s account, the strike, which hit the Syrian village of Tokhar 
near Manbij, representsthe single worst incidence of civilian casualties in the 
entire US war against Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/us-airstrike-allegedly-kills-56-civilians-in-northern-syria>
. But human rights monitors believe the US military is still undercounting the 
death toll, which is substantially lower than the ranges those monitors have 
compiled.

US airstrikes allegedly kill at least 73 civilians in northern Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/us-airstrike-allegedly-kills-56-civilians-in-northern-syria>
The Syrian Network for Human Rights has listed 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B7O1jbPIaDd0ZUhIN0ZIUklyd3c/view>, mostly by 
name, 98 men, women and children dead from the July airstrike. The human-rights 
monitor Airwars, based in the UK, assesses civilian deaths in the strike to 
range between 73 and 203.

In a statement on Thursday, US central command (Centcom), said that an 
internal investigation had concluded that “up to 24” civilians died from the 
bombing.

Key details of the incident remain unclear: the attack at Tokhar, near Manbij, 
occurred in the early morning hours of 19 July, local time. Centcom listed the 
date of the strike as 18 July, while saying that a different 19 July strike 
allegation, this one near Aleppo, did not in fact happen. But it had previously 
acknowledged that the airstrike in questionoccurred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/us-military-syria-investigation-july-airstrike-manbij>
.

Centcom said the civilian deaths resulted from Isis “interspers[ing]” 
civilians with its fighters at an area identified as a staging ground for a 
“counterattack” against US and proxy forces.

At the time, the two sides had been locked in weeks of fierce fighting for 
control of Manbij, a waypoint for Isis to exfiltrate terrorists through Turkey, 
and – for the US coalition – the last obstacle southward to Isis’ Syrian 
capital of Raqqa.

The US said the airstrike targeted the area and “inadvertently” killed the 
non-combatants alongside nearly 100 Isis militants.


Eastern Aleppo becoming 'one giant graveyard' says UN humanitarian chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/syria-aleppo-death-toll-united-nations-statistics>
“Unknown to Coalition planners, civilians were moving around within the 
military staging area, even as other civilians in the nearby village had 
departed over the previous days,” Centcom said in its statement.

After various investigations into allegations of US-caused casualties, Centcom 
now believes that the US has inadvertently killed 173 people to date in a war 
that has entered its third year.

But monitoring groups say that the US has systematically undercounted the 
civilian death toll of the war.

“Our own research indicates at least 330 civilians died in these same events. 
Even when [Centcom] confirmed cases, there appears to be under-reporting on 
these incidents,” said Airwars’ Chris Woods.

Woods said he was “very pleased” that Centcom acknowledged its role in the 
Manbij-area strike, though he noted the confusion in dates as to when the 
strike occurred. But he considered the variance in casualty figures alarming.

“How can we only have 24 killed by the coalition, when we have such 
substantial reporting of civilian casualties that day?” said Woods.
 