
The thunderstorms and steady downpour that reduced the finely manicured Lower 
Course at BaltusrolGolf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Club into 
marshy wetlands over the weekend finally relented yesterday afternoon, sparing 
tournament officials the headache of the first Monday finish at a PGA 
Championship since the season’s final major was last played here in 2005 – and 
further criticism over how it was handled.

Jimmy Walker holds off Jason Day to claim stunning US PGA win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/jimmy-walker-jason-day-us-pga> 
By the time Jimmy Walker drained a nervy three-foot putt to cap a no-bogey 67 
and seal his first major championship, the rivers that had flowed through the 
fairways and puddles that had gathered on the greens and bunkers less than 24 
hours earlier were distant memories, a testament to the yeoman work of Mark 
Kuhns’ groundstaff.

“Mark and his crew, the volunteers, everyone that’s kind of made this 
tournament what it is, definitely needs more than a pat on the back,” saidJason 
Day <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jason-day>, who eagled the 18th to 
finish second, falling one stroke short of becoming the only player besides 
Tiger Woods to defend the PGA title since it went to strokeplay in 1958. 
“Because with the amount of rain I’m not sure if these guys have had any time 
off at all. To be able to get the course ready, playable for us, is pretty 
special.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fjimmy-walker-jason-day-pga-championship-first-major-title-win-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jimmy%20Walker%20reflects%20on%20PGA%20Championship%20win%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fjimmy-walker-jason-day-pga-championship-first-major-title-win-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jimmy%20Walker%20reflects%20on%20PGA%20Championship%20win%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fjimmy-walker-jason-day-pga-championship-first-major-title-win-video&media=>
Jimmy Walker reflects on PGA Championship win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/01/jimmy-walker-jason-day-pga-championship-first-major-title-win-video>
Bipolar weather had dogged the tournament nearly from the start with a 
quarter-inch of rain overnight on Thursday leading to a late start on Friday, 
but not until the following day had it become the prevailing narrative. 
Third-round play was called for the day late on Saturday afternoon a half-hour 
before the last group was scheduled to tee off and nearly four hours after the 
warning horn initially sent players off to the clubhouse. Ten of the 47 players 
who returned early on Sunday morning to complete their rounds played a full 18 
holes.

The final round began at 8.40am yesterday with the final pairing of Walker and 
Robert Streb scheduled for 3.16pm. The PGA, which conducts the tournament, had 
issued a release saying Saturday tickets would be honoured for Monday if play 
was forced on to a fifth day. But with rain forecast for the area on Sunday and 
Monday, there was the alarming prospect that play could be pushed further into 
the week. Not since the 1987 US Women’s Open at nearby Plainfield Country Club 
had a major tournament finished on a Tuesday.

Matt Fitzpatrick ends US PGA in style but Ryder Cup spot on knife-edge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/matt-fitzpatrick-us-pga-ryder-cup-spot>
Kerry Haigh, the PGA’s chief championships officer, answered criticism for not 
altering the format to a two-tee start on Saturday to ensure the completion of 
the third round in the face of a grim forecast, creating a situation where a 
number of within touching distance of the lead – among them Kevin Kisner and 
Padraig Harrington – were playing their fourth rounds while the leaders were 
playing their thirds.

“Obviously we’re disappointed with not being able to complete or even resume 
play for today,” Haigh said. “We had the three cells of dangerous weather. We 
suspended when the first one came. The second two were only 30, 35 miles to our 
south, southwest. The forecast was for them to move through, and there was some 
clear skies behind them.

“When the third cell went through and dissipated it was safe; then the rain 
came down a lot heavier and caused basically the golf course to have standing 
water and was unplayable. And even if it were to stop, we could not get the 
course playable.”

Had the tournament been pushed to Monday, it would have created a scheduling 
nightmare for those players – among them Henrik Stenson, Bubba Watson and 
Rickie Fowler – who are flying to Rio de Janeiro this week to participate in 
Friday’s Olympic opening ceremony. But after a flash storm early on Sunday 
afternoon that did not require a stoppage, the players could complete their 
final rounds beneath overcast skies and in sweltering humidity.

Ultimately the weather complied, perhaps bailing out the PGA and ensuring the 
grounds staff’s overnight work was not for nothing. “These guys are here at the 
crack of dawn and here until the end of the day, and they are doing that every 
single day,” As Day said: “Hats off because we’ve just got to go out there and 
chase a white golf ball, and these guys are working very, very hard.”
 