
The US is seeking closer cooperation with Russia in the fight against Islamic 
State and al-Qaida’s Syrian branch in the hope that Syria’s president,Bashar 
al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, will stop 
attacking the mainstream rebels who are fighting to overthrow him.


US officials said the plan under discussion would also require western and 
Arab-backed opposition forces to distance themselves from Jabhat al-Nusra, 
linked to al-Qaida, to avoid being hit in airstrikes. Both Jabhat al-Nusra and 
Isis are proscribed by the UN and seen as legitimate targets by Washington and 
Moscow.

The Syrian Network for Human Rights, meanwhile, reported on Friday that 6,567 
civilians had been killed in the first half of 2016 – 1,271 of them in June 
alone. Unofficial estimates used by the UN say 400,000 people have died since 
the Syrian uprising began in 2011. Millions have been made homeless.


News of the latest US initiative, reported by the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/us-offers-to-share-syria-intelligence-on-terrorists-with-russia/2016/06/30/483a2afe-3eec-11e6-84e8-1580c7db5275_story.html>
, came as the UN envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, admitted that conditions 
were still not ripe to reconvene the suspended Geneva peace talks before a 1 
August deadline for the start of a “political transition” in Damascus.


The paper said the Obama administration had submitted a proposal that includes 
“enhanced information sharing”, though no decisions had been made.Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is also being asked to pressure 
Assad to halt the bombing of armed rebel groups that are supported by the US.


The US defence secretary, Ashton Carter, said that if Russia would “do the 
right thing inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> – that’s an 
important condition – as in all cases with Russia, we’re willing to work with 
them.”

The idea is likely to be greeted with scepticism by critics of US policy on 
Syria, which is widely seen to be overly dependent on Russian goodwill and 
cooperation. Overall, however, there seems to be increasing convergence between 
the two big powers despite their ostensible disagreement about Assad’s fate.

The formal US position is that the president should step down, but Russia has 
continued to back him and to insist that his future is a matter for the Syrian 
people alone. The anti-Assad opposition fears a deal between Washington and 
Moscow on an imposed solution that will leave the president in place.


Assad himself said in an interview that Syrian cooperation with Russia and 
Iran – his main regional ally – was intended to restore stability. “The chaos 
in Syria is going to provoke the domino effect in our region,”he told the 
Australian broadcaster SBS 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2016/06/29/exclusive-syrian-president-assad-says-western-countries-secretly-deal-his>
. “It’s going to affect the neighbouring countries, it’s going to affect Iran, 
it’s going to affect Russia, it’s going to affect Europe.”


De Mistura told al-Hadath TV 
<http://english.alarabiya.net/en/News/middle-east/2016/06/30/UN-envoy-to-Syria-political-solution-must-be-found-urgently.html>
 on Thursday that the key countries involved needed to work “with a feeling of 
urgency” to get the Geneva talks started again. Despite not being able to set a 
date for a resumption, he hinted at grounds for optimism. “I want to believe, 
and I think I have reasons to believe, that both Russia and the US – who are 
crucial because they are the co-chairs – have both an urgent vested interest in 
avoiding that this conflict starts again and becomes open ended,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fsyria-us-russia-cooperate-fight-islamic-extremists-united-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9320a593822505c2e9b754185c64294225032c09%2F0_209_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20ready%20to%20work%20with%20Russia%20to%20fight%20Syria's%20Islamic%20extremists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fsyria-us-russia-cooperate-fight-islamic-extremists-united-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20ready%20to%20work%20with%20Russia%20to%20fight%20Syria%27s%20Islamic%20extremists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fsyria-us-russia-cooperate-fight-islamic-extremists-united-nations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9320a593822505c2e9b754185c64294225032c09%2F0_209_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Bashar al-Assad visits Syrian army troops fighting near Damascus. Photograph: 
SANA/EPA 
He also said he had worked out how to untangle what he called the “Assad knot” 
– the central problem of irreconcilable demands about his political future – 
but he did not elaborate.

Restoring the always patchy cessation of hostilities agreement that was 
brokered by the US and Russia last February appears to be a pre-condition for 
any progress towards a political solution to the war.

De Mistura said Brexit was another “casualty” of the Syrian crisis – a view 
held by many 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2016/jun/29/europe-pays-a-heavy-price-for-syria-it-must-act-to-end-the-crisis>
. “The consequences of this conflict are affecting everyone, even producing a 
sense of concern in European countries to the point of reaching that type of 
consequence,” he said.

On Friday Britain appealed for wider humanitarian access to besieged areas of 
Syria, noting recent progress but demanding deliveries to eight areas that had 
not yet been reached by the UN. “Until we see a change in regime behaviour, 
thousands will continue to starve,” said Gareth Bayley, the UK special envoy 
for Syria.

On Thursday Britain announced that it would increase support to Iraqi forces 
fighting Isis by deploying 50 additional trainers on improvised explosive 
devices, infantry skills and combat first aid. The extra personnel will be 
working with US and Danish forces, providing training to the Iraqi army, border 
guards and federal police. Britain will also provide 80 army engineers to build 
infrastructure to support this deployment at an airbase in western Iraq.
 