
The spread of the trafficking of people and forced labour in a growing number 
of sectors in the UK and Ireland was confirmed as the US State Department 
released its latest global report on Trafficking in Persons (TIP).

The TIP report <http://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/> records that some 
migrant workers in the UK were subjected to forced labour in agriculture, 
cannabis cultivation, construction, food processing, factories, domestic 
service, nail bars, food services, car washes and on fishing boats in 2015, 
according to evidence supplied to the State Department by the UK government. 
Albania, Vietnam, Nigeria, Romania and Poland were the top countries of origin 
for foreign trafficking victims.

In Ireland, victims of forced labour were formally identified in the 
restaurant industry and car washes, and, for the first time, one non-EU victim 
was identified as a victim of trafficking in the fishing sector.


The annual TIP report ranks countries on their effectiveness in tackling forms 
of slavery and is the principal diplomatic tool used by the US to pressurise 
foreign governments to act against trafficking. Both the UK and Ireland 
received the top ranking for their efforts but were told they need to do more.

The report highlights the UK’s lead in requiring large corporations to check 
their supply chains for trafficking through theModern Slavery Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/30/contents/enacted>, passed last 
year. But it is critical of the UK’s failure to support victims after an 
initial period, finding that it tends to deport people rather than care for 
them long term. The Guardian hashighlighted the plight of some victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/30/we-are-hopeful-now-brothers-freed-from-slavery-seek-british-policy-change>
 left without support.

UK Home Office minister Karen Bradley said the government would continue to 
take a leading role in global action on modern slavery. She pointed to the 
extension of powers being given to the agriculture and shellfish sectors. “New 
police-style powers in theImmigration Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2016/19/contents/enacted> will enable the 
Gangmasters Licensing Authority <http://www.gla.gov.uk/> [GLA] to investigate 
serious cases of exploitation right across the labour market,” she said.

The campaign group Anti-Slavery International has welcomed the government’s 
commitment to greater powers for the GLA but its director, Aidan McQuade, said 
the TIP report was right to highlight areas for concern.

“The UK’s role in victim protection is still problematic, tainted by the 
negative discussions around immigration that have poisoned so much of the UK’s 
political discourse in recent years. In addition to the human suffering that is 
caused, this limits the opportunities to obtain witness statements vital to the 
prosecution of traffickers in the UK,” he said.

While Ireland fully meets the minimum standards for the elimination of 
trafficking, the TIP report says its failure to identify suspected victims who 
are forced to take part in criminal activity and instead to prosecute them is 
“a serious concern”.

Human rights groups have expressed concern about a rise in forced labour in 
Ireland, highlighted in the report. The Guardian exposed exploitation of 
migrant fishermen last year, prompting a government taskforce to create a 
permit scheme to regularise large numbers of undocumented workers on Irish 
trawlers from outside the EU.

The Migrant Rights Centre Ireland <http://www.mrci.ie/> coordinator, Gráinne 
O’Toole, said it was urgent for the government to finalise its action plan to 
tackle forced labour. “Our caseload has consistently shown that we need to 
focus on forced labour and get the evidence for prosecutions,” she said.

The Irish Department of Justice said tackling modern slavery and trafficking 
was a priority for the government. A special project has been established to 
tackle the risk of human trafficking in the maritime industry.

The police have comprehensive arrangements in place to deal with the often 
“extremely complex” investigations where suspected victims of trafficking are 
involved in crime, it said.
 