
Tony Abbott is fading fast. Within days of his fall he’s looking like a prime 
minister we once had a long time ago. The drama ofhis execution this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/australian-leader-tony-abbott-ousted-by-malcolm-turnbull-after-mps-vote>
 was muted by the lingering disbelief that he was ever there. His government 
has slipped easily into the past. He is gone and barely missed.


“The beauty of being leader is you are freer to be yourself,” he remarked five 
years ago after becoming leader of the opposition. But that self proved, in the 
end, not made for the politics of today.

Abbott was a brawling politician of great skill but he was also – and fatally 
– still in many ways the cold war kid who rode out with Bob Santamaria’s forces 
in the late 1970s to confront the zeitgeist and save western civilisation.

Along the way, Abbott would abandon nearly every policy Santa stood for but he 
never lost the old man’s fear of the future and the belief that his God-given 
mission was to save us from enemies we don’t even realise are there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fvale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd8340176ef5e5ee484b57603e1e5dd851cf7661%2F0_0_2592_1728%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vale%2C%20Tony%20Abbott%20%E2%80%93%20both%20a%20unique%20man%20and%20a%20unique%20failure%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fvale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vale%2C%20Tony%20Abbott%20%E2%80%93%20both%20a%20unique%20man%20and%20a%20unique%20failure%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fvale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd8340176ef5e5ee484b57603e1e5dd851cf7661%2F0_0_2592_1728%2F2592.jpg>
 The Labor benches taunt Tony Abbott with the Herald Sun headline ‘Bowser 
bandit’ during question time in October last year. Photograph: Mike Bowers for 
the Guardian 
In Abbott’s political imagination danger lurks everywhere. Whether it’s the 
death cult abroad or the ABC at home, there is always more at stake than meets 
the eye. Ruin is at hand. Combat is imperative. Hyperbole is the order of the 
day.

In the end, that didn’t wash with Australia. 

Abbott used to talk of himself as a mutt chasing a car. What happens, he used 
to wonder, when the dog catches the vehicle? The answer when he became prime 
minister turned out to be: not much.

It’s not that he didn’t have ideas. Opinion pieces were his strength in his 
early career as a journalist. Even as minister for health – and he was a good 
minister – he liked to lock himself away for days at a time to write newspaper 
pieces in which he threw around big, bold ideas.

But missing from these tens of thousands of words was much about strategy. 
Abbott does not have the profoundly professional imagination of John Howard, 
whose mind focused instinctively on the task of getting where he wanted to go.

Without his superb talent for political conflict, he would never have brought 
his party in from opposition. True, he wrecked the joint to get there, butthe 
victory of 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/07/tony-abbott-new-prime-minister> 
can never be taken away from him.

That’s when his troubles began. He found he had little to carry him forward 
when he came to power except his instinct for brawling. There was no strategy. 
Persuasion was at a minimum. He picked fights everywhere. Like the worst of 
world war one’s generals, he led his government straight at the machine guns.

Point scoring and talking points miss the point – this budget is fundamentally 
unfair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/06/point-scoring-and-talking-points-miss-the-point-this-budget-is-fundamentally-unfair>
In opposition he had built up a great political asset: trust in his word. That 
he was caught out so often ducking and weaving didn’t matter. Abbott convinced 
Australia that he was the truth teller and his opponent, Julia Gillard, the 
liar.

This political gold was squandered in his first budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/06/point-scoring-and-talking-points-miss-the-point-this-budget-is-fundamentally-unfair>
. From that strategic error, Abbott never really recovered. That the budget 
picked so many fights he couldn’t win only compounded a fundamental 
miscalculation that reduced Abbott to the ranks of ordinary politicians.

His devotion to the crown was comic yet it didn’t bring him undone – though 
even his supporters regard his knighting of Prince Philip as one of thesilliest 
political gestures in living memory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/03/how-giving-prince-philip-a-knighthood-left-australias-pm-fighting-for-survival>
.

Nor was it a bar to his survival that Abbott was a John Paul II brand of 
Catholic warrior. Hisdefence of marriage as an honourable estate fit only for 
heterosexuals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/24/tony-abbott-says-its-ok-to-be-gay-but-insists-same-sex-marriage-is-not-ok>
 was one of the few times in his career Abbott tried to force his religious 
beliefs on the nation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fvale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36a6b9eac731ea90ce210d747e3223bb504093ff%2F0_0_4690_3044%2F4690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vale%2C%20Tony%20Abbott%20%E2%80%93%20both%20a%20unique%20man%20and%20a%20unique%20failure%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fvale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vale%2C%20Tony%20Abbott%20%E2%80%93%20both%20a%20unique%20man%20and%20a%20unique%20failure%20%7C%20David%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fvale-tony-abbott-both-a-unique-man-and-a-unique-failure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36a6b9eac731ea90ce210d747e3223bb504093ff%2F0_0_4690_3044%2F4690.jpg>
 Abbott during a seemingly spiritual moment at Parliament House. Photograph: 
Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
These old loyalties gave a sepia wash to his leadership but were not the cause 
of his downfall. Abbott was only Santa-lite but in the end he failed in the 
same way Santamaria failed half a century ago: we didn’t buy his vision of a 
nation in peril. We don’t see ourselves that way.

He is a unique man. His was a unique failure. And he was true to himself all 
the way out. In hislast appearance in the prime minister’s courtyard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/tony-abbott-delivers-his-final-barbs-as-he-steps-into-the-wilderness>
 he lectured the media in grandiose terms: “Refuse to connive at dishonour by 
acting as the assassin’s knife.” He sees himself as he always has: surrounded, 
indeed white-anted, by enemies.

Tony Abbott delivers his final barbs as he steps into the wilderness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/tony-abbott-delivers-his-final-barbs-as-he-steps-into-the-wilderness>
By that point, of course, he wasn’t entirely wrong. 

He leaves behind a band of ultra conservatives distraught at his fall. For a 
time they had a champion. It seemed under Abbott they might yet fend off the 
future. They imagined an Australia free of everything from wind turbines to 
lesbian offspring. But this has all been plucked away from them.

The leaders of this band are Eric Abetz, Cory Bernardi and Kevin Andrews, who 
scored a remarkable 30 votes in the contest for deputy leader early this week. 
They are forMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> to deal with now.

Whatever else happens this will be the defining task 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/conflicting-promises-present-malcolm-turnbull-with-core-leadership-dilemma>
 of Turnbull’s time as prime minister. He spoke of changing the discourse on 
economics. But he must know the discourse has to change across the board.

The bounce he enjoyed in the polls this week has been modest. He’s on notice 
that Australia wants much more than the leadership to change.
 