
Valerie Amos has joined calls for an arms embargo against South Sudan, the 
most senior UN official to backgrowing international demands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/09/obama-urged-un-resolution-ban-arms-sales-south-sudan>
 for action against the country as it enters a second year of civil war.

“Anything that takes weapons off the streets, out of countries and out of 
communities will help us because ultimately for us it’s about bringing peace,” 
the UN humanitarian chief told the Guardian. “If there are no weapons, it’s 
harder for people to fight, peace will come sooner and we can get more aid to 
the people who so desperately need it.”

The United States has so far resisted efforts to implement an embargo 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/01/26/exclusive-inside-the-white-house-fight-southsudan-obama-conflict-susanrice-unitednations/>
, although the secretary of state, John Kerry, and senior members of the Obama 
administration have recentlyspoken in support of one 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/world/Kerry-backs-arms-embargo-on-South-Sudan/-/1068/2615730/-/irw3ur/-/index.html>
. An arms ban would target both the South Sudanese government and the 
opposition, with both sides being accused of war crimes after fighting broke 
out in December 2013.


Tens of thousands of lives have been lost and millions of citizens forced to 
flee their homes during the civil war in the country.Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> group says about 2,5 
million people are at risk of famine.

Amos, who leaves her position as UN under-secretary-general for humanitarian 
affairs and emergency relief coordinator after five years in March, was 
speaking in Wai in Jonglei state at the end of a three-day visit to South Sudan 
with Unesco peace envoy and actorForest Whitaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/forest-whitaker>.

The UN is assisting around 25,000 people in rebel-held Wai, providing food, 
water, some shelter and basic medical care. Amos praised the resilience of the 
refugees she met, adding: “I just wish that those that are really pursuing this 
conflict would take time out to come and see what the impact of this is, 
particularly on women and children.”


The economic cost of war has already reached billions of dollars and a recent 
Frontier Economics report 
<http://www.frontier-economics.com/news/new-frontier-report-highlights-economic-cost-war-south-sudan/>
 found that ending the conflict this year would save the international 
community about $30bn.


Amos said both sides should be held accountable for human rights abuses and 
expressed concern about an “economic crisis” in the country. “It’s a country 
dependent on oil and we have seen production halved,” she warned.


After meeting the South Sudanese president Salva Kiir and many of his 
ministers in the capital Juba, Amos both praised and criticised authorities. 
“The government does not want to admit hunger figures of 2.5 million people 
facing severe food shortages. We have to keep the pressure on,” she said, 
adding that the government had improved access to aid in many areas.


Amos has urged the international community to embrace a “more interventionist” 
approach towards global conflicts but urged caution against military 
involvement. “One of the things I’ve become more conscious of as I’ve been 
working in places like Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Somalia, Democratic Republic of 
Congo andSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> is that we 
have this whole international framework of law and norms, but those rules are 
being broken every single day. We talk about the importance of protecting 
civilians yet it’s about those civilians being killed as a result of barrel 
bombs or women being raped.”

She said it was shameful that these abuses were tolerated. “So my question is, 
where is the accountability? Countries have signed up to these rules so how do 
we hold them accountable? When you talk about interventionism, everybody thinks 
about war and putting troops from another country on the ground. That’s not 
what I mean. When we see this happening, how do we stop it? One of my jobs is 
to raise these questions.”
 