
The proud face of the revolutionary hero Simón Bolívar gazes from a stack of 
banknotes dumped in a grubby box on the floor of a supermarket that doubles as 
a foreign exchange bureau in a small border town in the Amazon.

No disrespect is intended: there is simply not enough space in the till for 
the thick wads of cash. Nor is it practical to treat the 100 bolivar bills with 
more care: they are worth barely more than the paper napkins stacked rather 
more attentively on the shelves.


This, however, is Venezuela’s highest denomination, a note that once 
represented Latin America’s most powerful petro-economy – but is now a near 
valueless symbol for one of the most dramatic reverses in a country’s fortunes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38c9adebc23f6bd78f8311ab0c7f7e6ddb2d29cc%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38c9adebc23f6bd78f8311ab0c7f7e6ddb2d29cc%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Notes dumped in a box in a border supermarket. Photograph: Jonathan Watts for 
the Guardian 
With greater oil reserves than Saudi Arabia, Venezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela> should be at least moderately 
prosperous. Instead, it has the world’s fastest contracting economy, the second 
highest murder rate, inflation heading towards 1,000% and shortages of food and 
medicine that have pushed the poorest members of its 30 million population to 
the edge of a humanitarian abyss.

To get a snapshot of the fast-changing – and sometimes tragically surreal – 
socio-economic landscape, the Guardian travelled 870 miles across the country 
from the Amazonian border with Brazil to the capital, Caracas.


Santa Elena de Uairen – where money comes in suitcases

For most of its history, the frontier town of Santa Elena de Uairen was 
considered an underdeveloped outpost deprived by distance of the goods and 
services available on the coast and the interior. Today, however, it is seen as 
a relatively safe and prosperous sanctuary from the crime and chaos found 
elsewhere. Thanks to the proximity of Brazil, food is not in short supply and 
there is a brisk border trade in grain.
Venezuela <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/10/venezuela-map/> 
It takes just five minutes to cross from the porous border at Pacaraima. 
Locals say the government in Caracas lifted food import tariffs from Brazil two 
months ago in a sign both of its desperation to ease shortages and its 
weakening control over the economy. There is now a steady stream of traders 
buying sacks of rice, sugar, wheat and spaghetti for resale in Venezuela.


People here rely on cash because Santa Elena is so far from the rest of the 
country that communication networks are too unreliable for debit or credit 
cards. That means they probably spend more time and effort counting and 
carrying money here than anywhere else.


Life could be made easier if the authorities printed notes with higher 
denominations than 100 Bolivars, which is worth less than 8p, or 10 cents. But 
the central bank appears reluctant to make a move that would confirm a level of 
hyperinflation not seen in Latin America since the crises in Brazil and 
Argentina in the 1980s and 1990s. As a result, locals have to pay for 
everything in the equivalent of dimes. Even when made of paper, that can be 
cumbersome and heavy.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3576e6079f752b7b6fe51aeadeb361025ce290c%2F0_135_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3576e6079f752b7b6fe51aeadeb361025ce290c%2F0_135_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 A petrol station attendant counts Venezuelan bolivar banknotes. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Getty Images 
“When I go to the market I have to carry such a big bag of money that I get a 
backache,” said Carmen Ramirez, a local hotel manager. Her friend Wanda 
Wojtowitcz, a lawyer, said she went shopping with her cash in a toiletry bag 
because it would not fit in her purse. “At the bank you see people with 
suitcases full of notes to deposit,” she says.

The increasingly secretive central bank does not reveal how much it costs to 
print each bill, but based on international parameters, José Manuel Puente, an 
economist and professor with the Institute of Higher Administration Studies, 
estimates that the cost of paper, ink and printing of each note is about 20% 
more than their face value. “They are not worth what they cost. It’s a joke. 
But that’s the way things are,” he said.


Gran Sabana – oil is cheaper than water

The government’s tendency to subsidise many products below the cost of 
production is a major reason why the economy is in such a mess. It is a habit 
formed by oil, which warps price perceptions like a pyschotropic drug.

Historically, abundant supplies have made Venezuelans regard cheap petrol as a 
birthright, so for political reasons – and despite hyperinflation, collapsing 
government revenues, global markets and climate change – the current price for 
a litre of high-grade gasoline is just 6 bolivars (less than a penny or a cent) 
– more than 100 times cheaper than the same volume of mineral water. This meant 
the fuel bill for the entire 1,400km journey was less than a pound or dollar.


When Hugo Chávez came to power in 1999, he took this way of thinking a step 
further and used petrol dollars to subsidise essential products such as rice, 
sugar, toilet paper, sanitary towels and medicine.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38fc336680ebb09322a27fe7bf7f64ceacf3f105%2F0_101_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38fc336680ebb09322a27fe7bf7f64ceacf3f105%2F0_101_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The 100 bolivar note is the highest denomination. Photograph: Anadolu 
Agency/Getty Images 
It was an altruistic, populist move that allowed the poor to finally share in 
the nation’s oil wealth. But it also stifled incentives for producers and 
created a system of dependency and black-marketing that was already causing 
economic problems before Chávez died in 2013 and the global crude market 
collapsed the following year.


Venezuela's worsening economic crisis – the Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/22/venezuela-economic-crisis-guardian-briefing>
His successor, Nicolás Maduro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-maduro>, has tried to continue and 
even extend this policy, despite a 60% fall in crude prices since 2014. Even in 
the midst of crisis, the government still hands out free or massively 
discounted homes, cars, DVD players and microwave ovens.


Driving through the Gran Sabana region to its gateway San Isidro, also known 
as Kilometro 88, taxi driver José Lopez is conflicted about the consequences. 
He has benefited personally from these ad hoc policies: his one-year old 
Chevrolet was given to him on very generous credit terms as part of a 
government campaign. But even this loyal Chavista says people are now 
suffering. “Things turned bad towards the end of Chávez’s time, and it’s much 
worse now under Maduro,” he said.

El Tigre – fertile fields lie empty

Further north, the road crosses the Orinoco river into the state of 
Anzoátegui, which is home to many of Venezuela’s biggest oil refineries and 
aluminium plants. Almost all have been run down. Output at the PDVSA state oil 
company has fallen by 450,000 barrels a day from its 2014 level of 2.7m 
barrels. Given that each barrel is also worth less than half its value two 
years ago, this has created an enormous hole in the state’s finances.

Compared to agriculture, however, that is a relatively small decline. On the 
roadside are miles and miles of empty, fertile land, and relatively few crops. 
With prices of many vegetables kept low, there is little incentive for farmers. 
Between 2012 and 2015, domestic grain production fell by 80%, meat by 40% and 
vegetables by 18%, according to private sector analysts. Shortfalls were once 
covered by imports, but the state has to use its remaining petrodollars to 
service debts.

Private companies are also struggling as a result of the weak bolivar. At the 
Unicasa Supermercado in El Tigre, there are few customers and little variety. 
Today there is no rice, sugar, flour, jam, cooking oil, toilet paper, condensed 
milk, vinegar or baby products.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F239f10dafffc16cac43215954da8d42a3bcfbd6a%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F239f10dafffc16cac43215954da8d42a3bcfbd6a%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 The shelves are full, but with only the same few products. Photograph: 
Jonathan Watts for the Guardian 
Yet the shelves are mostly full, thanks to single rows of the same few 
products – Royal brand paper towels, Zulia beer, Lina sardines, Heinz spaghetti 
sauce – which are repeated in aisle after aisle.


Food scarcity and empty cupboards in Venezuela - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/may/11/food-scarcity-emtpy-cupboards-in-venezuela-economic-crisis-pictures>
Anselm Suárez, who was shopping with his wife, said he was pleased there were 
more vegetables than usual and plenty of spaghetti for a change, but he sighed 
when asked about rice. “If you can find it, it’s all Brazilian, which means it 
is more expensive,” he said. While prices of rice and flour have more than 
doubled in recent months, he said his salary had increased by only a fraction. 
“It’s getting very hard for us.”

Alejandro Grisanti, an economist at EcoAnalitica, said the slump in purchasing 
power was what made this crisis the worst ever seen in Latin America. While 
Brazil and Argentina suffered appalling hyperinflation in the 1980s and 1990s, 
he said the current situation in Venezuela was harsher because – unlike in 
those two countries – wages are not index linked, so people are experiencing a 
devastating collapse in their ability to pay for goods.


As a result, demand is collapsing. In the past year, Grisanti estimates, beer 
sales are down by 75% and canned peas and corn by 90%. “They have become luxury 
items. This shows the level of crisis that Venezuela is suffering.”


Barcelona – the Maduro diet

There is still abundant food if you have foreign currency. But up to a quarter 
of the population does not even earn the minimum wage of 22,500 bolivars (£18) 
a month. They rely on the subsidised grain, toiletries and medicine provided by 
the government – but there is no longer enough to go around, which leaves many 
not just hungry but unhealthy.

At the Luis Razetti hospital in Barcelona – a city close to the Caribbean 
coast – medical staff are having to cope with growing shortages of basic drugs, 
the re-emergence of long dormant diseases such as diphtheria, and increasing 
cases of malnutrition.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6db99b15967e159cb3dab87ced5e51244e5f8e5%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6db99b15967e159cb3dab87ced5e51244e5f8e5%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Estimates say that around a quarter of Venezuelan children are malnourished. 
Photograph: Ariana Cubillos/AP 
“We used to only read about malnutrition in medical books, but now we are 
seeing cases like those in Africa. Things have become far worse over the past 
year,” said one doctor who asked to remain anonymous.


In the paediatric ward, a three-month old baby named Luís Alberto was being 
treated after his weight fell from 3.5kg to 3kg as a result of diarrhoea. “His 
mum was too weak to lactate and we couldn’t buy infant formula, so we used soya 
milk,” said his grandmother Dámela Castellanos. The treatment ought to be 
simple – a drip and regular meals – but the hospital cannot provide either, so 
the family have to pay for their own stents and hope for donations of food.


Castellanos too has lost weight. “I’m on the Maduro diet,” she laughed grimly, 
echoing a popular phrase that blames the president for the nationwide lack of 
calories.


The nutrition crisis is not on the scale of sub-Saharan Africa or North Korea. 
On the streets, people do not look evidently malnourished and there are many 
roadside food hawkers for those who can pay. Imports from Brazil and Colombia 
have also eased some of the pressure. Yet the situation is moving in an 
alarming direction.


Food shortages take toll on Venezuelans' diet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/venezuela-crisis-basic-food-shortages>
The average weight loss in Venezuela over the past five months is between 5kg 
and 15kg, according to theBengoa Foundation for Food and Nutrition 
<http://www.fundacionbengoa.org/>, which estimates that 25% of children are 
malnourished.


“We have enough data to show that we are between a crisis and an emergency,” 
said Pablo Hernandez, a Bengoa representative and professor of nutrition at the 
Central University of Venezuela. “Thanks to the lack of medicine and food and 
the increase of violence, this young generation will die younger than their 
parents.”

The government admits there is a problem, but claims opposition supporters in 
academia and the NGO sector exaggerate the numbers to stir up social unrest. 
The lack of official statistics, however, prompts many to assume the worst.

Caracas – the world’s most murderous city

The final stretch of the journey followed the Caribbean coast and then cut 
inland near Rio Chico, where a long line of frustrated shoppers had formed 
outside the Abastos Mario E supermarket. A handwritten sign taped to the door 
said the first 50 people in the queue would receive priority for any supplies 
that arrive the next day.

Latecomers would get a lottery number for a draw to decide who gets the 
leftovers. “It’s very complicated,” sighed one woman, who had been waiting for 
several hours. “Very complicated and very hard.”

Waiting in line is no longer just a way of life, it has become a profession. 
The middle class pay people to queue on their behalf. Black-marketeers – known 
asbachaqueros – line up wherever there are subsidised products, buy what they 
can, and then sell it illegally at 10 to 30 times the price they paid. This is 
supposed to be illegal, but it is one of the few growth industries left in the 
country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe44520d5bf07beae6fc22f96451faeec7fb4f937%2F0_143_4370_2622%2F4370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuela%20on%20the%20brink%3A%20a%20journey%20through%20a%20country%20in%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fvenezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe44520d5bf07beae6fc22f96451faeec7fb4f937%2F0_143_4370_2622%2F4370.jpg>
 People queue outside a supermarket in Caracas. Photograph: Federico 
Parra/AFP/Getty Images 
According to the research company Datanalysis, half of those in any given line 
are working in this shady arbitrage business. Some are doctors or teachers, who 
can make more from lining up and selling on than the few cents an hour they are 
paid in the public system

The queues have added to the social tension in the world’s most murderous city 
<http://www.insightcrime.org/news-briefs/caracas-most-violent-city-in-the-world-2015-report>
, where residents are more than 100 times more likely to die a violent death 
than in London, and 25 times more likely than in New York. Crime has worsened 
in line with the economy. September was the capital’s most violent month in six 
years with 474 killings,according to the National Forensic Medicine Service 
<http://runrun.es/nacional/281538/el-mes-que-cerro-es-el-septiembre-mas-violento-de-los-ultimos-seis-anos-en-caracas.html>
.


'We are like a bomb': food riots show Venezuela crisis has gone beyond politics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/venezuela-breaking-point-food-shortages-protests-maduro>
Looting and food riots have become commonplace. According to the Venezuela 
Conflict Observator, there were 139 food-related protests in the country in 
August.

All of which has helped fuel political instability. Last month, a million 
people took to the streets of Caracas to demand the recall of the government, 
and another big rally has been called for this Wednesday.


Although the opposition is weak and divided, Maduro is on the ropes. His 
approval ratings have plunged to 15% and his PSUV party has lost control of the 
legislature. Meanwhile the army – a powerful political force throughout 
Venezuela’s history – is growing increasingly influential. In July,General 
Padrino López was placed in charge of food production and distribution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/venezuela-protests-caracas-politics-president-nicolas-maduro-food-shortages>
. As chief of the “great mission of sovereign supply”, all other ministers must 
answer to him.

A militarisation of food supply would be consistent with the government’s 
insistence that Venezuela is the victim of an “economic war” waged by Colombian 
gangs, multinational corporations and financial institutions, who hoard goods, 
manipulate currency rates and smuggle contraband oil across the border.

Certainly, corruption – both in the government and the private sector – has 
played a major part in the crisis. But whatever forces are egging on the 
downfall of Maduro, they are unlikely to have caused as much chaos as the 
government’s maverick policies: Venezuela was moving towards recession even 
before the oil price crash.

Damningly, many economists believe poverty levels in Venezuela are now higher 
than they were when Chávez won power 
<http://www.rectorado.usb.ve/vida/sites/default/files/2015_pobreza_misiones.pdf>
 18 years ago.

The government would dispute this, but in Caracas it is easy to see who is 
suffering the consequences. For the wealthy, it is still possible to buy 
champagne, Belgian chocolates and US pharmaceuticals. The poor, meanwhile, have 
to spend more hours in lines waiting for rice, sanitary towels and antibiotics.

“The Chavistas had good intentions. At first, they helped the poor more than 
any government had ever done before” said the taxi driver Lopez. “The problem 
is, good intentions are not enough.”
 