
At first sight, the small Amazonian border community of Pacaraima appears to 
be doing well amid the humanitarian crisis afflictingVenezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela>, transforming itself into a giant 
grain warehouse, and supplying food – at considerable profit – to a country 
that cannot feed itself.

Boutique Charmoso has stopped selling smocks and bikinis and started hawking 
rice and flour. The Flip-Flop Shop is piled high with sacks of sugar and pasta. 
Four of the town’s seven butchers have given up carving meat and switched to 
flogging grain. Boxes of cooking oil fill the lobby of the Amazon hotel. 
Drinkers at the Ronaldo Bar have to weave between stacks of produce.

“I went for a haircut last week, but even my salon has switched businesses,” 
said social worker Socorro Lopes. “It’s madness here now. There is such a rush 
to get rich.”

Venezuela on the brink: a journey through a country in crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/venezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis>
But the economic boom has come at a price: growing desperation in Venezuela is 
starting to send ripples across the border, where it is triggering a new set of 
social tensions.

An estimated 30,000 Venezuelan migrants have come to Pacaraima looking for 
food, jobs and medical care in an influx that threatens to overwhelm local 
hospitals, police and social services.

“The chaos in Venezuela is causing turbulence for us,” says Lopes, who is on 
the frontline of municipal efforts to cope with rising homelessness, begging, 
prostitution, hunger and ill health.

“We know this is just the start. We don’t know how bad it will get. But if the 
number of migrants keeps growing uncontrolled, we won’t be able to deal with 
crime and the demand for healthcare.”

In the past 10 months, 1,805 Venezuelans have sought refugee status in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, more than the combined total for 
the previous five years. Deportations in 2016 are on course to be 10 times 
higher than in 2015. In the vast majority of these cases, they enter through 
the porous border at Pacaraima.


For most of its history, this Brazilian town was the poor neighbour of the 
Venezuelan town of Santa Elena de Uairén. Many Brazilian children crossed the 
frontier to attend the better-resourced schools of the oil-rich state. The sick 
would go to Venezuelan hospitals. Hundreds of workers would commute to 
higher-paying jobs. And Indian tribes in this indigenous reserve have never 
recognised the border, crossing back and forth to visit their ancestral 
territories.

Today, however, the relationship has been reversed by one of the greatest 
economic and social upheavals Latin America has seen this century. Venezuela 
has hyperinflation heading towards 2,000%, plunging supplies of food and 
medicine, and growing rates of malnutrition and murder.

By comparison, Brazil – even in the midst of its worst recession for decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/03/brazil-economy-low-oil-prices-inflation>
 – seems a sanctuary of stability, safety, provisions and profits. Since 
Venezuela dropped food tariffs a couple of months ago, traders have come from 
as far afield as China, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Lebanon to cash in.
map <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/10/brazil-venezuela-map/> 
Mostly though, the influx is of Venezuelans filling cars and trucks with goods 
they cannot find in their own country. Some buy for themselves; most buy to 
sell on at a profit.

“For me, it’s a business,” said Elisa Flores, as she loaded up a battered 
Chevrolet with sacks of rice, spaghetti, cooking oil, mayonnaise and washing-up 
liquid. “This town should be grateful. They make more money from our government 
than anyone. But this situation is not good for the Venezuelan people. There is 
no starvation, butthere are many people who don’t get enough to eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/venezuela-crisis-basic-food-shortages>
.”

At the bus station, a family of five Venezuelans waited to start their journey 
home, after putting in a few months’ work in Brazil. They were loaded up with 
provisions that they cannot find in their own country. “It’s terrible. There 
are shortages of everything. The government is robbing the people,” said the 
mother, who declined to give her name.

Drawn by availability of food and work, Venezuelans are moving toward the 
border region in droves. The population of Gran Sabana – the municipality 
closest to Brazil – has increased by about 40% in the past two years. 
“Basically, it’s because food production in Venezuela has collapsed,” Lopes 
said. “Their system is broken so they have no money, no products and no work.”

The knock-on effects on Pacaraima – and the state capital of Boa Vista – are 
increasingly evident.

As demand for goods grows, prices are going up. In four months, rice has 
increased from 1.8 reais (£0.46/$0.56) per kilogram to 3.8 reais (£1/$1.20), 
and flour has more than doubled from 3.4 reais to 7 reais. Scarcity is also a 
problem. Aspirin and vaccines are harder to find.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbrazil-border-town-boom-venezuela-economic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F325e6cb3097b44f5def8eb7d269ed35df14c653d%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuela's%20crisis%20brings%20economic%20boom%20but%20social%20tensions%20to%20Brazil%20border%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbrazil-border-town-boom-venezuela-economic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuela%27s%20crisis%20brings%20economic%20boom%20but%20social%20tensions%20to%20Brazil%20border%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbrazil-border-town-boom-venezuela-economic-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F325e6cb3097b44f5def8eb7d269ed35df14c653d%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 The Brazil-Venezuela border at Pacaraima where between 1,000 and 1,500 
Venezuelans every weekend cross the line, buy food and return to their country. 
Photograph: Marcelo Sayao/EPA 
The local infrastructure is not built for the growing influx of cars and 
people. Hospitals are being overwhelmed. Police and social services cannot cope.

Venezuelan beggars and prostitutes are an increasingly common sight on the 
streets. Casual labourers offer their services – as cleaners or building 
workers – at a fraction of the minimum wage, which puts their Brazilian 
counterparts at a disadvantage.

“I think this might become a crisis,” Lt Maria Lima, commander of the border 
police, told the Guardian. “We are noticing a rise in criminality; we are 
seeing thieving and murders due to this rising influx.”


The Pacaraima authorities have installed more security cameras on the main 
roads and conducted surveys, but there are limits to what they can do.

Police arrest and deport underage sex workers, but they simply return the next 
day. It is a similar story for beggars and itinerant indigenous groups. Social 
services try to protect vulnerable children found on the street. Local 
hospitals help the sick. Church groups have opened weekend soup kitchens, but 
it is not enough.

“Once they hear there is food, they come in larger numbers,” Lopes said. “It’s 
a profound crisis because we have our own economic problems in Brazil. With 
this extra demand, our institutions are struggling to cope.”

Demand for medical treatment has tripled in the past year, as Venezuela’s 
health system – once the pride of the Bolivarian Socialist administration – 
struggles with a shortage of essential medicines and an exodus of doctors.

At the Hospital Délio de Oliveira Tupinambá on the outskirts of the town, 
about two out of every three patients are now Venezuelan. There has been a 
surge in demand for medicine to treat diabetes, hypertension, tuberculosis, 
leishmaniasis, malaria and HIV/Aids.


‘Like doctors in a war’: inside Venezuela’s healthcare crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/venezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas>
“Any treatment they can’t deal with over there, they send here,” said a nurse, 
who asked to remain unnamed. “The demand is beyond our capacity. We sometimes 
run out of antiseptic and anaesthetic. For us, it’s an emergency situation.”


Many – particularly those from indigenous communities – come as a family. 
“They are similar to refugees, though they are not officially classified as 
that. It’s a very delicate situation,” said the nurse.

Hospital authorities have called for more support from the federal government. 
In a private letter, seen by the Guardian, the hospital director asked the 
Brazilian health ministry to alleviate “the chaotic state caused by the 
immigration crisis”. He asked for a 27 beds, 18 nursing staff, a paediatrician, 
an anaesthetist, two odontologists, a psychologist, four radiology technicians, 
an ambulance and a laboratory. This would more than double current capacity.

The response has been piecemeal. The national guard – which is equipped for 
disaster relief – has twice been dispatched to the area in the past two months. 
They provide medical kits and extra doctors and nurses, but it is a temporary 
fix for a problem that looks unlikely to go away any time soon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbrazil-border-town-boom-venezuela-economic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9b04883fd00f32cd16fa9f852580b9b93a7c007%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuela's%20crisis%20brings%20economic%20boom%20but%20social%20tensions%20to%20Brazil%20border%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbrazil-border-town-boom-venezuela-economic-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuela%27s%20crisis%20brings%20economic%20boom%20but%20social%20tensions%20to%20Brazil%20border%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbrazil-border-town-boom-venezuela-economic-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9b04883fd00f32cd16fa9f852580b9b93a7c007%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Pacaraima is booming with sales of food and other supplies to visitors from 
Venezuela. Photograph: Marcelo Sayao/EPA 
Jean Carlos Ferrer was diagnosed with malaria at a hospital across the border 
in Santa Elena de Uairén, but health workers could not help him, so he came to 
Pacaraima for treatment. “Everyone comes to Brazil for all medical problems. 
It’s free,” he said. After three days in the hospital, he was due to return 
home that evening, with medication. The hospital plans to halt this practice 
because of reports that Venezuelans are reselling their free Brazilian drugs on 
the black market.

Further along the corridor, María Rodríguez is nursing a newborn daughter. She 
had crossed the border from Venezuela that morning as her waters were about to 
break and said she planned to return the next day. “I would have preferred my 
child to be born in Venezuela, but that is not possible now. The hospitals 
there have nothing,” she said.

Along with the free treatment comes the added bonus of a new passport. 
Regardless of origin, the mother of any child who gives birth on Brazilian soil 
is entitled to citizenship. This stirs up both sympathy and resentment among 
locals.

Venezuelan health workers in Santa Elena say it is need rather than 
opportunism that is driving patients across the border. At the Rosario 
Verazuita hospital, both operating theatres are closed. “We can’t even perform 
something as simple as a C-section,” said one of the staff. “Most of the time, 
we just tell people to go to Brazil.”

Additional reporting by Shanna Hanbury

 