
People are already calling it the fashion moment of 2016. In Galeries Lafayette
 <http://www.galerieslafayette.com/>, an upmarket department store in Paris, 
cult labelVetements <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vetements>, purveyor 
of elevated streetwear, is staging its latest rule-breaking collection. The 
brand is opening staid old couture fashion week with a show featuring genuinely 
unexpected collaborations with various other fashion labels – waist-highManolo 
Blahnik <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/manolo-blahnik> boots, rejuvenated 
Juicy Couture tracksuits – and models with a haute level of scowl. But it is 
when stylistLotta Volkova <http://lottavolkova.com/> strides past on the 
catwalk, modelling a floral white and blue Vetements dress, with a dismissive 
hand holding the corner of a white clutch bag, that the front row’s iPhones are 
raised in unison. Because that’s the picture. Lotta Volkova modelling the 
Vetements dress that self-consciously references the Vetements look. In an 
industry that constantly seeks to label things “cool”, Lotta Volkova has just 
been crowned as the coolest woman in the world.

Volkova is arguably fashion’s most in-demand creative. She is stylist and muse 
for the Vetements collective, the Paris-based group of designers currently 
subverting the barriers between streetwear and high fashion. She consults for 
fashion houseBalenciaga <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga> – on 
the casting and catwalk shows – where Demna Gvasalia is creative director. She 
also works with her friend, the menswear designer,Gosha Rubchinskiy 
<http://gosharubchinskiy.com/> and a raft of other labels. She somehow squeezes 
in editorial shoots with the likes ofJuergen Teller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/jan/06/juergen-teller-photography-in-pictures>
 and DJs at her friends’ fanzine launches. Volkova’s is a seven-day working 
week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F594fe137715839c127bc4252666d2ed74c0430b7%2F0_0_1080_1080%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=interview%20with%20Vetements%20stylist%20Lotta%20Volkova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=interview%20with%20Vetements%20stylist%20Lotta%20Volkova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F594fe137715839c127bc4252666d2ed74c0430b7%2F0_0_1080_1080%2F1080.jpg>
 Lotta Volkova relaxing. From her Instagram feed Photograph: Lotta Volkova 
Instagram 
A few days before her Vetements fashion moment, I’m sat in a 
cool-but-you-have-to-know-it’s-cool-to-realise-it’s-cool cafe in the 10th 
arrondissement of Paris, not far from the Gare du Nord, asking Volkova how she, 
as a 32-year-old woman, feels about appearing as a model on the catwalk. Since 
starting work with Vetements, Volkova has walked in every show alongside kids 
cast from Instagram and regular models with an edge. Between swigs of Perrier 
and sips of black coffee, she laughs fast and loud before snapping into her 
brusque-sounding answering mode.

“It came about really spontaneously and out of the blue. When we were prepping 
for the first show, we did not have enough models, so Demna was like, ‘Oh, you 
are gonna model’ and I was like, ‘OK fine.’ Of course I was flattered. But for 
me it was like a friendly gesture. ‘Try this black turtleneck and sweatpants, 
and I just want to see you in it’ and I put in on and he was like, ‘Oh yeah, 
this is the opening look.’ I was like, ‘Nawwwww....’” Her speech is peppered 
with a Baltic-accented vocal fry that is too compelling not to mention.

“Spontaneous” and “out of the blue” are phrases that Volkova returns to 
regularly. Those and the fact that she and her gang are “just doing what we 
laaaav”. Volkova’s rise to the pinnacle of high fashion was neither exponential 
nor intentional, but not wholly surprising either. Born inVladivostok 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/18/vladivostok-new-super-casinos-rejuvenate-the-city>
, Russia, in 1984, Lotta was exposed to rebellion early on. Her father had 
jumped on a train from Siberia when he was 16 to captain a ship. Her mother, a 
professor of physics at medical school, instilled in Lotta the idea of doing 
things her own way: “For her that was a rebellion against communism, against 
this pre-packaged life.” It is her mother, too, that she has to thank for her
Led Zeppelin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ledzeppelin>-inspired name 
(she’s named after the songWhole Lotta Love) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q0utAHY3xo4>. “She liked the whole post-punk, 
early 80s, alt-rock era, so I grew up sucking in all those references.” It was 
also her mother who fuelled her love of fashion, taking 12-year-old Lotta on 
shopping trips to London and Tokyo. “I had Prada shoes and Dior by Galliano 
jumpers, she was wearing Galliano herself. She is tiny and has really big boobs 
and is blonde, but then she pretty much looks like me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfbc8f988ee4c02a0af0c969a0caa1d06dec809c%2F0_0_3104_4637%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=interview%20with%20Vetements%20stylist%20Lotta%20Volkova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=interview%20with%20Vetements%20stylist%20Lotta%20Volkova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfbc8f988ee4c02a0af0c969a0caa1d06dec809c%2F0_0_3104_4637%2F3104.jpg>
 The fashion moment of 2016: Volkova in the Vetements SS/17 show in Paris. 
Photograph: Giannoni/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
The sociopolitical landscape of the early 90s also had a powerful impact on 
Volkova’s taste; apparently high fashion in 2016 owes quite a debt toAntoine de 
Caunes and his 90s TV show Eurotrash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/10/eurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis>
. After 1991 the cultural influences from Europe and America flooded into 
eastern Europe: “Suddenly you had these crazy things on television and people 
started talking about fashion and art,” Volkova recalls. “I feel like it’s a 
Russian character trait – we look for something new and we are quick learners 
in a way.” That, coupled withMarjan Pejoski’s swan dress for Björk at the 2001 
Oscars ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/22/the-best-oscars-dresses-ever>, 
indelibly formed Volkova’s left-field taste. “For me fashion was about 
expressing how different you are, you know?”

As with all stylists, Volkova’s taste is her currency, and hers is 
particularly esoteric.Her Instagram account 
<https://www.instagram.com/lottavolkova/?hl=en> forms a visual stream of 
consciousness which for those in her aesthetic network makes complete sense. 
Not everybody will understand quite how a picture of a wolf with a glass of red 
wine on its back chimes with raw 4am post-DJ stint snaps and Soviet era 
tracksuit bottoms. But that’s the point. Her taste relies on a balance of 
street and haute. Grunge for a generation of “likers”. So specific and 
individual is her look that the phrase “That’s a bit Lotta” has, in fashion 
terms, now become synonymous with anything unexpectedly cool with just a hint 
of a scowl.

The phrase 'That’s a bit Lotta' has become synonymous with anything 
unexpectedly cool with just a hint of a scowl

When we meet, Volkova is looking “very Lotta”. She is wearing a blue Vetements 
pinstripe shirt, jeans byJohn Lawrence Sullivan 
<http://www.john-lawrence-sullivan.com/>, a label she consults for, lace-up 
Vans with white socks which betray her skate kid credentials, a diagonal neon 
green Shellac manicure from a no-frills salon, her trademark severe parted 
short hair and large steel-framed glasses. It’s a strange cocktail of Wall 
Street and backstreet, coupled with her extraordinary face, blank yet engaging, 
and her gangly frame; Volkova is not someone who blends in. Does she know she 
is physically intimidating? “I think a lot of people would describe me as 
extremely direct! It’s quite a Russian thing that you come across as quite 
stern and a bit cold, but once you get to know me I am quite a warm person.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8e2a069f609c7b56c38bcf2e025ac24501c0995%2F0_17_2065_3017%2F2065.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=interview%20with%20Vetements%20stylist%20Lotta%20Volkova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=interview%20with%20Vetements%20stylist%20Lotta%20Volkova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8e2a069f609c7b56c38bcf2e025ac24501c0995%2F0_17_2065_3017%2F2065.jpg>
 Volkova in the Vetements AW/16 show in Paris. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
At 17, encouraged by her mother, Volkova arrived in London to complete a 
three-month course in art and design at Central St Martins. Was she nervous? 
“No. I was excited… My whole childhood and teenage years I was just bored, 
waiting to grow up and live life by myself.” Unsurprisingly Volkova didn’t 
return to Russia when the course finished, instead submerging herself in London 
life, partying at electroclash nights such as Nag Nag Nag and Trash. By 2004 
Volkova had started her own brand (which of course “came about really 
naturally”), dressing herself and her friends for that scene. The label “Lotta 
Skeletrics” riffed heavily on DIY punk heritage and featured T-shirts 
overloaded with studs and sandpaper-distressed jeans. In classic Volkova hi-low 
style, these clothes were worn with experimental makeup, but also with 
beautiful Prada shoes.

It wasn’t until 2008, when she moved to Paris, that Volkova’s styling career 
started to crystalise. She met Gosha Rubchinskiy, the Comme des Garçons-backed 
Russian designer who is also a crucial part of the Paris/Russia style nexus. 
Rubchinskiy is also part of the Vetements family – his catwalk turn in the
Vetements DHL T-shirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/19/dhl-t-shirt-vetements-fashion-paris-catwalk>
 on the AW/15 catwalk was broadly hailed as the fashion moment of last year. 
“We became friends instantly. We were both born in 1984 and I think that makes 
a big difference. We have the same references and are interested in the same 
subcultures.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91862fd50b82c20af3648f8c68947d1a348603cf%2F0_0_1080_1080%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=interview%20with%20Vetements%20stylist%20Lotta%20Volkova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=interview%20with%20Vetements%20stylist%20Lotta%20Volkova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fvetements-stylist-lotta-volkova%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91862fd50b82c20af3648f8c68947d1a348603cf%2F0_0_1080_1080%2F1080.jpg>
 Lotta Volkova on Instagram Photograph: Lotta Volkova Instagram 
Three years ago Volkova met her main co-conspirator Demna Gvasalia, who 
currently designs both Vetements and Balenciaga. “We were introduced by a 
mutual friend and he asked me to check out a look-book shoot and I was like, 
‘Wow, the clothes are really beautiful, really well made and really 
interesting’ but I really didn’t like Demna’s styling. I told him and he said, 
‘Well, why don’t you do it yourself then?’” Volkova has since morphed into 
stylist, consultant, muse and, crucially, proto-customer for the designer. “For 
Demna it’s important to consider a real woman in his clothes. I am a woman and 
a customer.”

Volkova, Gvasalia and Rubchinskiy are a gang united by their backgrounds and 
style references growing up in the former Soviet bloc. They combine street 
labels and a left-field fashion approach which owes much to Maison Martin 
Margiela, where Gvasalia once worked. And it is the crew’s take on beauty that 
is wielding the most influence on fashion right now. “Of course conventionally 
beautiful things are beautiful but everyone finds them beautiful and I find 
that boring. I want to be inspired by things that not everyone knows.”

This translates into high fashion in unexpected ways – from an anorak on the 
Balenciaga catwalk presented in the way an atelier would have shown a fur coat 
in the past – to office chairs, rather than gilt opera seats, for the front 
row. “The chairs were comfy!” Volkova tries to convince me.

But she is right. This outlook cuts to the heart of the prevailing mood in 
fashion. “Actually practicality is quite important to us. For everything, in a 
way. That mentality; things have to be functional.” Granted Volkova’s look 
isn’t practical in the way most people would understand the term. Vetements’ 
hooded tops and steroid-level Balenciaga anoraks are not practical in the 
hiking sense nor comfortable in the TV dinner sense. There is a level of nuance 
and caveat; a disparity that Volkova almost manages to vocalise. “I know I am 
saying it’s all about practicality but I hate to be comfortable in a way. I’m 
good at putting on heels and doing a look. I’m actually shit at really dressing 
down.”
 