
English football, so often the subject of both front and back pages during 
frothing episodes in which “scandal” and “shame” are appended to any number of 
trivialities, has had a week during which those words have taken on a deadening 
tone.

After the former professional Andy Woodward waived his anonymity to tell the 
Guardian of years of childhood sexual abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> at the hands 
of Barry Bennell,a convicted paedophile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/barry-bennell> who worked for 
Crewe Alexandra in the 1980s and 1990s and also had associations with 
Manchester City and Stoke City, the shockwaves have reverberated round the game.

On reading Woodward’s harrowing tale of how abuse had permanently scarred his 
life, better-known players came forward. David White, a former Manchester City 
striker and England international, who was working on a book about his 
experiences,confirmed he had also been abused by Bennell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/david-white>.

Crewe were warned about Barry Bennell but he stayed on, says former board 
member
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/crewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member>
In another interview Paul Stewart, a former Liverpool and Spurs striker who 
also played for England,revealed he had been abused by another coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/paul-stewart-sexual-abuse-coach>
 who moved in similar circles – raising fears of a paedophile ring operating in 
the north-west of England during the period in question.

“I believe there was a conspiracy and [a] paedophile ring,” Jason Dunford, a 
youth team player with Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/child-abuse-in-football>, 
told the BBC. “There were people at those clubs who had a duty to look after 
boys coming through their system.”

On Thursday and Friday Northumbria and Hampshire police also opened inquiries 
after complaints by former players on the south coast and in the north-east, 
and a hotline set up by the Football Association and the NSPCC had fielded more 
than 50 calls in the first few hours of operation.

Clubs including Manchester City and Newcastle United have said they will 
assist police with inquiries. The Metropolitan police also said they had 
received information relating to historic sexual abuse at football clubs in 
London.

Michael Bennett, head of player welfare at the Professional Footballers’ 
Association (PFA), spoke of a “dam being busted” after first Woodward and then
Steve Walters, another player at Crewe in the late 1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
, came forward to waive their anonymity and speak of Bennell’s crimes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20child%20abuse%20victim%3A%20it's%20time%20for%20justice%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20child%20abuse%20victim%3A%20it%27s%20time%20for%20justice%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video&media=>
Football child abuse victim: it’s time for justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/25/football-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video>
. 
Both players painted a picture of a talented coach who would target the more 
sensitive boys under his care. “These are heinous crimes and they need to be 
investigated by the police and they will get our support,” Greg Clarke, the FA 
chairman, said.

But while the PFA and the FA tried to get to grips with a historic crisis that 
threatens to spiral beyond their control, there were fresh questions over 
whether they were sufficiently prepared or had been proactive enough previously 
in providing a support network for those affected.

And while the FA insists its child-safeguarding unit and a network of 
designated safety officers throughout the grassroots structure makes it far 
less likely such abuse could persist today, campaign groups believe there is 
still not enough protection for would-be whistleblowers.

Woodward himself said this week that he thought the spiralling number of cases 
could eventually be “worse than Savile”. The same grim cocktail of conditions 
that led to the serial abuser taking advantage of children in the entertainment 
industry also existed in football.

Meanwhile a shadow has fallen over Gresty Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/crewe-alexandra-barry-bennell>
, the home of the club at the heart of a scandal rippling across the country. 
Crewe Alexandra, where Bennell was a youth team coach until he was sacked in 
1992, has a longstanding reputation for youth development under Dario Gradi.

Now 75, Gradi has spent more than three decades at Crewe as its long-serving 
manager and latterly director of football. For most of that time he worked 
closely with the chairman, John Bowler, who backed Gradi as the club fashioned 
a reputation for developing a string of players that went on to bigger and 
better things.

After a period of numb silence, which brought criticism from the victims and 
their own fans, both said they hadno knowledge of the abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/crewe-director-football-dario-gradi-sympathy-barry-bennell-victims>
 and the club would now conduct its own inquiry.

The questions will now turn to how many others like Bennell were out there. 
With the procession of those coming forward showing no signs of slowing, the FA 
and clubs are under pressure to show they are able to handle the outpouring.

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and ChildLine for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 
0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 