
In 2014, the playwright Michael Wynne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/05/who-cares-michael-wynne-nhs-royal-court-london>
 wrote a warm-hearted family drama calledHope Place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/16/hope-place-review-everyman-liverpool-family>
 to celebrate the reopening of Liverpool’s much-loved Everyman theatre. It drew 
strongly on local history and touched on the Everyman’s previous incarnations 
as a dissenters’ chapel, a concert hall and a cinema. Wynne included a couple 
of songs drawing on the site’s brief use as a music hall, and at every 
performance he noticed that the crowd went mad for them.

One night, he turned to the Everyman and Playhouse’s artistic director, Gemma 
Bodinetz <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/mar/15/features11.g29>, 
and suggested a play about music hall, the art form that gave us enduring songs 
such as Don’t Dilly Dally andWhen Father Papered the Parlour 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pvSzyd1b7g8> and extraordinary acts including 
mesmerists, escapologists, canon acts, clog dancers, conjurors and acrobats.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe4b91647ec0428b1ef5024262af9b04cdc5dc29%2F9_2_657_821%2F657.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorians%20Got%20Talent%3A%20Liverpool%20rekindles%20its%20love%20for%20music%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorians%20Got%20Talent%3A%20Liverpool%20rekindles%20its%20love%20for%20music%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe4b91647ec0428b1ef5024262af9b04cdc5dc29%2F9_2_657_821%2F657.jpg>
 The Star theatre in 1908. Photograph: Everyman Playhouse 
Now, Wynne has done exactly that. Billed not as a play but “an entertainment”, 
The Star is a love letter to the music hall that opened 150 years ago on the 
site where the currentLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> 
Playhouse stands. A beautiful star-shaped mosaic in the building’s disused 
box-office area is one of the few enduring reminders of this neglected part of 
the Playhouse’s history.


Under several owners from 1866 until 1898, when it became a theatre presenting 
drama, the Star – or the New Star as it was eventually called – was a 
successful music hall. In 1911, over lunch at the Adelphi hotel, it was sold 
for £28,000 to the Liverpool Repertory Company, and has been a leading regional 
theatre ever since. There is an irony to the fact that a place formerly home to 
Tyrolean facial artists, acrobatic posturers and equilibrists became, in the 
early 20th century, a temple of middle-class drama by Ibsen, Galsworthy and 
Barrie.


In an upstairs room at the Playhouse, director Philip Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2010/may/26/regional-theatre-media-coverage>
 and choreographer Cressida Carré are rehearsing a song and dance sequence. 
“We’ll run through it again, and then straight into the catapult act,” says 
Wilson. He smiles. “It’s not often as a contemporary theatre director that you 
get to say ‘and straight into the catapult act’.” The heyday of music hall 
passed over 100 years ago but Wilson believes that the songs are “in our DNA”. 
“You may not think you know a particular song but when you hear it, the tune 
and words come flooding back.”

Wilson thinks the songs’ longevity is due to the fact that they are so well 
constructed. “They are often catchy, very witty and have internal rhythms that 
would be the envy ofStephen Sondheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/14/stephen-sondheim-british-american-theatre-audience-difference>
.” Wynne says that the songs that have survived were the creme de la creme.


“Thousands of songs were written in the music hall era, but only the best are 
remembered. That’s because the stars would try out a new song on a Monday and 
if the audience weren’t all singing along by Wednesday they would dump it. It 
was all about genuine interaction with the audience – giving them a good time.” 
He pauses. “Maybe that’s something theatre-makers need to think about today.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc21ed622ff995e497bf6eaa902190fb833d37ea9%2F174_2131_3315_1989%2F3315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorians%20Got%20Talent%3A%20Liverpool%20rekindles%20its%20love%20for%20music%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorians%20Got%20Talent%3A%20Liverpool%20rekindles%20its%20love%20for%20music%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc21ed622ff995e497bf6eaa902190fb833d37ea9%2F174_2131_3315_1989%2F3315.jpg>
 Danny O’Brien, Michael Starke and Helen Carter. Photograph: Dan Kenyon 
Both Wilson and Wynne point to the fact that the music hall and variety 
tradition lives on in Saturday night TV entertainment, with shows such as 
Britain’s Got Talent. In the golden age of music hall stars like the 
cross-dressingVesta Tilley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/13/cross-dressing-women-musical-theatre>
, Dan Leno and Little Tich performed at a network of halls and theatres across 
the country from the Jarrow Palace of Varieties to the Leeds Tivoli, the Empire 
in Newcastle and the Gaiety in Edinburgh, the Alhambra in Nottingham, the 
Surrey Music Hall in Sheffield, and of course the Star in Liverpool.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0ae20581cb6b1442e64c818d36782546e844569%2F147_210_3220_4835%2F3220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorians%20Got%20Talent%3A%20Liverpool%20rekindles%20its%20love%20for%20music%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorians%20Got%20Talent%3A%20Liverpool%20rekindles%20its%20love%20for%20music%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0ae20581cb6b1442e64c818d36782546e844569%2F147_210_3220_4835%2F3220.jpg>
 An old programme from Liverpool’s Star. Photograph: Everyman Playhouse 
Many earned lavish wages – at the height of her fame, Marie Lloyd commanded 
£1,000 a week. But lower down the bill there would be all-comers who – like 
many of those on BGT – had honed a specific talent, in some cases a very 
peculiar one. Dentalists performed aerial tricks while hanging from their 
teeth; water spouters – more fartistes than artistes – were very popular in the 
Victorian era.


There was, says Wilson, “a transgressive element to music hall acts, a cheeky 
innocence”. “Womendressed up as men and men pretended to be women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/01/stella-review-neil-bartlett-cross-dressing-theatre-royal-brighton-hoxton-hall>
. Some of the songs are very risque.”


Wynne’s play, which, in the Noises Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/16/how-we-made-noises-off-michael-frayn-patricia-routledge-theatre>
 tradition, simultaneously charts both backstage and on-stage life, uses 
well-known music hall songs to push the action on, draws on the rivalry between 
performers and has a meta-theatre element (“But not in a wanky way,” he says). 
It plays to the Victorian tradition of melodrama: a mysterious villain skulks 
the wings and the Star’s future is in jeopardy as the cast try and save it by 
giving their all.

With 157 flying cues, hundreds of exits and entrances, 82 costumes, and 
silhouette sequences, the actual cast – all Liverpudlian actors, including 
former Brookside actor Michael Starke – have to give it their all as well.

“I’m thinking of it as a paid gym rather than a job,” says Eithne Browne 
drily. She plays Ellen, a character perhaps inspired by Florrie Forde, the 
music hall star whose most famous songs included Down at the Old Bull and Bush 
and It’s a Long Way to Tipperary. Wilson says it’s the only production he has 
ever had to storyboard, such is the complexity of its staging.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc010b5d9e7d452f872d67b90261c63049f449a2%2F493_154_2214_1329%2F2214.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorians%20Got%20Talent%3A%20Liverpool%20rekindles%20its%20love%20for%20music%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorians%20Got%20Talent%3A%20Liverpool%20rekindles%20its%20love%20for%20music%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvictorians-got-talent-liverpool-rekindles-its-love-for-music-hall-the-star%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc010b5d9e7d452f872d67b90261c63049f449a2%2F493_154_2214_1329%2F2214.jpg>
 ‘It was all about genuine interaction with the audience’ … Eithne Browne in 
rehearsals. Photograph: Brian Roberts 
“It’s not a history lesson. It’s not an homage or a pastiche. Michael has 
written a proper celebration of a form that knew how to make people laugh, sing 
along and cry,” says Wilson.


As the journalist WJ MacQueen-Pope observed in 1948: “It was entertainment of 
the people, by the people, for the people … It had no place for reticence; it 
was downright, it shouted, it made a noise, it enjoyed itself and it made the 
people enjoy themselves as well.” With The Star, the Playhouse returns to its 
rowdier, less well-behaved roots.


“Music hall knew how to entertain,” says Wilson. I see nothing wrong with 
being entertaining. Or in giving people a good time. If they buy a ticket, it’s 
the least we can aim to do.”


 * The Star is at Liverpool Playhouse <http://www.everymanplayhouse.com/> from 
9 December to 14 January 2017.
 