
Recognition that women are people too seems to be a bit of a theme with the 
Daniel Andrews government in Victoria, who announced on Thursday that they will 
befunding a resource kit to support medical practitioners to make 
comprehensive, early diagnosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/17/endometriosis-awareness-drive-painful-periods-are-not-normal>
 for endometriosis, as well as to assist sufferers identifying symptoms.


Endometriosis is a disease in which tissue similar to the lining of the uterus 
grows outside of it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2015/sep/28/what-is-endometriosis-guide>
, attaching and “adhering” to other internal organs, most commonly in the 
pelvic cavity. No one knows what causes it, it can only be managed, not cured.

Endometriosis awareness drive: 'Painful periods are not normal'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/17/endometriosis-awareness-drive-painful-periods-are-not-normal>
It afflicts roughly half the number of Australians with diabetes, has a 
greater financial cost to the economy than diabetes butreceives 5% of the 
funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/20/endo-what-it-wont-be-a-hit-but-this-myth-busting-film-is-inspirational>
 that diabetes research does. The reason is not because endometriosis poses 
less lifestyle management issues, because the symptoms of endometriosis include 
chronic severe pain, heavy bleeding, fatigue, depression, pain during or after 
sex and infertility. No one has ever, in fact, explained the reason for such a 
discrepancy in funding, although there is one clear distinction in the patient 
pools between the two.

Only women get endometriosis. And I am one of them.

The Victorian endometriosis awareness campaign should be lauded; failure to 
diagnose the condition early is infuriatingly common. While 30% of women with 
endometriosis have no symptoms, the other 70% can experience shocking levels of 
pain and disruption to their lives.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> often spend years submitting 
to the horror of invasive gynaecological examinations, blood tests and smears, 
in pain, and are frustrated again and again at being told by medical 
professionals that there’s nothing wrong, it’s all in their heads. Stop me if 
you’ve heard that one before.

Consider instead that the symptoms of endometriosis are not invented, 
psychosomatic notions, but an ongoing, pulpy, bloody, material experience. All 
too often we marginalise women’s health – particularly gynaecological and 
sexual health – by insisting on a puritanical imposition of euphemism in lieu 
of fact. And that’s when we’re at least prepared to talk about it. In the case 
of endometriosis, a condition that affects 10% of women of reproductive age, 
too many health professionals ignore symptoms, remain ignorant of best practice 
treatments and spread myths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/28/endometriosis-20-things-every-woman-and-every-doctor-should-know>
 about “cures”. No, it will not go away if I get pregnant, this is not like 
putting arnica on a bruise, thank you.

If we are at last recognising the disease in Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>, let’s celebrate by 
exposing its reality. The stray tissue outside the uterus glues organs together 
– meaning that the natural swelling and pressure of ovulation and the menstrual 
cycle provoke pain akin to the tearing apart of the body’s most delicate 
pieces; this means tearing at fallopian tubes and ovaries, bladders and bowels, 
and all their painful complications of bleeding, inflammation, diarrhoea and 
constipation.

How painful is endometriosis? I’ve had accidents that shattered an ankle and 
I’ve broken both hands. I’ve survived swine flu and almost died of measles as a 
teen. My editor, who also has endometriosis, was run over by a train and broke 
her shoulder, at another time, she suffered a spinal fracture in a skiing 
accident. Listen to us when we tell you explicitly: none of this compares to 
the pain of endometriosis.

It’s perversely better that both my editor and I have the condition than that 
we suffer alone. Solidarity between sufferers is, at least, sanity.Endometriosis
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/endometriosis> pain can be so 
overwhelming that days are torn from you and work becomes impossible – but as 
the condition is internal, workplaces and work practices can complicate and 
multiply suffering. I once bled through five sanitary pads while teaching a 
class – and managed to stave off passing out from blood loss until I managed to 
waddle as far as a hospital, crippled further by a terror of being seen in 
blood-stained clothes.

So there are days my editor understands I can’t file a story because my right 
ovary is burning and rather than giving into an instinct to hack it out with a 
melon-baller, I’m taking myself to hospital.

With endometriosis, shouldn't 'let's get you well' come before 'let's get you 
pregnant'? | Sylvia Freedman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/19/with-endometriosis-shouldnt-lets-get-you-well-come-before-lets-get-you-pregnant>
And there are days I realise my edit will come later because my editor was so 
nauseous she had to go home or she might be sick at her desk.

There are doctors and hospital visits for us both. To conclusively identify 
endometriosis, surgery is required. For some women, multiple surgeries may be 
required to remove the tissue and separate attached organs. Even that does not 
always ease the symptoms.

The launch of some government brochures might not seem like much to get 
excited about. But when those brochures are using the latest evidence to advise 
women about symptoms and help healthcare professionals properly assess, 
diagnose and treat women with this disease, indicating maybe – just maybe – 
progress on the journey to effective treatment and a cure, it’s a moment of 
celebration for those of us who live with a deprioritised disease.

Just forgive me, brother, if I am conspicuously untroubled by your man flu. 
It’s perhaps because I’m having a quiet haemorrhage in the corner, trying not 
to throw up or pass out.
 