
A chunky, ribbed, stone-coloured polo-neck jumper with leather elbow patches, 
grey schoolboy trousers, white trainers, no socks, a centre parting and a 
ponytail. What Victoria Beckham chooses to wear to present her catwalk 
collection isn’t just celebrity trivia, it’s salient fashion news, because the 
designer’s personal wardrobe, as featured in paparazzi pictures and gossip 
websites, underpins theVictoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham> brand. Backstage before 
her show in New York on Sunday, she said with the knowing pragmatism of a 
self-made woman: “It’s just what I want to wear now but in a fresh way.”

Judging by her latest collection, what Beckham wants to wear now are corsets 
as daywear, checks with intentionally unfinished threads and shut-out-the-world 
coats. These corsets are not, it must be stressed, shiny items which speak 
tackily of Valentine’s, nor a relic of the Posh Spice brand, which is gathering 
dust somewhere in the noughties. Instead, they are wool bodices worn with hefty 
midi-length skirts that swish and land above bare calves, accompanied by flat, 
pointed, buckled shoes. Beckham said she had wanted the collection to recall 
where she started from as a designer, those 10 corset dresses which formed the 
pillars of a fashion business that turned over £34m last year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fvictoria-beckham-2016-fall-winter-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0c78b7d45d0b77c7f8214e2dff5ed9c2cb7134%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victoria%20Beckham%20returns%20to%20source%20for%202016%20autumn-winter%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fvictoria-beckham-2016-fall-winter-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victoria%20Beckham%20returns%20to%20source%20for%202016%20autumn-winter%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fvictoria-beckham-2016-fall-winter-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0c78b7d45d0b77c7f8214e2dff5ed9c2cb7134%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 The coats were a standout part of the show. Photograph: The Guardian 
Reminiscing in fashion is fine, of course – but not repeating. In fashion, 
self-referencing is known as having a design signature, a positive, but going 
backwards in an obvious way is clearly not an option. Thus the collection was 
light years away from where the brand started in terms of mood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fvictoria-beckham-2016-fall-winter-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc305f8713311e4f915bae0598bd3b2d5f45dbb64%2F0_0_2333_3500%2F2333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victoria%20Beckham%20returns%20to%20source%20for%202016%20autumn-winter%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fvictoria-beckham-2016-fall-winter-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victoria%20Beckham%20returns%20to%20source%20for%202016%20autumn-winter%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fvictoria-beckham-2016-fall-winter-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc305f8713311e4f915bae0598bd3b2d5f45dbb64%2F0_0_2333_3500%2F2333.jpg>
 Beckham talked about the modern femininity in her clothes. Photograph: Richard 
Drew/AP 
Back then, in 2008, the mood was as controlled and uptight as the corset 
dresses but now the mood is about easiness and relaxed luxury. The Victoria 
Beckham who talks through her collection on Sunday talked about a modern 
femininity in her designs but had something of the tomboy about her. When a 
temporary power cut interrupted the preparations ahead of the show, she laughed 
and turned on the torch of her iPhone and carried on: “We won’t let that stop 
us.” A question about what to wear in New York’s freezing temperatures was met 
with an anecdote about how cold her hair-parting was when she left her hotel 
and how the wind made unwelcome leggings of her boyish pants. Not exactly the 
patter of an ivory-towered designer.

Highlights on the catwalk included a pair of high-waisted gabardine pants 
which were worn with a knitted bustier, which Beckham stated was “exactly what 
she wanted to wear on the red carpet now”. They were downplayed and chic rather 
than showy and unrealistic. Some of the ribbed knitwear felt familiar, the 
trousers which puddled at the hem and the trompe l’oeil bra-cupped jumpers were 
similar to ideas explored at other labels in recent seasons. But 
familiar-feeling pieces which are produced impeccably, rather than trailblazing 
hard-edged fashion pieces, are arguably more appropriate for the Beckham 
customer. Best were the coats: a hefty navy coat with fringed hem worn 
giant-sized and clasped shut by the model’s hand – the details count – was 
standout.
 