
When and how did you first come to write for the Observer?

I started writing for the Observer in about 1998/9, just after Roger Alton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rogeralton> became editor. He asked me to 
write occasional features and to cover forRichard Ingrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richardingrams>’ column when Ingrams was 
on holiday. Roger is very good at understanding the appeal of a mixed read; 
other people at the time probably thought I was a bit trivial or mainstream in 
my interests, but he was happy enough to bring that into the paper alongside 
the more heavyweight political opinion and harrowing news. I started writing my 
own regular weekly Observer column in 2002. It was a very happy fit, I felt 
comfortable with the readers immediately. I liked them.

What do you consider to be your finest hour as an Observer columnist? And your 
least glorious?

I think a highlight would be the piece (and later follow-up piece) I wrote for 
the Observer about “the funeral crashers”: a gang of unsavoury characters who 
bumble around the southeast of England, attending funerals and memorial 
services for people they’ve never met, enjoying free food and drink on the 
pretence of having known the deceased. I set a trap for them and wrote about 
it. I was proud to avenge my father (whose service they tried to gatecrash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/dec/21/celebrity-victoria-coren>
), proud to expose them in the paper, and very glad about a last-minute 
decision to end on a note of forgiveness. The gang might be still at it, by the 
way, so do look out for “Terrence Jolley” if you have a death in the family. 
Meanwhile there are opinion pieces I’ve written that I might not agree with 
now, but I don’t have a big problem with that. A newspaper column isn’t a poem; 
it’s not about the eternal. It’s about the week.

If you had to be stuck in the Kings Place lift with five Observer journalists, 
past and present, who would you choose?

Five, eh? Okay. George Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/11/georgeorwell.classics>, of 
course; much as I likeJay Rayner <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jayrayner>
, it would be weird not to take the opportunity to meet George Orwell.Rachel 
Beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/05/rachel-beer-first-lady-fleet>; I 
know nothing about her but she was female, Iraqi, Jewish and the editor of The 
Observer in the 1890s – how on earth did that happen, and how could she not be 
fascinating?Clive James <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/clive-james>, 
probably the greatest TV reviewer of all time, whom I know a bit but not 
terribly well and is the kind of person you could talk to for hours and days 
without getting bored.Nigel Slater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nigelslater>, because I’ve never met him 
and I’d like to. And then, obviously, the columnistDavid Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidmitchell>. That would save me a phone 
call home to say I’m trapped in a lift.

If the Observer were to disappear tomorrow what would you miss the most? 

I love everything about a proper, print-and-paper newspaper. Whether it’s 
rustling through the letter-box like a delivery from Father Christmas, or I’m 
picking it up from a shop on the way to read it slowly over a cafe breakfast, I 
love its feel and promise. I hope that newspapers will live on for centuries.
The Observer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theobserver> specifically: I 
would miss itstone, the way it combines acuity of thought with gentleness of 
heart. It’s funny but not glib. It’s analytical and kindly at the same time, 
like you would teach children to be if you could. I’d miss that voice and quiet 
power. But most of all, I’d miss the crossword.
 