
Viggo Mortensen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/viggo-mortensen> is in his 
socks – he likes to go shoeless whenever he can – and is making a cup of tea. 
If this does not seem a thing of note, you’ve never watched Viggo brew. He 
carefully portions out green leaves from his own pouch into his personal silver 
vessel – a modern version of the South American mate gourd – then decants the 
water into a silver Thermos, adding the leaves to brew. “I’m ready to go,” he 
says, pulling his vessel close.

I mean, obviously he’d have been ready to go five minutes ago if he’d just 
dunked a tea bag in a cup with a slosh of milk like most of us do, but it’s 
clear Viggo likes to do things on his own terms and to his own very precise 
standards. You just have to look at his CV to see that. Viggo became an 
internationally fancied and bankable star as Aragorn, king of men, in theLord 
of the Rings <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lord-of-the-rings> trilogy 
starting back in 2001. It’s a reputation he’s cemented over the years, in large 
part with another trio of films –A History of Violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-history-of-violence>, Eastern Promises  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eastern-promises>and A Dangerous Method 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-dangerous-method> – all directed by David 
Cronenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidcronenberg>. Though he 
received an Oscar nomination forEastern Promises in 2007, Viggo never 
capitalised on the earning potential theLOTR franchise offered. In fact, that 
idea is baffling to him. He says he only took the role of Aragorn to please his 
son, Henry, who was around 10 years old at the time.

Given the choice, what Viggo wants above all else is to tell a story he thinks 
is interesting. “I don’t really look for movies based on the budget or the 
nationality or the language,” he has said. “I just want to be in movies that I 
wouldn’t mind seeing 10 years from now.” Looking at the films he has been in 
since he made his name, it’s fair to say his vision of enduring storytelling is 
not one seen in the romcoms and blockbusters that typically make for box-office 
hits.

Jauja <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2514338/>, the film we have met to discuss, 
is possibly one of his least commercial yet. It’s an Argentinian-Danish movie 
directed by Lisandro Alonso, an award-winning young director, and co-written by 
Alonso with Fabian Casas, an Argentinian poet. “Jauja” is a Spanish word with 
Arabic origins which roughly translates to Neverland. After he’s patiently 
clarified the pronunciation (“How as in how you doing? And huh as in uh-huh,”) 
Viggo explains that the promise of Jauja was used as propaganda by the 
Spaniards who conquered South America in the 16th century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427802965548%2Ff91ba727-8a88-44a9-bf81-3972d396ab7b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Viggo%20Mortensen%3A%20%E2%80%98Often%20people%20are%20desperate%2C%20so%20I%20do%20what%20needs%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Viggo%20Mortensen%3A%20%E2%80%98Often%20people%20are%20desperate%2C%20so%20I%20do%20what%20needs%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427802965548%2Ff91ba727-8a88-44a9-bf81-3972d396ab7b-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘What else would I do?’: as Aragorn in Lord of the Rings: Two Towers. 
Photograph: AP 
“It was hard to convince people to go there. You’d either die on the way or 
die when you got there. You never got to go home. So they tried to make it 
sound like the ideal place. Something you’d dream about seeing or achieving. 
But you never really get what you’re looking for, do you?”

The film is about a Danish captain stationed in a remote Patagonian army 
outpost. He’s travelling with his 15-year-old daughter and when she vanishes 
into the pampas, he goes on a desperate quest to find her. Viggo stumbles and 
sweats through the unforgiving landscape and a series of surreal encounters. At 
one point he follows a dog through the mountains – chasing not his own tail, 
but someone else’s.

Viggo’s lack of physical vanity has become a recurring theme in his work. On 
film he’s been beaten up (Eastern Promises), starved (The Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131971/road>) and kicked in the balls (
A History of Violence), but he can’t imagine work being any other way. “What 
else would I do?” snorts the 56-year-old. “Those films where I’m the hero with 
a 20-year-old girlfriend? I go for what needs to be there. Often people are 
desperate or ridiculous rather than heroic, so I do what needs to be done.”

Jauja is a beautiful film – lit like a Technicolor classic and surprisingly 
funny – but also baffling. I went to the loo during the screening and, when I 
returned, for a moment I thought I’d walked into the wrong auditorium because 
the film had changed so completely. “It’s nonlinear,” agrees Viggo. “But even 
people who resisted it and didn’t think they liked it find there’s a resonance 
on an intellectual level. You can get existential about it. What’s it about? 
Well, you keep thinking about it. Most movies don’t do that.”

Viggo’s animation and enthusiasm as he talks about the film are contagious. 
He’s very smart and articulate and his intensity is interestingly at odds with 
his laidback appearance – his scruffy jeans and faded San Lorenzo football 
shirt (Viggo is a huge football fan and the Buenos Aires team was his first 
love), and the ratty friendship bracelets that slither up and down his arm as 
he drinks his tea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427803044307%2Fae76463e-2b8f-4465-bcf1-fbf7f39faaa3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Viggo%20Mortensen%3A%20%E2%80%98Often%20people%20are%20desperate%2C%20so%20I%20do%20what%20needs%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Viggo%20Mortensen%3A%20%E2%80%98Often%20people%20are%20desperate%2C%20so%20I%20do%20what%20needs%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427803044307%2Fae76463e-2b8f-4465-bcf1-fbf7f39faaa3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In The Road with Kodi Smit-McPhee. Photograph: Allstar 
Jauja is also a personal project for Viggo. Though he was born in New York, he 
grew up in Argentina with his American mother Grace, Danish father Viggo Sr, 
and younger brothers Walter and Charles. His father worked as an agricultural 
manager and, though they mainly lived in Buenos Aires, they also spent time in 
Chaco in the rural north. “We’d go on camping holidays over the Christmas 
holidays in the area whereJauja was shot, just our sleeping bags in the car,” 
he says. “It made me really happy to be on a horse in that landscape again.”

Viggo left South America aged 11, when his parents divorced and he moved to 
upstate New York with his mother and siblings. The move was a shock: to lose 
that Spanish culture, the TV, the football. He and his brothers mainly spoke 
Spanish, but then they were living near Quebec. He adapted – learned some 
French, started supporting the Montreal Canadiens <http://canadiens.nhl.com/> 
hockey team – but it seems unsurprising that he now mainly lives in Madrid with 
his girlfriend, actorAriadna Gil <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0317725/> (best 
known here for the filmPan’s Labyrinth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/nov/24/sciencefictionandfantasy.worldcinema>
).

Making a movie is not always about being paid – there is no limit to what you 
can learn

Working on Jauja made him think about his father a lot. “In the film I speak 
Spanish with a thick Danish accent, copying my father. I was raised there so 
there were connections for me in terms of culture, language and landscape. I 
knew those things would be assets for me and for Lisandro.” Did it make him 
think about his parents’ split? “Maybe subconsciously. I certainly thought a 
lot about our life there.”

Even without the personal connection, Viggo approaches each film as a learning 
experience. “Making a movie for me is not always about being paid, but it is a 
new university course. There’s no limit to what you can learn. I mean, it’s 
perfectly fine for an actor to say I’m just going to learn the lines and get on 
the horse, but I happen to enjoy digging deeper. In this case, I already knew 
about 19th- century Danish history and the wars the captain would have fought, 
so I went to Denmark and met with antiquarians and military historians. I found 
the uniform he would have worn and also picked out a medal. It was only given 
to soldiers who served in 1848-64 against the Prussians.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427803384631%2F05fdfdd3-b801-48cf-b923-1a13e1550209-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Viggo%20Mortensen%3A%20%E2%80%98Often%20people%20are%20desperate%2C%20so%20I%20do%20what%20needs%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Viggo%20Mortensen%3A%20%E2%80%98Often%20people%20are%20desperate%2C%20so%20I%20do%20what%20needs%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427803384631%2F05fdfdd3-b801-48cf-b923-1a13e1550209-1020x612.jpeg>
 With his son Henry. Mortensen says he only took the role of Aragorn to please 
Henry who was 10 at the time. Photograph: Matt Baron/Rex 
For Viggo, this research is pretty superficial. He slept outside in his 
costume for the first few days of theLOTR shoot. For the big-screen adaptation 
of Cormac McCarthy’sThe Road he went one further and slept outside in sub-zero 
temperatures wrapped in nothing but a tarpaulin and always made sure his shoes 
were soaking wet before filming, for added discomfort. While researchingGood 
(2008), in which he plays a German professor working with the Nazis, he drove 
more than 1,000 miles around Germany and Poland visiting concentration camps. 
To get under Freud’s skin forA Dangerous Method, he not only learned to write 
like the psychoanalyst but also bought first editions of the books that the 
good doctor would have had on his study shelves.

“I just think,” explains Viggo, “that the more realistic and specific you are 
with the details, the more universal the story becomes.”

Much of Viggo’s LOTR money was sunk into Perceval Press 
<http://www.percevalpress.com/>, an independent publishing company (named after 
the knight who stars in his favourite part of the myth of the Holy Grail). 
Perceval produces albums, art books and poetry collections by obscure artists, 
and the company recently diversified into film with Jauja, the second film it 
has been involved in.

Viggo’s own art books, poetry and albums are also available on Perceval. He 
was a published poet before he set up the imprint and his art had already been 
shown around LA (you can see his paintings in the 1998 filmA Perfect Murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian/0,,44316,00.html>
. He played an artist and, of course, created the work for the film). 
Perceval’s biggest profits come from Viggo’s own artistic output – though 
whether that’s because his fans really love his spoken-word albums or because 
they fancy him and would buy anything he released is hard to tell. His latest 
album,Under The Weather, came out last month, dedicated to feminist author 
Ti-Grace Atkinson and Albert Camus.

Perceval Press <http://www.percevalpress.com/>’s website is interesting even 
if you’re not in the mood for buying a book of paintings of endangered species 
by an Iranian artist. It’s a repository for Viggo’s political and world views, 
too. He regularly posts features, news stories and poems which he thinks will 
interest visitors. Currently the home page is a jumble of pieces about Israel, 
Benjamin Netanyahu’s re-election and climate change.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427803502726%2F78bcbfd7-6c6f-4e14-9862-b4d381a339de-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Viggo%20Mortensen%3A%20%E2%80%98Often%20people%20are%20desperate%2C%20so%20I%20do%20what%20needs%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Viggo%20Mortensen%3A%20%E2%80%98Often%20people%20are%20desperate%2C%20so%20I%20do%20what%20needs%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fviggo-mortensen-interview-jauja%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427803502726%2F78bcbfd7-6c6f-4e14-9862-b4d381a339de-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘The more realistic and specific you are with the details, the more universal 
the story becomes’: in his latest film, Jauja. Photograph: Rex 
“Putting that stuff up there makes me pay attention,” he says. “I concentrate 
when I’m reading the newspaper in case there’s something I can take from it. 
It’s like having a camera. I’ve carried a camera since I was a teenager and 
whether you’re using it or not, it means you look at composition, think about 
what around you would work well in the frame. The pieces on Perceval are just 
things I think are interesting to read. I’ll put up pieces I don’t agree with – 
conservative, right wing – if I think they’re well written. I’m not saying what 
I think, I’m asking questions and giving you the opportunity to ask yourself 
how you relate to this.”

This is a nice idea, but not strictly true. Viggo has always been fairly 
outspoken: no one would be in any doubt about his left-wing political 
affiliations. “Yeah, I’ve been called antisemitic and I got so much shit for 
speaking out against the Iraq invasion, but it was a huge waste of material 
resources and manpower.”

One of my favourite stories about Viggo comes from 2005. He heard that 
Californian mother Cindy Sheehan had driven her motorhome to Texas and parked 
outside George Bush’s family home in the hope of talking to the president about 
her son, who had been killed in Iraq. Viggo decided to show his support, so he 
flew out of LA and turned up unannounced at her motorhome with fresh 
vegetables, mineral water and a copy of George Orwell’sAnimal Farm (to read, in 
case she had to wait around before meeting Bush). He only spoke to Sheehan for 
20 minutes because he had to go back to LA to pick Henry up from school. 
Sheehan said she was a bit surprised when Aragorn turned up on her doorstep, 
but she appreciated the gesture. Viggo dedicated his next album,Intelligence 
Failure, to her.

You have to admire Viggo’s intentions, no matter what you think of the end 
results. Whether he’s stumbling through a desert looking for life’s answers, 
bringing his own tea set to an interview or flying across the country for a 
20-minute chat, the man knows what he wants. As we finish, I tell him I think 
he has a pretty nice life – he basically gets to do all the things he enjoys. 
He shrugs: “Yeah, but if people weren’t interested in that stuff, I’d be doing 
it anyway. You just have to go ahead and do it, don’t you?”

Jauja is in cinemas now

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 