
I feel some sympathy towards Vikings’ King Ecbert (Linus Roache). I know what 
it’s like having to put up with an invading force of bearded men with odd 
haircuts, dressed in outdated clothing, using bizarre lingo, and field their 
continual requests to borrow a plough. Chuck in some fixed-gear bicycles and 
the series could be called Hipsters: Mud and Stabbing. (Spoiler alert for those 
who haven’t watched up to season two.)


Now into its third season, the series is strong as ever – largely due to 
Ecbert, yet another antagonist for the show’s psycho-hipster numero uno and 
Viking hero, Ragnar (Travis Fimmel). It means the bearded ones are no longer 
just squabbling among themselves for power, but dealing with a larger, more 
sophisticated force. With their shiny armour and advanced tactics, the 
Christians in Wessex outmatch the Vikings who have, so far, relied on winning 
clashes by joining their beards together with mud and then charging across the 
battlefield like an angry clump of hairy soil.

That the clashes are now ideological, and not just physical, injects Vikings 
with some new material to work with. Ecbert is Christian, but by the end of 
season two thought it better to take advantage of the beaten pagans rather than 
destroy them altogether, and so we now find Ragnar’s Vikings reluctantly 
fighting for the King.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPiqWLM3wyeY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPiqWLM3wyeY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPiqWLM3wyeY&media=>
It’s not without reward, though: Ecbert has given the Vikings some farmland to 
support themselves. Of course, you can’t expect Vikings to just, sort of, farm 
conventionally: where would be the fun in using an axe to dig up a big cabbage? 
No, they have to inject some blood and gore into their farming, which sees 
Ecbert watch uncomfortably as Lagertha (Katheryn Winnick), leader of the Norse 
settlers, presides over an agricultural ceremony where her fellow Vikings chop 
off a cow’s head and then pour its blood all over her. Awkward, considering 
that the night before Lagertha and Ecbert jumped into a bath and used each 
other as human groin luffas. You think you know a girl, and then she goes and 
drenches herself in a shower of tepid cow’s blood. Might be a breakup to handle 
via carrier pigeon, that one.

Back in the Viking home of Kattegat, Aslaug (Ragnar’s second wife, played by 
Australia’s Alyssa Sutherland) and friends listen to the stories of a 
mysterious stranger who identifies himself as Harbard (he’s the one with the 
beard). We know he’s probably evil because he walks around hooded, hidden, with 
only his beard poking out like a biker ringwraith. He can make babies go to 
sleep, which apparently qualifies him as a terrifying sorcerer. Who knows what 
he might do next? Make a nappy rash disappear, possibly. All I know is that 
he’s a new character and one to watch.

All in all, so far so good in season three. The show doesn’t seem to be tiring 
yet, despite the glut of epic, exotic television locations audiences have been 
spoiled for, courtesy ofGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
. In contrast to GoT’s winning formula of pyramids meets pubes, most of Vikings 
is filmed in patches of fog, occasionally punctuated by the sort of 
realistically understated forests in which you’d expect to find theKnights Who 
Say Ni <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QTQfGd3G6dg>.

If anything, the dreariness creates a kind of intimacy, like a story told on a 
rainy night next to a campfire, rather than bellowed through a megaphone during 
a fireworks display set off by lingerie models. It’s not extraordinarily 
stunning by any means, but it is very good. Particularly if you are a fan of 
beards, mud, plotting, and fog-shrouded violence.

• In Australia Vikings airs on SBS 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/412420163683/Vikings-S3-Ep3-Warrior-s-Fate>
, in the US on theHistory Channel <http://www.history.com/shows/vikings> and in 
Britain onAmazon <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Vikings-Season-3/dp/B00TQ9CJJQ>
 