
The football associations of Wales and Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> are to contest 
disciplinary proceedings brought by Fifa over remembrance ceremonies and the 
wearing of poppies at the World Cup qualifying matches against Serbia and 
Azerbaijan respectively.

Unlike the English and Scottish FAs, which defied Fifa’s request 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/02/england-players-to-defy-fifa-ruling-and-wear-poppies-in-armistice-day-match>
 not to have poppies sewn into black armbands for their qualifier at Wembley, 
Wales and Northern Ireland complied and believed they were adhering to the 
prohibition against political symbols. At their matches on 11 and 12 November, 
players did wear black armbands and there were remembrance ceremonies, 
including the laying of wreaths and poppy mosaics in the crowd.

The Northern Ireland FA limited its response to a short statement 
<http://www.irishfa.com/news/2016/november/irish-fa-statement> saying: “The 
Irish Football Association will robustly defend the disciplinary charges 
levelled against it by Fifa regarding acts of remembrance at the World Cup 
qualifying match between Northern Ireland and Azerbaijan on 11 November.”

England and Scotland likely to challenge Fifa on poppy disciplinary action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/england-scotland-fifa-poppy-disciplinary-action>
The FAW also said it will defend the charges but explained its stance and the 
Fifa disciplinary charges ina fuller statement 
<http://www.faw.cymru/en/news/fa-wales-statement/>. It argued the ceremonies at 
and beforethe 1-1 draw with Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/wales-serbia-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
 at the Cardiff City stadium had paid respects to the fallen “who had made the 
ultimate sacrifice” while adhering to Fifa’s rules against football teams and 
matches incorporating political symbols or messages.

The FAW confirmed Fifa had opened disciplinary proceedings and said the 
“incidents, as detailed in the communication fromFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa>, under investigation” included 
“some supporters in the stands wearing the poppy”.

Other more staged elements with which Fifa is taking issue, according to the 
FAW, included a member of the armed forces holding a bunch of poppies at the 
exit of the tunnel; a fans’ poppy mosaic in the stands during the Welsh anthem; 
and a banner depicting the poppy held up by supporters before the match.

Football’s rules, which are made and overseen by the International Football 
Association Board, a body comprising the four British FAs and Fifa, have always 
sought to maintain matches as sporting contests and separate them from politics 
and military conflicts. That stance was zealously pursued by the English Fifa 
president, Sir Stanley Rous, throughout his tenure from 1961 to 1974.

The English and Scottish FAs believe a precedent was set in 2011 when Fifa 
agreed their teams could wear poppies on armbands in friendlies that coincided 
with Armistice Day. When explaining the stance on poppies earlier this month, 
Fifa, which has 211 member countries, said: “The laws are applied uniformly in 
the event of similar requests by any member association to commemorate similar 
historic events.”

The Fifa general secretary, Fatma Samoura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/fatma-samoura-fifa-century-of-patriarchy-infantino>
, who is from Senegal, has explained the rule in the context of the number of 
countries that are and have been ravaged by war, including her own.

The Welsh FA’s chief executive, Jonathan Ford, said in the statement: 
“Naturally as an association we are disappointed and surprised at the news. Our 
intention was to show respect, which we feel we did in the right and proper 
way. We also adhered to the rules and regulations of the competition and the 
communication from Fifa prohibiting the FAW request for the players to wear the 
poppy symbol on the armbands or the field of play.

“We are particularly disappointed one of the charges relates to supporters in 
the stands wearing poppies. Naturally as an association we will strongly 
contest the charges.”

Fifa’s disciplinary committee is due to hear the cases against the four UK FAs 
at hearings on 9 December.
 