
When Shostakovich played the first two movements of his Seventh Symphony to 
his friends in the besieged city of Leningrad in the summer of 1941, his 
performance was interrupted by a German bombardment. As the air-raid sirens 
began to blare after he had finished playing the gigantic first movement – 
music that dramatises, parodies and immortalises the German invasion – he 
assured his audience that he would return to play the second just as soon as 
the warning had stopped and he had taken his wife and children to the shelter. 
As one of his listeners that day, the critic and composer Valerian 
Bogdanov-Berezovsky, later wrote, theSeventh Symphony “is an extraordinary 
example of a synchronised, instant creative reaction to events as they are 
being lived through, transmitted in a complex, large-scale form, yet without 
the slightest hint of compromising the standard of the genre”.

'He speaks to us': why Shostakovich was a great communicator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/10/shostakovich-great-communicator-composer-gerard-mcburney>
The Seventh’s story is one of the most astonishing in the history of music. 
The first full performance in Leningrad (now St Petersburg) was given in August 
1942 by a half-starved orchestra, whose emaciated state is symbolised by the 
drummer Dzaudhat Aydarov, who had literally been rescued from the dead. Aydarov 
was thought already to be a corpse, but the desperate conductor, Karl 
Eliasberg, went to the morgue to make sure – and discovered this supposed 
cadaver moving and breathing. Aydarov took arguably the most demanding role in 
the symphony, playing the side drum that beats the relentless rhythm of war at 
the heart of the first movement.

The heroism and humanity of the stories associated with the “Leningrad” 
Symphony are revealed by the testimony of two women who were in the audience in 
the Grand Hall of the Philharmonia in August 1942. Olga Kvade and Tamara 
Korol’kevich – both now in their 90s – talk toAmanda Vickery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amanda-vickery> in our film, Leningrad and 
the Orchestra That Defied Hitler, and their accounts are indelibly moving. They 
heard the tragedy and suffering of their own experiences in the siege 
transmuted into the symphonic epic, but they also recognised their desperate 
hopes and their individual courage and collective resistance in the final, 
overwhelmingly intense sounds of longed-for victory.

The Seventh was interpreted by listeners all over the world as proof that 
the Nazis would not, could not, win in Russia

The piece also has a special significance for Shostakovich’s own biography, 
and for the bigger context of 20th-century music. It reflects his propaganda 
power as a Soviet composer, writing the sounds of resistance to the Nazis at 
the same time as he was saving the Leningrad Conservatory from German 
incendiary bombs as a firefighter on the roof of the building. Shostakovich was 
evacuated from Leningrad with his family in October 1941, and composed the 
finale of theSeventh in Kuibyshev (where the piece was premiered), but the idea 
of Fireman Shostakovich, who didn’t spare himself from the front line of 
defence yet also composed the soundtrack to allied resistance, proved 
irresistible. That was the image which adorned the cover of Time magazine in 
the summer of 1942, as the symphony embarked on a tour of a wartorn world.

When Henry Wood and Arturo Toscanini conducted performances for the BBC in 
London and NBC in New York, broadcast to millions of allied households, 
Shostakovich was a symbol of international political and cultural defiance. 
That a composer could write a symphony of this scope, ambition and integrity 
while a city was being bombed and starved was interpreted by listeners as proof 
that the Nazis would not, could not, win in Russia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fwar-music-the-humanity-heroism-and-propaganda-behind-shostakovich-symphony-no-7%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feee6b7e5ef8ff971e53f26b78c8f50ba5fa152ca%2F167_117_4808_2891%2F4808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20music%3A%20the%20humanity%2C%20heroism%20and%20propaganda%20behind%20Shostakovich%E2%80%99s%20Symphony%20No%207&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fwar-music-the-humanity-heroism-and-propaganda-behind-shostakovich-symphony-no-7%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20music%3A%20the%20humanity%2C%20heroism%20and%20propaganda%20behind%20Shostakovich%E2%80%99s%20Symphony%20No%207&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Fwar-music-the-humanity-heroism-and-propaganda-behind-shostakovich-symphony-no-7%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feee6b7e5ef8ff971e53f26b78c8f50ba5fa152ca%2F167_117_4808_2891%2F4808.jpg>
 Shostakovich in 1950. Photograph: Sovfoto/Universal Images Gro/REX 
Or that’s the conventional narrative. But the Seventh’s reception wasn’t 
universally laudatory. The American critic and composer Virgil Thomson said 
that the symphony “seems to have been written for the slow-witted, the not very 
musical and the distracted”, defining a kind of composition that might 
“eventually disqualify [Shostakovich] for consideration as a serious composer”. 
Composers exiled in the US weren’t impressed, either. Rachmaninoff reacted by 
saying, “Well, and now let’s have some tea”, but Béla Bartók went further than 
apathy and indifference. Performed more than 60 times in the US within a single 
year, the symphony had become inescapable, and inescapably popular. Bartók 
responded by sending up the so-called “invasion theme” in the first movement – 
the simple tune that steamrollers its way through hundreds of bars, becoming 
more brutal, brainless and terrifying with every repetition – in hisConcerto 
for Orchestraof 1943.

All of these criticisms, which continue today – the composer and writer Robin 
Holloway, for example, describes Shostakovich as “music to rouse rabble, to be 
seen from far away like slogans in letters 30 feet high, music without inner 
musical necessity” – stem from a particular interpretation of Shostakovich: his 
compositional crudity, his supposedly simplistic contrasts of material, colour 
and texture, and his unashamed desire to communicate.

Yet there is a deep sophistication in what Shostakovich is doing in this piece 
at precisely the moments when its surfaces seem the most banal. The innocent 
but insidious tune that blows apart the first movement is designed to be as 
mundane as possible. It’s an image of how the most mediocre and unthinking idea 
– or person – can inflict the greatest devastation. Shostakovich was revealing 
and realising an abiding truth of all ideological tyrannies. As he told a 
friend after he finished the symphony, one of its themes is “fascism. But 
music, real music, can never be literally tied to a theme. National Socialism 
is not the only form of fascism; this music is about all forms of terror, 
slavery, the bondage of the spirit.”

The regime tried to make Shostakovich’s music disappear, but it couldn't be 
silenced in the hearts and minds of Russians

While the first three movements were written quickly, the finale took longer. 
The symphony grinds away at its eventual victory, its final moments almost as 
hard-won for the concert hall audience as they were for the composer. That 
means the end of the piece is not a simple celebration, since there are echoes 
of the struggle of the rest of the symphony even in the final bars, as if this 
victory cannot be complete when it has cost so much.

Which is exactly as it proved for Shostakovich and the Soviet Union after the 
end of the Leningrad siege in 1944 and the Great Patriotic War, as Russians 
call it, a year later. Shostakovich’s work was banned in 1948. However, Josef 
Raiskin, who heard the premiere of the “Leningrad” Symphony as a young child in 
Kuibyshev in 1942, remembers that his classmates, in defiance of their teacher, 
started tapping out the rhythm of the invasion theme on their desks. Whatever 
the regime’s attempts to make Shostakovich’s music disappear, it could not be 
silenced in the hearts and minds of Russians.

And despite the critics, it can’t be silenced in our concert halls, either. 
The “Leningrad” Symphony remains a uniquely resonant revelation of a chapter in 
20th-century history. But it finds new meanings, interpretations and relevance 
in the 21st century. The symphony doesn’t just belong to the city to which it 
is dedicated – it’s ours, too.

• Leningrad and the Orchestra That Defied Hitler is on BBC2 on 2 January at 
9.10pm.
 