
The US has been accused of “behaving like a tax haven”, in an escalating war 
of words between Washington and Brussels over the European commission’s 
anti-trust cases against Apple, Amazon andStarbucks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks>.

On Wednesday, the US Treasury threatened retaliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/apple-taxes-european-commission>
 if Europe continues its tax crusade against American multinationals.


Margrethe Vestager, Europe’s top anti-trust regulator, is expected to conclude 
her state aid investigation into Appleas early as next month 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/ireland-expects-eu-decision-in-apple-state-aid-case-this-fall-1468432640>
. If her ruling goes against the Californian tech group, it could be ordered to 
hand over as much as $19bn (£14.4bn) in unpaid taxes to the Irish government.

A white paper 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjPr-nD-9zOAhWKOxoKHTxHBXcQqQIIHjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.treasury.gov%2Fresource-center%2Ftax-policy%2Ftreaties%2FDocuments%2FWhite-Paper-State-Aid.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGLmQ-8qJfo2r9WgbQIqC6qJFomfQ&sig2=Nnfc07O2mAfKJdtlNEY4zA>
 commissioned by the US Treasury secretary, Jack Lew, accused Europe of 
targeting American companies disproportionately and behaving like a 
“supranational tax authority”. The claims have now prompted a swift rebuttal 
from MEPs and the European commission.


“The US Treasury prefers defending the interest of its multinationals rather 
than promoting international cooperation to fight corporate tax avoidance,” 
said Molly Scott Cato MEP, a spokeswoman for the Green party on tax affairs in 
the European parliament.

Apple may have to repay millions from Irish government tax deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/30/apple-repay-millions-irish-government-tax-deal>
Campaigners are furious because the US has failed to back two major 
initiatives designed to combat tax avoidance and money laundering.They are the 
creation of public registers of the owners of private companies and the 
automatic sharing of bank account information between countries, known as the 
Common Reporting Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/european-commission-announces-crackdown-on-corporate-tax-loopholes>
.

“The US is behaving like a tax haven by operating a deferral system which 
allows US companies to stash profits offshore,” said Cato. “The commission is 
seeking to prevent exactly this sort of free-riding and to ensure that tax is 
paid where economic value is added.”

America’s 500 largest companies have accumulated a record $2.4tn offshore, 
according to the pressure groupCitizens for Tax Justice 
<http://ctj.org/ctjreports/2016/03/fortune_500_companies_hold_a_record_24_trillion_offshore.php#.V78V_9eUyOU>
. The money, which comes from sales outside of their domestic market, has built 
up in tax haven subsidiaries because multinationals are refusing to bring the 
cash into the US, where it would incur a 30% corporation tax charge.

Anneliese Dodds MEP, tax lead for Labour in the European parliament, said: 
“The timing of this [white paper] seems highly suspect, falling as it does 
right in the middle of election season in the US. Instead the US government 
should be working with the EU commission to clamp down on tax evaders and 
aggressive tax avoiders, rather than criticising attempts to make the system 
fairer.”

The EU commission said on Wednesday: “All companies, no matter their 
nationality, generating and recording their profits in an EU country should pay 
taxes in line with national tax laws.

“Under EU state aid rules, national tax authorities cannot give tax benefits 
to selected companies that are not available to others. These state aid rules 
and the relevant legal principles have been in place for a long time.”

Lew’s white paper threatened retaliation, saying the US “continues to consider 
potential responses should the commission continue its present course”. 
Existing tax treaties could be revised and this would have a “chilling effect” 
on US investment intoEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, it 
claimed.


The commission has already ruled that tax advantages negotiated by Starbucks 
with the Netherlands government and by the Italian carmaker Fiat with Luxembourg
amounted to illegal state aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/21/starbucks-and-fiat-tax-deals-with-eu-nations-ruled-unlawful>
, with €20m-€30m potentially owed by each company. In January, the commission 
took a preliminary view that Amazon’s deal with Luxembourg also amounted to 
state aid. A final decision is pending.

Apple boss Tim Cook has dismissed the claim that his company avoids taxes 
overseas as “political crap” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/19/tim-cook-calls-notion-of-apple-avoiding-us-taxes-political-crap>
. The iPhone maker has paid as little as2% in tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/nov/04/apple-paid-low-overseas-tax>
 on its international profits, most of which are routed through Ireland. Cook 
told theWashington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/classic-apps/stepping-out-of-steve-jobss-shadow-tim-cook-champions-the-promise-of-apple/2016/08/12/fadb6c26-59cd-11e6-831d-0324760ca856_story.html>
 earlier this month: “I hope that we get a fair hearing. If we don’t, then we 
would obviously appeal it.”

Alex Cobham <http://www.taxjustice.net/2016/08/24/us-treasury-tax-war-europe/>
, research director at the pressure group Tax Justice Network, said: “The US 
Treasury has fired the first shots of a tax war with Europe. And while it’s 
wrapped up in a claim to defend international tax cooperation, it looks more 
like an attempt to prevent an effective measure against international 
tax-dodging.”
 