
If the first two days of the rain-affecting Melbourne Test were hardest on the 
fans who stuck around through prolonged rain delays, the swelteringly hot third 
pushed bowlers to the head of the complaints queue as first Azhar Ali and then 
Australian pair David Warner and Usman Khawaja mastered a docile pitch and 
feasted on runs.

Both bowling attacks should have been on danger money today. They toiled for a 
combined 411-3 from 83.1 overs and fulfilled a task you wouldn’t wish upon your 
worst enemy.

Sport picture of the day: determined David Warner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/dec/28/sport-picture-of-the-day-determined-david-warner>
Azhar was the man of the hour, or the man of close to ten hours as it turned 
out, unhurriedly stroking his was to an undefeated 205 and helping his side to 
443-9 when Pakistan captain Misbah-ul-Haq finally put the home side out of its 
misery. Undisturbed in 577 minutes at the crease, Azhar only briefly played 
second fiddle during a swashbuckling, run-a-ball cameo of 65 from from No9 
Sohail Khan.

On 160 Azhar had already written himself into the history books by reaching 
the highest Test score by a Pakistani batsman on Australian soil. Unknowingly, 
Misbah called time on the first innings when its hero was three runs away from 
joining Arthur Mailey, Bob Cowper and Sarfraz Nawaz on the wall of the Melbourne
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club’s nearby Percy Beames 
bar for posting the highest individual score among all touring Test men in 
history. For now, a giant scoreboard plate bearing “Richards 208” remains in 
place.

Play had started with another ominous rain delay but this time the elusive 
Melbourne sun finally came out, combining with intense humidity and a 
temperature of 37 degrees. Having resumed on 139 overnight, Azhar lost a 
partner early when Mohammad Amir edged behind off his hip to hand Mitchell 
Starc a consolation wicket. There followed a 118-run stand with Sohail, who 
biffed six boundaries and four sixes, thus contributing to Australia’s growing 
catalogue of late innings fades with the ball.

After play on day two the home side’s bowling coach David Saker said he feared 
injuries to his pacemen after their prolonged exertions. Today Starc only 
looked likely to crock his neck, so often was he craning it to watch Sohail’s 
sixes fly over his head at long-on. Nathan Lyon was the main victim in that 
respect. Nice Garry was quickly put on ice Garry, brutalised out of the attack 
on his way to 1-115 from 23 overs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fwarner-and-azhar-ali-dominate-day-three-in-melbourne-as-bowlers-suffer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a1899824fb5ee3febf7c1374cc971ca6277310f%2F0_121_2944_1768%2F2944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warner%20and%20Azhar%20Ali%20dominate%20day%20three%20in%20Melbourne%20as%20bowlers%20suffer%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fwarner-and-azhar-ali-dominate-day-three-in-melbourne-as-bowlers-suffer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warner%20and%20Azhar%20Ali%20dominate%20day%20three%20in%20Melbourne%20as%20bowlers%20suffer%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fwarner-and-azhar-ali-dominate-day-three-in-melbourne-as-bowlers-suffer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a1899824fb5ee3febf7c1374cc971ca6277310f%2F0_121_2944_1768%2F2944.jpg>
 Azhar Ali finished undefeated on 205, a record for Pakistan batsmen in Tests 
on Australian soil. Photograph: Ratnayake/REX/Shutterstock 
At the innings break after Pakistan’s declaration, Australian great Glenn 
McGrath was out in the middle of the ground hitting catches to youngsters, but 
his baton has most obviously been passed to his bowlalike Josh Hazlewood, who 
continued performing both the yeoman’s work and the strike bowling 
simultaneously to finish with 3-50 from 32.3 overs. Jackson Bird had peaked 
yesterday, it turned out, and ended up with 3-113 from 34 overs, while nominal 
spearhead Starc (1-125 from 31) looked utterly spent in the end.

To say Pakistan put in a flawed bowling performance and Misbah a 
head-scratching effort setting fields would be an understatement, and keeper 
Sarfraz Ahmed had a DRS moment to rival the best of Shane Watson’s cricket 
comedy. A review launched when David Warner fenced at a length ball from Amir 
was quickly shown to have missed the batsmen’s outside edge by the width of of 
an OLED TV.

Australia, who finished the day at 278-2 from 58 overs, lost Matthew Renshaw 
for 10 when the rookie opener made no contact while attempting a lavish 
slog-sweep and he could have no complaint after losing his off stump to the 
leg-spin of Yasir Shah. The latter struck early in his spell but otherwise 
bowled as badly as he’s likely to on this tour and finished with 1-97 from 16 
overs, still managing to smile all the way though, as though even the most 
egregious of his full tosses were unplayable gems. It’s almost impossible to 
dislike a single element of his game.

Any hope that scoreboard pressure and the spectre of day five madness could be 
conjured by Pakistan’s bowlers was dispelled in the afternoon. Warner in 
particular carved into the bowling like leftover Christmas ham, rattling along 
to a century from 113 deliveries and only improving his strike rate thereafter 
to end up with 144, while Khawaja rode his momentum.

Warner’s 17th Test hundred was his second against Pakistan and his first at 
the MCG, and never failed to thrill. Not sheepish about bringing it up with a 
fortunate inside-edge to fine leg, he again punctuated his milestone with that 
rote leap in the air which so pleasesCricket Australia sponsors Toyota 
<http://www.toyota.com.au/cricket>. The ICC, which still tightly regulates the 
size of logos at the base batting pads, remains silent on the issue of 
guerrilla marketing.

Mickey Arthur peeved at 'premature' Boxing Day Test rain break
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/28/arthurs-peeved-premature-boxing-day-test-rain-break>
Warner finally went in the 49th over – fittingly within one-day international 
parameters – by thinly gloving Wahab down the leg side and into the hands of 
Sarfraz. Having started his departure before the decision had been made, the 
Australian vice-captain changed his mind halfway to the fence and briefly 
returned to the scene of the crime, like the most easily-fingered suspect of a 
murder mystery.

By then he’d shared a 198-run stand with Khawaja, whose undefeated 95 
confirmed him as a stylist to rank with Mark Waugh and Greg Chappell in the 
annals of Australian batsmen. Even when he’s doing something innocuous, like 
knocking a single to fine leg the left-hander’s bat swishes around the corner 
like a muleta, taunting opponents. When he resumes with his captain tomorrow 
his sights might be set well beyond the benchmark established by Azhar.
 