
It was nearly a decade ago that I interviewed Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/nov/11/golf.news?CMP=share_btn_tw>. The 
Donald (“I do it to do it”) was seeking to build “the greatest golf course 
anywhere in the world”, 1,500 homes and a 12-storey hotel on a beautiful 
stretch of dune. Standing up to him were a band of locals led by Mickey Foote, 
ex-manager of the Clash (“Will the last person to sell what remains of 
unspoiled Aberdeenshire order more cement?”).

Is Donald Trump lying about having a three handicap?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/donald-trump-golf-handicap-3-unlikely-course>
Suffice to say, The Donald – it was ever the case – needed good publicity. And 
to this end his people had contacted me to set up yet another opportunity for 
their boss to talk at length about himself. I can only assume they selected the 
Observer because his daughter was soon to marrythe owner of the New York 
Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/jared-kushner-new-york-observer-jewish-antisemitism>
, conveniently for the Donald, on the 18th green of one of his golf courses, 
and he assumed that “Observer” was a brand like Hertz or Hilton or Heinz.

I recall little other than becoming increasingly bored. The Donald is a 
relentless conversationalist. He is all give, no take. You don’t discuss, you 
listen. There are no (intentional) jokes. Theresa May, like a miscreant 
schoolboy queuing to be caned, should thank her lucky stars that, on the list 
of the getting-to-know-you calls,she was positioned 10th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/theresa-may-still-awaiting-call-from-donald-trump>
, by which time the man doling out the punishment was likely to have lost a 
little zip.

As you do when bored, I attempted to change the subject:

In the film Local Hero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/mar/12/the-film-that-makes-me-cry-local-hero>
, the developer succumbs; in Trump’s world, the developer rides roughshod over 
those with the temerity to stand in the way of his vision. “Scotland will 
become even more involved in the world of golf as the world of golf becomes 
more powerful and more influential,” said Trump. “Sean Connery is my first 
member, he’s a great man, a great guy and a great Scot. I met him at a Dressed 
to Kilt charity do in New York.”

What could possibly have stopped someone so well connected? A diversion, 
perhaps.

“Have you thought about running for president?” I asked.

“People keep asking me to run,” replied The Donald, selfless to a fault.

“You’re a registered Democrat [strange but true]. Would you run against 
Hillary Clinton?”

“She’s a very good friend of mine,” says New York’s Most Popular. “I can’t run 
against a friend [small pause]. So is Rudy Giuliani. So I’m pretty well 
covered.”

Typical property developer, fully insured should anything go wrong.

Re-reading this, a couple of things strike me. Forgive the solipsism but I 
didn’t put the thought in his head, did I? No, no, no, he has probably thought 
of little else since he rented his first Hertz on his way to the Hilton for a 
burger or two. In between deals he considers the biggest deal of all. That’s 
how The Donald unwinds.

But then my mind turns to his musings on the status of golf. Forget the fact 
that The Donald is both boring and unstable (a terrible combination); forget, 
too, the fact that he is the first estate agent to become leader of the Free 
World; focus instead on the golf, because it is the golf that allows us to make 
some sense of recent events.

Donald Trump deserves his frosty reception in Scotland | Anthony Baxter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/donald-trump-frosty-reception-scotland-broken-promises-golf>
In all the breathless coverage, bleating commentary and ever-more intricate 
polls, no one mentioned the golf (Nate Silver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/17/nate-silver-interview-election-data-statistics>
, what were you thinking?!). And yet it is the golden rule of presidential 
elections that the golfer will beat the non-golfer. The person who is more golf 
wins. There have been 18 contests since the second world war and the only 
exceptions to this rule are Harry S Truman (not a golfer) beating Thomas Dewey 
(Augusta member whogave his green jacket to Jack Nicklaus 
<http://onlineathens.com/stories/122599/spo_1225990022.shtml#.WCrmeXpiv7I>) and 
Jimmy Carter (not a golfer) defeating Gerald Ford (who, contrary to rumour, 
could play golf and chew gum at the same time). Aside from these two anomalies 
it is all golf. For some deep buried reason, the US electorate trust a man who 
can handle a four iron even more than one with whom they can have a beer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fgolf-donald-trump-presidential-elections-golfer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee06c6df1bfd2d9b286c9724f2f6f734420b0400%2F0_26_2328_1396%2F2328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Was%20golf%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20secret%20weapon%3F%20%7C%20Will%20Buckley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fgolf-donald-trump-presidential-elections-golfer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Was%20golf%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20secret%20weapon%3F%20%7C%20Will%20Buckley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fgolf-donald-trump-presidential-elections-golfer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee06c6df1bfd2d9b286c9724f2f6f734420b0400%2F0_26_2328_1396%2F2328.jpg>
 George HW Bush and George W Bush play golf together in 2003 at Kennebunkport, 
Maine. Photograph: Jim Bourg/REUTERS 
Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Reagan, Clinton, Obama … golfers 
all. And as for the Bushes: was there ever a family more golf? The most 
successful modern political family (a record that remains intact after last 
week) is also the golfingest. Bush senior’s grandfather and father were both 
presidents of the United States Golf Association (considered within the family 
the greater honour) and his son once stood on the first tee at the 
Kennebunkport golf course and said to the world’s media: “I call upon all 
nations to do everything they can to stop these terrorist killings. Thank you.
Now, watch this drive <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/aug/08/1>.” 
The Mighty W proceeded to duck-hook the drive as, in many regards, he did the 
subsequent war.

No surprise, therefore, that Americans have only gone and elected a man who 
has turned his hobby into his business and actually builds golf courses for a 
living. Hillary (weak off the tee, inconsistent putter and further let down by 
a shocking short game) never had a chance. The world of golf has indeed become 
more powerful and influential. And the Democrats, looking to 2020, need to find 
themselves a candidate who is more golf than The Donald. Good luck with that 
one.
 