
In the lead-up to her 22-date run of sold-out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/31/kate-bush-review-magical-new-dawn>
 Before the Dawn performances in 2014, Kate Bush spent three days submerged in 
a tank filled with water. Not for some new-age cleansing ritual, but to create 
a sense of authenticity while shooting the video for And Dream of Sheep, a song 
about a woman who is lost at sea.

This realism however, became more tangible than Kate had initially imagined. 
According to a spokesperson for the artist, she spent so long in the water 
during the first day of filming that she contracted mild hypothermia, but 
recovered after a day off and carried on filming. “Everyone agreed it had added 
to the authenticity of the performance,” they said.

Kate Bush and the K Fellowship: Before the Dawn review – a pop treasure, live 
and kicking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/17/the-k-fellowship-before-the-dawn-review-kate-bush-live>
Recorded at Pinewood Studios, the video for the track – which features the 
musician strapped to a lifejacket, hoping to be rescued – was created for her 
unexpected return to the stage, during which she performed The Ninth Wave, her 
1985 song cycle thatthe Guardian described 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/26/kate-bush-before-the-dawn-eventim-apollo-review>
 as “disturbing, funny and so immersive that the crowd temporarily forget to 
applaud everything Bush does.”

'She seemed shy. Then suddenly this wild beast came out' – my 10 years 
shooting Kate Bush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/12/kate-bush-photographer-guido-harari-interview>
Although originally released on her fifth studio album Hounds of Love, the 
still, mournful piano ballad is reworked – featuring a live vocal take from the 
shoot itself – and appears onKate Bush and the K Fellowship: Before the Dawn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/17/the-k-fellowship-before-the-dawn-review-kate-bush-live>
, a live album that captures her show over three CDs and four vinyl. The box 
set is available on 25 November, but before then, you can watch And Dream of 
Sheep in the player below.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_256xd9N27o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_256xd9N27o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_256xd9N27o&media=> 