Voices of America box 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/voice-box/giv-12515tWTYgPgl2pbI/>
On a hot and lazy afternoon in Palm Beach, the only sign of movement is the 
water gently lapping at the grounds of Mar-a-Lago, the private club that is the 
prize of Donald Trump’s real estate acquisitions inFlorida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida>.


Trump currently dismisses climate change as a hoax invented by China, though 
he has quietly sought to shieldreal estate investments in Ireland 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/05/donald-trump-climate-change-golf-course-223436>
 from its effects.

But at the Republican presidential contender’s Palm Beach estate and the other 
properties that bear his name in south Florida, the water is already creeping 
up bridges and advancing on access roads, lawns and beaches because of 
sea-level rise, according to a risk analysis prepared for the Guardian.

In 30 years, the grounds of Mar-a-Lago could be under at least a foot of water 
for 210 days a year because of tidal flooding along the intracoastal water way, 
with the water rising past some of the cottages and bungalows, the analysis by
Coastal Risk <http://coastalriskconsulting.com/>Consulting found.


Trump’s insouciance in the face of overwhelming scientific evidence of climate 
change – even lapping up on his own doorstep – makes him something of an 
outlier in south Florida, where mayors are actively preparing for a future 
under climate change.


Trump, who backed climate action in 2009 
<https://grist.org/politics/donald-trump-climate-action-new-york-times/> but 
now describes climate change as “bullshit”, is also out of step with the US and 
other governments’ efforts to turn emissions-cutting pledges into concrete 
actions in the wake of the Paris climate agreement. Trump has threatened to 
pull the US out of the agreement.

And the presidential contender’s posturing about climate denial may further 
alienate the Republican candidate from younger voters and minority voters in 
this election who see climate change as a gathering danger.

When Guardian US asked its readers about their most urgent concern in these 
elections as part of ourVoices of America series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/voices-of-america>, the single 
issue looming on their minds wasclimate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/climate-change-voters-2016-election-issues>
.

Real estate professionals, with perhaps an extra dash of self-interest, hold 
similar views. In a surveypublished in the Miami Herald 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/real-estate/article81971977.html> last month, 
two-thirds of high-end Miami realtors were concerned sea-level rise and climate 
change could hurt local property values, up from 56% of them last year.


So too for mayors in south Florida. About a third of the civic leaders in 
south Florida’s compact of mayors are working on strategies to protect their 
towns from rising seas – and lobbying Florida’s governor and fellow Republicans 
in Congress to acknowledge the gathering threat.

Mar-a-lago tide scenario map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/06/maralago-tide-map/> 
Elected officials in those same Florida towns say they are already spending 
heavily to rebuild disappearing beaches and pump out water-logged streets.

 Republicans in coastal districts can’t afford to play politics with climate 
change, said Steve Abrams, a Republican and mayor of Palm Beach County.


“We don’t have the luxury at the local level to engage in these lofty policy 
debates,” said Abrams. “I have been in knee-deep water in many parts of my 
district during King Tide.”

King Tides, the extreme high tides of the autumn, are a growing nuisance in 
Miami and other areas of south Florida – and are creeping up the manicured 
lawns of Trump’s Mar-a-Lago from the intracoastal waterway, according to the 
CRC analysis.

Parts of the estate are already at high risk of flooding under heavy rains and 
storms, the analysis found. By 2045, the storm surge from even a category two 
storm would bring waters crashing over the main swimming pool and up to the 
main building, the analysis found.

The historic mansion at the heart of Mar-a-Lago is not going to be underwater, 
“but they are going to have more and more issues with health and safety, 
access, and infrastructure,” said Keren Bolter, chief scientist for the firm.

 Despite Trump’s pronouncements, there is strong evidence that he – personally 
– could pay the price for climate change in his property interests along the 
south Florida oceanfront and intracoastal waterway.

In south Florida, sea level is projected to rise up to 34in by the middle of 
the century and as high as 81in by 2100, according to the national oceanic and 
atmospheric administration.

South of Mar-a-Lago, where the elevation is lower, water already pools in the 
road in front of the Trump Hollywood condos after the briefest of cloud bursts. 
The luxury development, where three-bedroom units are on sale for up to $3m 
apiece, offers “pristine beaches”.

“Right outside your door you’ll find the Hollywood Beach broadwalk, ranked as 
one of the five best boardwalks in the country,” the company website says.
Mar-a-lago hurricane scenario map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/06/maralago-hurricane-map/> 
But Peter Bober, a Hollywood native who is now the city’s mayor, said flooding 
was becoming a regular occurrence, when storms coincided with high tide.

“We have had neighbourhoods where the water has been up to people’s front 
doors. That is not something that I remember as a kid growing up in the city of 
Hollywood,” he said.

Meanwhile, the city is spending heavily on pumping systems and to truck in 
sand to replenish beaches disappearing due to erosion.

Bober said he had seen storms with water pouring over the sea walls of the 
intracoastal. “Water just floods the entire neighbourhood, and there is nothing 
we can do about it,” Bober said. “We have occasional storms where we are 
totally overwhelmed.”

Such instances are only growing more frequent. Bolter’s modelling suggests 
Trump’s Hollywood condos could be turned into islands for up to 140 days a year 
by 2045, cut off from the low-lying A1A coastal road because of tidal flooding 
and storm surges. Under a category two storm, a storm surge could wash right up 
to the front gate.

Further south, the Trump Grande in Sunny Isles also faces a soggy future, 
according to the projections. In 30 years, the boundaries of the property could 
face tidal flooding and storm surges for 97 days a year, cutting off access to 
the A1A road. The beaches could also be scoured away by erosion.


“The big issue here is that if a big storm hits, you have 5ft, 6ft waves, and 
that is going to eat away even at the grass here. It could push the waves even 
to where we are standing, And if that is going to eat away this whole area, 
that could do some serious damage,” Bolter said.

Other Trump-branded properties, such as the golf clubs in Doral and Jupiter, 
are at higher elevations, above the water line amid projected sea-level rise 
this century. But Bolter said the courses faced different risks from heavy 
rainfall and poor drainage because of Florida’s high water table.
Trump-branded properties days with flooding 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/06/trump-days-underwater/> 
Scientists have long expected sea level rise on the south-east Florida coast 
to occur faster than the global average, advancing rapidly on barrier islands 
and beaches.

The low-lying coastal areas are exposed to an additional threat of inland 
flooding, from the intercoastal waterways, and contamination of fresh water 
supply by high tides and storm surges.

But the pace of sea-level rise has accelerated over the last decade because of 
the collapse of ice cover in Greenland and Antarctica, and because of the 
weakening of ocean currents such as the Gulf Stream. Nowhere is this as evident 
as in south Florida.

Since 2006, the average rate of sea-level rise in south Florida has increased 
to 9mm a year from 3mm a year 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0964569116300278>, for a 
total rise over the decade of about 90mm, or about 3.5in, according to Shimon 
Wdowinski, a research scientist at the University of Miami.


As a result, flooding in Miami Beach and other low-lying areas has doubled 
over the last decade, Wdowinski found, using tide gauges, rain records, 
insurance claims and other data to construct the flood record. “People should 
be aware of where they want to invest for their properties,” he said. “I think 
for the next 20 years it will be OK, but I don’t know if it will be in 50 or 80 
years. That’s a different story.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-climate-change-florida-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F692a2d73b83cc34c6a0420910b0e089f51320f40%2F46_131_2278_3469%2F2278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Water%20world%3A%20rising%20tides%20close%20in%20on%20Trump%2C%20the%20climate%20change%20denier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-climate-change-florida-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Water%20world%3A%20rising%20tides%20close%20in%20on%20Trump%2C%20the%20climate%20change%20denier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-climate-change-florida-resort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F692a2d73b83cc34c6a0420910b0e089f51320f40%2F46_131_2278_3469%2F2278.jpg>
 Donald Trump, Melania Trump and Barron Trump at the Trump Invitational Grand 
Prix at Club Mar-a-Lago in Palm Beach last year. Photograph: Larry 
Marano/Rex/Shutterstock 
Other sections of the low-lying south Florida coast are just as vulnerable. In 
2012, Hurricane Sandy barely grazed Florida, reserving its fury for New York 
and New Jersey.

But a subsequent storm unleashed huge waves that uprooted traffic lights and 
street signs, and caused the collapse of a 1.5-mile stretch of the A1A coastal 
artery in the center of Fort Lauderdale.

 “When the road collapsed, that was basically a huge wake-up call,” said Jason 
Liechty, environmental projects coordinator for Broward County. “Sometimes when 
you talk about climate change and sea-level rise it seems very abstract, but if 
you see big chunks of concrete just sticking up out of the road, it becomes 
very real.

“It took $20m and 40,000 truckloads of imported sand so far to raise the 
mile-long section of road by 2ft, sink in metal sheets 40ft down, and rebuild 
sand dunes to provide buffers from future storms – and the repairs are still 
under way four years later.

“So let’s do the math here: you are talking about several hundred million 
dollars if the whole coast line is affected, and that’s a lot of money,” 
Liechty said.

A number of towns in south Florida are already beginning to make the 
investment, calculating that it would be cheaper to put in defences against 
rising seas now than wait for a catastrophe.

Miami Beach is spending $400m to raise roads and install pumps to drain 
streets that experience regularly flooding at high-tide – and to prevent salt 
water from contaminating fresh water storage inland. 


In other sea level hotspots, such as Hollywood, newer construction – including 
Trump-branded buildings – are being built on top of steeply graded driveways, 
above the flood zone.

But for some of south Florida’s cities, there may be no alternative to retreat 
– even if it means abandoning some of the wealthiest real estate in the country.

In his offices in the historic city hall of Coral Gables, James Cason keeps a 
poster-size map showing a wide swathe of land, sliced up by canals, yacht 
moorings and multimillion dollar homes in gated communities with elevations 
below 4ft.

About 34 miles of Coral Gables are exposed to the ocean. The entire area – 
representing about $3bn in property and about 10% of homes – will be underwater 
in the second half of the century, according to Noaa’s projections.

Two schools, 20 bridges, 21 pumping stations will all be swamped, according to 
the projections. Some 302 yachts will almost certainly be trapped behind 
low-lying bridges. Water treatment plants and pumping stations will no longer 
work.

Cason has no patience for those, like Trump, who deny climate change is 
occurring. “It’s an existential threat to a city like us,” he said. So much so 
that Cason has hired consultants to contemplate a future when it may no longer 
be able to engineer a way out of sea-level rise.

“What do you do if and when the water is up so high you can’t provide services 
– when do you stop charging taxes?” he asked. “If your house is underwater, can 
you stop paying taxes on it?”


He would like to believe that by the end of the century scientists will have 
figured out a solution to the rising seas that threaten his city. But there is 
one thing of which he is certain: Coral Gables will not survive by retreating 
behind a sea wall.

 “There is no Dutch solution,” he said. “You can’t really build a wall around 
it. It will just come up from below.”
Voices of America explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/voices-explainer/giv-12515xn3lRvPSSNFX/> 