
On a February day of no consequence this year, I sat alone in a movie theatre 
and watched actor Chiwetel Ejiofor, as the titular character of12 Years A Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/28/12-years-a-slave-us-national-curriculum>
, take a series of pounding blows from two white men after being abducted and 
sold into slavery.

My discomfort at witnessing scenes like these – of brutal, systemic violence 
against black bodies that look like mine – was easily assuaged by the reality 
that so many people had survived beatings like these – had survived worse – so 
that I could sit alone and revisit their history. I could afford to be 
uncomfortable for three hours.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb004b3243456235fd9dfcc95313f9bf12b5ac073%2F0_101_2712_1627%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20declared%20in%202014%20that%20black%20lives%20matter%20because%20we%20saw%20how%20often%20they%20didn't%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20declared%20in%202014%20that%20black%20lives%20matter%20because%20we%20saw%20how%20often%20they%20didn%27t%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb004b3243456235fd9dfcc95313f9bf12b5ac073%2F0_101_2712_1627%2F2000.jpg>
 David Oyelowo, center, plays Martin Luther King, Jr and Carmen Ejogo, right, 
plays Coretta Scott King in the film Selma. Photograph: Atsushi Nishijima/AP 
This Christmas Day, I will sit in a similar seat for Ava DuVernay’s film Selma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/17/ava-duvernay-film-director-selma>
, a historical dramatization of the series of marches in which Dr Martin Luther 
King Jr became involved – marches that precipitated the passage of the 1965 
Voting Rights Act. The actors in the production have already made waves by
appearing at their red carpet premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/15/selma-cast-wear-i-cant-breathe-t-shirts-new-york-premiere-martin-luther-king>
 wearing T-shirts bearing the slogan “I CAN’T BREATHE” – a reference tothe 
final words of Eric Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/18/staten-island-man-dies-nypd-chokehold>
, who had the life choked out of him by a police officer whom a Staten Island 
grand jury later refused to indict.

My year in movie theatres will be bracketed by a chronicle of the brutality of 
slavery and the successful push to achieve legal recognition of citizenship. 
Yet, in my life outside of the dark theatre, in the lives of black people in 21
st century America, we still struggle for unquestioned personhood.

Solomon Northup’s life mattered. My parents’ lives mattered. Black lives 
matter – and they always did.

It pains me that, in 2014, in America, we have to publicly affirm that black 
lives matter. And yet, in 2014, we’ve seen so many examples of when they didn’t.
 The mother of Jordan Davis said justice had been served for her son, but also 
for ‘Trayvon and for all the nameless faces and children and people that will 
never have a voice’. Photograph: Bob.Mack/AP 
In February, a Florida jury failed convict Martin Dunn 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/16/us/florida-killing-over-loud-music.html?hp&_r=1>
 for thekilling of Jordan Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/04/trayvon-martin-jordan-davis-america-racism>
. The Atlantic’s Ta-Nehisi Coates interviewed Davis’ mother, Lucia McBath, 
shortly thereafter, andshe offered powerful parting words to Coates’ son 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/02/i-am-still-called-by-the-god-i-serve-to-walk-this-out/284064/?single_page=true>
 at the end of that interview. “You exist,” she told him. “You matter. You have 
value. You have every right to wear your hoodie, to play your music as loud as 
you want. You have every right to be you. And no one should deter you from 
being you. You have to be you. And you can never be afraid of being you.”

Dunn was later retried and convicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/01/florida-man-guilty-first-degree-loud-music-retrial>
 in October for the killing of Davis, and we all breathed a brief sigh of 
relief that the jury believed Davis’ life mattered enough to punish the man who 
took it .

It didn’t last long.

In July, less than a month after I and a few hundred of my fellow 
Brooklynnites packed ourselves in the heart of Brooklyn’s Bed-Stuy to
commemorate the 25th Anniversary of Spike Lee’s classic film Do The Right Thing 
<http://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/Spike-Lee-Do-the-Right-Thing-Anniversary-Block-Party-Bed-Stuy-Brooklyn-264930141.html>
, we witnessed a chilling symmetry to Radio Raheem’s death in that film, as
video quickly spread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2014/dec/04/i-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video>
 of Officer Daniel Pantaleo choking Garner to death on 17 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/18/staten-island-man-dies-nypd-chokehold>
. The NYPDbanned the manoeuvre 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/12/context-for-the-punishment-free-killing-of-eric-garner/383413/>
 in 1993, in the aftermath of the 1991 death of Federico Pereira. A police 
killedthe Bronx’s Anthony Baez 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1996/10/10/opinion/the-killing-of-anthony-baez.html> in 
a chokehold less than a year later, in 1994.

I was miles away from Ferguson, Missouri, when I saw a photo of a grieved 
father with his handmade sign immediately after his stepson, Michael Brown, was 
killed by now-former Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson and his body was 
left in the street for over four hours on 9 August.

Months later, on 23 November, Cleveland police shot and killed 12 year old 
Tamir Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/26/tamir-rice-video-shows-boy-shot-police-cleveland>
 within seconds of spotting him in a park. Theywaited four minutes 
<http://www.cleveland.com/metro/index.ssf/2014/11/cleveland_police_officers_wait.html>
 before administering, or allowing anyone to administer, first aid to him.

And there were others besides: John Crawford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/30/police-officer-shot-john-crawford-walmart-lied-victims-mother-says>
.Darrien Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/03/darrien-hunt-walking-replica-sword-911-shooting>
.Vonderrit Myers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/11/security-firm-involved-in-st-louis-shooting-has-history-of-lawsuits>
.Yvette Smith 
<http://www.rawstory.com/rs/2014/02/texas-cops-go-silent-after-retracting-claim-woman-had-gun-when-officer-killed-her/>
.Pearlie Golden 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/fired-fatally-shot-93-year-old-woman-rips-knee-jerk-reaction-article-1.1789207>
. The year blurs as we track the deaths of unarmed black civilians from police 
violence, whether they were captured on video or not.

But there were bright spots. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419082234772%2F4292f38e-2147-4c49-a8f0-ca7305824a02-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20declared%20in%202014%20that%20black%20lives%20matter%20because%20we%20saw%20how%20often%20they%20didn't%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20declared%20in%202014%20that%20black%20lives%20matter%20because%20we%20saw%20how%20often%20they%20didn%27t%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419082234772%2F4292f38e-2147-4c49-a8f0-ca7305824a02-2060x1236.jpeg>
 That this is a rallying cry in 2014 (and beyond) needs to change. Photograph: 
Brent Eysler/Demotix/Corbis 
Alicia Garza, Patrisse Cullors and Opal Tometi created the hashtag 
#BlackLivesMatter on Twitter in 2012 in response to the shooting death of 
Trayvon Martin. In 2014, after the death of Brown,BlackLivesMatter became more 
than a hashtag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/15/ferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter>
. It is a living and breathing tool to support a national – dare I say 
international? – social justice movement inspiring action to stop the 
extrajudicial killing of black people in the United States.

Activists in Ferguson protested Brown’s death and police brutality longer than 
anyone – especially the police, who clearly hoped an overwhelming show of force 
would end the movement – ever expected, organizing a months-long series of 
protests and creative civil actions to keep attention on the need for justice 
for Michael Brown Junior. It may well become a years-long movement. Meanwhile, 
we all waited to see whether grand juries in St Louis County and Staten Island 
would determine if black lives mattered enough to merit indictments and 
criminal trials for the officers who killed them.

But America is constant paradox; we are backsliding into something insidious, 
ignoring the civil liberties of black people, denying the basic respect of 
recognizing the humanity and possibility of black lives. Brown’s killer and 
Garner’s killers were freed by their respective grand juries, and the streets 
erupted again with the pain of a people who realized, again, that justice is 
unequally applied if your skin is black and your uniform is blue.

It was almost ironic that in the year that we heralded the 50th anniversary of 
the passage of the Civil Rights Act – the landmark legislation that is the 
foundation for expanding and protecting civil liberties for, but not only for, 
African Americans – that we had to reaffirm that black lives matter and require 
legal protection too, still.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419082435780%2Fd0506a0b-db44-4833-a9e4-547a7d400819-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20declared%20in%202014%20that%20black%20lives%20matter%20because%20we%20saw%20how%20often%20they%20didn't%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20declared%20in%202014%20that%20black%20lives%20matter%20because%20we%20saw%20how%20often%20they%20didn%27t%20%7C%20Syreeta%20McFadden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2F2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F20%2F1419082435780%2Fd0506a0b-db44-4833-a9e4-547a7d400819-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Voting is fundamental to our democracy, and to our rights. Photograph: Mario 
Tama/Getty Images 
In 2013, the US supreme court, in an act of judicial activism or hubris, 
eliminated from the 1965 Voting Rights Act the critical pre-clearance clause 
for states that historically prohibited black Americans from exercising their 
franchise. Chief Justice John Roberts, in his majority opinion, contended that 
“Our country has changed”. This year challenged his assertion.

The great divide between black and white America will continue to insist upon 
itself.Racialized income inequality 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/12/12/racial-wealth-gaps-great-recession/>
, the lingering effects of housing discrimination andpersistent school 
segregation <http://www.propublica.org/article/segregation-now-full-text> fuel 
the separation of communities 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/03/black-white-friends-poll_n_5759464.html>
, or at least prevent us from mixing, meeting and socializing interracially 
which, in turn, fuels indifference and the false narrative of a colorblind 
society.

Were we truly so naive to believe that post-racial America was a real thing?

We are past the point where any of us should be satisfied with flat 
conversations around racisms – structural or interpersonal. We are past the 
point that we can deflect. It’s time that we ask harder questions of ourselves 
and entertain – even demand – difficult answers. We shouldn’t have to have 
another march from Ferguson to Jefferson City to assert the personhood of black 
Americans in 21st century America. We can’t be afraid to talk honestly about 
the brutal legacy of slavery or its phantom effects that pervade every aspect 
of our society. We can’t be afraid to acknowledge racism for fear of being 
labeled racist.

We can’t rely on the reality of the Obama presidency to substitute for the 
deep, authentic work of interrogating who we really are, and the depths of our 
racial fears and biases. We cannot have to march in the streets for another 
year, and another, to remind America that black lives matter.
 