
The number of South Sudanese seeking refuge in the UN compound in Bentiu has 
risen above 100,000, the organisation has announced, making it the country’s 
largest camp for those fleeing the civil war that has killedmore than 50,000  
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/africa/horn-of-africa/south%20sudan/223-sudan-and-south-sudan-s-merging-conflicts.pdf>
people since 2013.

South Sudan marked the fourth anniversary of independence from Sudan earlier 
this month, but the ongoing conflict between forces loyal to the president,
Salva Kiir <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-12107760>, and rebels 
supporting his former deputy,Riek Machar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/04/riek-machar-south-sudan-ambitions>
, has left little to celebrate.

Humanitarian organisations say they are struggling to cope with the influx of 
people to the camp, and conditions are grim as the rainy season – which runs
from April to November <http://ss.one.un.org/country-info.html> – envelops 
everything in thick mud.

With the 100,000 milestone reached 
<https://radiotamazuj.org/en/article/sprawling-un-protection-camp-bentiu-grows-more-100000-people>
, three women living in the camp spoke about how they ended up there – and what 
they want for the future.

‘I don’t want to live alongside my enemies’

My name is Julia John (pictured above) and I’m 25 years old. I have three 
children, one-year-old Tuach, three-year-old Nyachiew and eight-year-old 
Nyawuora. I’ve been in this camp for 18 months. There was fighting outside my 
house in Bentiu town and we had to flee. My husband, Henry, is also here. Every 
day I am cooking, collecting firewood, getting water and taking care of my 
children. I hope for peace and the guns silenced. I will return to my home but 
I don’t want to live alongside my enemies.

I was hopeful in 2011, during our independence, for a South Sudan with no 
killing. I want to tell President Salva Kiir that many people have been killed 
and we need peace. As a woman inSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, we are suffering because when 
we try to help our children, men can rape and kill us. When we go to collect 
firewood near this camp, government troops can get us. We are vulnerable.

I know some women who are getting treatment in Juba [the capital] after being 
attacked. In this camp, the UN supports us but we need firewood and charcoal 
because we have to leave this place to find them and that brings risk for us 
from government soldiers. I hope the UN and NGOs can address this.

‘We are not free in our own country’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsouth-sudan-bentiu-camp-internally-displaced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397890594%2F1c3895d1-d504-4270-84c4-fcead766f109-2060x1694.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20need%20new%20leaders%3A%20women%20of%20South%20Sudan's%20Bentiu%20camp%20speak&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsouth-sudan-bentiu-camp-internally-displaced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20need%20new%20leaders%3A%20women%20of%20South%20Sudan%27s%20Bentiu%20camp%20speak&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsouth-sudan-bentiu-camp-internally-displaced%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437397890594%2F1c3895d1-d504-4270-84c4-fcead766f109-2060x1694.jpeg>
 Tabitha Nyakuon Gai, who walked for two days to reach the safety of the camp 
Photograph: Antony Loewenstein 
My name is Tabitha Nyakuon Gai and I’m 36 years old. I’m from the Nhialdin 
area in Rubkona County. I have six children. I’ve been in this camp for one 
month. I had to walk two days to get here. My husband is fighting with the 
rebels and I don’t know where he is. I’ve had no contact with him since 
September last year. I miss him.

My husband is fighting with the rebels. I’ve had no contact with him since 
last September. I miss him
Tabitha Nyakuon Gai 
It’s hard to manage kids on my own. My husband fights a just war because the 
government has killed so many people. Every day I collect firewood and then 
sell it to make a little money to buy milk for my children.

In 2011 at independence I was happy because I didn’t want to be with Sudan 
anymore. I wanted to be free. We thought we should be united so it’s hard to 
believe that we are not free in our own country anymore. Hope disappeared in 
one minute. I’m worried about my kids’ future – there are no schools, and only 
the UN gives us food. If the UN leaves, who will feed us?

President Kiir has been in power for 10 years [Kiir served as regional 
governor before independence] so if I meet him I’ll tell him to leave office. 
It’s time to give the role to somebody else. Riek Machar has been waiting for 
so long, give him a chance and then after that Machar can hand over power to 
somebody else. It’s not right that one person holds power for so long.

‘Now there’s just insecurity’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsouth-sudan-bentiu-camp-internally-displaced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437398045631%2Ff5b9aa00-e294-4a23-bfeb-d550345117fe-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20need%20new%20leaders%3A%20women%20of%20South%20Sudan's%20Bentiu%20camp%20speak&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsouth-sudan-bentiu-camp-internally-displaced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20need%20new%20leaders%3A%20women%20of%20South%20Sudan%27s%20Bentiu%20camp%20speak&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsouth-sudan-bentiu-camp-internally-displaced%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437398045631%2Ff5b9aa00-e294-4a23-bfeb-d550345117fe-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nyaduop Machar Puot, who has lived for two months in the camp at Bentiu 
Photograph: Antony Loewenstein 
The harsh reality of life in South Sudan's Bentiu camp – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jul/03/south-sudan-bentiu-camp-in-pictures>
My name is Nyaduop Machar Puot and I’m 37 years old. I have five children. I 
came from Boau village in Koch country. It took me six days to walk here. My 
cattle were taken and house burned. I had to flee. I had no choice. A 
government-affiliated militia attacked me. I saw women and children burned 
alive in a tukul [traditional South Sudanese home] by militias. When I saw 
people burned alive I knew I had to leave my village. I saw two people killed 
like this and they were my friends. My husband is still back in the village. I 
don’t know if he’s OK. He could not leave with us because he’s an old man with 
bad legs. I’ve been two months here in Bentiu.

When independence was declared in 2011, I expected there would be services for 
my kids and now there’s just insecurity. Today I cannot walk freely. I cannot 
help my children because South Sudan is at war and in a mess.

The Guardian view on the South Sudan crisis: give the people a chance to craft 
a peace | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/12/the-guardian-view-on-the-south-sudan-crisis-give-the-people-a-chance-to-craft-a-peace>
My message to President Kiir is that your turn is done. Let Machar take over. 
If Kiir doesn’t agree, both men should leave and not seek power. It’s time for 
new people at the top.

Compared to life in the village, life in this camp is safer. I still need 
shelter here because I’m living in temporary housing [her family resides in a 
flood-prone area of the camp]. The UN tells me it’s coming soon. I hope so 
because I need to protect my family.
 