
There is nothing more expensive 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/19/opinion/charles-blow-how-expensive-it-is-to-be-poor.html?_r=0>
 in America than being poor.

Poverty is the quiet, quotidian violence not easily captured in live streams 
and news feeds. It rarely strikes with a flashy bang, manifesting more often as 
the slower destruction of accumulated theft.

Since the death of Freddie Gray 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/04/the-mysterious-death-of-freddie-gray/391119/>
 after being in the custody of Baltimore law enforcement, the city’s residents 
havecome together to protest 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/04/nonviolence-as-compliance/391640/>
 both the injustice of Gray’s last moments and the broader series of everyday 
horrors of which it isonly one part 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/04/the-brutality-of-police-culture-in-baltimore/391158/>
. This civilian uprising occurs against andbecause of the backdrop of 
Baltimore’s economic abandonment, which has left its primarily black residents 
vulnerable not only to police violence, but also to adangerous lack of basic 
human services <http://www.cnbc.com/id/102628126> like water and affordable 
housing.

Baltimore’s schools remain underfunded even though almost 85% of the city’s 
students <http://www.baltimorecityschools.org/Page/25305> come from households 
with incomes low enough to qualify for free or reduced-priced lunches. The 
impossible constraints the city’s residents must grapple with are as unique as 
they are emblematic of economic injustice facing all black people in the US. 
Too often, economic discrimination (or the threat of it) heightens the violent 
targeting of black individuals and communities by law enforcement.

When black people are incarcerated at impossibly high rates 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/07/18/chart-of-the-week-the-black-white-gap-in-incarceration-rates/>
,private prison companies 
<http://time.com/3446372/criminal-justice-prisoners-profit/> and state 
governments 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/14/private-prisons-buying-state-prisons_n_1272143.html>
 both stand to profit. That profit motive accelerates state violence across the 
country. Ferguson’s police violence and open hostility toward black residents 
were part and parcel of a law enforcement practice thatprioritized the 
extraction of revenue 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2015/03/04/the-12-key-highlights-from-the-dojs-scathing-ferguson-report/>
 from its citizens over public safety needs. Horror stories ofthousands of 
dollars accrued in fines 
<http://apps.washingtonpost.com/g/documents/national/department-of-justice-report-on-the-ferguson-mo-police-department/1435/?page=7>
,days spent in jail 
<http://apps.washingtonpost.com/g/documents/national/department-of-justice-report-on-the-ferguson-mo-police-department/1435/?page=56>
 andjobs lost 
<http://apps.washingtonpost.com/g/documents/national/department-of-justice-report-on-the-ferguson-mo-police-department/1435/?page=6>
 as a result are not an anomaly; they are simply theaccumulated, mundane 
discrimination 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2014/09/wages-discrimination-2014923102524262748.html>
 against which black residents have no readily accessible recourse.

In New York, the dubious “resisting arrest” charge 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/nicolasmedinamora/new-york-police-commissioner-wants-resisting-arrest-to-be-a#.xd0XQ6PVWw>
 is a hallmark of the “Broken Windows” policing strategythat targets low income 
communities of color 
<http://fusion.net/video/40509/molly-crabapple-broken-windows-broken-people/?hootPostID=f5aa5e257b0729781ed25f159a6965a2>
 for petty offenses. Used most often to stamp people viewed as inherently 
criminal with an arbitrary arrest record, “resisting arrest” – or simply, 
existing while black – can cost someone up to one year in jail and thousands of 
dollars in fines.

Arrest records, even when they don’t lead to sentencing, can dramatically 
reduce someone’s chances 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/177017/boxed-how-criminal-record-keeps-you-unemployed-life>
 of attaining an education or stable employment. For black people, who are 
already pushed out of the workforce by so many other factors, an arrest 
incurred for simply“pissing off police” 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2015/02/10/384990293/nypds-top-cop-wants-to-make-it-a-felony-to-resist-arrest>
 can be the difference between having a job and starving.

Indeed, the violence of the state extends beyond fatal or expensive encounters 
withtrigger-happy law enforcement 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/04/the-myth-of-police-reform/390057/>
 officers, long before the final breaths now played onharrowing, infinite loop 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/04/09/black_bodies_on_the_ground_shocking_images_spark_blacklivesmatter_outrage_but_at_what_price/>
. To stifle a community slowly, without the decisive replay value of a 
chokehold, youcriminalize poverty 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-watch/wp/2014/05/23/the-criminalization-of-poverty/>
 while withholding the resources needed to escape it. There are many quiet ways 
to rob someone of breath.

Across the US, racial and ethnic wealth gaps continue to increase 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/12/12/racial-wealth-gaps-great-recession/>
, climbing to record highs even as the economy slowly churns out of a 
recession. In 2013, thepoverty rate 
<http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2014/demo/p60-249.pdf>
 among white Americans was 9.6%; among black Americans the number jumped to a 
whopping 27.2%. The wealth of white American households in 2010 was eight times 
the median wealth of black households; by 2013 it had risen to 13 times greater.

And that gap grows in no small part because of the intertwining forms of 
economic discrimination that target black communities – a complex web ofracist 
housing policy 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/05/the-case-for-reparations/361631/>
 that creates intergenerational poverty, education practices thatfunnel black 
students into prisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/10/end-school-to-prison-pipeline>
 and out of classrooms and an economic climate thatoffers primarily low-wage 
jobs 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/28/business/economy/recovery-has-created-far-more-low-wage-jobs-than-better-paid-ones.html?_r=0&gwh=302F9349155ACA87C420B7A07BD123E8&gwt=pay&assetType=nyt_now>
 in lieu of better-paying work.

Though the black unemployment rate is consistently double that of whites 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/08/21/through-good-times-and-bad-black-unemployment-is-consistently-double-that-of-whites/>
, many black Americans are among the expanding ranks of the nation’sworking poor
 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/12/15/poverty_nation_how_america_created_a_low_wage_work_swamp/>
, often working two or three low-wage jobs but still unable to consistently 
affordrapidly rising cost of living 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/04/08/gentrifications_insidious_violence_the_truth_about_american_cities/>
 expenses (most notably, rent 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/18/nyregion/in-new-york-having-a-job-or-2-doesnt-mean-having-a-home.html>
).

Black workers must also contend with a job industry informed by the same 
racist beliefs that seep into other facets of American life. Across sectors, 
black workers experience myriad forms of race-based discrimination in the work 
place –frombeing fired over complaints that there are “too many” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/22/mcdonalds-sued-discrimination-racism-lawsuit-minorities>
 of them, tonot being considered 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/ruchikatulshyan/2014/06/13/have-a-foreign-sounding-name-change-it-to-get-a-job/>
 for positions becausetheir names are “too ghetto” 
<http://www.chicagobooth.edu/capideas/spring03/racialbias.html>, to being 
bombarded with a series ofharmful microaggressions on the job 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2015/03/how-to-make-your-company-less-sexist-and-racist/388931/>
 that both reduce morale and inhibit professional progress.

For low-wage workers, these consequences are especially dire. The current job 
climate isstructured to slow or stop their advancement  
<http://www.nelp.org/content/uploads/2015/03/NY-minimum-wage-report-FPI.pdf>at 
every turn: erroneous complaints that low-wage work is“low-skilled” work 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/29/magazine/debunking-the-myth-of-the-job-stealing-immigrant.html?_r=0>
, that most low-wage workers are “teens looking for supplementary cash 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/average-minimum-wage-worker-myth>” and that 
low-wage workers simply haven’t tried to “attain an education 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/feature/in-plain-sight/poverty-u-many-adjunct-professors-food-stamps-n336596>
” halt workers’ progress toward securing a living wage. For decades, minimum 
wagehas not provided workers 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/02/18/minimum-wage-hasnt-been-enough-to-lift-most-out-of-poverty-for-decades/>
 with the necessary resources to move above the poverty threshold, let alone 
thrive beyond meeting basic needs.

But, as conversations about racial justice and police brutality progress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/13/black-lives-matter-ferguson-police-shooting>
, propelled by thediligent, unceasing work of activists around the country 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/55351565e4b0ef6d9974b165#axzz3XaVaCrWp>
, opportunities emerge to re-examine the stakes of our nation’s investment in 
this damaging economic system. #BlackLivesMatter, the ongoingmovement to 
address multiple forms of injustice <http://blacklivesmatter.com/about/> facing 
black people and build a world in which we can not just survive butprosper, is 
working to build a world in whichblack labor is appreciated and compensated 
accordingly 
<http://www.theroot.com/articles/politics/2015/04/how_racial_injustice_is_now_driving_the_fight_for_15.html>
.

That activism takes multiple forms – like Baltimore’s protests, or holding the 
state accountable forfining black residents simply to cover its revenue needs 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/26/st-louis-county-municipal-courts_n_6896550.html>
 and demanding that corporations pay employees a decent wage. On 15 April, the
largest national group of low-wage workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/15/fight-for-15-minimum-wage-protests-new-york-los-angeles-atlanta-boston>
in US history gathered to demand a wage of $15.#BlackWorkMatters 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/04/15/black-work-matters-15_n_7071946.html>
, a conversation led by member-based activist organizationBlack Youth Project 
100 <http://byp100.org/> as part of national labor protests, highlighted the 
tangible and symbolic consequences of devaluing black labor (and by extension, 
black workers).

Addressing economic discrimination is a multi-pronged struggle that affects 
every arena of black life; our lives are informed by the complex, violent 
circumstances that shape black oppression. There is no racial justice without 
economic justice: we can’t breathe if we can’t eat.
 