
Black American culture is experiencing a kind of delicious dominance at the 
moment. It’s one that might seem odd given its contrast with the resurgence of 
racism embodied by some supporters of Donald Trump. But Trumpism, as my 
colleague Steven Thrasher hasnoted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/may/11/trump-has-to-be-the-next-president-american-history-dictates-it-video>
, is just the latest version of a pattern in America: black progress beckons 
white rage.

This artistic triumph isn’t a new movement, then, but rather reads like one 
because this time around, creators aren’t making work that over explains black 
life or that makes white society comfortable, centered or even included. 
Beyoncé’s Lemonadewas made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/25/beyonce-lemonade-jay-z-infidelity-emotional-project-depths>
 to speak to black women. Larry Wilmore’s N-word use at the White House 
Correspondents’ Dinnerwasn’t meant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/larry-wilmore-n-word-i-felt-black-pride>
 for the white people it offended. Shonda Rhimes is the most successful 
showrunner in television, creating space for black actors to feature complex 
representations of black life. Claudia Rankine’s critically acclaimed volume, 
Citizen, explicitly interrogates micro aggressions that shape black life in 
America.

As black deaths overtake the news cycle and the current presidential campaign 
slog has shaken awake racist, inflammatory rhetoric that many non-black 
Americans want to believe was dead, black art is unconcerned with the emotional 
wellbeing of white folks. The cultural work of black American creators at this 
moment is exciting, energizing and a reflection of the ever maturing 
consciousness in black America.

The dominant narrative of American identity, one centered in whiteness and its 
aesthetics, is one that black American artists have explored, confronted and 
challenged since the nation’s beginning. Black American artists, writers and 
creators have long asserted the personhood of black people. From Phyllis 
Wheatley’s poemsOn Being Brought From Africa to America 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/45465>, to the 
compulsive portraiture of Frederick Douglass and Sojourner Truth, to the novels 
and poets of the Harlem Renaissance era, the paintings of Jacob Lawrence to the 
works Carrie Mae Weems, Mikalene Thomas and Kehinde Wiley, these artists have 
pivoted from a presumed white gaze, and expanded definitions of the American 
self.

But those efforts, while vanguard and significant, have stayed at the 
mainstream’s margins: when I ask people of all ages and shades to tell me what 
they know of the American story – and as a professor, that opportunity comes up 
more than you’d think – they tell me spotty ramblings from their high school 
history and civics classes that they can recall, mostly centered in a narrative 
of exceptionalism.

The current wave of scholarship, criticism, novels, works of art from global 
pop artists, rappers, painters, playwrights, film-makers and photographers is 
crucial to resisting the old narratives that have been taught across 
generations.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Ftrump-has-to-be-the-next-president-american-history-dictates-it-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20has%20to%20be%20the%20next%20president.%20American%20history%20dictates%20it%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Ftrump-has-to-be-the-next-president-american-history-dictates-it-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20has%20to%20be%20the%20next%20president.%20American%20history%20dictates%20it%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Ftrump-has-to-be-the-next-president-american-history-dictates-it-video&media=>
Trump has to be the next president. American history dictates it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/may/11/trump-has-to-be-the-next-president-american-history-dictates-it-video>
Beyoncé’s Lemonade blurs the lines between music video and art installation. 
The television series Underground challenges convention in its focused 
retelling of antebellum America and slave resistance. Novelist Angela 
Flournoy’s The Turner House upends rigid narratives about working-class 
Detroit, and Nate Parker’s forthcoming film, subversively titled The Birth of a 
Nation, aims destroy the racist association of the title, attaching it forever 
to the courageous acts of Nat Turner. These works insist that as a people we 
remain awake in this great revolution.

Because if we don’t, the backlash might end up simply furthering what has 
often looked like the natural arc of US history: black equality and success 
leads to white retrenchment and violence. Instead, we must push on.

When you, say, reject the birth certificate of the first black president, what 
you mean to say is that to be American is to be white. The billionaire who 
declared that the birth certificate was invalid is now the presumptive nominee 
for the party against slavery – the party of Lincoln. Rejecting the 
authenticity of Obama’s American-ness is by proxy a rejection of black American 
authenticity. To protest, demanding, “I want my country back” in 2009, or to be 
flummoxed or enraged by the affirmation “Black Lives Matter” in 2016 and not 
admit that anti-black racism fuels this ignores the nation’s true history.

If you doubt me on this point, then consider that the Trump campaign claimed 
to have accidentallynamed  
<http://www.vox.com/2016/5/10/11652822/donald-trump-delegate-white-nationalist>
a white nationalist as a primary delegate for the upcoming California primary, 
who reportedly wants to deport anyone with “negro blood”. Or just watch any of 
the video in which crowds physically assault people of color at his campaign 
rallies.

“I love America more than any other country in the world,” James Baldwin wrote 
in 1955, “and, exactly for this reason, I insist on the right to criticize her 
perpetually. I insist on the right to criticize her perpetually.” Baldwin was 
one of a long line of black American artists, thinkers and writers, who 
resisted the singular story of the American people that occluded black people.

To declare an American identity, an American-ness as a black artist has always 
felt like a political act. And as the era of the nation’s first black president 
draws to a close, black artists and people aren’t seeking permission or 
acceptance from the dominant cultural narrative of old. We are simply 
declaring: we are.

It’s our country, we’re not apologizing anymore for telling it how we see it. 
 