
First there were the "Brics" - now there's "Bric 'n' Mitsk." Jim O'Neill, the 
economist who coined the term Brics to describe Brazil, Russia, India and 
China, is adding Mexico, Indonesia, Turkey andSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> to the original four countries 
to create a new grouping of growth markets.

"It's just pathetic to call these four 'emerging markets'," he told the 
Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/f717c8e8-21be-11e0-9e3b-00144feab49a,Authorised=false.html?_i_location=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ft.com%2Fcms%2Fs%2F0%2Ff717c8e8-21be-11e0-9e3b-00144feab49a.html&_i_referer=#axzz1BGs6y8Xa>
. O'Neill, chairman of Goldman Sachs Asset Management, told the FT his new 
approach will involve looking at fresh ways to measure exposure to equity 
markets beyond market capitalisation, such as looking at gross domestic 
product, corporate revenue growth and the volatility of asset returns.

The concept of "emerging markets" was created 30 years ago by World Bank 
economist Antoine van Agtmael to replace the more pejorative "third world" tag. 
O'Neill told the FT that the term was no longer helpful because it encompassed 
countries with too great a range of economic prospects.

Some emerging markets are illiquid and small, but any economy from the 
emerging markets world that is already 1% of global GDP or more, and has the 
potential for that to rise, has the ability to be taken seriously, said O'Neill.

Mexico and South Korea each account for 1.6% of global GDP in nominal terms; 
Turkey 1.2% andIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> 1.1%.

His new growth markets grouping doesn't quite have the ring of Brics about it, 
but O'Neill looks as though he's on the right lines – Moody's this morning
upgraded Indonesia's rating to one notch below investment grade 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2011/01/17/moody039s-upgrades-ri-rating-one-notch-below-investment-grade.html>
, to Ba1 from Ba2.

O'Neill also tells the FT's Gillian Tett how he came up with concept of Brics 
in 2001 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/112ca932-00ab-11df-ae8d-00144feabdc0.html#axzz1Adlw4gQv>
. It was shortly after the departure of his colleague, Gavyn Davies, who was 
co-head of economics at the investment bank. Feeling under pressure to come up 
with a new idea, O'Neill found inspiration in the wake of the tragic events on 
9/11. "What 9/11 told me was that there was no way that globalisation was going 
to be Americanisation in the future – nor should it be."

"In order for globalisation to advance, it had to be accepted by more people … 
but not by imposing the dominant American social and philosophical beliefs and 
structures."

His prediction that the Brics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/brics> 
would overtake the six largest western economies was initially greeted with 
scepticism but the concept has become widely accepted. And it has had a huge 
impact on O'Neill: "It has transformed my life," he said.
 