
I am on my way to meet Wendi Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wendi-deng> – as, I’m surprised to learn, 
she still likes to be known – and I’m scared to death. C’mon, you remember 
Wendi Murdoch. Rupert’s ex-wife. The incredibly glamorous one with long hair – 
no, notJerry Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jerry-hall>, that’s the 
current one. The one before – the fiercer one. The one who grew up in a small 
flat in China and ended up living in the most expensive apartment in Manhattan 
– $44m (£35.8m), don’t you know – after meeting Rupert at Star TV, which he 
owns, in Hong Kong. According to multiple reports at the time, his children 
from his previous marriage loathed her, and not just because of their father’s 
bafflingly bad dye job that happened on her watch, although I always thought 
that was cause enough. Her most glorious moment on the international stage was 
whenshe walloped Johnnie Marbles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/19/rupert-murdoch-attacked-phone-hacking-hearing>
, aka Jonathan May-Bowles, a protestor who tried to pie Rupert during his 2011 
parliamentary appearance (“Mr Murdoch, your wife has a very good left hook,” 
Tom Watson said, rightly, at the time).

Sadly, this image of marital bliss soon ended and the two were divorced in 
2013, possibly or possibly not due to causes related toa note she apparently 
wrote about Rupert’s close friend, Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/feb/14/tony-blair-rupert-murdoch-deconstruction-friendship-wendi-deng>
: “Oh, shit, oh, shit. Whatever why I’m so missing Tony. Because he is so 
charming and his clothes are so good. He has such good body and he has really 
really good legs Butt … And he is slim tall and good skin,” the note read. 
Blair and Wendi have both denied that anything improper happened between them. 
More recently, she has had to deny further rumours that she is in a 
relationship with – but of course –Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/01/wendi-deng-putin-rupert-murdoch-caribbean-russian-yacht>
, although that the rumour sounded so credible says a lot about Wendi. So, like 
I said, I’m terrified. But, if I’m honest, an even bigger part of me would like 
her to be my life coach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a2d3f9cc7c86899570c789c2b133256710bb1a6%2F251_0_2438_1462%2F2438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wendi%20Deng%20Murdoch%20on%20Rupert%2C%20Ivanka%20Trump%20and%20her%20new%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wendi%20Deng%20Murdoch%20on%20Rupert%2C%20Ivanka%20Trump%20and%20her%20new%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a2d3f9cc7c86899570c789c2b133256710bb1a6%2F251_0_2438_1462%2F2438.jpg>
 Deng Murdoch with ex-husband Rupert Murdoch in 2011. Photograph: Vincent 
Kessler/REUTERS 
Sky Ladder: The Art of Cai Guo-Qiang review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/22/kevin-macdonald-documentary-sky-ladder-the-art-of-cai-guo-qiang-review->
I decide the best way to make her adopt me is to try to dress like her. To 
this end, I’ve studiedher Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/wendimurdoch/?hl=en>, which features cosy pictures 
of her withNaomi Campbell <https://www.instagram.com/p/BFuDYVbKVcL/>, Anna 
Wintour <https://www.instagram.com/p/BBqfyYRKVXM/> and, er, Henry Kissinger 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/2REnDxKVUE/>. Her style is best described as 
“international lady billionaire”: some independent labels (Christopher Kane, 
Giambattista Valli) mixed with the big stalwarts (Dior, Chanel). The closest I 
can get to this in my closet is a very old Diane von Furstenberg dress and some 
scuffed Miu Miu shoes. This is, without a doubt, the most dressed up I’ve ever 
been for work and, as I hustle to a central London hotel to meet her on a 
Friday morning, I feel slightly like I’m going on the scariest date of my life.

The reason I’m meeting her is that she has produced a film, and guess what? 
It’s really good.Sky Ladder: The Art of Cai Guo-Qiang 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80097472> is a documentary directed by Kevin 
Macdonald (Touching the Void 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,4267,1104804,00.html>
,The Last King of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/12/thriller.jamesmcavoy>) about the 
extraordinary Chinese artistCai Guo-Qiang <http://www.caiguoqiang.com/>, who – 
as well as being a skilled painter, sculptor and taxidermist – works in 
gunpowder and explosives (you probably know him best as the man behind the 
mind-blasting fireworks display at theBeijing Olympics opening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2008/aug/08/olympics2008.china> and 
closing <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VReg_NTqHyk> ceremonies). 

The film follows him as he tries to realise his 20-year dream of creating what 
he calls a “sky ladder”: a fireworks project that resembles a 500-metre ladder 
reaching up into the heavens. Alongside this, Macdonald traces a line between 
Cai’s family and childhood during the cultural revolution and the art he makes 
today. The art really is incredible, but it’s Cai himself who really stands out 
– a gentle, charming man with a bright smile, a world away from the usual image 
of the tortured artist.
 With Naomi Campbell in 2011. Photograph: Alexandra Wyman/GETTY IMAGES 
I’m meeting Cai (pronounced Tsye) and Murdoch in the hotel, which creates a 
rather tricky interview dynamic. On the one hand, there’s the extremely 
impressive Cai, who proves to be as warm in person as he is in the film. On the 
other hand, there’s Murdoch, as fascinatingly frightening as I’d hoped and a 
thoroughly distracting presence. I ask Cai who persuaded him to allow a 
documentary-maker to trail him around for months and poke around in his life.

“It was Wendi,” he replies at once, unsurprisingly.

I imagine she is good at persuading people, I say.

“I had never done a documentary before, so I met Fisher Stevens 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001770/>, who is an amazing documentary filmmaker, 
and he and I talked together about [directors]Bennett Miller 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0587955/?ref_=nv_sr_1> and Kevin Macdonald, and we 
got them both,” she says with a bark of laughter. Her accent is like the 
distilled essence of a first-class lounge in an airport, an unplaceable mix of 
various but undeniably well-heeled intonations. “Before”, for example, becomes 
“befarrrrrr”, sort of how Katharine Hepburn might have said it, but louder and 
more rat-a-tat-tat.

Cai smiles at how Murdoch was able to persuade three esteemed directors to 
work on her film, with Stevens and Miller acting as producers: “Wendi’s really 
amazing. She’s able to bring all these little boys together.”

And how does she do that, I ask.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb332a98c1a9db85d16d726cf021f28394ec1e738%2F0_15_944_566%2F944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wendi%20Deng%20Murdoch%20on%20Rupert%2C%20Ivanka%20Trump%20and%20her%20new%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wendi%20Deng%20Murdoch%20on%20Rupert%2C%20Ivanka%20Trump%20and%20her%20new%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb332a98c1a9db85d16d726cf021f28394ec1e738%2F0_15_944_566%2F944.jpg>
 A still from Sky Ladder: The Art of Cai Guo-Qiang 
Cai just laughs, but Murdoch makes a sly smile at me and arching her eyebrows 
while batting her lashes. “I love working with creative people,” she says, with 
a flick of her long hair.

Cai is dressed just as I would expect of an artist, by which I mean he is 
dressed a little like Vincent van Gogh, with a loose tweedy jacket, a simple 
jumper and loose trousers. Murdoch, by contrast, is in her usual glamazon style 
and she happily talks me through her outfit: “I love having fun with fashion,” 
she says, waggling her leather-and-tweed flat boots (“Chanel”) while the rest 
of her is in a long-sleeved black top with ruffles (“Peter Pilotto”) and a 
leather skirt (unspecified). Cai and Murdoch make a somewhat unlikely double 
act, although they have been friends for 15 years, ever since they met at the 
Royal Academy in London and realised they were neighbours in downtown Soho, New 
York.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055cadc0c0a103ba0167f4dabf388bfa678951c7%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wendi%20Deng%20Murdoch%20on%20Rupert%2C%20Ivanka%20Trump%20and%20her%20new%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wendi%20Deng%20Murdoch%20on%20Rupert%2C%20Ivanka%20Trump%20and%20her%20new%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055cadc0c0a103ba0167f4dabf388bfa678951c7%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Deng Murdoch’s second film, Snow Flower and the Secret Fan. Photograph: 
Allstar/FOX SEARCHLIGHT PICTURES 
“Our children play together and speak Chinese together,” says Murdoch (her 
daughters with Rupert are 15 and 13; Cai’s are 26 and 13). “And I just knew 
Cai’s story would make such a great story: a child from a small town becomes a 
huge star internationally. Then you have to ask yourself: how do I challenge 
myself now? I need new things. It’s a universal story,” she says.

Well, not quite universal. But perhaps she related to it on some level?

“Yeah. But we all relate to it.”

Sky Ladder is Murdoch’s second film; Snow Flower and the Secret Fan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/03/snow-flower-and-the-secret-fan-review>
, a historical drama set in 19th-century and modern China, was released by 20th 
Century Fox – of which Rupert was CEO at the time) and was not a critical 
success. She is already working on her third film, although she won’t talk 
about it yet. Has she ever askedHarvey Weinstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harvey-weinstein> for tips about how to 
produce? (I find it’s generally a safe assumption that all super-rich people 
know each other.)

“Oh, I love Harvey’s movies!” she says. (See?) “But I didn’t want to bother 
him – he’s so busy.” And who needs Weinstein’s advice anyway? I get the strong 
impression that Murdoch’s chief gifts are bringing people together (“Whenever a 
famous person is dating another famous person, chances are that Wendi Murdoch 
brought them together,”according to Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.com/13459215/businesswoman-wendi-murdoch-career-profile/>), 
and then bending them to her will, both of which seem like good qualities for a 
producer.

I had been firmly instructed by the PRs to stick to questions about the movie, 
but I can’t help but notice that her name in the credits is Wendi Murdoch, not
Wendi Deng <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wendi-deng>. Why is that?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5611bf15d8ee2286b2e35d2e0e4ae4a3a6166d8%2F0_449_4419_2652%2F4419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wendi%20Deng%20Murdoch%20on%20Rupert%2C%20Ivanka%20Trump%20and%20her%20new%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wendi%20Deng%20Murdoch%20on%20Rupert%2C%20Ivanka%20Trump%20and%20her%20new%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fwendi-deng-murdoch-rupert-trump-sky-ladder-art-of-cai-guo-qiang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5611bf15d8ee2286b2e35d2e0e4ae4a3a6166d8%2F0_449_4419_2652%2F4419.jpg>
 A still from Sky Ladder: Cai Guo-Qiang’s Elegy, on the riverfront of the Power 
Station of Art, China. Photograph: Lin Yi/Netflix/Courtesy of Cai Studio 
“Because my children are Murdoch,” she replies.

Does she think the Murdoch name helps her?

“No, I don’t think so,” she says, sounding a little astonished at the thought.

So presumably she and her ex are on good terms if she has kept his name?

“Many people ask that,” she says, again sounding surprised. “We are very 
friendly. We parent together and we go to school events together. We have the 
same rules for the kids, like not to spend hours on social media. He’s an 
excellent father and we are on the same page.”

So is she happy that he has found love with Jerry Hall?

“Mmm, next time you interview me we can discuss that,” she says, and I suspect 
I’m just about escaping Johnny Marbles’ fate. Still, in for a penny and all 
that, so I carry on. Is she dating?

This question seems to please her more: “I am, but no one serious. No one in 
particular.”
 With Ivanka Trump in 2015. Photograph: Jamie McCarthy/Getty Images 
One particular person she is definitely not dating is Putin. “I’ve never met 
Putin,” shesaid to US Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.com/13459215/businesswoman-wendi-murdoch-career-profile/> 
this summer. And yet, our conversation does return to Russia frequently. Sky 
Ladder recently had a successful screening there.

“Russia and China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, these old 
communist cities, they connect,” smiles Murdoch.

“A shared history of cultural revolution,” agrees Cai.

In fact, she and Cai first discussed plans for the documentary on a flight to 
Sochi, on their way to the winter Olympics. But nobody goes to watch the winter 
Olympics. What were they up to?

“We go to almost all the Olympics!” says Murdoch.

“I like to see all the nervous people. It’s like the excitement I’d feel for 
the Chinese Spring festival,” says Cai, sweetly. “And the winning,” says 
Murdoch, less sweetly.

As well as producing, Murdoch backs an art website with Dasha Zhukova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/oct/04/dasha-zhukova-interview-roman-abramovich>
, the wife ofRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>, and the two are close 
friends.

It’s that Chinese and Russian connection again, I say.

She looks at me suspiciously and sits forward.

I mean you and Dasha, I say nervously.

“Ah right,” she says, sitting back again.

Another close friend is Ivanka Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ivanka-trump>, who Murdoch set up with her 
now husband, Jared Kushner, and the threesome were photographedholidaying 
together in Croatia this August 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/08/ivanka-trump-wendi-deng-vacation>. I 
ask Cai and Murdoch how they find it living in America during this especially 
crazy election.

“What they’re experiencing is similar to what’s happening around the world, 
like thereferendum in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>,” says Cai. “I agree,” 
says Murdoch firmly.

That must be rather awkward, given that she’s such close friends with Donald 
Trump’s daughter.
 The team behind Sky Ladder: Murdoch with Fisher Stevens, Cai Guo-Qiang and 
Kevin Macdonald Photograph: Maarten de Boer/Getty Images 
“Well, she’s not running for office. She’s very impressive. She has three 
children and she is teaching them Chinese. It’s very nice. We’ve been friendly 
for many years. I try to separate [the election] from that. She collects art, 
you know.”

I’ll say this for Murdoch: she’s a real hoot. Terrifying, obviously, but also 
hilarious, sometimes deliberately so. When I ask her to describe her typical 
day, she reels off: “I wake up early, then I work out,” she begins, and she 
mimics lifting dumbbells, which is quite a sight to see in her Chanel boots. 
She clearly cares about educating the west about China; as well as making 
China-based movies, she co-hosted the massive exhibition,China: Through the 
Looking Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/19/china-through-the-looking-glass-show-breaks-metropolitan-museum-record>
, at New York’s Metropolitan Museum last year, “and a lot of people told me 
they loved the show and it opened their eyes. So that’s good,” she says. But 
she’s a lot more relaxed when she’s talking about fashion, dating and her 
friends. I can see why Rupert’s kids were wary of her (a shy and retiring 
stepmother she was never going to be), but I always thought she looked a lot 
more entertaining than any of them. She would be a lot of fun to have a 
two-martini lunch with at some fancy place on Manhattan’s Upper East Side. And 
she’d be petrifying to antagonise.

The time is up and, as I stand, Cai gives me a beautiful postcard of the Sky 
Ladder. Murdoch, meanwhile, gives my outfit a very blatant once-over. The room 
goes silent. I hold my breath.

“Oh, God, I love your shoes!” she shrieks. “The heel – so perfect!”

Nailed it.

• Sky Ladder: The Art of Cai Guo-Qiang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sky-ladder--the-art-of-cai-guo-qiang> is on 
Netflix and in UK cinemas from 14 October
 