
The man sitting opposite could be a pugnacious newcomer pitching for a job. He 
lays out his credentials just in case I don’t know and recounts scenes from his 
films which I already know off by heart. He claims he performs a magic with 
cinema which no one else can. They should put him in a straitjacket, his work 
is that wild. Building to a climax, he says: “I want to throw my arm around 
your shoulder and take you to the realm of complete poetry and fantasy.” I 
think he’s speaking metaphorically. Then again, maybe not.

Into the Inferno review – Werner Herzog peers into the depths of the volcano
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/21/into-the-inferno-review-werner-herzog-peers-into-the-depths-of-the-volcano>
It’s tempting to cast Werner Herzog as the last of cinema’s old-style 
swashbucklers; the sort of intrepid adventurer who makes movies in the way 
other men might go prospecting for gold or sail off in search of the Northwest 
Passage. It’s a view the man himself does little to discourage. Pour him some 
coffee and he’ll pour out his war stories. He’ll mention (surely for the 
umpteenth time) how he once hauled a steamship over a mountain in Peru (for 
1982’sFitzcarraldo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H_OgtTZMSXI>). Or how he 
hypnotised his entire cast (1976’sHeart of Glass 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rGdEeKxSrX4>). Or how he’s supposedly the only 
film-maker to have shot on all seven continents. He’d be utterly exasperating 
if he weren’t so entertaining, if his films weren’t so good, and if all his 
tall tales were not by and large true.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZc1tZ8JsZvg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZc1tZ8JsZvg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZc1tZ8JsZvg&media=>
Watch the trailer for Lo and Behold, Reveries of the Connected World 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zc1tZ8JsZvg> 
His latest documentary, Lo and Behold, Reveries of the Connected World 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zc1tZ8JsZvg>, sends Herzog travelling to the 
lawless frontier of the virtual world. He comes cantering through the badlands 
of online forums, robot laboratories and hacker conventions, firing questions 
as he goes. The trip is typically idiosyncratic, brazenly subjective. Out of 
the blue, for instance, the director spins an exuberant fantasy of a futuristic 
Chicago that is completely abandoned except for a few Buddhist monks. On 
another occasion, wandering the campus at UCLA, he can’t resist providing a 
review of the decor: “The corridors here look repulsive.”

I would be cautious about assigning qualities like good or bad to the 
internet. We don’t do it with electricity, do we?

Off camera, too, the man has an authoritative snap that verges on the comic. 
He’s as capricious as a medieval king. His precise German accent lends every 
pronouncement an Old Testament thunder. His sentences swing from chuckling 
amusement to inexplicable fury. I have the sense he’s at his happiest when his 
thoughts have free rein. He can’t be doing with interruptions or pesky attempts 
to pin him like a butterfly. “Your premise is partially true,” he tells me at 
one point, “and fundamentally wrong.”

Herzog insists he has nothing against the internet, per se. It’s just that it 
is currently experiencing a boom time, “like American cars in Elvis time”, and 
that we need to learn how to use it responsibly. One woman in his film – a 
bereaved mother who experienced horrific online abuse – regardssocial media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> as the embodiment of all evil. 
Herzog sympathises with her but doesn’t see it that way. “I would be cautious 
about assigning qualities like good or bad to the internet. We don’t do it with 
electricity, do we?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwerner-herzog-internet-lo-and-behold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55a6edd36d8837771ebeae1e547afa9a75a07b1%2F0_0_2048_1152%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Werner%20Herzog%3A%20'My%20fake%20selves%20have%20some%20unifying%20sensory%20organ'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwerner-herzog-internet-lo-and-behold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Werner%20Herzog%3A%20%27My%20fake%20selves%20have%20some%20unifying%20sensory%20organ%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwerner-herzog-internet-lo-and-behold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55a6edd36d8837771ebeae1e547afa9a75a07b1%2F0_0_2048_1152%2F2048.jpg>
 Technological frontier … a robotics researcher at work, in Lo and Behold. 
Photograph: Dogwoof 
In the past, Herzog’s movies have taken him up the Amazon river (Aguirre, 
Wrath of God 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/06/aguirre-the-wrath-of-god-review>
), across the Antarctic (Encounters at the End of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2009/apr/24/werner-herzog-encounters-at-the-end>
) and through the bear-infested woods of Alaska (Grizzly Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/jan/27/2>). I’ve just watched his other 
new documentary,the excellent Into the Inferno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/21/into-the-inferno-review-werner-herzog-peers-into-the-depths-of-the-volcano>
, in which he hunkers down at the edge of a belching volcano. Time and again, 
his work depicts a natural world which is beautiful and terrible and ultimately 
uncaring. I wonder if the virtual world is really any different.


I have a presence on the internet. It’s fake. Somebody answers. There are 
voice impersonators.

Herzog frowns at the notion. “No,” he says. “Because it is not independent of 
us. When we speak of the horrors of the internet, it’s not the internet we are 
talking about – it’s humans. And human nature manifests itself in a way we have 
never seen before, because it’s anonymous and it’s on a massive scale. But it 
is not like nature, that is not it at all. It is human beings using the tool of 
the internet.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYoSmPkWmG4k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYoSmPkWmG4k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYoSmPkWmG4k&media=>
Watch a trailer for Into the Inferno 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YoSmPkWmG4k> 
The director turned 74 in September. He accepts that this makes him a stranger 
in a strange land. He’d rather speak face-to-face than pick up a smartphone. 
He’d rather walk to the shop as opposed to using satnav. But he admits that 
technology has its uses. Herzog is based in LA and so he will often email his 
brother, who lives in Vienna. Alternatively he might use Google for what he 
refers to as “superficial research”. Just the other day he was looking up 
neolithic menhirs in Brittany; sending pictures to a friend. He says: “The 
menhirs break into very interesting shapes.”

And yet while Herzog may be keen to hold the internet at arm’s length, the 
internet – for its part – rushes to embrace him. His distinctive persona has 
inspired a rash ofTwitter handles <https://twitter.com/WernerTwertzog> and 
Facebook profiles and achatbot <http://wernerbot.com/> that advises the user to 
immediately read a book called The Catalogue of Dwarves bythe Poetic Edda 
<http://www.sacred-texts.com/neu/poe/poe03.htm>.
Werner Twertzog (@WernerTwertzog) 
No, cashier, 
I did not "find everything I am looking for." 

But you did not mean it as an existential question. 

I absolve you.
 <https://twitter.com/WernerTwertzog/status/787064023221170183> October 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/WernerTwertzog/status/787064023221170183> 
“Yes,” he says. “I have a presence on the internet – one that I have not 
encouraged. It’s fake. Somebody answers. There are voice impersonators. So I 
have had to get acquainted with this very quickly. Representation of self is 
drastically changing. And of course on Facebook it’s all embellished, stylised 
selves anyway. But my popularity on the internet has to do with the fact that 
all of these fake selves somehow recognise each other and have some unifying 
sensory organ for authenticity.” He chuckles. “So I have no problem with all 
the impostors. It would be silly to complain. I think I have enough self-irony 
to understand what’s going on.”

I suggest that in his later years he has become a kind of self-sustaining 
brand: the archetypal European arthouse director. Most of the people who follow 
his representatives online have probably never actually sat through one of his 
films. “No,” he says. “Not true. People actually see my films more now. I get 
emails from 12 year olds asking aboutThe Enigma of Kaspar Hauser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/oct/28/3>.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzxreLUzuUI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzxreLUzuUI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzxreLUzuUI&media=>
 Watch a trailer for Herzog’sThe Enigma of Kaspar Hauser 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tzxreLUzuUI> 
Shot back in 1974, The Enigma of Kaspar Hauser is the haunting, fact-based 
tale of a young outcast, raised in chained isolation before being adopted by 
19th-century bourgeois society. Possibly it even reflects Herzog’s own 
experience. He spent his childhood in the German Alps, without a telephone or 
running water. Alighting in Munich as an adolescent, he stole his first camera 
from the local film school. Even today, he seems to pride himself on a 
primitive purity, a naked curiosity about the world and its people. It’s as if 
he believes that each production he shoots is the very first film ever made.

He agrees that this mindset is a hangover from his youth. “I had no experience 
of cinema until I was 11. I didn’t even know cinema existed because I grew up 
in the mountains of Bavaria, very remote. So I always, from a very young age, 
had the feeling I had to invent cinema. Even today I feel like the inventor of 
cinema. Now you have to take that with a grain of salt, because of course I’m 
not the inventor of cinema. But nonetheless…” He trails off.

The only thing I also wanted to be was a ski-jumper. That was over in a second 
when my friend had a near-fatal accident

I ask what the catalyst was; what initially made him want to direct. He says 
he honestly can’t think; most likely the profession chose him. “I love what I 
do. And I have never been able to learn anything else. A decent profession. The 
only thing I also wanted to be was an athlete. I wanted to be a ski-jumper. But 
that was over in a second when my best friend at the time had a near-fatal 
accident.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwerner-herzog-internet-lo-and-behold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38c85aeb604cebb7762537ee1c8d49ec8a4ab52c%2F0_19_2309_1487%2F2309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Werner%20Herzog%3A%20'My%20fake%20selves%20have%20some%20unifying%20sensory%20organ'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwerner-herzog-internet-lo-and-behold-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Werner%20Herzog%3A%20%27My%20fake%20selves%20have%20some%20unifying%20sensory%20organ%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwerner-herzog-internet-lo-and-behold-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38c85aeb604cebb7762537ee1c8d49ec8a4ab52c%2F0_19_2309_1487%2F2309.jpg>
 Werner Herzog on set with Klaus Kinski, taken from My Best Fiend. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/BBC 
Does he still ski for pleasure? “No,” he says. “Because I had a very serious 
accident of my own some years ago. And the injuries I suffered are somehow 
still present.” For some reason this strikes him as funny; he can’t stop 
giggling. “I shouldn’t fall hard on my left shoulder, for example. I would come 
apart at the seams. You watch. I would explode!”

Lo and Behold: Reveries of the Connected World review – Herzog's sombre look 
at the digital revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/27/lo-and-behold-reveries-of-the-connected-world-review-herzogs-sombre-look-at-the-digital-revolution>
The evidence suggests that he’s exploded already. As well as the two 
documentaries currently doing the rounds, he has an ecological thriller (Salt 
and Fire) set for imminent release. His workrate, if anything, appears to be 
speeding up. And that’s reckoning without his vibrant online presence: the 
Twitterbots and avatars which speak their master’s voice to the world.

“I am becoming, like, an internet meme!” Herzog exclaims at one point and his 
amusement is such that it makes him choke on his coffee. He’s like a student 
mastering an exotic language, or a child taking his first steps in a brand new 
pair of shoes.

 * Lo and Behold, Reveries of the Connected World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/lo-and-behold-reveries-of-the-connected-world-review-herzogs-wild-ride-through-the-web>
 is out now;Into the Inferno <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80066073> is 
available on Netflix.
 