
Salomón Rondón scored a second-half hat-trick of headers to keep West Bromwich 
Albion <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> airborne in the Premier 
League and Swansea City flapping near the foot of the table. It was the 
Venezuela international’s first three-goal haul for his club and took his tally 
to the season to seven from 15 league matches, an excellent strike rate for a 
player who often fulfils a lonely role up front in a team that is not always 
minded to attack.

Albion’s ambitions are growing, however, and this win propelled them back to 
seventh in the table.

Two-goal Christian Eriksen inspires Tottenham to victory over Hull City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/tottenham-hotspur-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
Tony Pulis’s evening was sullied a tad when Wayne Routledge struck to deny 
Albion a clean sheet, but that detail could not take too much lustre off a 
highly satisfying win for the hosts. Nor could it console the visitors, who had 
arrived hoping to secure back-to-back victories for the first time under Bob 
Bradley but departed knowing that they had not bared their teeth until it was 
too late.

The frustration for the American manager was that his team finished strongly 
and started quite solidly but lost because they unravelled for a spell after 
half-time. “There was a 13-minute stretch where we seemed to lose our way,” he 
said. It was during that stretch that Rondón put the match beyond Swansea’s 
reach.

The salvo was all the more welcome for Rondón because he had squandered 
Albion’s only two clear chances in the first period. After a quarter of an hour 
he was denied by Lukasz Fabianski but the striker was visibly annoyed with 
himself for making a save possible, his effort from 10 yards placed too close 
to the goalkeeper and undoing splendid preparatory work by Matt Phillips and 
James Morrison. Later in the half he was sent clear again but did not get his 
shot away fast enough, allowing Alfie Mawson to make a terrific block.

At that stage Swansea were well in the game. But the visitors’ nimble moves, 
orchestrated by the ever-wonderful Leon Britton, tended to fizzle out before 
reaching the opposing box. That meant they failed to test an Albion defence 
that was missing two of its stalwarts, with Jonny Evans injured and Craig 
Dawson suspended. Swansea’s only notable shot in the first half came from a 
predictable source: a free-kick by Gylfi Sigurdsson. The Icelander curled his 
shot over the wall from 20 yards but straight into the arms of Ben Foster.

As the first half wore on the tide turned on the Swans and they were grateful 
to make it to half-time with the scoreboard blank. The reprieve, though, only 
seemed to lull them into negligence.

Fabianksi, in fairness, remained alert. He made an urgent intervention within 
50 seconds of the resumption, bounding off his line to snaffle the ball at the 
feet of Nacer Chadli. But Swansea’s defenders were sleep-walking and conceded 
three goals in 13 minutes. The first came five minutes into the half when 
Phillips swung in a free-kick from the right and Rondón stole a march on his 
markers to head powerfully into the net from eight yards. Mawson jumped up and 
down in impotent anger but Swansea would need to channel their frustration into 
something more constructive to draw level.

They did not. Albion threatened to widen the gap just before the hour, but 
Phillips could not match Rondón’s heading prowess when presented with an 
opportunity by Darren Fletcher. Two minutes later Rondón gave another 
demonstration of the art, expertly steering a header into the bottom corner 
from a cross by Chris Brunt. Again, Swansea’s defenders had done nothing to 
deter him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwest-bromwich-albion-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F535635e42ea16b35fe4cf0c13d4ba9866616f63f%2F0_47_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Brom%E2%80%99s%20Salom%C3%B3n%20Rond%C3%B3n%20swamps%20Swansea%20City%20with%20headed%20hat-trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwest-bromwich-albion-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Brom%E2%80%99s%20Salom%C3%B3n%20Rond%C3%B3n%20swamps%20Swansea%20City%20with%20headed%20hat-trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwest-bromwich-albion-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F535635e42ea16b35fe4cf0c13d4ba9866616f63f%2F0_47_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Swansea’s Lukasz Fabianski is put under pressure by Salomón Rondón. 
Photograph: Nick Potts/PA 
Their inattention amounted to encouragement. So Rondón wasted no time 
completing his hat-trick, nodding powerfully home from 12 yards from another 
delivery by Brunt.

“It was a wonderful hat-trick,” said Pulis. “He’s getting better. He finds it 
very difficult sometimes to understand how hard every game is in thePremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>. He was up and down 
last year but he’s been more consistent this year. And the great thing about 
this match is that he missed two great chances in the first half and it hasn’t 
affected him.”

Swansea came back to life only when it was too late. In the 78th minute the 
substitute Modou Barrow made the sort of jagged run that they had been lacking. 
It led, thanks partly to a misjudgment by Jonas Olsson, to Routledge slamming 
the ball into the net from 12 yards. Foster then made a fabulous reflex save in 
stoppage time to prevent a cross from cannoning off Gareth McAuley for an own 
goal.

“There was a spell late on when we played some decent stuff,” said Bradley. 
“But one of the most important things that we have to be able to improve is 
that if we do go behind, we have to be able to get back into the game, string 
some passes together, not panic or lose concentration or belief. That’s the 
part that gets me angry.”
 