
It was an afternoon when the mood turned ugly in South Wales as Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> supporters called for Bob 
Bradley to be sacked and vented their anger at the members of the board who 
sold their shares in the summer. “We want Bradley out” and “You greedy bastards 
get out of our club” were among the chants reverberating around the stadium 
during another chastening defeat for a team who look resigned to relegation.

Bob Bradley expects crisis talks after Swansea fans demand his sacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/bob-bradley-swansea-fans-sacking-west-ham>
The only festive cheer was found in the away end, where the euphoric West Ham 
fans celebrated a third successive victory that lifted Slaven Bilic’s side up 
to 11th and piled the misery on to Swansea and their American manager. Bradley 
put on a brave face and all indications are the Swansea board have no desire to 
dismiss the man who was appointed in October, yet there is no escaping the 
level of discontent that was swirling around the Liberty Stadium in the second 
half.

The atmosphere felt poisonous and it was not only the hardcore support, in the 
upper tier of the East Stand, who were calling for Bradley to go. At one point 
near the end that “We want Bradley out” chant swept around the stadium as fans 
railed at the sight of their club sliding towards the Championship.

Bradley was never a popular choice at the outset and the results since his 
appointment have done nothing to change opinion. Swansea have picked up only 
eight points from his 11 games in charge and, most damningly of all, conceded 
29 goals. The West Ham defeat was the eighth time under his watch that Swansea 
have shipped three goals or more in a game.

It is a woeful record, yet Bradley is not solely responsible for the way that 
Swansea’s season has unravelled. Their recruitment in the summer was 
desperately poor and it is tempting to wonder how much better any other manager 
would do with the group of players Bradley inherited when he replaced Francesco 
Guidolin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fswansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbb1c5bb0763cfe560431001cdedac0e4e72493a%2F0_103_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%E2%80%99s%20Andy%20Carroll%20twists%20knife%20into%20Bob%20Bradley%20and%20Swansea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fswansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%E2%80%99s%20Andy%20Carroll%20twists%20knife%20into%20Bob%20Bradley%20and%20Swansea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fswansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbb1c5bb0763cfe560431001cdedac0e4e72493a%2F0_103_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 André Ayew opens the scoring for West Ham from a yard out against his former 
club. Photograph: Michael Steele/Getty Images 
Defensively Swansea are a shambles. Bradley has tried just about every 
permutation possible with the back and yet nothing seems to get any better. 
Some of his tactics in other areas make no sense and it was a curious decision 
on Bradley’s part to leave out Fernando Llorente, who had scored four goals in 
his previous two home matches. Borja, the £15.5m club-record signing who has 
scored only once all season, started in place of Llorente and was dragged off 
at half-time.

By that stage Swansea were a goal down after yet another piece of calamitous 
defending. André Ayew, returning to the club where he finished as top scorer 
last season, registered his first goal for West Ham with a simple tap-in. 
Winston Reid added the second early in the second half and it was at that point 
that the frustration in the stands started to boil over.

Arsenal’s Olivier Giroud snatches late win against West Brom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/arsenal-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
Michail Antonio later added a third and although Llorente pulled one back for 
Swansea late on, Bilic’s side were not finished. Andy Carroll, volleying home 
at the far post, twisted the knife with a fourth to re-establish their 
three‑goal advantage.

Swansea face Bournemouth at home on Saturday, and travel to Crystal Palace 
three days later. Whether Bradley will still be around for both of those games 
remains to be seen. Whatever the board thinks privately about wanting to give 
Bradley more time, the manager’s position will become close to untenable if 
Swansea lose in front of their own fans against Bournemouth. “In terms of 
trying to win back a bit of belief from the supporters, Bournemouth couldn’t be 
bigger,” Bradley said.

For West Ham, who have collected 10 points from their past four matches, the 
world seems a much happier place. They brutally exposed Swansea’s defensive 
frailties and never looked back from the moment Reid headed in Dimitri Payet’s 
corner five minutes into the second half.

West Ham’s breakthrough in the first half had owed much to Carroll, who 
towered above Angel Rangel to head Mark Noble’s diagonal pass back across goal, 
and also Lukasz Fabianski’s poor goalkeeping. Fabianski carelessly pushed the 
ball into the path of Ayew, who slotted home from inside the six-yard box.

Chelsea’s Pedro torments Bournemouth to stretch league winning run to 12
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/chelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
Although Darren Randolph made a couple of decent saves to deny Gylfi 
Sigurdsson and Jack Cork, Swansea never threatened to mount a fightback. There 
is no conviction about their play and it was no surprise when Antonio stabbed 
home a third, turning in Havard Nordtveit’s wayward shot. Llorente, on for 
Borja, reduced the deficit when he converted Nathan Dyer’s cross but Carroll 
put a smile back on Bilic’s face with West Ham’s fourth goal.

Not that the West Ham manager is taking anything for granted. “It would be 
suicidal to think we are safe now and look only who is above us,” Bilic said. 
“It is still very tight but we have to use this to gain confidence and continue 
to improve. Only then we will have a chance to finish good.”
 