
He could see them go – they were not exactly sneaking out. Even before Arsenal 
scored their final goal last Saturday, thousands of West Ham United fans had 
left the London Stadium, those long, painful closing minutes played before 
sweeps of empty white seats. Álvaro Arbeloa could not stop them; nor could he 
blame them. His manager couldn’t, either: afterwards all Slaven Bilic could do 
was apologise to them. “A big humiliation,” he called it.It finished 5-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/west-ham-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, the home side conceding three in six minutes, four in 14. It could have been 
eight.

Slaven Bilic admits ‘all the clubs’ would like to sign Liverpool’s Daniel 
Sturridge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/slaven-bilic-west-ham-liverpool-daniel-sturridge>
“You reach the point where you think: ‘Let’s stop the bleeding, at least,’” 
Arbeloa admits, but the cut was deep. “It felt like we might get into it, but 
they scored three in six minutes.Bam! We went for it desperately and every 
counter was a goal: goal, goal, goal. You felt the disappointment. You have to 
live with that: we can’t ask anything from them.” The word he uses next is
desencantada and while it does not translate exactly, it fits – not just last 
Saturday but all season, on the pitch and off. The fans are disenchanted, 
disillusioned. Everyone at West Ham is.

It was not supposed to be this way. After seven years at Real Madrid, having 
won every trophy there is, there were good reasons for Arbeloa to join West 
Ham. England, London, the Premier League, European competition, a team playing 
“attractive” football, a new stadium, the excitement of a new era, supporters 
he likens to those who so embraced him when he played forLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, the Hammers’ opponents on 
Sunday. “They’re alike; there’s a great communion between fans and players.”

It is tempting to respond: not any more, there’s not. Last Saturday Arsène 
Wenger claimed: “West Ham aren’t comfortable at home.” Perhaps because it is 
not home yet. But that alone does not explain them lying 17th, one point from 
the relegation zone. Their away form has been worse, for a start. “I didn’t 
expect this; nobody did,” Arbeloa says. “Last season was spectacular, bringing 
hope, but thenwe were knocked out of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/west-ham-astra-giurgiu-europa-league-match-report>
. That was the first hammer blow and everything followed. Not playing in 
Europe, which would’ve given everyone minutes, moving stadium, which has been 
hard, the team in this position … it’s not surprising fans lose enthusiasm, 
that hope.”

There is a case to suggest that last season was part of the problem, creating 
false expectations; such hope was misplaced. But things still should not be 
this bad. “They were seventh, above Liverpool. Is repeating that impossible? I 
don’t think so, but we do have to recognise that the two Manchester [clubs], 
Arsenal, Chelsea, Liverpool and Tottenham have stronger squads,” Arbeloa says. 
“Yet our squad should be as good as, say, Everton’s. We shouldn’t be so low.”

“I played at Upton Park [for Liverpool] and it’s completely different. A 
smaller pitch, the fans closer. Upton Park meant points. A new stadium allows 
you to grow, but it’s good to maintain that proximity. For visiting teams, the 
new stadium’s much easier. That’s not the [sole] reason, but it’s another 
ingredient. You can’t say: ‘This is why we’re in this situation, or this is.’ 
It’s lots of things. Take injuries: is it that? No, but they play a part. You 
miss your best players, you can’t create an identity, the base of a team. Then 
when things start going badly, you don’t have the same confidence; it becomes a 
snowball, gathering a momentum, that you have to stop.”

After the Arsenal game Bilic tried, accusing his players of lacking intensity, 
even in training. “It’s good for the manager to tell it the way he sees it, to 
highlight what he thinks we need to do to change the situation,” Arbeloa says. 
“And on the Monday, he told us we have to be united in these difficult moments. 
I also understand that coaches sometimes try to get a reaction from players via 
the media.”

Bilic’s words spoke too of a manager under pressure, reportedly handed an 
ultimatum, yet Arbeloa says: “He looks more volcanic than he is. Other coaches 
might have been more susceptible, they might have lost it, but he’s been quite 
calm. We’re not in this situation because of the manager and I don’t think 
changing means you’ll pick up more points. Inside the team, you won’t hear 
anyone saying he’s the problem.”

Nor have there been recriminations in the dressing room. “The relationship’s 
good,” Arbeloa insists, pausing to add, “maybe even too good. At times, I think 
we should be killing each other a bit more – more angry. The atmosphere should 
be more tense.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwest-ham-alvaro-arbeloa-slaven-bilic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F614701448e4806d7aa558484110379459cc782a1%2F0_186_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%E2%80%99s%20%C3%81lvaro%20Arbeloa%3A%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20regret%20coming%20at%20all.%20I%20want%20to%20be%20here%20to%20the%20end%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwest-ham-alvaro-arbeloa-slaven-bilic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%E2%80%99s%20%C3%81lvaro%20Arbeloa%3A%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20regret%20coming%20at%20all.%20I%20want%20to%20be%20here%20to%20the%20end%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwest-ham-alvaro-arbeloa-slaven-bilic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F614701448e4806d7aa558484110379459cc782a1%2F0_186_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Álvaro Arbeloa has made just three league appearances for West Ham this 
season, the most recent the 5-1 defeat to Arsenal. Photograph: David 
Price/Arsenal FC via Getty Images 
It is, he says, a young team, a good group, although it sounds like one that 
lacks leadership, that person who steps forward. “I don’t think it would fair 
to the captain to say that,” Arbeloa insists. He says there are different ways 
to lead – he cites Dimitri Payet’s willingness to take the ball and 
responsibility at difficult moments, for example – but admits there have been 
few raised voices. If that all sounds a little too comfortable, Arbeloa says 
they are aware of the reality. And although it is new to him he says he is 
ready for it, too. “We’re conscious of the position we’re in, which is 
important: look at Newcastle, who thought that there was no chance they’d go 
down.

“The teams around us are getting points, the teams above are opening a gap, 
Swansea and Sunderland looked dead but they’ve closed on us. I don’t want to be 
in that position but at Madrid every defeat is a catastrophe and the demands 
are brutal. Pressure is pressure. That: ‘Shit, we have to win.’ The next four 
or five games are crucial.”

That run starts at Liverpool on Sunday, although Arbeloa admits that the four 
matches that follow are likely more decisive: Burnley, Hull, Swansea and 
Leicester. He will miss out on Anfield, too; he would have loved to return to a 
stadiumspecial to him, as he did with Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/20/alvaro-arbeloa-liverpool-real-madrid-champions-league>
, but he is limping as he arrives in Marylebone, his leg purple, swollen and 
bruised just as he aspired to a rare opportunity. Last Saturday was only his 
third league appearance of the season. Injuries suggested he might have got a 
fourth; form suggested he might not have done, except that it is hard to know 
what his form is actually like with so few chances.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Another reason Arbeloa came was to play, after a final season of limited 
opportunity in Spain, but he has not. When he got his chance last weekend, for 
the first time since coming on against Middlesbrough on 1 October, it ended 
with a heavy defeat. Then came reports that he would be moved on in January, 
departing in virtual anonymity havingarrived feted as a World Cup winner 
<http://www.whufc.com/news/articles/2016/august/31-august/hammers-sign-world-cup-winner>
.

A late arrival did not help, Arbeloa insisting that working alone is never the 
same, “even if you trained 24 hours a day”, and he suggests that he and the 
coach still need time to “connect”, but he has not asked for an explanation as 
to why he has started just one league game all season.“You don’t ask why when 
you’re playing and you don’t ask when you’re not,” he says. “He’s under a lot 
of pressure; he doesn’t need me saying: ‘Hey, why aren’t I playing?’ That would 
just create tension, another problem to deal with. But I want to play, of 
course.”

Can he though? Is his level good enough any more? “I went almost two months 
without playing and [against Arsenal] I covered the most distance sprinting and 
in high intensity,” Arbeloa says. “But to really judge it, you need to play 
more, so I don’t know. I do know that I’m killing myself to change things; I 
haven’t just accepted it.

“And I’m not leaving. Sometimes you read things [in the papers] and think: ‘Do 
I say something? Do I ignore it?’ I feel like people were misinformed and all I 
can say is that I’m staying until the summer, no matter what. And no one from 
West Ham has told me to look for a team or anything.”

And then? In January, Arbeloa will be 34. For many players that is retirement 
age and inactivity tends to nudge players towards the end. It is not a decision 
he has taken – so long as he feels fit and motivated he intends to continue – 
and nor has he decided what he will do next. Coaching appeals, especially after 
Zinedine Zidane told himwinning the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
 as manager was miles better than doing so as a player. “But then,” he says 
with a laugh, “I think about putting up with 25 bastards like me. I’d put a 
bullet in my head. You’re always the bad guy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwest-ham-alvaro-arbeloa-slaven-bilic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7006ab154d5e416a1da0149ac6541d3260dd8a9%2F63_407_1294_776%2F1294.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%E2%80%99s%20%C3%81lvaro%20Arbeloa%3A%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20regret%20coming%20at%20all.%20I%20want%20to%20be%20here%20to%20the%20end%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwest-ham-alvaro-arbeloa-slaven-bilic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%E2%80%99s%20%C3%81lvaro%20Arbeloa%3A%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20regret%20coming%20at%20all.%20I%20want%20to%20be%20here%20to%20the%20end%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fwest-ham-alvaro-arbeloa-slaven-bilic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7006ab154d5e416a1da0149ac6541d3260dd8a9%2F63_407_1294_776%2F1294.jpg>
 Álvaro Arbeloa with Steven Gerrard at Liverpool in 2008: ‘I’ve played with 
some of the best players in history, but Gerrard’s the most complete.’ 
Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty Images 
He has watched others make the transition and he certainly has some of the 
attributes – he has had the coaches too, including Benítez, Mourinho, Ancelotti 
and Del Bosque – but he says that sometimes life, and opportunity, makes 
decisions for you. Take Jamie Carragher, for example.

“Everyone saw Carragher as a coach but he’s as happy as can be on the telly, 
eh! Relaxed, comfortable. We all said: ‘Carragher will be a coach, Stevie 
[Gerrard] on the telly,’ but maybe it’ll be the other way around.”

Isn’t Gerrard a bit quiet to be a coach, though? “And Zidane isn’t?” Arbeloa 
shoots back. “None of us could see it and now look. I’ve been lucky. I’ve 
played with some of the best players in history, but Gerrard’s the most 
complete.” More than Zidane? “Could Zidane defend like Steven?” Arbeloa 
replies, swiftly.

“He defended, he attacked, he was good in the air, he could hit it with his 
right, with his left, he could head a corner or take it, play everywhere. He 
could do so much, so well. He has experience, he’s worked with good coaches, 
and if he wants to be a coach, he can.

“You think he’s calm but on the pitch he’s all passion. You see him flying 
into a tackle or celebrating a goal and think: ‘Calm? Yeah, when he’s sleeping 
maybe …’ And if he wants to be a coach there’s no better place than Liverpool.”

The place West Ham will go on Sunday, travelling to Arbeloa’s former home 
without him. There is that spiral he talks about, so hard to break. When your 
luck’s out, it’s out. Summer excitement has given way to this; it could hardly 
have gone worse so far.

“One of the good things about getting older is you learn with experience and 
I’ve learnt that a season isn’t September to January; what really matters is 
January to June, and I hope to be here. I just want to help,” he says. “I don’t 
regret coming at all – and the proof of that is that I don’t want to go in 
January; I want to be here to the end.”
 