
Tony Pulis may not wish to dwell on financial matters after his costly loss in 
the high court last week but there is at least one calculation of which he can 
be proud. If transfer expenditure is factored into the amount of points won by 
eachPremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> club 
this season, then Pulis is the highest-performing manager.

Manchester City 1-0 Stoke City | FA Cup final match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/14/manchester-city-stoke-city-fa-cup>
West Bromwich Albion <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> made a 
net spend of around £12m in the summer and after their win against Watford on 
Saturday they sit seventh in the league. When asked about this timely reminder 
of his ability to maximise resources, Pulis smiled and said: “If you look at 
the last eight or nine years, in terms of pounds per points gained as a 
manager, I’m top of that as well – but I don’t like to talk about it.”

Pulis, famously, has never been relegated during nearly three decades as a 
manager. What is less well known is that for all his success, even at Stoke 
City, whom he led to the 2011 FA Cup final and qualification for the Europa 
League, he has never finished in the top half of the Premier League table.

“If you speak to people at Stoke and ask: ‘Would you have preferred Tony to 
finish in the top 10 or take us to a Cup final and finish in the last 16 in 
Europe and go to Valencia and places likes that’, I know what they’d say.”

Having reached new heights with Albion, Pulis is trying to figure out how to 
stay there. He knows how quickly fortunes can change, as his team have provided 
proof in recent weeks. “Before the Leicester game [on 6 November] we looked at 
the table and were fourth from bottom and had been sucked right back in because 
we played last,” the captain, Darren Fletcher, said. “But we responded to that.”

The 2-1 victory at Leicester was the start of a run that has yielded 10 points 
from four matches. They had to work hard to extend that against Watford. Jonny 
Evans headed the first goal before Chris Brunt fired in the second with the aid 
of a deflection. Christian Kabasele pulled one back in the second half but after
Watford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> had Roberto Pereyra sent 
off for pushing James McClean, Matt Philips secured victory for Albion. Their 
next assignment is at Chelsea, who have hit strong form themselves. Something 
will have to give.
 