
I store my photos on a six-year-old MacBook Pro, which still has a traditional 
hard drive. My next laptop will probably have a 512GB or smaller SSD, so I will 
need another way to store them. I would like to share a database with my 
husband, so we can store family and travel photos from phones and cameras. I’m 
still uncomfortable with the thought of all my family photos being online 
somewhere, which I accept may be a little illogical as I do use cloud back up 
for other items.


The next part of the question is how best to manage photos. I use iPhoto (now 
Photos) and briefly looked at Adobe Lightroom, but didn’t really need the pro 
features for the handful of times I shoot in RAW. However, iPhoto/Photos was/is 
creaking with the amount of photos I have.Jan

When storing digital photos, aim to have at least three copies of everything, 
preferably more. Ideally, all three sets of photos should be on different 
media, and one copy should be “off site”, not in your home.

There are lots of different ways to store photos. These include SD cards, USB 
thumb drives, DVD or Blu-ray discs, external hard drives, NAS (Network Attached 
Storage) boxes, and online (cloud) services. It depends how many photos you 
have, how often you need to access them, and how much you are willing to pay.

The best option for individuals is an external hard drive, connected to your 
PC via a USB or Thunderbolt port. Powered USB 3 drives are big, fast, 
reasonably priced, and generally reliable. At the moment, 3TB drives are 
probably your best bet, but you can choose from 2TB to 5TB drives. It depends 
on the size of your photo collection, and how fast it’s growing. Estimate how 
much space you will need in, say, five years.

You will need two external hard drives, so that one provides a backup. What I 
do is copy all the media files (photos, music, movies etc) on my desktop PC – 
the master database – to an external hard drive. This is synced to an identical 
external hard drive viaFreeFileSync <http://freefilesync.sourceforge.net/>, but 
there are plenty ofalternative programs 
<http://alternativeto.net/software/freefilesync/>.

This approach has two problems. First, it doesn’t provide an off-site backup. 
Second, it doesn’t offer a simple way to share photos that are not on the PC.

In your case, the cheapest solution is to buy his-and-hers external hard 
drives. You copy all your photos to your EHD, your husband copies all his 
photos to his EHD, and then you sync the two drives. Obviously this must be a 
two-way sync, so each drive ends up with both sets of photos. (A mirror sync 
will delete all the photos that are on one drive but not on the other.)

With this system, you will have at least two copies of each photo, and 
possibly more (if your PC or Time Capsule has copies). Each of you will have 
easy access to the other’s photos, as long as you’re at home.

Get a NAS

A more flexible, but more expensive, approach is to buy a NAS box. A NAS is 
basically a small computer with its own processor, memory and operating system. 
but it’s packaged as an appliance for storing and sharing files.

You could both store all your photos on the NAS, and access them at any time 
via Wi-Fi. The NAS makes it easy to look at photos on smartphones and tablets 
as well as on PCs. NAS boxes can be accessed from any operating system 
including macOS (OS X), iOS, Windows, Android and Linux, and you can access them
remotely 
<https://turbofuture.com/computers/How-to-Remotely-connect-to-your-NAS-device>.

NAS boxes are usually supplied without any storage. You can buy a 2-bay, 4-bay 
or larger NAS and then installsuitable hard drives 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/HGST-Deskstar-inch-Internal-Drive/dp/B00HE7HG2C/>. If 
you run out of space, you can replace the NAS hard drives with larger ones. 
Look at Synology and QNAP devices to see what you need, and can afford. As a 
Mac user, you will want AirPlay support.

Set up your NAS to use RAID 1 
<http://www.thegeekstuff.com/2010/08/raid-levels-tutorial/>, so you have two 
hard drives installed, and one is a mirror image of the other. This will 
provide a backup if one hard drive fails. You can also back up the NAS to 
another external hard drive, which you can store somewhere else. (At your 
office, a friend’s house, a bank vault or whatever.)

For more information, see my earlier answers: Which NAS should I buy to store 
files? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2014/mar/07/which-nas-should-i-buy-to-store-files>
 andHow do I set up a media server to share photos with phones and tablets? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2014/jul/31/how-do-i-set-up-a-media-server-to-share-photos-with-phones-and-tablets>

Cloud backup

Nowadays, it’s easy to get an off-site back up by uploading files to the 
cloud. For photos, I recommend Flickr, which has been one of the best solutions 
for a decade. During that time, many other services have disappeared, such as 
Everpix, or changed the way they work, often for the worse. Flickr lets you 
share photos if you want, and it also has iPhone and Android apps.

Flickr provides 1TB of free photo storage 
<https://www.flickr.com/account/upgrade/pro> with photo editing and management 
tools. Two accounts will provide 2TB.

The best alternative is SmugMug <https://www.smugmug.com/plans/basic>, which 
provides unlimited storage of photos for $40 a year. SmugMug is aimed at 
professional photographers, who can set up websites and sell photos and prints 
online. However, it’s easy enough for anyone to use, and you can 
password-protect folders, galleries, pages, or your whole site.

There are dozens of cloud services that don’t specialise in hosting images. 
There are also online backup services that will back up whole hard drives, 
including Backblaze, CrashPlan, Carbonite, and Mozy. I don’t have the space to 
go into all of them here. However, there are significant differences between 
sites that are serious about storing original photos online, and sites that 
just store files.

Photo organisers

The major task is to organise all your photos in one folder called Photos or 
something similar, so you can back them up. It’s easiest to store images in the 
sub-folders that were created in the camera. However, I suggest you open 
folders for each year (2013, 2014, 2015 etc) and then sub-folders for each 
month or each quarter. After that, you can have topic folders, such as Vienna 
trip, or Alice’s wedding, with a General folder for the leftovers.

You can also have separate folders for topics such as holidays or weddings, 
which you remember by name rather than by year. I have separate folders for 
family photos, which would otherwise be widely dispersed across the past decade.

Once you have a logical, expandable structure in place, you can use software 
to catalogue your photos and make individual pictures easier to find.

There are dozens of photo organizers 
<http://alternativeto.net/software/adobe-lightroom/>, but I recommend Adobe 
Lightroom 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Adobe-Photoshop-Lightroom-PC-Mac/dp/B00M3YAIC6>. Most 
people see it as a way of processing images, and it’s very good at that. It’s 
also a great way to organise the photos on your hard drive. You can sort them 
using EXIF data, move them into new folders, and rename them easily. See, for 
example,How to Organize Photos in Lightroom 
<https://photographylife.com/how-to-organize-photos-in-lightroom>, and the 
YouTube video,Image Management in Lightroom 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dBhVvU8ZD4w>.

Lightroom is ubiquitous in serious photographic circles so there are dozens of 
tips andtutorials <https://helpx.adobe.com/lightroom/tutorials.html>, it can 
handle professional work volumes in a professional way, and – unlikeApple’s 
Aperture 
<https://techcrunch.com/2014/06/27/apple-to-cease-development-of-aperture-and-transition-users-to-photos-for-os-x/>
 – it’s not going to be abandoned. It’s very reasonably priced by Adobe 
standards, and you can buy a standalone version without signing up for Adobe’s 
Creative Cloud.Adobe Elements 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Adobe-Photoshop-Elements-14-Mac/dp/B013UNN9N8/> is a 
cheaper alternative

Mylio <http://mylio.com/> (from “My life is organised”) is a different sort of 
alternative: it catalogues and organises photos wherever they happen to be 
stored, whether on PCs, smartphones, or online services. But for long-term 
backup purposes, it’s better to do the work up front and consolidate your 
photos in one place.

Have you got a question? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com
 