








I draw a lot and I am using up a lot of paper. I would like to start drawing 
on something more virtual as I make a lot of mistakes. I also want to start 
drawing on some kind of tablet, as when I am older I would like to be an 
animator. Should I buy a drawing/graphics tablet or a normal tablet but use it 
for drawing only? Niamh (aged 12)

Drawing <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/drawing> on a graphics 
tablet and drawing on a tablet screen, are both very different from drawing on 
paper, so it’s a good idea to try before you buy. It seems to me – and I admit 
I’m rubbish at drawing – that it requires a lot of effort and many hours of 
practice to produce reasonable results. The digital products that come closest 
to matching the experience of drawing on paper tend to be somewhat expensive.

Getting hands-on experience could be difficult. If you’re lucky, your school 
may have some products you can try. Could you engineer a visit to a local art 
college? Do any family friends have graphics tablets? Could you try some in 
shops?

Lots of people own digital graphics products even if they have no interest in 
digital drawing. Examples include Samsung Galaxy Note tablets and phablets with 
S-Pen styluses, Microsoft Surface Pro tablets and Apple iPad Pros. Ordinary 
touch-screen tablets are not suitable for drawing, even if you can write on 
their screens.

If all else fails, the Wacom Intuos Draw graphics tablet is a simple, reliable 
and affordable answer. This plugs into a PC’s USB port and gets you going for 
around £50. The package includes an entry-level drawing tablet, a 
pressure-sensitive stylus, the ArtRage Lite program for Microsoft Windows or 
Mac, and some online tutorials.

Tablet history

Graphics tablets go back a long way: they were used in the 1970s for high-end 
CAD (computer-aided design) workstations, and entered the home computing market 
in the 1980s with the cheapKoalaPad 
<http://www.retroist.com/2012/01/23/the-koalapad/>, which was available for the 
Apple II, Commodore 64 and Atari 800.

The graphics tablet essentially replaced a mouse. However, the hand-held 
stylus enabled users to have much finer control.

As when using a mouse, your eyes are on the screen, not on the stylus and the 
graphics tablet. It’s certainly possible to do very detailed work this way, but 
it’s not quite the same as using a pencil and paper.

The next step was to combine the digitiser with the screen. The first popular 
example was theGRiDPad <http://www.oldcomputers.net/gridpad.html>, which was 
launched in 1989. The GRiDPad was a thick tablet running Microsoft’s MS-DOS 
operating system, and it had a monochrome screen with a resolution of 640 x 400 
pixels. It wasn’t much use for drawing, but it had industrial and military uses 
as a sort of electronic clipboard.

Digitising tablets finally hit the mainstream in 2002 with Tablet PCs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Tablet_PC> running Microsoft Windows 
XP Tablet PC Edition. These came with Ink Art, a licensed copy of ArtRage, and 
they could also do handwriting recognition synced to sound recordings – a 
popular feature with journalists. However, the screens were “laggy” and not 
very responsive, and XP Tablets were expensive and heavy, so they never caught 
on.

Wacom, a Japanese company, came to dominate the market for graphics tablets. 
Its patented technology was used in the screen of theCompaq Concerto 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compaq_Concerto> laptop released in 1992. Wacom 
expanded its range to include graphics tablets with LCD screens, so that users 
could draw directly onto the display surface. Being designed for graphics 
professionals, they were pressure-sensitive. They were also expensive.

Wacom’s screen-based Companion tablets now work as standalone tablet PCs 
running Microsoft Windows 8.1, though you can still use them plugged into a 
Windows PC or Mac. The dedicated buttons and Wacom software make them 
specialised devices.

When Microsoft launched the Surface Pro range of tablets in 2013, it included 
a pen and a Wacom digitiser for screen input. The performance and prices made 
them very attractive to artists, but less appealing to people who didn’t want 
pen input.

With the Surface Pro 3, Microsoft switched to using active (battery-powered) 
pens and N-Trig DuoSense digitising technology with 256 levels of pressure 
sensitivity. I’d guess that Surface Pro sales had reached the sort of volume 
where Microsoft wanted a cheaper solution, and it avoided future licence 
payments by buying N-Trig.

There has been a lot of debate about how N-Trig’s 256 levels of pressure 
sensitivity compare with Wacom’s 1024-levels in the Surface Pro 2. I’m no 
artist and I couldn’t tell the difference. However, I did find the Surface Pro 
3 pen nicer to use.

The most recent candidate is Apple’s iPad Pro, for which you can buy a powered 
stylus. This works extremely well. It’s at least the equivalent of Wacom’s 
Cintiq Companion and Microsoft’s Surface Pro 3 and 4 in being smooth and 
responsive, and probably better.

However, the Cintiq Companion and Surface Pro tablets have the advantage of 
being full-spec computers with standard USB and monitor ports. You can use them 
to run professional drawing and animation programs, the full Adobe Creative 
Suite of software, Microsoft Office and so on. There’s no hurry, in your case, 
but if you’re going to do this professionally, it’s important to be proficient 
with professional software.

Resolution, size and price

More is usually better, but also costs more. The things to look for include 
the size of the active drawing area, the resolution and the pressure 
sensitivity.

From this point of view, the Wacom Intuos graphics tablets are the best value, 
because you are not paying for a built-in LCD screen, processor, memory and 
other electronics. Of course, this does assume that you can plug your Intuos 
tablet into an existing desktop or laptop PC.

The Intuos Draw has a small active area of 152 x 95mm, 1024 levels of 
pen-pressure sensitivity and a resolution of 2540 lines per inch (lpi) for£49 
<http://www.wexphotographic.com/buy-wacom-intuos-creative-pen-graphic-tablet-draw-white-small/p1581548>
. Wacom also offers an Intuos Pro range, which comes in small, medium and large 
sizes. The medium has an active area of 224 x 140mm, 2048 pressure levels, and 
a resolution of 5080lpi, while the Large has an active area of 325 x 203mm.Wex 
Photographic’s prices 
<http://www.wexphotographic.com/search/?q=wacom%20intuos%20pro> are £165, £239 
and £335 respectively. (You can shop around.)

The cheapest 13.3in Wacom Cintiq 13HD Interactive Pen Display costs £580 
<http://www.wexphotographic.com/buy-wacom-cintiq-13hd-interactive-pen-display/p1536805>
 or more, and still needs to be plugged into a PC or Mac. The cheapest 
standalone Cintiq Companion 2 running Windows 8.1 on an Intel Core i5 processor 
costs£1,269 
<http://www.wexphotographic.com/buy-wacom-cintiq-companion-2-128gb/p1575115> or 
more. But these are overkill for your purposes, even if you can afford them.

If you really want to draw on a tablet screen, the cheapest options are 
probably the 10.1inSamsung Galaxy Note 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Samsung-Galaxy-10-1-inch-Tablet-White/dp/B00FZLHMFK/> 
and the 9.7inApple iPad Pro <http://www.apple.com/uk/ipad-pro/> (£499 plus £79 
for the Pencil). An alternative would be a second-hand or refurbished Microsoft 
Surface Pro 2. You can find them for around £235 to £300, depending on 
specification and condition. However, if they go wrong, they may be expensive 
to repair.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 