
There isn’t a lot of joy left in this presidential election, so we may as well 
pause a moment to appreciate those little satisfactions. When Ann Coulter tells 
Milo Yiannopoulos that she thinksDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is “mental”, try to see past 
the predictably crass slur and enjoy it.

Apparently, Yiannopoulos has a podcast. I mean, I guess he does. I didn’t 
listen pastthe preview 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ftfcMziE_7s&feature=youtu.be>. Anyway, this is 
where Ann Coulter gets to spend her time now.

Coulter, who once tweeted at 10:31 pm that Donald Trump should deport South 
Carolina’s governor, Nikki Haley 
<https://twitter.com/anncoulter/status/687114640782921728>, asserted that she 
doesn’t “[send] out half-baked tweets at midnight”. She then allowed that she 
was “a little testy with our man right now. Our candidate is mental. Do you 
realize our candidate is mental? It’s like constantly having to bail out your 
16-year-old son from prison!”

Naturally, one’s mind races to conceive of the Trumpian atrocity that finally 
prompted this frustration. Is it the fact that he railed for months against the 
Iraq war and troops on the ground and suddenly, in the Florida debate, 
suggested sending 40,000 of them to the region? More Megyn Kelly stuff? His 
chief of staff allegedly assaulting a reporter?

No, it’s a tweet mocking someone’s appearance, a funny thing to raise on this 
show of all shows <https://twitter.com/nero/status/518889155385118721>. 

Specifically, Trump retweeted this tweet 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/712850174838771712?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 about how Ted Cruz’s wife looks in comparison with Melania Trump. That’s bad. 
That’s the part where Trump did the bad thing.

Braying in her affected patrician lockjaw, like a more muscular William F 
Buckley, Coulter laments that she must defend or excuse things like this, as 
opposed to everything else Trump believes in, as if that is the real hindrance 
for a first-rate thinker.

Still, the defense must be averred all the same. Trump “has been more a victim 
than a victimizer”, she says, a clumsy rewording of “more sinned against than 
sinning”, which is likely a tactically poor phrasing to use when addressing a 
candidate whose favorite Bible passage comes from “Corinthians: The Deuce 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/01/18/463528847/citing-two-corinthians-trump-struggles-to-make-the-sale-to-evangelicals>
”.

What’s funny about this, besides everything obvious, is watching Trump do an 
end-around on Coulter’s schtick, forcing her to grab hold of his movement and 
get dragged through the mud if she doesn’t want to be left behind.


Coulter’s always made easy money writing barely-Wikipedia’d books that inflame 
prevailing conservative orthodoxy until it’s an eye-catching garbage fire 
blazing away just to the rightward outskirts of civilization. Democrats are 
guilty ofSlander 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slander:_Liberal_Lies_About_the_American_Right> 
andTreason 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treason:_Liberal_Treachery_from_the_Cold_War_to_the_War_on_Terrorism>
 before becomingdemonic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demonic:_How_the_Liberal_Mob_Is_Endangering_America>
 andmugging people 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mugged:_Racial_Demagoguery_from_the_Seventies_to_Obama>
. Now a billionaire is doing her bidding, and he doesn’t even need the cash.

Ann Coulter’s job now, though she won’t admit it, is reckoning with whatever 
Donald Trump does, because his entire campaign has either moved to the right of 
her or flattened her in position. She didn’t land on Donald Trump’s point of 
view; for all intents and purposes, Donald Trump landed on her.


When your only role on the scene is being that jackass, your gimmick is at 
risk from any jackass. For Coulter, at this point, endorsing and explaining 
Trump is a form of existential brand maintenance. Bookers have to be reassured 
that Ann Coulter is not only somewhat relevant but also still alive, that 
there’s movement twitching through the limbs crushed under the Trump monolith. 
Assuming bookers listen to Breitbart podcasts.

For his part, Yiannopoulos is downright plummy throughout the interview, 
giggling like Ernst Röhm hosting The View. He refers to Trump as “Daddy”, loves 
him when he gets “trashier” and guesses his penis size. It’s ever so naughty. 
But he also applauds Trump’s courage.

“It’s precisely that lack of adherence to the politically correct … it’s why 
he’s been able to open discussions about immigration when no one else did.”

Crediting Donald Trump for opening a xenophobic conservative discussion about 
Muslims and Mexican immigration is like claiming Paul Ryan invented tax cuts 
and Marco Rubio invented Reaganism.

But xenophobia’s what they’re left with, when the candidate’s policies are 
nonexistent and his positions flit about like a plastic bag in a hurricane. 
Coulter seems almost plaintive when clutching to it: “He’s the only one who’s 
going to build a wall, but please stop testing our patience on this stuff.”

These are the joys we have. In campaign 2016, you can watch someone whose work 
normally turns your stomach belly up to a buffet full of nauseating items and 
force them down, one by one, with a smile.
 