
The Queen and the prime minister both suffered diplomatic embarrassments last 
week. They were caught on camera speaking their minds.David Cameron, while 
talking to the Queen, referred to the “fantastically corrupt countries” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/10/david-cameron-afghanistan-nigeria-possibly-most-corrupt-countries>
 whose leaders were attending his anti-corruption summit. Then, later that day, 
while talking to a senior police officer,the Queen called the Chinese 
delegation from last year’s state visit “very rude” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/11/queen-chinese-officials-very-rude-xi-jinping-state-visit>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fcameron-caught-boasting-to-queen-about-fantastically-corrupt-countries-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron%20caught%20boasting%20to%20Queen%20about%20'fantastically%20corrupt'%20countries%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fcameron-caught-boasting-to-queen-about-fantastically-corrupt-countries-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameron%20caught%20boasting%20to%20Queen%20about%20%27fantastically%20corrupt%27%20countries%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fcameron-caught-boasting-to-queen-about-fantastically-corrupt-countries-video&media=>
Cameron caught boasting to Queen about ‘fantastically corrupt’ countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/10/cameron-caught-boasting-to-queen-about-fantastically-corrupt-countries-video>
Embarrassment is a strange emotion. You can never be quite sure when it’ll 
strike. There are some things you’d predict would be embarrassing: farting 
audibly, discovering your flies have been undone all day, being woken by an 
usher because you were snoring during a play. But then there are other, less 
obvious moments: feeling strangely observed while helping yourself at a buffet, 
running hard to catch a train and missing it, being suddenly noticed by the 
person you’ve been strangely observing help themselves at a buffet.

Being observed is crucial – it’s difficult to feel embarrassed in utter 
solitude – but there’s more to it than that. Otherwise this newspaper’s title 
would be a mission statement to embarrass the whole world; not so much speaking 
truth to power as waiting until power’s trousers fall down and then laughing.

If someone says to you 'That’s a bit embarrassing', it immediately is, even if 
it wasn’t. The chain reaction has begun

The timing of the sensation of being observed is the vital factor. If you’re 
in control of the timing, everything is much less embarrassing. Hence the 
difference between striding naked into a crowded room, and a curtain 
unexpectedly falling away to reveal you naked to a crowded room. I’m pretty 
sure the latter experience is more embarrassing than the former, though I’ve no 
intention of conducting an experiment to prove it.

Embarrassment can spread, like fire. It’s a chain reaction. People have two 
main responses to someone else’s embarrassment: to find it funny or to be 
embarrassed for them. Either outcome increases the embarrassment of the first 
person: it’s embarrassing to be laughed at, and it’s extremely embarrassing to 
feel that other people are embarrassed that you’re embarrassed.

In the usher-and-snorer-in-the-theatre scenario, the usher will, unless he’s a 
sociopath, probably be as embarrassed as the snorer – and a third-party 
observer might be embarrassed for them both. This spreading stain of 
mortification is odd as, in this situation, it’s only the snorer who’s done 
anything at all wrong (unless we count the director and playwright).

One of the most intensely embarrassing moments of my life came a few months 
ago when I accidentally sent an email to my long-time comedy partner, Robert 
Webb, which was blank apart from the subject line, which read: “RING ROB RE 
LIFT AND SAY HAPPY BIRTHDAY!” I meant to send it to myself because I use my 
inbox as a sort of “Things to do” list. (I could probably use “Notes” or 
“Calendar alerts” or “Reminders”, and I swear I’ll get to grips with all that 
just as soon as I receive confirmation that I’m immortal.)

In this case, the things I wanted to make myself do were to ask Rob for a lift 
to a mutual friend’s stag do the following weekend, and to wish him happy 
birthday for the week before. But I wouldn’t have chosen to do it that way 
round. I’d intended to telephone, full of apologies for forgetting his 
birthday, and then slip in the all-important lift request like an afterthought.

It was exactly as my phone made its swish of email-sending irrevocability that 
I realised some bloody temp of a synapse in my brain’s admin cortex had caused 
me to send the messageto Rob for the totally inadequate reason that it was about
 him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdavid-mitchell-queen-chinese-rude-cameron-corrupt-countries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf99da0b7734e5c4e6518fa1aa996698cd6b950e%2F0_0_2086_2877%2F2086.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%E2%80%99s%20so%20embarrassing%20about%20being%20embarrassed%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdavid-mitchell-queen-chinese-rude-cameron-corrupt-countries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%E2%80%99s%20so%20embarrassing%20about%20being%20embarrassed%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdavid-mitchell-queen-chinese-rude-cameron-corrupt-countries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf99da0b7734e5c4e6518fa1aa996698cd6b950e%2F0_0_2086_2877%2F2086.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
I don’t know why it was such a cringe-inducing moment. I wasn’t particularly 
ashamed of it: not of sending myself email reminders, nor forgetting Rob’s 
birthday (I often have before, as he has mine), nor wanting to ask for a lift. 
I am happy to admit to being a birthday-forgetting lift-scrounger who can’t set 
up calendar alerts. I suppose the catalyst for my embarrassment was the 
amusement I knew Rob would feel at the embarrassment he’d know I would.

The unintended observers’ expectation of discomfiture is also crucial in the 
cases of the Queen and the prime minister – because neither of them has said 
anything remotely weird, wrong or, in terms of its actual meaning, 
controversial.

The countries that David Cameron called corrupt, Nigeria and Afghanistan, 
absolutely are corrupt. WhenTransparency International  
<http://www.transparency.org.uk/>recently listed the world’s countries in order 
of governmental probity they featured at 136 and 166 respectively. So the prime 
minister said something accurate. Why’s that embarrassing?

Because those countries’ leaders got to hear it? Well, they’re already coming 
to an anti-corruption conference, so I imagine the subject was inevitably going 
to be raised and their attendance implies they might even be amenable to 
addressing it.

Because Cameron’s government indiscriminately sloshes aid those countries’ way 
and doesn’t lift a finger to make the City of London a less effective haven for 
the world’s ill-gotten gold? Well, if it’s that, it’s not his one factually 
correct remark we should focus on, but his whole lamentable regime.

And, as for the Queen’s comment, what on earth is she expected to say? 
President Xi’s delegation was clearly a nightmare. Would it have been better if 
she’d called them polite? “When will we British learn to treat foreign 
potentates with respect? All they want is to carry guns and have a bunch of 
protesters thrown in jail – what’s the problem?” She merely expressed the view 
that any decent person would hold.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fvery-rude-queen-unguarded-comments-chinese-officials-uk-visit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Very%20rude'%3A%20Queen's%20unguarded%20comments%20on%20Chinese%20officials%20during%20UK%20visit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fvery-rude-queen-unguarded-comments-chinese-officials-uk-visit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Very%20rude%27%3A%20Queen%27s%20unguarded%20comments%20on%20Chinese%20officials%20during%20UK%20visit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fvery-rude-queen-unguarded-comments-chinese-officials-uk-visit-video&media=>
‘Very rude’: Queen’s unguarded comments on Chinese officials during UK visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/may/11/very-rude-queen-unguarded-comments-chinese-officials-uk-visit-video>
It’s only embarrassing because the media say it is. And if someone says to you 
“That’s a bit embarrassing”, it immediately is, even if it previously wasn’t. 
The chain reaction has begun. Afaux pas has occurred. The fact that it 
consisted solely of the expression of self-evident truths doesn’t matter.

This is a consequence of our culture’s increasing comfort with placing limits 
on freedom of speech, and with the notion that some things simply must not be 
said – opinions or, in this case, facts. It’s as if we’re reinventing the 
proprieties of the Victorian age, when no one would refer to sex or the 
lavatory, when outward bland placidity concealed a ferment of hypocrisy.

We could easily suffer such repression again if we come to accept a climate in 
which both our head of state and leader of government are made to feel 
embarrassed when footage emerges of them disdaining to lie.
 