
Ramy Alshakarji was still coming to terms with the idea that at last he was 
safe – he was leaving Lesbos after all,one of 11 refugees rescued by the pope 
last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/pope-francis-flies-to-lesbos-to-highlight-humanitarian-crisis-in-europe>
 – when he found himself at the centre of an improbable security crisis. Ramy 
must have thought he had a broad and visceral understanding of the meaning of 
security after five years in Syria during which he and his family had been 
“ready to die at any moment, constantly moving because there was constant 
bombardment”. But at the airport, as he and his wife and their three children 
passed through the scanners, a panicked flurry broke around them.

“It was our falafel mould,” Ramy smiles. They had brought the metal falafel 
maker <http://www.falafelmaker.com> with them from their home in Deir ez-Zor. 
“But the Greeks wouldn’t let us take it on the plane. But we were going on the 
pope’s plane! The Vatican officials told them it had to come … The Greeks said 
no. There was a conflict between Al Pacino and Robert De Niro, a diplomatic 
rift between the Greeks and the Italians. All over our falafel mould.”

The Vatican <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican> prevailed and the 
mould has become for the family a more consequential object than Ramy’s wife, 
Suhila Ayiad, thought when she packed her bag long ago, and her eyes alighted 
on the small metal instrument tucked inside a package of scissors, needles, 
thread, “all the things I’d need”. For a moment she weighed the space the mould 
occupied in the bag against its future usefulness. “I thought, ‘Well, I’ll 
leave it in there.’”

“To remember,” Ramy says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefe4016dc81063b47ea2dca68db30d40238f84e8%2F0_216_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happened%20to%20the%2012%20Syrian%20refugees%20rescued%20by%20the%20pope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happened%20to%20the%2012%20Syrian%20refugees%20rescued%20by%20the%20pope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefe4016dc81063b47ea2dca68db30d40238f84e8%2F0_216_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Pope Francis meeting refugees at the Moria refugee camp on Lesbos in April. 
Photograph: Filippo Monteforte/AFP/Getty Images 
Behind a pair of heavy metal gates in Rome’s Trastevere quarter, where an old 
hospital sign has faded into the stone wall, lies a language school run by the 
church ofSant’Egidio 
<http://www.santegidio.org/pageID/5593/itemID/61/Aiuta_la_Comunit_di_Sant_Egidio.html>
. Since its opening in 1982, 60,000 new arrivals to Rome have passed through. 
It is here that Ramy, 51, and Suhila and their three children, and thepope’s 
other refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/17/pope-francis-hailed-saviour-syrian-refugees-lesbos-vatican>
, come to learn Italian – “the key to integration”, according to theSant’Egidio 
community <http://www.santegidio.org/index.php?langID=en> – and where Ramy and 
Suhila are reliving the airport incident, sitting on a bench while their 
seven-year-old daughter, Quds, dances around them.

The three families have been in Rome for one month, and I speak to two of 
them. Contrary to some reports, none has spent a night inside the Vatican and 
live, instead, in a refuge run by Sant’Egidio, a few streets from the school. 
How are they settling? “Well, actually, it’s been OK,” says Suhila. They eat 
eastern food – aubergine for lunch – they have found the mosque, pray at home, 
take the kids to school each day, “and the weather is similar to the weather in 
our country”. Quds has made friends with the Italian daughter of one of the 
volunteers. “We have started to feel ourselves adjusting. The world is smiling 
at us.”

“We just really want to be stable, to resettle. It’s been five years and we 
haven’t felt ourselves normal,” Ramy says. “InSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, for a long time we couldn’t even 
stand in the window, let alone look out of the window, because you didn’t know 
where a bullet was coming from.”

Pope Francis takes refugees to Rome after Lesbos visit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/pope-francis-flies-to-lesbos-to-highlight-humanitarian-crisis-in-europe>
Nour Essa, 30, and her husband Hasan Zaheda, 31, were also rescued from Lesbos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/life-on-lesbos-residents-tell-us-what-its-really-like>
 by the pope, and have a window in the same building as Ramy and Suhila. It’s a 
palazzo in the square of Santa Maria di Trastevere, to which thousands of 
tourists daily flock. But when Nour and Hasan stand there “every day, every 
day”, and look out at the fountain, listen to the musicians, what they see is 
their “whole life in Syria before the war”. The smells are the same, Hasan 
says. Maybe it is the sweetness of jasmine that is in flower all over the 
apricot walls in this part of Rome. Or maybe it is because Sant’Egidio reminds 
him of a church in Bab Touma, Damascus. “It’s a city full of life. Like 
Damascus was before,” Nour says.

Inside, however, when they step back from the window, the civilisation is very 
different to the one they knew. Their house in Wadi Barada, 30km outside 
Damascus, was 120 square metres, with three bedrooms and a small garden. In 
Trastevere, they live with their two-year-old son Riad in a single room with a 
double bed. “The most difficult thing is to have a child in a common home, as 
you’ve lost somehow control of him, as he is raised with other children,” Nour 
says. Kitchen and bathroom are shared with neighbours, not all of them 
refugees, ushered into Rome through the Sant’Egidio charity’s “humanitarian 
corridor” 
<http://www.santegidio.org/pageID/1165/langID/en/itemID/756/Dossier-What-are-the-humanitarian-corridors.html>
 (donatehere 
<http://www.santegidio.org/pageID/3/langID/it/itemID/15588/Per-aprire-vie-di-salvezza-ai-profughi-per-evitare-i-viaggi-della-morte-SOSTIENI-i-corridoiumanitari-DONA-ORA.html>
), but also Italians in need.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0686e84ef6a92fe5c82321e5b924729d32f0e101%2F0_2017_4590_2754%2F4590.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happened%20to%20the%2012%20Syrian%20refugees%20rescued%20by%20the%20pope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happened%20to%20the%2012%20Syrian%20refugees%20rescued%20by%20the%20pope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0686e84ef6a92fe5c82321e5b924729d32f0e101%2F0_2017_4590_2754%2F4590.jpg>
 Nour Essa, Hasan Zaheda and the two-year-old son Riad. Photograph: Christian 
Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
Unlike Ramy and Suhila, Nour and Hasan brought no treasured object from home, 
no equivalent of the falafel mould. They left in a hurry after Hasan was called 
up to fight. Their bags were stuffed with nappies and milk for Riad, who is 
busily crayoning and crawling under the table while they talk. Beyond 
underwear, they took only the clothes they were wearing when the emergency 
vehicle pulled up outside their home one night last December, to carry them on 
the first leg of their $3,000 smuggled journey.

As the pope’s refugees, it would be easy to assume that life for Nour and 
Hasan – and the others who boarded the papal plane – had been instantly solved. 
But of course it hasn’t. Piece by piece, they are beginning the long job of 
assembling a new life. Some of the pieces are small and firm and, in time, 
achievable. Spoons, for instance, Nour says. She has a whole list in her head. 
“Knives, frying pan, glasses. You have your own kitchen in Damascus. Now you 
have to buy something to cook in. Clothes. And maybe after that we could buy a 
laptop.” But other pieces are harder to name and harder to find.

In Syria, Nour was a student of microbiology, Hasan a landscape designer. “We 
hope to find the same thing here,” Nour says. Aided by the Sant’Egidio 
community, they have filed their papers requesting refugee status and when – 
perhaps in a few months – they are awarded it (surely a formality, given the 
papal connection), they will be able to work. But whileunemployment 
<http://www.tradingeconomics.com/italy/unemployment-rate> has fallen in Italy 
this year, it remains above 11%. The busiest days at the Sant’Egidio language 
school are Thursday afternoons and Sundays, when the shops are shut – because 
that’s the sort of work most of the school’s attendees do.

Pope Francis hailed as saviour by Syrian refugees taken in by Vatican
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/17/pope-francis-hailed-saviour-syrian-refugees-lesbos-vatican>
“We haven’t thought about that yet,” Nour says. “But we in all cases 
integrate. Because we have a child, and he has needs. You must adapt to the new 
life, and you must start from zero.”

“We hope we can find the same job as we had in Syria,” Hasan interjects. 
“Because we were interested in those jobs. I worked on a lot of landscape 
projects and I am interested in those projects, and for her, I think she was 
also interested in her studies.” On a church-organised trip toReggia di Caserta 
<http://www.ancientcapua.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/reggia_di_caserta-1.jpg>
, with its formal gardens, Hasan’s old job loomed before him. Again and again, 
he and Nour say that the first thing they must do is learn Italian. They have 
downloaded videos and books, they go to the school, useDuolingo 
<https://www.duolingo.com>, studying for an hour or two a day – the best they 
can manage with Riad. And all the while, what they most crave, both agree, is 
“free time”. On paper, this is the one thing they do have – with no jobs and a 
child between two of them – but that only makes their wish more poignant, 
because their heads are busy with appalling memories and an uncertain future, 
and no amount of time right now would feel free.

In particular, they don’t know when or where they will have an apartment. The 
Sant’Egidio community was asked by the Vatican to provide “a first welcome” to 
the Lesbos families, and it hosts and teaches them freely. But even the 
Sant’Egidio officials are unsure whether the families will be housed inside the 
Vatican, in a Vatican property outside the state’s walls, or somewhere else 
altogether. The Vatican provides the families with living expenses, in the 
region of €30 (£23) “now and then”, according to a charity spokesperson, who 
describes the families as “guests of the pope”.

“Now there is another journey,” Nour says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7aa30bbbe5da3f6a71babbf45a5f8fe7aa596e0e%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happened%20to%20the%2012%20Syrian%20refugees%20rescued%20by%20the%20pope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happened%20to%20the%2012%20Syrian%20refugees%20rescued%20by%20the%20pope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fwhat-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7aa30bbbe5da3f6a71babbf45a5f8fe7aa596e0e%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Pope Francis welcomes the refugees after landing at Ciampino airport in Rome. 
Photograph: Reuters 
She has not seen the pope since they touched down, but she hopes to meet him 
again. She wants to thank him, even though she thanked him each time she met 
him – shaking hands at the airport, on the plane, on the asphalt when they 
landed. “He was smiling and he blessed my son. He caressed him. He was a very 
kind man. He was a very … real human being.” When the pope passed to the back 
of the plane to take questions from journalists, Nour listened. “Someone, I 
remember, asked him, we were Muslim families, why did he save us? And he 
answered that he saved us because we were human beings and we were suffering 
and we must be saved.”

Nour and Hasan and Ramy and Suhila knew quite a lot about the pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> before they left Syria. Pope 
John Paul II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/05/pope-francis-john-paul-saint> had
visited Damascus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/may/07/israel.catholicism> in 2001. 
They followed theelection of Francis in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/13/pope-francis-mario-bergoglio-election>
. “It was all over the television in Syria,” Nour says. “It was so famous.”

In Damascus, they lived alongside people of different faiths. “We are 
open-minded to other religions,” she says, and maybe something in her 
experience has blended her sense of them. “I asked the pope to pray for us, 
because he was the first Muslim” – she uses the Italian wordMusulman before 
correcting herself and continuing. “He was better than the other Arabic 
leaders, because they didn’t make the same gesture, although we shared the same 
religion.” She describes the pope’s act of taking the families to Rome as “like 
a miracle”.

Like a particular miracle, in fact: “When our prophet Muhammad is hiding in a 
cave with his friend Abu Bakr, and the non-believers are following them. The 
God makes a miracle.” A spider spins its web across the cave opening, “and the 
non-believers can’t see Muhammad”.

Perhaps it is the sense of protection the pope gave that made Nour think of 
the spider. In any case, what has happened to her family, the pope’s saving of 
them, she says, “has strengthened my faith in God and in destiny. The God is 
always with you in every place. Maybe you don’t get the things you want faster 
… But you discover that the God is hiding something for you.”

Of course Italy brings challenges. “It’s a little bit unstable, but surely, 
surely, it’s better than living in the war.” Like so many who have swapped all 
they know for safety, she and Hasan teeter in double-edged relief: there is joy 
at being free of danger, but they feel lost themselves in all they have left 
behind. Their families remain in Syria. For Ramy and Suhila, only yesterday 
Facebook brought news of two more friends’ sons who had died, one in a bomb 
blast, another beheaded by Isis. But still there is so much to miss. “It’s like 
a tree,” Ramy says. “The body of the tree might go into the neighbours’ garden, 
but the roots are still where it was planted.”

Can they be happy in Italy?

“Maybe,” Hasan says.

“I think we could be safe here,” Nour nods. “We could be stable here. We could 
live in peace here.”

And be happy?

“Somehow,” she says.

She and Hasan, like Ramy and Suhila, have stopped at some of Rome’s sites: St 
Peter’s, the Colosseum, the Caracalla baths. It must be strange to step out of 
the refuge each day into the piazza’s throng of tourists – travellers 
themselves, or not travellers now, but new arrivals. Do they feel like locals 
or visitors?

Hasan laughs. Nour lets out a long sigh. “I don’t know,” she says. “Visiting. 
Visiting but …”

“Maybe next time,” Hasan suggests.

Nour turns to him, as if she has just remembered something. “Well. We are here 
now.”

“Yes. We are here. Just we are only thinking about the language.”

Nour nods. “It is the first obstacle for us. But the most important thing is 
that he’s safe and that my child is safe.” She lays a hand on Hasan’s arm.

In the meantime, Ramy and Suhila keep their falafel mould safe. One day, they 
will have a grinder and the other utensils they need for it to be put to use at 
last, to earn its space in the bag. “When we have a house,” Ramy says. “Then we 
will make falafel.”
 