
The phrase “TV event of the week” seems to have pointlessly malleable 
applicability. Assemble a good-looking dessert or sing a song slightly better 
(or worse) than most people could, and TV executives feel entitled to 
out-hyperbole the internet. Heaven forbid someone in the middle of a karaoke 
session should knock out a decent crème brûlée: it would probably be met with 
more excitement than the sodding moon landing.

Barack Obama turns tables in David Attenborough climate change interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/29/barack-obama-turns-tables-in-david-attenborough-climate-change-interview>
Australian viewers watching a pudding that moves  
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/masterchef/>over on Ten this week might have 
had their attention briefly drawn away toWhen Attenborough Met Obama 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/when-attenborough-met-obama/ZW0395A001S00> on 
ABC1: admittedly just two men chatting in chairs, but certainly more of an 
“event” than most shows can claim to be. As a starter for a full series, it was 
prohibitively impressive. Next episode: When Noam Chomsky Met The Ghost of 
Kennedy? Probably just as well it was a one-off.

The statesman’s and naturalist’s conversation mostly focused on environmental 
issues, such as climate change and the damage being done to the Great Barrier 
Reef. </open News Corp mode> Pah! Typical left-wing luvvy undergraduates! Not 
surprised the ABC broadcast this factual nonsense </close News Corp mode>

It’s sad in a way that Attenborough’s career has lasted long enough to 
necessitate his emergence as an activist. At one time he could almosthave been 
considered old-hat – someone only your parents watched – but as time has 
snuffed it, and much of the planet too, his relevance has only increased.

Attenborough has done a reverse Top Gear, a show that has staggered from the 
realm of edgy into the truly fuddy-duddy. As our collective complicity in 
Mother Nature’s knackered organs became clear, Top Gear began to look as cool 
as a broken petrol pump at an all-day dad joke festival.

Does Australia have a workable climate change policy? – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2015/jun/29/big-picture-politics-climate-change-lenore-taylor-podcast>
Obama wasn’t quite up to scratch as an interviewer, managing a tired smile for 
most of the meeting, but not much more. He seemed distracted and forlorn at 
points but perhaps it’s not surprising. It must be hard to muster enthusiasm in 
front of an octogenarian getting excited about slugs when, after this, you know 
you’ve got to go to a meeting and order a drone-strike. I imagine a 
sleep-deprived Jack Bauer would have struggled to interview Steve Irwin for the 
same reasons.

Overall, though, it was a riveting 35 minutes, using Attenborough’s birthday 
(and longevity) as a hook to explore humankind’s ongoing impact on the world. 
Just as well he got to spend his special day at the White House.

I’m not sure When Attenborough Met Abbott would have been quite as 
informative. Attenborough would have found his passion for nature extinguished 
by a PM who thinks coal is good for humanity and windfarms not just 
aesthetically awful but bad for your health too. Perplexed and terrified, 
Attenborough would have ended the exchange with a caterwaul as he dived through 
a window.

Thank goodness outside Australia there are more level-headed countries where 
this sort of TV event is met with a warm reception. Over here, the mere act of 
confronting anyone in cabinet with an expert who’s grounded in reality would 
probably be regarded as some sort of communist stunt.
 