
A closet cyber nerd since my pre-teen days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/12/internet-mosaic-teens-build-identity>
, I started a blog <http://ethiopienne.com/> on a whim during my sophomore year 
at the notoriouslyracist 
<http://thegrio.com/2013/08/15/dartmouth-university-fraternity-throws-bloods-crips-party/>
,sexist 
<http://thinkprogress.org/health/2013/04/24/1911741/dartmouth-protest-cancels-classes/>
 Dartmouth College. I used it to flesh out thoughts that consumed me about 
blackness in the US, campus racism, feminism(s), and mental health. I 
discovered words I didn’t know I’d needed to describe my experiences, thanks in 
large part to conversations I had with other people existing at the margins of 
our respective worlds. Tumblr kept me company on the nights I stayed up well 
past 5 am. My insomnia was born of anxiety; some days I was physically and 
psychologically incapable of leaving my room in the morning to face the 
interminable whiteness either ofNew Hampshire weather 
<http://www.weather.com/wx/today/?lat=43.19&lon=-71.57&locale=en_US> or of 
Dartmouth classrooms 
<http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/the-gender-race-and-diversity-issues-with-dartmouth/article/2547434>
.

The internet had become a coping mechanism for me. It was better than what my 
“real world” could offer. Exhibit A: When I tried reaching out to campus health 
resources about my inertia, they scheduled an appointment with the only 
counselor available within four weeks. When the appointment finally did roll 
around, I found myself sitting across from a blonde-haired, blue-eyed man – one 
who forced me to make the case that yes, systematic racism does exist. 
Remember, he was supposed to be helping me.

The conversation made me feel crazy in a way my depression itself never had. 
He made me list detail after detail offinding racist graffiti in dorms 
<http://www.vnews.com/news/4013673-95/college-dartmouth-community-incident>, 
being called a “nigger bitch” to my face, having my hair (and the rest of my 
body) routinely prodded without consent, and so much more. I left the 
appointment feeling physically sick when I realized only the boldest of 
offenses even gave him pause. The rest were, as he put it, “perhaps difficult 
to navigate” but not evidence of a campus culture that refused to address its 
attitude towardbodies not included at its inception 
<http://www.dartmouth.edu/~library/digital/publishing/books/calloway2010/html/index.html?mswitch-redir=classic>
.

It is at best exhausting and at worst dehumanising to have to explain to a 
mental health professional whydiscrimination could have a negative effect on 
your mental health 
<http://www.isr.umich.edu/williams/All%20Publications/DRW%20pubs%202000/racism%20and%20mental%20health.%20the%20African%20American%20experience.pdf>
. I felt like I was once again defending my right to exist at a college to 
which I had been accepted. So I posted about it on Tumblr, disappeared into a 
vortex of 90s television jokes, and called it a night. I didn’t feel perfect, 
but I felt better.

And I am not alone. Much has been written about the internet (and more 
specifically, social media) as a space critical to supporting activist networks 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/07/17/how_twitter_fuels_black_activism/>, attracting 
media attention 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/01/not-just-hashtag-activism-why-social-media-matters-to-protestors/384215/>
 to issues often ignored by old media, and reframing narratives 
<http://www.dailydot.com/opinion/how-social-media-changed-conversation-ferguson/>
 about marginalised groups. But in the spaces I frequented as a depressed 
college student, the internet had a basic emotional function, too. There the 
people I talked to felt allowed to express the things that burn slowly in the 
back of their throats, unshared and unquenched, during face-to-face 
conversation. It is at once bothpublic and deeply private 
<http://www.papermag.com/2014/11/anonymity_is_freedom_sosadtoda.php>, 
facilitating both an openness and vulnerability which elide other forums.

“Being able to share experiences and receive support online has the benefit of 
making people feel less alienated and more connected, which is what often leads 
to and/or exacerbates depression,” Dr Welansa Asrat, an adult psychiatrist in 
private practice in New York, told me via email. “Online forums may be most 
critical for those who have no access to mental healthcare and/or have a 
disability such as agoraphobia that prevents them from going out to get care.”

So the intersection of my identity with my mental health isn’t just a theory, 
either. After all, access to mental healthcare is, like access to all healthcare
 
<http://poverty.ucdavis.edu/faq/how-poverty-related-access-care-and-preventive-healthcare>
, stratified along socioeconomic lines 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2011/10/poverty-and-mental-health-can-the-2-way-connection-be-broken/247275/>
.

This is not just a problem for people of colour, either. The recent death of 
Leelah Alcorn by suicide held echoes of the alienation many marginalized people 
grapple with constantly. LGBT people, whose barriers to access include alack of 
adequately informed professionals 
<http://www.nami.org/TextTemplate.cfm?Section=Fact_Sheets1&Template=/ContentManagement/ContentDisplay.cfm&ContentID=48110>
, know this feeling all too well. It is one of the many reasons they, like 
countless other groups who face discrimination, often tease out mental health 
concerns in digital spaces rather than with formal treatment.

Online spaces do not have quite the same “safe space” quality as physical 
support groups. Abuse of marginalized people can –and does 
<http://www.athinline.org/about#research> – often creep through the same portal 
thatoffers us comfort 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/sosadtoday-twitters-secret-superstar-speaks-for-the-first-time-20140528>
, too. Not everyone’s experience online is cathartic and unfettered. LGBT 
people, especially trans folks, aretargeted at disproportionate rates 
<http://destrantalk.blogspot.com/2009/12/mtv-launches-thin-line-to-stop-digital.html>
 simply for speaking about their experiences. Women (especially women of color) 
facestaggering rates of online abuse 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/10/the-unsafety-net-how-social-media-turned-against-women/381261/>
. And unregulated forums present a whole host of new triggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/feb/03/excessive-internet-use-depression>
 forpotentially harmful thoughts and behavior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/05/children-cyberbullying-self-harm-gaming-mps-concern>
, without the benefits of training and accountability from providers. So I 
don’t mean to suggest that going online is a catch-all solution.

But I do know that it helped me at a time when the institution charged with 
helping me simply wouldn’t. In times when there’s no quick fix in sight, 
sometimes you just need to know you and your dark thoughts arenot alone 
<http://gawker.com/on-depression-to-anyone-else-living-in-a-fog-1645830356>.
 