
The time has come to loosen our grip on reality. All the signs are there. 
Millennia of booze and drug abuse, hundreds of conflicting religions and cults 
and superstitions and alternative medicines and conspiracy theories, the 
premise of theMatrix <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-matrix> franchise, 
the internet, sunglasses, video games and the powerfully convincing 
anti-intellectualism ofMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/19/michael-gove-bit-of-an-animal>
. They’re all saying the same thing: ignore what’s really happening and you’ll 
feel a lot better. It’s been staring us in the face: we need to close our eyes 
to what’s staring us in the face.

And there’s been a huge breakthrough in this direction. They’re calling it the 
“Taste Buddy”, but that’s because they’re awful and cheesy and the less we have 
to perceive their existence, the happier we’ll be. And the Taste Buddy will 
help separate our perceptions from that sour reality. Particularly our 
perception of cheesiness, which we should soon be able to precisely regulate 
using a computer.

Couscous salad, on the culinary battlefield, is a flint-headed arrow to the 
cruise missile that is a fried egg sandwich

The Taste Buddy, which was unveiled last week, is a new invention, still in 
its prototype stage, that changes our sense of what things taste like by 
emitting thermal and electric signals that stimulate, or rather delude, the 
taste buds. Currently it can only make things seem saltier or sweeter than they 
are, but the team behind it, led byAdrian Cheok 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/news/spotlight-on-research/professor-adrian-cheok> of 
London University, believes that, with development, it could go much further. 
If built into pieces of cutlery, it “could allow children to eat vegetables 
that taste like chocolate”; it could make tofu taste like steak; basically, it 
could make healthy things taste like delicious things.

“But healthy things are delicious!” you may be saying. And therein lies the 
problem. Not that healthy things actually are delicious – that’s patently not 
true. Sometimes it might seem like they are – nuts, for example, often give 
this impression – and then you discover the deliciousness is all because of 
some salt or sugar or duck fat that’s been added in cardiovascularly hazardous 
quantities. Healthy things are delicious if either a) they’re deep fried, or b) 
there’s nothing else to eat. Couscous salad is much better than no food at all 
but, on the modern culinary battlefield, it’s a mere flint-headed arrow to the 
state-of-the-art cruise missile that is a fried egg sandwich.

No, the challenge for the Taste Buddy is not that lentils actually are tastier 
than chips, but that some people say they are and, in some cases, come to 
believe it. Their own mental powers of self-delusion rival Taste Buddy’s 
thermal and electric trickery. And that’s because many people define their 
identities by their eating choices.

Amber Rudd announces crackdown on overseas students and work visas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
Whether consciously or not, some healthy eaters’ healthy eating is primarily 
an expression of control, cleanliness and virtue. It doesn’t just make them 
feel better, it makes them feel better than other people. If eating steamed 
broccoli is suddenly no hardship, because it can be made to taste like baked 
Alaska, they’re going to be deeply offended. It would be like offering a devout 
order of self-flagellating monks an inexhaustible supply of local anaesthetic.

Frankly, Taste Buddy will be seen as cheating. These penitents won’t like it 
that those of us with coarse, lifespan-reducing palates will get the benefit of 
nutrients we haven’t earned, now that gruel is no longer gruelling. A market 
will immediately open up for some scientists to discover that it’s actually 
tasting the lettuce rather than swallowing it that matters most.

The most rabid salad eaters and the haute cuisine sector will combine to 
incentivise anyone who’ll claim “there are still no shortcuts” when it comes to 
eating well, that the brain needs the taste of roughage, or just that Taste 
Buddy might give you tongue cancer. Which, I suppose, it might. As might a 
sexist joke on a lolly stick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fseeming-is-believing-taste-buddy-foreign-students-theresa-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F146b74bb468582472bb25ecc75a9f519cfd99f28%2F0_0_3543_4724%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20bitter%20tastes%20sweet%2C%20seeming%20is%20believing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fseeming-is-believing-taste-buddy-foreign-students-theresa-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20bitter%20tastes%20sweet%2C%20seeming%20is%20believing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fseeming-is-believing-taste-buddy-foreign-students-theresa-may%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F146b74bb468582472bb25ecc75a9f519cfd99f28%2F0_0_3543_4724%2F3543.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari 
And maybe they’d have a point. A spoonful of sugar may help the medicine go 
down, but it probably screws up the placebo effect. Who knows how crucial those 
feelings of sacrifice, self-denial and moral superiority (lost for ever if 
Taste Buddy turned everything delicious) actually are to the health-enhancing 
powers of a balanced diet. In a carefully conducted study, it could probably be 
measured. But that sounds rather elitist, doesn’t it? Measuring things with 
cold objectivity, as if that can ever matter as much as a sincere conviction of 
the heart.

If you think that’s all a bit touchy-feely, or tasty-thinky, you may be 
surprised to learn it’s an approachTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is very keen on. Last week the
Timesreported that the Home Office was concealing a report it had commissioned 
into the number of foreign students who break the terms of their visas and 
remain in Britain illicitly after their courses have finished. The number the 
report had come up with was about 1,500 annually, rather than the tens of 
thousands that had previously been estimated and generally bandied about. That 
was not what the Home Office, or the prime minister, wanted to hear.

Why not? It’s good news, isn’t it? Well not if you’ve just cracked down on the 
admission of foreigners to British universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
, with potentially disastrous consequences for the latter’s funding. The notion 
that this drastic policy might have almost no effect on reducing net 
immigration was extremely unwelcome and, the government clearly felt, best kept 
quiet.

Particularly as, among likely Tory voters, there’s a broad perception that 
foreign students stay here and scrounge. Many people feel that feckless young 
foreigners are dragging us down and the government has come up with a 
harsh little policy to address that. Why let the fact that it’s not true get in 
the way?

Surely, Theresa May must think, it’s not the business of government to start 
telling the public it’s wrong. In an increasingly virtual world, feelings are 
as valid as facts. Let’s focus on what people perceive to be the case and 
concentrate on adding to that a perception that something is being done about 
it. That’s efficient democratic accountability for post-truth Britain.

No need to contradict people about what they reckon is going on, 
denying problems they believe exist and citing others they were previously 
untroubled by. Policy doesn’t need to reflect reality any more than the 
currency needs to be backed by gold. Just listen to their fears, confirm them 
and then use them to make the government seem vital. People will swallow 
anything if you control how it tastes.
 