
I’m looking to purchase a tower PC for working from home, ideally for less 
than £500. It must have a processor fast enough to manage my work across 
multiple Excel spreadsheets, as well as running Microsoft Word and Google 
Chrome at the same time. At the moment, I am using an old laptop with two 
external monitors. When I try to process my spreadsheets, things slow down to 
the point of freezing, or it crashes.Diana

You are right in thinking that a tower PC will generally run faster than a 
similarly priced laptop. Towers provide plenty of space for chips to run hotter 
and therefore faster than they can in laptops, without throttling performance 
to avoid overheating problems.

An Intel Core i5-6 should be more than adequate for your needs. A Core i7 
would be better, but usually pushes the price up considerably. You can compare 
processor speeds and operating temperatures atNotebookCheck 
<http://www.notebookcheck.net/Mobile-Processors-Benchmark-List.2436.0.html>.

Heavyweight tasks such as recalculating large spreadsheets also tend to 
require more memory. It’s usually easier to add RAM to a tower than a laptop. 
You can also add faster graphics cards and multiple hard drives, including 
Blu-ray drives for backups.

At the moment, your Excel work is probably limited by a shortage of RAM. (A PC 
is more likely to crash if it runs out of memory than if it runs out of 
processing power.) If your laptop has 4GB of memory, you should start with at 
least 8GB and make sure you can upgrade to 16GB or more. You can check the 
upgrade options in the manufacturer’s service or repair manual or, if you know 
the model number,Crucial’s website <http://uk.crucial.com/>.

PC motherboards usually have either two or four memory slots, so ideally at 
least one should be free for an upgrade. For example, 8GB should be on one 
stick, not on two 4GB sticks. If you have 8GB and one free slot, you can 
upgrade to 16GB by buying one 8GB stick for less than £50. It would cost twice 
as much to replace two unwanted 4GB sticks with two new 8GB sticks.

Ready built or DIY?

There are still plenty of desktop towers available off-the-shelf from 
retailers such asJohn Lewis 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/browse/electricals/desktop-pcs-imacs/desktop-pcs-imacs/tower/_/N-7flrZ1z13u74>
,Currys PC World 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/tower-pcs/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/1093_8225_71255_xx_ba00010707-bv00308577/1_27/price-asc/xx-criteria.html>
 andArgos <http://www.argos.co.uk/>. You can also buy them directly from small 
British companies, such as (in alphabetical order)Chillblast 
<https://www.chillblast.com/>, PC Specialist 
<https://www.pcspecialist.co.uk/desktop-pcs/home-office-pcs/> and Scan 
<https://www.scan.co.uk/>, as well as from giant business suppliers such as 
Dell, HP and Lenovo.Zoostorm <http://www.zoostorm.com/>, another British 
company, sells through a range of outlets including Amazon, Argos and Tesco.

Part of the appeal of direct suppliers is that you can often customise PCs to 
get what you want. Unfortunately, the number of configuration options has 
fallen dramatically over the past five years, especially on the cheaper ranges. 
It can also be a bit of a nightmare trying to find out which parts you can 
upgrade yourself. If Crucial doesn’t know, you can always ask in the support 
forums for each PC.

The ultimate form of customisation is to build your own PC from scratch. This 
takes more effort, but thePC Part Picker <https://uk.pcpartpicker.com/list/> 
website provides plenty of sample builds. You can share your selection of parts 
to see if other users can suggest improvements. One drawback is that Windows 
costs a lot more if it’s bought separately, rather than pre-installed on a PC, 
partly because it includes Microsoft support.

Home or business PC?

If you are buying a PC for business use, consider a business PC. These should 
not include the sort of third-party “crapware” that most suppliers bundle with 
consumer PCs to reduce the cost of pre-installingWindows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows>, sometimes to zero or less. 
However, most suppliers still bundle anti-virus software and some of their own 
“utilities”, which are not always useful.

Business PCs usually run 64-bit Windows 10 Pro rather than the Home version. 
It probably doesn’t matter for your purposes. The main advantages of the Pro 
version are the ability to attach to corporate networks, BitLocker drive 
encryption, built-in virtualisation,Group Policy controls 
<http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/12-ways-windows-group-policy-can-make-pc-better/> 
andWindows Update for Business 
<https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/itpro/windows/manage/waas-manage-updates-wufb>
. Pro also supports 2TB of memory, compared with Home’s 128GB.

The main attraction is business support. It’s painful to lug a desktop PC to 
your local store and RTB (return to base) repairs can take up to two weeks. By 
contrast, you can buy business PCs with business support. Dell offers from 
three to five years of pro support and “next business day” on-site service for 
£70 to £200, depending on what the original PC starts with. HP offers four 
years of “next coverage day call to repair 
<http://store.hp.com/UKStore/Merch/Product.aspx?id=U8UG1E&opt=&sel=CPK>” on 
desktops for up to £208.80. It’s only £1 a week.

Possible purchases

The Lenovo IdeaCentre 510S 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/lenovo-ideacentre-510s-desktop-pc-10146072-pdt.html>
 is one of your cheapest off-the-shelf options with a Core i5-6400, 8GB of 
memory and 1TB hard drive for £399.99 at PC World. (“Was £629.99”, it says.) 
It’s also selling the same machine with a fastCore i7-6700 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/lenovo-ideacentre-510s-desktop-pc-10146054-pdt.html>
 for £599.99.

Zoostorm’s Origin 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Zoostorm-Origin-Desktop-PC-Processor/dp/B01G8BE38E/> 
desktop PC is another affordable option, with the Intel Core i5-6400/8GB 
version available on Amazon.co.uk for £419.99.

HP’s Pavilion range of desktops with Core i5-6400 processors at PC World start 
with thePavilion 550-202na 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/hp-pavilion-550-202na-desktop-pc-red-10146631-pdt.html>
 for £599.99. This has the usual 8GB of memory (maximum 16GB), an AMD Radeon 
R5-330 graphics card with 2GB, a 128GB SSD, a 3TB hard drive and a DVD writer.

Buying direct from HP, you could get a Pavilion 550-252na 
<http://store.hp.com/UKStore/Merch/Product.aspx?id=T1J68EA&opt=ABU&sel=DTP> 
tower in red, white or blue for £429. This model has a Core i5-6400 processor 
with 8GB of memory (2 x 4GB, sadly), a 1TB hard drive and a DVD burner, leaving 
one internal hard drive bay free. There is no professional service for this, 
but you could add three years of pickup and return service for £29.

Alternatively, you could get much the same thing with a 2TB hard drive – the 
Pavilion 550-254na 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/hp-pavilion-550-254na-desktop-pc-intel-core-i5-8gb-ram-2tb-natural-silver/p2481359>
 – from John Lewis for £479.95. In this case, the price includes a two-year 
guarantee.

Buying direct from Dell, you could get an Inspiron 3650 
<http://www.dell.com/uk/p/inspiron-3650-desktop/pd?oc=cd65032&l=en&s=dhs> with 
a Core i5-6400, 8GB of memory (one slot free), Nvidia GeForce 730 graphics card 
with 2GB of memory, 128GB SSD, 1TB hard drive, DVD writer and Windows 10 Home 
for £519 (Code CD65032). Sadly, you only get one year of collect and return 
support with no better options.

Switching to the very similar Vostro 3650 
<http://configure.euro.dell.com/dellstore/config.aspx?c=uk&cs=ukbsdt1&fb=1&l=en&model_id=vostro-3650-desktop&oc=bdv606&s=bsd&vw=classic>
 would provide a Core i5-6400 with only 4GB, no graphics card and no second 
hard drive for £394.80, plus £30 delivery. The only advantage is that you could 
add four years of on-site service for £140. You could always stick8GB of memory 
<http://uk.crucial.com/gbr/en/compatible-upgrade-for/Dell/vostro-3650> into the 
empty slot to bring the RAM up to 12GB.

The most configurable affordable tower PC I can find is the Lenovo ThinkCenter 
M800 <http://shop.lenovo.com/gb/en/desktops/thinkcentre/m-series-towers/m800/>. 
It offers a choice of six processors, nine memory configurations from 4GB to 
32GB and nine first or second hard drives. Prices start at £379.99, but you can 
select an Intel Core i5-6400, 8GB of memory (leaving three slots free), and a 
128GB SSD for £485.99: just under budget.

To that, I would add a 1TB secondary hard drive for £58.80 and another 8GB of 
RAM for £52.80, bringing the grand total to £597.59. Of course, you could do 
these upgrades yourself later if you find you need them.

There’s not much to choose between these PCs. The Lenovo IdeaCentre 510S is 
cheapest, while the ThinkCenter M800 is the most configurable and possibly the 
best. Otherwise, the Dell Inspiron 3650 is good value at £519. If you shop 
around, you may well find some HP Pavilion 550 desktops with better 
specifications at better prices. Argos sometimes has deals, while Laptops 
Direct has deals andrefurbished 
<http://www.laptopsdirect.co.uk/a1-refurbished-hp-pavillion-550-153na-intel-core-i5-6400-2.7ghz-8gb-1tb-dvd-a1-n8y07ea-w10-1tb/version.asp>
 models.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 