
My Dell desktop’s wired optical mouse and keyboard are getting a little long 
in the tooth, and I’d like to replace them. What do you recommend? Are wireless 
devices worth it, or do you continually need to recharge them and replace 
endless batteries? I can touch-type, but my skills are a little rusty.Mamie

Keyboards are partly a matter of taste, and habitual use overcomes many 
objections. In other words, if you use a flawed keyboard for long enough, 
you’ll get used to it. You may even come to like it.

To generalise, there are three major tastes, with some overlaps between them. 
These are: traditional keyboards, isolated keyboards, and ergonomic keyboards.

As a touch typist, I’m a big fan of traditional keyboards with mechanical keys 
that click and have lots of travel. This comes from having learned to type on 
an ancient upright Remington that was built like a tank, then spent a couple of 
decades with an IBM Model M, which some claim is the finest keyboard ever made.

Other people are equally big fans of isolated keyboards with flat keys that 
have very little travel. These first appeared on Sony laptops (unless you want 
to count theSinclair Spectrum’s “dead flesh” version 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chiclet_keyboard>), but Apple produced a fine 
aluminium example for its all-in-one Macs.

There is no doubt about which way the keyboard world is going. Mechanical 
keyboards are bulky and expensive to manufacture. Isolated keyboards are much 
smaller, and very cheap to make. They’re ideal for laptops that are even 
thinner than mechanical keyboards. Most people now learn to type on these 
isolated keyboards – or even on-screen keyboards – so I expect them to become 
almost everyone’s favourite.

Nonetheless, mechanical keyboards are still popular and easy to find, 
especially if you don’t object to fancy multi-colour lighting effects. They are 
being kept alive byPC gamers, for whom rapid responses and N-key rollover are a 
matter of (virtual) life and death.

Health matters

The major drawback with both types of keyboard is that you have to twist your 
wrists to use them. Ideally, your wrists should be in line with your arms. The 
ergonomic solution is to split the keyboard so that each hand has its own set 
of keys.

Many ergonomic keyboard users are older people who have suffered from arm or 
wrist problems such as RSI (repetitive strain injury) and/or carpal tunnel 
syndrome. Ergonomic keyboards are much cheaper than the loss of work, or the 
weeks of expert physiotherapy, that often follow such afflictions.

Having enjoyed two courses of physiotherapy, I urge people to use ergonomic 
keyboards before problems arise, rather than afterwards.

Traditional keyboards

You’re a Dell user so you could consider another Dell keyboard. For example, 
the Dell SK-8115 has an excellent reputation, and you can find new ones cheap 
(eg£6.99 
<http://www.ebay.co.uk/itm/Dell-SK-8115-Black-USB-US-Keyboard-ODJ333-/252532305040>
) on eBay. Dell’s newer keyboards, such as theKB-212-B 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Dell-KB212-B-Keyboard-ENGLISH-IRISH/dp/B00C4N3TFE> 
and similar models, are also serviceable alternatives.

Otherwise, I’d suggest visiting shops that sell keyboards, such as Maplin and 
Currys PC World, to try a few and pick one you like. Both Logitech and 
Microsoft offer lots of options. TheLogitech M20 
<https://www.logitech.com/en-gb/product/desktop-mk120?crid=27> is reasonably 
priced at £18.99, including a mouse. The Microsoft equivalent is theWired 600 
<https://www.microsoft.com/accessories/en-gb/products/keyboards/wired-desktop-600/apb-00006>
 at £24.99, including mouse.

If you want a flat, Apple-style keyboard, look at the Cherry Strait JK-0300GB 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B00303FRKM/> at £29.99. There’s also a 
Cherry Strait inblack <https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B00CKJ7RPK/> for 
£34.17. The wireless version, theCherry DW 8000 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Cherry-JD-0300-8000-Keyboard-Mouse/dp/B00BLKA3MI/>, 
costs a bit more (£54.65) but still looks reasonable value. At least, it’s 
cheaper than the alternative fromMatias 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Matias-Bluetooth-Aluminum-Keyboard-Silver/dp/B01JA8LREU/>
 (£84.98).

If you feel like investing in something more traditional, the Cherry G80-3000 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Cherry-Quality-Action-Keyboard-G80-3000LSCGB-2/dp/B0041KJKAG>
 is cheap (£60 or so) for a keyboard that with clicky keys, and would be my 
pick. The Corsair gaming keyboards – available at Maplin’s shops – are also 
worth a look. There are, of course, many more expensive options, including the
Filco Majestouch-2 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Filco-Majestouch-2-Tenkeyless-Tactile-Keyboard/dp/B004HYCW56/>
 (£114) andDas Keyboard <https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B00F1ED9W6/> 
(£127.67).

Incidentally, you can still buy IBM Model M-style keyboards. IBM spun off its 
printer and keyboard businesses to form Lexmark, and when Lexmark moved to 
cheaper keyboards, some former employees carried on the old business as 
Unicomp. In the UK, you can buy these and many other fine keyboards fromThe 
Keyboard Company <http://www.keyboardco.com/>. They’re the experts.

Ergonomic choices

If you decide to try an ergonomic keyboard, the Microsoft Comfort range 
provides a baby step forward. I started with a Comfort Curve 2000 but today’s
Microsoft Natural Ergo Keyboard 4000 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Microsoft-Natural-Ergo-Keyboard-4000/dp/B000B9RYG8/> 
(£36.48) is a better choice. After a while, I wanted to increase the split so I 
picked up a newFujitsu KBPC E 
<http://www.fujitsu.com/fts/products/computing/peripheral/accessories/input-devices/keyboards/keyboard-kbpc-e-usb.html>
 (£56.18 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Fujitsu-S26381-K261-L765-KBPC-Keyboard-layout/dp/B000LV63K4/>
, but I paid £30 on eBay). Over time, the split naturally got wider, and I’m 
now ready to replace it with aKinesis Freestyle2 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Kinesis-Kin-FS2-01-Layout-Freestyle2-Keyboard/dp/B00CMALA46>
 (£80.68), which has mechanical keys.

When the Wirecutter website looked for the best ergonomic keyboard 
<http://thewirecutter.com/reviews/comfortable-ergo-keyboard/>, it picked the 
Microsoft Sculpt 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Microsoft-Ergonomic-Desktop-Keyboard-Numeric/dp/B00EO4NN5C/>
 (£61.18 including mouse). The review provides a good guide to picking a 
keyboard, and your personal preferences may lead you to a different conclusion 
– as mine did. However, the Sculpt is a good choice for anyone who doesn’t know 
what to buy, and is willing to adapt to an ergonomic layout.

Mousing around

I’m not too fussy about mice nowadays, and tend to use whatever comes with the 
PC or keyboard. When they fail, I pop into a local shop and buy something in 
the £10 to £15 range. I’m currently using anHP 5-button Optical Comfort Mouse 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/HP-USB-5-Button-Optical/dp/B004Q84UC6/>, and I do 
find HP’s Comfort Grip comfortable. Of course, bothLogitech 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Logitech-M500-Corded-Mouse-Mac/dp/B00HV9ZG98/> and 
Microsoft 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Microsoft-Comfort-Mouse-4500-Packaging/dp/B004LRDWQW/>
 also make decent mice, though most of them are wireless models.

Someone with smaller hands might well prefer a smaller mouse design, but 
again, it’s a matter of taste.

As before, the serious money is in gaming mice, which can cost over £100. I 
might be tempted by theRazer Abyssus 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Razer-Essential-Ergonomic-Ambidextrous-Programmable/dp/B00KXYV6YW/>
 (£34.99) or the fierce-lookingCorsair M65 RGB 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Corsair-CH-9000070-EU-Multi-Colour-Backlit-Performance/dp/B00NHJPUDS/>
 (£45.50) with back-lighting, but I can’t see the point for my humble purposes, 
such as playing FreeCell.

Ergonomic mice have also passed me by, usually because they feel unnatural – 
at least at first – and cost silly money. However, I’ve just noticed thatAnker 
Vertical Ergonomic Optical Mouse 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_sb_noss?url=search-alias%3Dcomputers&field-keywords=Anker+Vertical+Ergonomic+Optical+Mouse>
 prices start at around £10, so I’ll add one to my Amazon Basket.

Wired or wireless?

Most gamers use corded mice and keyboards, and the accepted wisdom is that 
wired peripherals work better. With my typing and reaction speeds, I can’t tell 
the difference. However, wired peripherals are generally more reliable, in that 
they never drop the Bluetooth connection, and they never run out of juice.

Under normal working conditions, your keyboard and mouse will not be very far 
from your PC. It should be possible to route the cables to avoid any snagging 
problems. If so, I can’t see the point in paying extra for wireless versions.

However, if distance is a problem, it may be better to use a wireless keyboard 
and mouse. Also, you may prefer wireless peripherals for other reasons, 
including aesthetics. That’s up to you.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>

 * Should I replace a MacBook Air with a Windows laptop? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/aug/18/should-i-replace-a-macbook-air-with-a-windows-laptop>

 * Should I buy a PC or Mac for working from home? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/jun/16/should-i-buy-a-pc-or-mac-for-working-from-home>
 * Are there any laptops suitable for high-speed typists? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2015/apr/02/laptops-suitable-for-high-speed-typists> 