
The perception of Australia’s indigenous people is that they live largely in 
deserts and other remote areas. And indeed, reflecting in part the necessity of
Indigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> to maintain 
strong physical links with traditional lands to retain native title, about four 
in 10 still live in traditional country, often remote from urban settlements.

But the flipside is equally telling: more than half of aboriginal Australians 
now dwell in the cities of the eastern seaboard. Long regarded as Australia’s 
indigenous capital, Sydney has been surpassed by Brisbane as host to the 
greatest number of Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander people) – as of 2011, there were 64,993 in Brisbane to Sydney’s 
64,184. Fifteen years from now, Nicholas Biddle of the Australian National 
University’sCentre for Aboriginal Policy Research 
<http://caepr.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/cck_indigenous_outcomes/2013/11/2011CensusPaper_14_Population_Projections.pdf>
 predicts Brisbane’s aboriginal population will reach 133,189 compared with 
Sydney’s 88,371.

Does this make Brisbane Australia’s most indigenous city? Certainly, neither 
Sydney nor Brisbane, nor any other Australian urban capital, has gone to any 
significant lengths to accommodate indigeneity, into either urban planning or 
cultural identity.

For that, you might have to look at Broome, on the Kimberley coast. (Although, 
with a population of 14,500, it probably doesn’t quite qualify as a city.) In 
Broome, recognition of land custodianship and culture is central.The Yawuru 
people <http://www.yawuru.com/> are the recognised native title holders of 
semi-bicultural Broome (Rubibi); their language is taught in primary schools, 
and citizenship ceremonies are conducted in Yawuru. Tourism is largely built 
around continuing indigenous culture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda3e67384438cd7d43d76ef3d42355ef1159c69c%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20indigenous%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20indigenous%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda3e67384438cd7d43d76ef3d42355ef1159c69c%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 A woman performs an indigenous dance called Huaylia marking the Day of the 
Dead holiday in Lima, Peru. Photograph: Rodrigo Abd/AP 
So how do we go about measuring the “aboriginality” of a given city around the 
globe in 2016? After all, most cities are indigenous, insofar as they are 
constructed on the lands of dispossessed first peoples. Sovereignty, usually 
ignored by settler states though rarely formally ceded, does not dilute innate 
indigeneity.

To make matters more complicated, among the many negative legacies of 
colonialism for aboriginal people worldwide is what the geographer and 
demographer John Taylor calls the absence of “indigenous data sovereignty”. In 
other words: “Research information about nations upon which first peoples still 
build their lives.”


The aboriginal proportion of a city’s total population might be one measure. 
Or as a proportion of a country’s total indigenous population. But both 
statistics must be qualified: urban indigenous communities are largely 
diaspora, very few are first inhabitants of the precise land upon which cities 
are built.

Another yardstick might be the overt cultural connection that a city has 
retained, or rekindled. Libby Porter, an academic at RMIT University 
specialising in urban land, property rights and dispossession,has written 
<http://researchbank.rmit.edu.au/view/rmit:32973>: “Indigenous people whose 
traditional territory is now urban continue to exert a connection to their 
country in rich and diverse ways that represent the changing cultural 
expressions of that connection. Yet we rarely grapple with what it means to 
recognise coexistence in cities, and the kinds of challenges ... to which such 
recognition gives rise.”

Take Guatemala City as an example. The capital of the Central American country 
– whose population is predominantly Mayan – has bloated tomore than 4.5 million 
<http://www.breakingnews.com/topic/guatemala-city-guatemala-gt/> since a rural 
exodus in the 1970s.More than half the city’s people are Mayan 
<http://www.refworld.org/docid/49749d163c.html>, identified in part by their 26 
languages – including Q’eqchi, Cakchiquel, Mam (Maya), Tzutujil, Achi and 
Pokoman. Yet they are concentrated most heavily in the semi-rural areas just 
north of the capital. How indigenous does that make Guatemala City?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe383a56e9c53d590ab6c4ab8555efb00e6baa5fa%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20indigenous%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20indigenous%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe383a56e9c53d590ab6c4ab8555efb00e6baa5fa%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Chores indigenous people from the Mexican Zoque region demonstrate against an 
education reform. Photograph: Hector Guerrero/AFP/Getty Images 
The country’s Mayans, despite numbering at least 6 million, have a long 
history of dispossession, cultural and political oppression. They are behind 
non-indigenous citizens on most social indicators:7 
<http://www.iwgia.org/regions/latin-america/guatemala>3% of the indigenous 
population are poor <http://www.iwgia.org/regions/latin-america/guatemala>, and 
on average they have markedly lower life expectancy and fewer people reach 
higher education.

Significant proportions of the Mayan diaspora also live in Mexico and the US. 
In Mexico, about15% of the population identifies as indigenous 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/IndigenousPeoplesRightsInMexico.aspx> 
– including more thanone million 
<https://www.culturalsurvival.org/ourpublications/csq/article/mexicos-indigenous-population>
 of the estimated21 million residents 
<http://worldpopulationreview.com/world-cities/mexico-city-population/> in 
Mexico City’s metropolitan area. By sheer numbers, it is Mexico City and Peru’s 
capital, Lima, that are the cities with the highest aboriginal populations.

About 45% Peru’s 31 million people identify as belonging to one of the 
country’s 51 indigenous communities. Indeed,Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> is home to more indigenous peoples 
than any other South American nation, and Lima, with a population of 8.5 
million, reflects this. Over the latter part of the 20th century, oppression, 
poverty and violence, as well as the clearing of native forests, forced 
hundreds of thousands of rural indigenous Peruvians to migrate to cities, 
including Lima. Many still live in largepueblos jóvenes (shanty towns), some of 
which lack basic amenities, including running water and power.

Certainly, both Mexico City and Lima host a plethora of cultural institutions 
celebrating Mexico’s indigeneity. Lima has numerous museums dedicated to 
aboriginal culture – the most celebrated among them beingMuseo Larco 
<http://www.museolarco.org/>. But indigenous culture over the world is 
frequently preserved more generously in collecting institutions than it is 
reflected in a genuine appreciation of traditional lifestyles, not to mention 
ownership of tribal property, including land and water. Indeed, despite Peru’s 
significant Amerindian population and its high representation in Lima, 
indigenous land rights are at best tenuous for Peruvian people, especially in 
the cities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99d4f3fea8c3136e1f667a3226326d73ce72fe1e%2F0_146_3888_2334%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20is%20the%20world's%20most%20indigenous%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20is%20the%20world%27s%20most%20indigenous%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fwhich-worlds-most-indigenous-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99d4f3fea8c3136e1f667a3226326d73ce72fe1e%2F0_146_3888_2334%2F3888.jpg>
 Ainu men hold a traditional praying ritual called Kamuinomi, as part of the 
2008 Indigenous Peoples Summit in Hokkaido, Japan. Photograph: Dai Kurokawa/EPA 
In some cases urban aboriginal people may as well not exist at all for all the 
recognition they get. In notoriously monocultural Japan, the indigenous Ainu, 
concentrated in Hokkaido, officially number more than 24,000 in a population of 
127 million. But Japan only recently recognised that its indigenous people 
exist at all, and centuries of oppression and aggressive assimilation policies 
are believed to have inspired manyAinu to deny their indigeneity 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/02/09/travel/cnngo-travel-hokkaido-ainu>. We don’t 
know how many there might be.

One country that makes some attempt to celebrate a vibrant indigenous presence 
is Canada. Half of Canada’s First Nations, Inuit and Métis (a distinct culture 
of mixed-race descendants of indigenous people) people live in cities. And more 
First Nations and Métis people live in Winnipeg than in any of the country’s 
other cities: compared to about 4% country-wide, indigenous people account for 
about one in 10 Winnipeggers (25,970 First Nations, or 3.6%, and 46,325 Métis, 
or 6.5% 
<http://www.winnipegfreepress.com/special/census2011/City-has-highest-aboriginal-population-206745721.html>
).

What’s more, their voices are heard in the cities. Canada recognises 
aboriginal rights and title in the constitution, and the urban shift of First 
Peoples and Métis has inspired new dimensions of indigenous cultural 
expression. But the parallels with so many other countries – not least 
Australia – are acute: urban aboriginal people in Canada, despite their 
traditional associations, are seen and treated, culturally and sometimes 
officially, as less “traditional” than their rural countrymen and women. And 
Winnipeg, despite official displays of pride in its significant aboriginal 
population,is still marred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/21/winnipeg-election-indigenous-divide-aboriginal>
 by racial tensions and indigenous disadvantage.

Which is the world's most segregated city?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/28/which-is-the-worlds-most-segregated-city>
In New Zealand, the Maori have dramatically urbanised since 1936 
<http://www.teara.govt.nz/en/maori-pakeha-relations/page-5>, when roughly 7% 
lived in urban areas. Now it is closer to 80%. About a quarter (143,000) of the 
country’s Maori population live in the Auckland region. The British colonial 
occupiers struck the Treaty of Waitangi with the Maori in 1840, but mass 
indigenous dispossession and violence followed. Despite New Zealand’s 
comparative biculturalism in Auckland and the capital, Wellington – whose 
national museum, Te Papa, boasts impressive celebrations of aboriginal culture 
– Maori access to traditional lands remains heavily contested and qualified, 
especially in cities. On major social indicators, including health, the Maori 
still lag behind the rest of the country.

One city, however, stands out. Nuuk, the capital of Greenland, has probably 
the highest percentage of aboriginal people of any city:almost 90% of 
Greenland’s population of 58,000 is Inuit 
<http://www.indexmundi.com/greenland/demographics_profile.html>, and least 
eight in 10 live in urban settlements. Nuuk also celebrates Inuit culture and 
history to an extent that is unprecedented in many cities with higher total 
aboriginal populations. By proportion and by cultural authority and impact, it 
may well be tiny Nuuk that is the most indigenous city in the world.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion




























 