
Let’s take the sanctity of human life as read and get down to brass tacks. Who 
matters most? To you, that is. Who are the important ones? If you say you feel 
everyone’s equal, you’re lying. That’s not feasible. There are seven billion 
and counting. To like/love/hate/be indifferent to them all to the same extent 
is impossible unless you’re a supercomputer. A supercomputer that can feel.

And while you’re at it, Empathbot-Maxilove, why do those currently alive have 
the monopoly on mattering? What about the dead? And the not yet born? If you’re 
factoring in the latter, your unavoidable implication is that those currently 
alive who are capable of reproduction count for marginally more than those who 
aren’t. That’s dangerous territory and shatters the egalitarian premise that 
got you into this mess.

It’s no good: some people count for more than others – that’s clear. You only 
have to watch the news. “Thousands killed, a Briton grazed – we’ll bring you 
live pictures of the graze.” We all care about the people around us, and the 
people not around us, to wildly varying extents. The only hope for equality is 
in everyone being someone’s priority. Which they’re not, which is awful. Our 
route into caring about people we don’t know is via imagining how we’d feel if 
their problems were afflicting those we do.

A lot of people don’t like inheritance tax. It feels like stealing from the 
dead

People we know are more important to us than people we don’t. And the better 
we know them, the more important they are. There’s a word for this. Friends! 
That’s it. And family, of course. Family, friends, friends of the family, 
family of friends, friends of friends, acquaintances, acquaintances of friends, 
someone you met once, someone a friend met once, someone an acquaintance met 
once, the rest of humanity. That’s the rough order of priorities, for 
most of us.

Where in that list would you place someone not yet born whom you will never 
meet, and indeed no one you will ever meet will ever meet? In fact, no one you 
will ever meet will ever meet anyone who will ever meet them. How high up does 
that person come? This is not about the environment, by the way. I’m not 
talking aboutbillions of people you will never meet; almost anyone would say 
they’d matter more than one person you know. I’m not referring to “our 
children’s children”. I mean your child’s child’s child’s child’s child’s 
child’s child’s child. If it’s a boy. And then his child. If it’s a boy. How 
high up your Christmas list are those chaps?

If your answer is “not very”, this is one way in which you differ from the 
late Gerald Grosvenor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/10/the-duke-of-westminster-obituary>
, Duke of Westminster. For the sixth duke, and most of his predecessors, it’s 
absolutely all about those little guys. This strange fact struck me last week 
amid all the chatter about the unjust ramifications of the duke’s sudden death.

In case you missed them, here are those unjust ramifications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/11/inheritance-tax-why-the-new-duke-of-westminster-will-not-pay-billions>
 again.

1) Of the late duke’s approximately £9bn, approximately £0bn goes to the 
taxman. I’m sure the Treasury gets some money, but nowhere near a billion quid, 
let alone the £3.6bn that would be owing if the estate were liable for the 
standard 40% inheritance tax rate. But it isn’t, obviously, for reasons that 
are as literally legal as they are figuratively criminal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fdavid-mitchell-who-duke-westminster-cares-about-9bn-estate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d7a40e8f7968b399ccb637b81f2a87f7b7a9819%2F0_0_1344_1539%2F1344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20the%20duke%20cares%20about%2C%20in%20descending%20order%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fdavid-mitchell-who-duke-westminster-cares-about-9bn-estate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20the%20duke%20cares%20about%2C%20in%20descending%20order%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fdavid-mitchell-who-duke-westminster-cares-about-9bn-estate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d7a40e8f7968b399ccb637b81f2a87f7b7a9819%2F0_0_1344_1539%2F1344.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
2) Of the late duke’s approximately £9bn, approximately £0bn goes to his three 
daughters.

3) Of the late duke’s approximately £9bn, approximately £9bn, and the titles 
of Duke of Westminster, Marquess of Westminster and Viscount Belgrave, go to his
third child and only son, Hugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/10/new-duke-of-westminster-hugh-grosvenor-inherit-fortune>
 (25).

A lot of people don’t like inheritance tax. It feels like stealing from the 
dead. It isn’t, but it feels like it. The reasoning goes: I worked hard for my 
money, I paid tax on it when I earned it (not all of the above quite applies to 
the late duke), so why shouldn’t I be able to leave it all to my children? Why 
should the taxman get any?

The answer is that, in order to pay for public services, the government should 
take money out of the economy where it’ll be least missed, where its absence is 
least likely to plunge people into poverty or reduce consumer spending. The 
money of the dead is therefore ripe for taxation: the owner no longer needs it, 
and his or her heirs have been doing OK without it up to now.Inheritance tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/inheritancetax> doesn’t discourage earning, 
it discourages dying, which I think we can all get behind.

But I understand why many people balk at that tax. I find it harder to 
understand where the late duke is concerned. What if £3.6bn were paid in tax? 
That would still leave unimaginable wealth for the next generation. Even at the 
same rate of tax, their children would also be stratospherically well off. The 
financial wellbeing of his family would be assured as far into the future as he 
could meaningfully look. Meanwhile, his country would benefit from a 
significant windfall that would help millions today. That’s just not the same 
as bereaved kids having to sell the house they grew up in to meet a tax demand.

Sign up to the Guardian's daily email
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/info/2015/dec/08/daily-email-uk> 
The late duke doesn’t strike me as greedy. “Given the choice I would rather 
not have been born wealthy, but I never think of giving it up. I can’t sell it. 
It doesn’t belong to me,” he once said. And I believe him. This was not a 
Philip Green figure, cavorting on a yacht. He was a quiet man, obsessed with 
the Territorial Army and duty. But what duty? A duty to humanity, a duty to 
those he loved? No, a duty to the longevity of the Grosvenor family’s 
prominence.

So he denied both his country and his daughters significant portions of his 
wealth, just to keep it all together, to increase its chances of lasting, like 
one big ice cube instead of several smaller ones – to maximise the length of 
time for which people of his name will still be rich, even though they are as 
distant strangers to him as his ancestor, the original “Gros Veneur” (fat 
huntsman), who came over with William the Conqueror.

Those remote, theoretical Grosvenors with whom he’ll share a fleck of DNA 
mattered more to him than his own daughters, never mind the patients of the 
NHS. That’s not insincere and it’s not selfish. But it is bonkers.
 