
It’s third time unlucky for Australia this evening. Once again Channel Ten 
will dump some candles, a gaudy mansion, a chiselled torso, troughs of 
champagne and repeated use of the word “journey” into the televisual meat 
grinder and crank the handle to produce the sodden, bitter reality sausage 
known asThe Bachelor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/australia-culture-blog/2014/oct/06/the-bachelor-finale-there-are-no-winners-in-competitive-dating>
.

The Bachelor finale: there are no winners in competitive dating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/australia-culture-blog/2014/oct/06/the-bachelor-finale-there-are-no-winners-in-competitive-dating>
But as a timely reminder of why you should feel more comfortable watching 
pandas being released from airlocks into deep space,UnREAL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/20/unreal-reality-tv-lifetime>
 on Stan does a good job. A fictional behind-the-scenes glimpse of an equally 
fictional (yet disturbingly accurate) reality show, Everlasting, it makes no 
attempts to glorify or defend the methods used to generate the controversial 
ratings-hit moments. In fact, knowing the show was co-created by Sarah Gertrude 
Shapiro, an ex-Bachelor producer, the entire series almost comes across as a 
retroactive letter of resignation.

If you’re looking for a relentless beat-up of the reality TV industry, you’ll 
get it here, and no surprises. The series is quite happy to meet your 
expectations, rather than confront them or confuse them by going all meta 
(tempting, no doubt, for a scripted show about the reality behind a fake TV 
show). Instead, it suggests that the people allowing the reality TV dog to foul 
on the pavement of civilisation are, in fact, as bad as the shows they’re 
incessantly churning out.

The writers, and therefore the series they’ve created, are completely 
unforgiving. There isn’t a single likeable character in all seven episodes, nor 
an arc that’s vaguely redeeming, nor, apparently, any sort of obstacle that 
stands in the path of their hideous flaws. I doubt you’d find a portrayal of 
humanity less encouraging outside UnREAL unless George Pell went on The Bolt 
Report to announce a new kitten abattoir.

Could dark dating-show satire UnREAL kill reality TV?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/14/could-dark-dating-show-satire-unreal-kill-reality-tv>
It’s almost unsatisfyingly bleak. Everlasting’s expletive-laden executive 
producer, Quinn King (Constance Zimmer), is hard to sympathise with. She’s not 
battling idiocy in some dull, unheard of corner of the world, à la Malcolm 
Tucker of The Thick of It. She’s making a terrible, glossy, fake reality TV 
show, she bathes in bigotry-for-profit and, even worse, she’s proud of it.

There’s little remorse or pity for the viewer’s humanity to latch on to here.

Even the audience’s “in” – reluctant producer Rachel Goldberg (played by Shiri 
Appleby) brought back after an on-set breakdown in the last series of 
Everlasting – ends up harnessing her own powers of psychological manipulation 
to ensure the show delivers its quota of engineered fights, tears, and 
raunchiness.

Whatever conscience was behind Rachel’s original breakdown is clearly 
providing little hindrance here, but then she does owe Quinn for nearly ruining 
the last series so, sorry viewer, you’ll have to give up on Rachel giving you a 
glimmer of hope. It’s like being tossed a life raft only for you to realise 
it’s a bag of inflated human skin.

This is my biggest gripe with UnREAL: we already assume the reality TV 
industry is despicably amoral, so creating fiendish characters by using that 
world as a backdrop feels a bit like cheating. Most of us imagine the 
advertising industry operates in a similar fashion. But that’s why Mad Men was 
so remarkable, providing us with characters we cared about and pitied: even Don.

UnREAL takes aim at reality TV – but the truth is even more brutal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/20/unreal-reality-tv-lifetime>
However, the fact that UnREAL was co-created by someone in the know means the 
warts’n’all approach is also its biggest selling point. It is an unsparingly 
blunt assault on reality TV from someone in the actual industry, ironically 
making it a more honest show than anything reality TV’s ever thrown at us.

If you don’t mind being shown a world that’s predictably devoid of charm, it 
can be enjoyed as a sort of self-congratulatory morality porn. Certainly after 
binge-watching all seven episodes, I felt like knighting myself for the mere 
act of sitting on my sofa without orchestrating the misery of everyone around 
me for profit. Apparently there’s a second season in the works. I’ll be curious 
to see if it shifts gear and becomes a more nuanced drama, or if it continues 
to be an enjoyably gross spectacle, much like the kind of show it’s dissecting.

 * The Bachelor <http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/the-bachelor> (Australia) 
starts on Channel Ten on 29 July at 7.30pm AEST.UnREAL 
<https://www.stan.com.au/watch/unreal> airs on Stan in Australia and on Lifetime
in the US <http://www.mylifetime.com/shows/unreal> and in Britain 
<http://unrealtv.co.uk/?gclid=CI65tLjv2sYCFaFl2wodnAMClw>  