
The Palace of Westminster is practically falling down. It’s riddled with leaks 
and infested with vermin. Whole toxic sections urgently need to be removed for 
everyone’s good. After decades of poor planning and quick, botched fixes, it’s 
badly decayed and it’s going to cost a fortune to put things right.

I expect your leaden-analogy alarm has already gone off. Lots of people are 
absolutely thrilled with the old palace’s decrepitude as a metaphor for “our 
broken politics”. Do you know what I think is a really good metaphor for the 
state of Britain today? It’s people enjoying that metaphor. It’s the tedious 
satisfaction they derive from likeningone building’s need of repair 
<http://www.restorationandrenewal.parliament.uk/information-on-the-fabric.html> 
to the decline in public trust suffered by the political system for which it 
houses key functions; the inwardly delighted wry shake of the head at that 
slow-news-week-political-cartoon quantity of wit and insight. Honestly, it 
makes me want to join Isis.

The fact remains, however, that coincident with this phase of widespread 
disappointment with our government and legislators, the structure in which 
their business is transacted has started to crumble. The stonework has badly 
eroded, the heating and plumbing keep breaking down and apparently not a single 
one of the 3,800 windows closes properly – which, in terms of sheer 
consistency, is analogous to absolutely nothing else in our political culture.

The public could stare down at them having their rows like angry hobbits in a 
special arguing burrow

The obvious solution to this problem – just letting the building gradually 
fall in on them all – has been rejected on the basis that it would “reward poor 
parliamentary attendance”. So a consensus has emerged that the palace needs to 
be restored. Of course that’s not to say there’s a consensus that it should 
continue to house parliament – some argue that its Victorian public 
school/gentlemen’s club vibe is so inappropriate to a modern democracy that it 
should be turned into a museum. But I suspect even those people think it should 
be a structurally sound museum.

So it’s going to be repaired, and it’s almost certainly not going to be turned 
into a museum – partly because that would necessitate building a whole other 
giant palace for the Houses of Parliament, with all the ill-fitting windows, 
enormous digital clock towers and statues of Tony Blair that that would entail; 
and partly because saying “The Palace of Westminster should be turned into a 
museum!” is such a big part of the identity and cocktail-party-opening-gambit 
technique of the idea’s adherents that actually turning the place into a museum 
would leave a gaping hole in their lives, which social services would then 
struggle to fill.

But doing the place up, I’m afraid to say, is going to be expensive – a report 
last Juneestimated it would cost £5.7bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/18/palace-of-westminster-renovation-options-report>
, and that figure is set to double when it turns out they were just guessing. 
Alternatively, and this is where it gets interesting (nearly halfway through, 
this week – I swear I’m getting worse), it could be slashed toa piffling £3.5bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2015/jun/26/parliament-manchester-mps-peers-westminster-northern-city>
 if the parliamentarians agree to fully vacate the place for six years. 
Basically, it’s a lot cheaper to renovate without loads of politicians 
obstructing proceedings. The politicians just get in the way of people trying 
to do their jobs and make things better. Has that alarm gone off again?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fdavid-mitchell-renovation-houses-parliament-palace-westminster-bristol-sorting-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F238a3d02befa71e3a75057550bba6b5d3d4834d4%2F0_272_2418_3744%2F2418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%E2%80%99d%20want%20to%20be%20an%20MP%20in%20a%20sorting%20office%20in%20Bristol%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fdavid-mitchell-renovation-houses-parliament-palace-westminster-bristol-sorting-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%E2%80%99d%20want%20to%20be%20an%20MP%20in%20a%20sorting%20office%20in%20Bristol%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fdavid-mitchell-renovation-houses-parliament-palace-westminster-bristol-sorting-office%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F238a3d02befa71e3a75057550bba6b5d3d4834d4%2F0_272_2418_3744%2F2418.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
So where would they move to? George Ferguson, who’s the mayor of Bristol, has 
a proposal: Bristol. There’s a derelict Royal Mail sorting office round the 
back of the station that he says would be perfect. Architectural firm Studio 
Egret West proposes to transform it into a sort of hill which members of the 
public could climb and then stare down at the politicians having their rows 
like angry hobbits in a special arguing burrow. Except they won’t be having 
rows because “the debating chamber, inspired by the idea of a clearing in the 
woods, encourages a less combative approach to government business with 
opportunities for better cross-party cooperation”. Much more like elves then. 
Lovely.

I’m slightly sceptical of the view that sitting our MPs in a different 
arrangement will make their deliberations more constructive. It’s usually put 
forward by those who dismiss the shoutyHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> as medieval and 
pantomimic. It has definitely become a bit of a parody of its former self, 
which is a shame, but I’m not sure that having our politicians yell and hurl 
abuse at each other in public isn’t, for a repressed nation such as ours, 
rather a healthy convention. It’s the vestigial remains of something honest 
and, as such, is one of the few elements of contemporary politics that I’d say 
was worth preserving.

It’s not as if an assembly of hundreds of people can ever have particularly 
detailed discussions anyway. It’s got to be fairly binary: do we agree with 
Thing A or not. So I don’t see that the shouting of “Hear hear!” or “Shame!” is 
any less effective than those beige semicircles of desks and microphones that 
other countries seem to favour. And it’s definitely more interesting.

My reservations about the woodland clearing approach to parliamentary debate 
aside, these plans look quite fun. There are somenice dynamic drawings online 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/studio-egret-west-reveals-plan-to-relocate-parliament-to-bristol/10005061.fullarticle>
, promising restaurants and cafes as well as committee rooms and a library. 
There’s even a “tranquil space”, right by the railway line – which suggests 
that, for all the blue-sky thinking, they’re not holding out much hope that the 
train service is going to improve.

But the sad thing about this idea is that, charming though that derelict 
sorting office covered in turf might be, getting to hang out in the Palace of 
Westminster is MPs’ last remaining perk. Once high-status pillars of the 
community, the nation’s representatives have seldom been held in lower regard – 
and the internet is there to bring all that negativity relentlessly to bear. 
But they still have their massive neogothic palace to run around in, drinking 
cheap booze and shouting at each other on television. It’s like a wonderful 
cross between Hogwarts and theBig Brother house.

So can you imagine what a slap in the face from history it would feel like if, 
as a newly elected MP in 2020, you realised you weren’t even going to get that? 
You were going to get all the abuse and disdain, the endless scrutiny of 
personal financial details and property arrangements, the daily grind of trying 
to court the lobbyist’s dime while persuading international corporations to 
close their factories in other people’s constituencies first, but without 
messing around in a magical castle. It would be like working for Disneyland, 
but in the complaints department.
 