
What kind of value judgments and viewing habits do we bring to the theatre 
when we are watching a new piece of dance? It’s a question posed byDance 
Umbrella <http://www.danceumbrella.co.uk/> and CCN-Ballet de Lorraine 
<http://ballet-de-lorraine.eu/en> in their new, joint production, Unknown 
Pleasures. By presenting an evening of five new works, whose choreography, 
design, lighting and music all remain anonymous, they are inviting audiences to 
look at the stage with their senses rinsed clean of all preconceptions – and all
PR <https://www.theguardian.com/media/marketingandpr>.

Unknown pleasures: do we enjoy art more if it's anonymous?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/03/unknown-pleasures-art-anonymous-dance-umbrella-royal-court>
It’s a bold and engaging experiment, challenging the roles that reputation, 
context, gender and age play in our evaluation of dance. But much as I enjoyed 
the novelty of the concept (and the freedom of arriving at the theatre without 
making any advance preparation), I didn’t find that the experience made me a 
more innocent viewer.

The five works in Unknown Pleasures are presented as one, near seamless 
performance, but with the first item divided into short sections that function 
as hinges between the four longer pieces. The movement in Anonymous #1 (my 
title) is a study in fragmented, frozen gesture and its dancers have a slightly 
lost air, as if unsure whether or not they are actively performing. They drift 
across the space, they place themselves precariously on the front edge of the 
stage, as if hoping to merge themselves with the audience. And while #1 adds a 
smart sliver of the conceptual to the programme, as a framing device it is 
perhaps too distancing, too self-conscious, for a show already fraught with 
questions.

The other works are admirably diverse in style. Best of the four is #2, a pure 
minimalist piece for 17 dancers whose elegantly repeating walks, turns and 
glides accumulate into grids, circles, and progressively mesmeric kaleidoscopic 
patterns. These patterns form and reform with such tantalising rapidity that we 
cannot see whether the letters printed on the dancers’ T-shirts are meant to 
make any sense; only at the end do the cast order themselves into a line in 
which the words “The world is burning but I keep on turning” become clearly 
legible. The drollery of it, combined with the musicality of the phrasing and 
the exquisite control of structure, all suggest the imprint ofLucinda Childs 
<http://www.lucindachilds.com/> – if not the choreographer herself then a 
talented disciple.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdance-guess-the-choreographer-unknown-pleasures-dance-umbrella-ccn-ballet-de-lorraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8364b3314f7bb7860ffd2d3b7b474ce07631021%2F0_414_4831_2898%2F4831.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20dance%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20The%20show%20that%20asks%20you%20to%20guess%20the%20choreographer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdance-guess-the-choreographer-unknown-pleasures-dance-umbrella-ccn-ballet-de-lorraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20dance%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20The%20show%20that%20asks%20you%20to%20guess%20the%20choreographer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdance-guess-the-choreographer-unknown-pleasures-dance-umbrella-ccn-ballet-de-lorraine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8364b3314f7bb7860ffd2d3b7b474ce07631021%2F0_414_4831_2898%2F4831.jpg>
 Unknown Pleasures by Dance Umbrella and CCN – Ballet de Lorraine. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Piece #3 is about three couples, who seem to be locked together in a language 
of gluey, febrile body contact. At moments they break apart, as one or other 
dancer makes a swerving break for freedom, yet some dark force of emotional 
gravity keeps dragging them back to the confines of the duet. I suspect that if 
this work were longer and revealed more about each couple I might have rated it 
more highly. At 15 minutes, however, it doesn’t transcend the very generic 
nature of its ingredients – the dysfunctional-looking relationships, the moody 
lighting and electronic score.

The dance clock is turned back a couple of decades in #4, where dancers in 
retro-gold Lycra and black tights perform choreography that looks like an 
homage toMerce Cunningham <http://www.mercecunningham.org/merce-cunningham/>. 
The stiff-legged footwork, the tight little clusters and rushes of energy are 
pure Merce, although the movement is also invaded by a different, less 
disciplined voice. It’s one that shakes the dancers into looser, blurrier 
lines, sends them toppling off balance and disrupts the symmetry of the floor 
patterns – almost as though the anonymous choreographer were having his or her 
own argument with Cunningham’s legacy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdance-guess-the-choreographer-unknown-pleasures-dance-umbrella-ccn-ballet-de-lorraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c872b0a77fb2ce6d17e0a538131d2e72fae767%2F948_0_2953_2921%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20dance%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20The%20show%20that%20asks%20you%20to%20guess%20the%20choreographer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdance-guess-the-choreographer-unknown-pleasures-dance-umbrella-ccn-ballet-de-lorraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20dance%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20The%20show%20that%20asks%20you%20to%20guess%20the%20choreographer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdance-guess-the-choreographer-unknown-pleasures-dance-umbrella-ccn-ballet-de-lorraine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c872b0a77fb2ce6d17e0a538131d2e72fae767%2F948_0_2953_2921%2F2953.jpg>
 Unknown Pleasures by Dance Umbrella and CCN–Ballet de Lorraine. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Unknown Pleasures closes in grandstanding style with a setting of Ravel’s 
Boléro <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boléro>. As 11 dancers criss-cross the 
stage to the insistent, orgiastic swell of the music, the blatancy of their 
pelvis-thrusting demeanour, their swagger and strut feel like a parody of the 
classicBéjart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YpdFYhf3XZ8> version of the same 
score. But there is also a strange, vivid torque to parts of the choreography 
that make it more animalistic than human, with the dancers springing across the 
stage on their hands and knees, or with their arms angled above their heads 
like antlers. The work also springs a sweet and funny surprise as the central 
couple, who first emerge from the group like jousting animals on heat, end up 
sitting cosily together on the edge of the stage, two quietly domesticated 
lovers.

Overall it’s a good evening of dance – and #2 and #5 are both works I would 
particularly like to see again. But while I was watching Unknown Pleasures I 
found the question of context and authorship a nagging distraction, which at 
times got between me and the stage. Perhaps the critic’s part of my brain 
doesn’t know how to shut up. But as a species we are wired to be puzzle 
solvers; given the conversations I had with other people, and the conversations 
I overheard, I wasn’t alone in finding the evening as much of a quiz as a 
liberation. The programme will go on international tour and at the end of its 
run, I’d be happy to see it return to Umbrella – but this time with the name 
credits inserted. It’s not that I’m desperate to know how well I scored at 
Guess the Choreographer, but I would be able to absorb myself far more 
completely with the works themselves if I wasn’t bothering about their 
provenance.

• Unknown Pleasures 
<http://ballet-de-lorraine.eu/en/pieces/86_Unknown-pleasures-Creation-2016> is 
atOpéra national de Lorraine <http://www.opera-national-lorraine.fr/>, Nancy, 
France, on 5, 6, 8 and 9 November.
 