
With its combination of thought and sport, nature ramble and rivalry, golf 
once seemed the ideal pursuit for a writer. Agatha Christie and Ian Fleming 
played regularly and put it into their fiction (inMurder on the Links and 
Goldfinger, respectively); Arthur Conan Doyle conceived The Hound of the 
Baskervilles during a round. Yet this week, despite the prompts of the 
Ryder Cup and thedeath of Arnold Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/arnold-palmer-obituaries>, 
literary golfers have been hard to spot. What went wrong in literature’s affair 
with the Scottish game?

The romance was at its height, usually in crime and comic writing, in the 
peaceful 1920s, 30s and 50s, when PG Wodehouse penned golf stories incessantly 
(sometimes featuring Bertie Wooster, but also dozens narrated by the Oldest 
Member); other mystery writers followed Christie in turning courses into crime 
scenes, and John Betjeman wrote his “Seaside Golf” – an evocation of scoring a 
par three on a Cornish course that ends ecstatically with “splendour, splendour 
everywhere”).

Open thread: which sports produce the best literature?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/may/02/sport-literature> 
Golf’s role in artier fare involves scenes and supporting characters rather 
than whole novels and protagonists, but these fleeting appearances in this 
era’s literary fiction are remarkably classy. The pre-eminent US modernist 
novel,William Faulkner’s The Sound and the Fury  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/20/sound-fury-william-faulkner-rereading>
(1929), actually opens on a course - working out that golf is being played (“I 
could see them hitting ... They took the flag out, and they were hitting”) is a 
kind of initiation into the puzzle posed by its distortive stream of 
consciousness narration. Jordan Baker, Nick Carraway’s girlfriend inThe Great 
Gatsby  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/03/what-makes-great-gatsby>
(1925), exemplifies the recurring trope of the free-spirited female golfer, 
also instanced by Holden Caulfield’s platonic pal Jane Gallagher - the only 
post-pubertal member of the opposite sex he talks of positively - inJD 
Salinger’sThe Catcher in the Rye  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/17/catcher-in-the-rye-at-60-anniversary-jd-salinger>
(1951).

The sense of a natural affinity between writing and golfing continued into 
subsequent decades for authors shaped by this heyday – notably John Updike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/may/15/have-we-fallen-out-of-love-with-john-updike>
 (an addicted player of what he called “the thinking man’s game” whose writings 
about it are collected inGolf Dreams) but also George Plimpton, who chronicled 
his brief time on the pro tour inThe Bogey Man, and once played a round against 
an LSD-fuelled Hunter S Thompson - and more surprisingly Samuel Beckett: a 
recent review of hisLetters Volume III noted that it was his “first love” and 
he played off a handicap of seven, “better than Ian Fleming, not as good as 
Patrick Hamilton or Malcolm Lowry”.

By the time of Palmer’s last major victory in 1964, however, the relationship 
had begun to sour. Younger writers rarely took up whacking tiny balls 
thereafter and viewed golf or country clubs as enclaves of complacent bourgeois 
privilege – protected in the recent past or even the present by racism, 
antisemitism, class prejudice and sometimes sexism that Updike loved to spend 
his afternoons ambling around such mock-estates embodied what the new guard 
reacted against in his work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwhy-golf-writers-out-of-fashion-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98217b9fd00e41a228dcc4438d888fc4d780d83%2F10_0_3050_1831%2F3050.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20has%20golf%2C%20once%20favoured%20by%20writers%2C%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwhy-golf-writers-out-of-fashion-ryder-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20has%20golf%2C%20once%20favoured%20by%20writers%2C%20gone%20out%20of%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwhy-golf-writers-out-of-fashion-ryder-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98217b9fd00e41a228dcc4438d888fc4d780d83%2F10_0_3050_1831%2F3050.jpg>
 Elizabeth Debicki as Jordan Baker, with Joel Edgerton as Tom Buchanan, in Baz 
Luhrmann’s The Great Gatsby. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
If golfers do appear in post-60s fiction, they can be counted to be male and 
obnoxious (Don DeLillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/06/don-delillo-kid-from-the-bronx-interview-xan-brooks>
 twice, in his 1970 story “The Uniforms” and 1977 novelPlayers, enigmatically 
depicts terrorist radicals slaying them in a shooting spree); and golf course 
developers – fictive Donald Trumps – emerge as a new category of villain, 
in for exampleCarl Hiaasen’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
Native Tongue(1991) and Jane Smiley’s Good Faith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/aug/24/fiction.features4> (2003).

While some 21st-century authors are ambivalent about the sport, - Hiaasen also 
wrote a rueful golfing memoir,The Downhill Lie – others are unequivocally 
hostile. Tennis aficionado David Foster Wallace said that watching televised 
golf means “crushing, crushing boredom ... like you’ve never known will wash 
over you and just about kill you”; while Jonathan Franzen has written that he 
dislikes “almost everything about it. The point seems to be the euthanising of 
workday-sized chunks of time by well-off white men.Golf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> eats land, drinks water, displaces 
wildlife, fosters sprawl.”
 