
Australian miners are making a killing overseas. With little regulation or 
oversight, billions of dollars are being made in some of the most remote places 
on Earth.

The necessity of partnering with autocratic regimes has proved no impediment 
to investment. Human rights have been breached. Victims are largely invisible.


None of this should be surprising. If Australian companies operating 
internationally are mentioned in the media, it appears in the business pages 
and discusses the strengths of a CEO or share price. Rio Tinto, for example, 
receives largelyuncritical coverage 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/markets/ten-stocks-to-watch-as-the-australian-dollar-drops-20150714-gibmj4.html>
 despite in the 1980s the corporation facingserious allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/06/shell-rio-tinto-human-rights-nigeria-kiobel>
 of human rights abuses around the world, including inPapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/19/bougainville-mine-locals-who-oppose-its-re-opening-must-have-a-voice>
.

Documents reveal extent of Shell and Rio Tinto lobbying in human rights case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/06/shell-rio-tinto-human-rights-nigeria-kiobel>
Two American non-profit media organisations, the Centre for Public Integrity 
and the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, recently bucked 
the trend and released a stunning report,Fatal Extraction 
<http://projects.icij.org/fatalextraction/>, on Australian mining companies 
working in Africa (in which no allegations were made against Rio Tinto). How 
revealing that this research was led from America and not Australia itself.

The findings of the report, produced in collaboration with African journalists 
on the ground, wereshocking 
<http://www.theage.com.au/good-weekend/danger-under-ground-20150710-gi8opb.html>
.

From the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Malawi, grim details of death, 
maiming and police and army brutality were revealed.

A lead investigator on the report, Will Fitzgibbon 
<http://www.icij.org/journalists/will-fitzgibbon>, told the Guardian that while 
the response to the report was “positive”, there was also a sense that 
“Australia’s debate on corporate impacts and alleged violations overseas is 
much more limited than elsewhere. In Canada, for example, there have been 
lengthy parliamentary debates and deep media analyses of comparable allegations 
in a way that is yet to happen in Australia.”

I asked Fitzgibbon how these violations should be addressed in Australia. He 
said:

The jury is still out on whether new laws are the most pressing response to 
this problem. Many argue that there’s a lot that can also be done in terms of 
company reporting to investors and of promoting voluntary and transparent 
application of international principles of business and human rights.

Australia’s lack of interest in alleged corporate crimes in far-away places is 
related to a worrying incuriousness among reporters and politicians (the Greens 
are akey exception 
<http://lee-rhiannon.greensmps.org.au/content/media-releases/abbott-govt-overdue-regulating-stop-aust-mining-companies-overseas-abuses>
).

“There is a huge imbalance between Australia’s diplomatic and business 
interests in Africa. We still have one of the lowest numbers of embassies and 
high commissions inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> among our 
peers yet we have mining companies, sometimes literally flying the Australian 
flag, in places like Burkina Faso, Niger, Madagascar and Zambia,” Fitzgibbon 
said.

Eritrea <http://projects.icij.org/fatalextractionapp/countries/eritrea/> is 
one country that should be under the spotlight.

“The economy of Eritrea has experienced considerable growth in recent years,” 
explains the website for Australian mining companyDanakali 
<http://www.danakali.com.au/>. The Perth-based firm, which until recently was 
known as South Boulder Mines, has partnered with the Eritrean National Mining 
Company to develop a massive potassium-bearing salts deposit around 350km from 
the country’s capital, Asmara.

Danakali’s managing director Paul Donaldson said 
<http://www.proactiveinvestors.com.au/companies/news/62694/south-boulder-mines-changes-name-to-danakali-62694.html>
, “The Danakil region of East Africa is recognised as an emerging potash 
[potassium salts] province, and to date over 10bn tonnes of potassium bearing 
salts have been identified.”

Online intelligence magazine Geeska Afrika explained 
<http://potashinvestingnews.com/12095-south-boulder-mines-eritrea-mining.html>: 
“Eritrea has many benefits it can offer potential investors. It has a safe and 
stable government with an educated and disciplined work force.”

Absent from all the propaganda was any mention of Eritrea as one of the most 
repressive nations in the world. AUN report 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/CoIEritrea/Pages/ReportCoIEritrea.aspx> 
in June detailed horrific allegations of abuse committed by the regime. Human 
Rights Watchargued 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/06/10/eritrea-scathing-un-report> that “this 
authoritative report rightly condemns the horrific patterns of torture, 
arbitrary detention, and indefinite conscription that are prompting so many 
Eritreans to flee their country”. A sizeable majority of refugees leaving 
Eritrea and attempting to reach Europe are fleeing from thisregime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/21/escaping-eritrea-migrant-if-i-die-at-sea-at-least-i-wont-be-tortured>
. I’ve met many Eritreans in South Sudan who prefer to live in a war zone than 
under the Eritrean dictatorship.

Bougainville mine: locals who oppose its re-opening must have a voice | Antony 
Loewenstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/19/bougainville-mine-locals-who-oppose-its-re-opening-must-have-a-voice>
Danakali has been engaged in Eritrea since at least 2013 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/05/15/eritrea-mining-idUSL6N0DW46920130515>
. An independent Eritrean media outlet hadaccused 
<http://www.asmarino.com/report/3917-the-use-of-forced-labour-at-the-colluli-potash-project-in-eritrea-rpt>
 the company of benefitting from forced labour. I can find no public response 
from the company about the country’s human rights record and the unavoidable 
ethical issues that arise from partnering with an autocracy. They have not 
responded to requests for comment.

Apart from a major Eritrean rebel group 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article54432> this year warning the firm 
to stay away due to environmental concerns and allegations that the indigenous 
Afar community was being pushed off its lands to make way for the development, 
the Australian company has not faced any serious questions over its work in 
Eritrea.

Australia has an inglorious history of turning a blind eye to profitable bad 
behaviour. Although the Australian Wheat Boardpaid kickbacks 
<http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2012/s3520724.htm> to the Saddam Hussein 
regime in the 1990s and early 2000s for favourable contracts, lengthy legal 
wrangling resulted in few significant scalps.

With only one journalist working for an Australian media organisation 
permanently based in Africa, ABC’sMartin Cuddihy 
<https://twitter.com/martincuddihy> in Kenya, the continent is easily ignored 
or dismissed. South America is even more woefully unrepresented. Finding 
stories of Australian corporate malfeasance on either continent requires 
expensive and time-consuming work.

Of course this is not just a problem facing Australia. The Centre for 
Constitutional Rights in New York has beenpushing 
<https://ccrjustice.org/home/blog/2015/07/13/how-un-can-help-us-end-corporate-impunity-human-rights-abuses>
 the United Nations for years to end the impunity enjoyed by American and 
European firms operating in developing states. The US Supreme Court has
increasingly accepted 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/06/30/riotinto-abuse-lawsuit-idUSL2N0F60DD20130630>
 arguments from multinationals that they have no responsibility for human 
rights abuses in the countries in which they operate.

I’ve spoken to senior human rights lawyers in Australia who say it’s also 
incredibly tough to pursue a successful case against a mining giant through the 
Australian courts. The people of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea have been
waiting for decades 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/kristian-lasslett/fog-of-peace-postconflict-environments-as-sites-of-impunity-denial-and-dispossessi>
 for any compensation from the Rio Tinto-owned mine that caused a brutal, 
decades-long civil war.

Australia sells itself as a nation that can teach the world about responsible 
mining – Afghanistan is onewilling student 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/15/afghanistan-should-leave-its-copper-in-the-ground-to-avoid-further-strife>
 – but the record suggests our corporations have a callous disregard for the 
rights of civilians.
 