
Last weekend at Wentworth, Darren Clarke had a choice. In naming three of what 
will eventually become a quintet of European vice-captains for the Ryder Cup at 
Hazeltine, Clarke had the option to stress the solitary importance of this 
event. Instead, and to his credit, the Northern Irishman insisted Paul Lawrie, 
Padraig Harrington and Thomas Bjorn were all on board with one eye towards the 
future. What precisely vice-captains do and bring in the midst ofRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> battle is up for debate but Europe 
has a successful history of succession which cannot be overlooked. Right on 
cue, Clarke underlined it.

The captain’s assistant choices were no great shock. Clarke and Bjorn are 
long-time and close friends. Harrington is not only steeped in both the Ryder 
Cup and top-level golf in general but has an extroverted streak which can help 
the team dynamic. Lawrie, when clearly irked at not being part of Paul 
McGinley’s backroom team in 2014, was wrong to use a newspaper interview before 
the last Ryder Cup to speak of the intense pressureon an already nervous 
Stephen Gallacher 
<http://www.scotsman.com/sport/golf/paul-lawrie-nothing-comes-close-to-the-ryder-cup-1-3541174>
. Still, like Bjorn, the Scot is a close confidant of Clarke who has seen and 
done more than enough in his sport to offer a valuable contribution from inside 
the ropes.

Future Ryder Cups are not yet a key Clarke domain. They will be soon, when he 
forms part of a selection process to determine his successor. That process will 
be made complex by the simple fact that multiple names into a maximum of two do 
not go. The Ryder Cup captaincy was highly coveted even before the commercial 
explosion of the event which meant pound signs appeared just as much as status.

When Lee Westwood stated an intention to captain Europe in 2020 at Whistling 
Straits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/29/lee-westwood-ryder-cup-captaincy-2020>
, it is safe to assume the comment was not offered without careful 
consideration. Likewise Westwood is one of a highly select group each of whom 
can essentially dictate when he will take on the role owing to his record in, 
and connection to, the Ryder Cup. Barring a change of heart from the man 
himself, 2020 for Westwood it is.

Chris Wood holds nerve to claim PGA Championship and enter Ryder Cup race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/chris-wood-danny-willett-pga-championship-wentworth>
What happens before and after that is cause for deep fascination and Clarke 
placed the topic back into the golfing consciousness on Friday.

The biennial meeting of Europe and the United States in 2018 in France 
arguably offers ideal scope to deviate from home captain’s picks with 
nationality of Great Britain and Ireland. Continental Europe has been 
represented by onlyBernhard Langer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/sep/20/golf.rydercup20042>, Seve 
Ballesteros andJosé María Olazábal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/01/ryder-cup-2012-olazabal-ballesteros>
 since the Ryder Cup took on its current format, which is an unhelpful scenario 
for a sport looking to broaden its boundaries.

If this bigger picture is acknowledged, Bjorn would be the favourite over 
Miguel Ángel Jiménez. Bjorn’s commitment to and respect within the European 
Tour should not be underestimated just as the inability – or unwillingness – of 
Jiménez to communicate expertly in English will once again cause the Spaniard a 
problem.

And yet, should Harrington decide back-to-back vice-captaincy appearances are 
sufficient to make a bid for the pole position, it would be tough to argue 
against the Irishman. Harrington is, after all,a three-time major winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/21/theopen.golf> and a six-time 
Ryder Cup participant as a player. That is double the number of times Bjorn has 
appeared. The only logical case against Harrington would be a nationality one, 
which some may regard as dubious.

The same goes for Lawrie, who might be viewed as an outsider to lead Europe 
but deserves to be part of the narrative. Like his compatriot Sandy Lyle, 
Lawrie may discover that winning a major is not enough for this particular post.

If we fast forward to 2022 in Italy, Ian Poulter and Henrik Stenson will be 
46, Sergio Garcia and Justin Rose 42. Without offering premature ending to 
their careers and those of others like them, these numbers provide an example 
of how the captaincy era will have moved on. Should Poulter fail to qualify or 
be picked for Clarke’s team, it is difficult to foresee a scenario where he 
would not instead begin a quest – like Westwood – for inevitable captaincy by 
standing alongside Bjorn, Lawrie and Harrington.

Golfers always swat aside any notion of jostling for position or political 
moves where the Ryder Cup captaincy arises but these background games 
inevitably take place. Clarke has enough to deal with over the next four months 
to place thoughts of what transpires post-Hazeltine to the back of his mind. 
There is an almighty scramble coming, though; it may even be under way.
 