
East Barsham Manor in Norfolk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lmxobY7ghD4> 
doesn’t seem to be selling. Its owner has just dropped the asking price, 
newspapers reported last week, from £4m to just under £3m. That’s 25% off. It’s 
reduced to clear.

Let me start by saying that £3m is still a lot of money. Though not as much as 
when the manor was built in 1520. At that point, £3m would probably have bought 
you the entire country, which then came with a fair bit of Ireland too, as a 
sort of granny flat.

As a society, we’re more comfortable with our former masters, with ‘old money’

But I want to make sure I clearly say that, even these days, £3m really is a 
lot of money. I want to do so mainly in order not to be hated. If you start 
saying millions of pounds isn’t much money – even in contexts like “it isn’t 
much money to renew a nation’s nuclear deterrent” – you’re immediately basking 
in other people’s dislike. Just the phrase “not much” in close proximity to the 
word “million” raises the hackles of those for whom hackle-raising is a major 
form of exercise.

In fact, there’s really nothing to be gained from asserting that any sum isn’t 
“still a lot of money”. No one makes friends by denigrating any amount of money 
greater than a pound. And I reckon there’ll be those who’d seize on the 
slightest disregard for 90p. “It’s all very well for you, happily leaving 90p 
in coppers down the back of your sofa – 1.2 billion people live on less than 
that a day!” “Sorry, I just thought it was quite cheap for a tea.”

So I’m sincerely of the opinion that absolutely any quantity of money, no 
matter how small, is in fact a huge and ridiculous fortune. I totally don’t 
want you to go away with the idea that I’m one of those TV lefties, so 
massively enriched by institutions perversely constituted for the sole purpose 
of turning a blind eye to paedophilia that they think £3m is roughly what you 
tip a pizza delivery man. I don’t want anyone thinking that about me. Because 
that, my management team tells me, is no way to sell DVDs.

Nevertheless, in the context of Britain’s current absurd property market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/07/uk-house-prices-pick-up-pace-101-annual-increase-halifax-brexit>
, £3m doesn’t always buy you much: a flat in central London, a small house in 
not-quite-central London, a large house in outer London. It would certainly not 
purchase central London’s equivalent of East Barsham Manor, because that’s St 
James’s Palace.

But I’m being naive. It’s “location location location”, isn’t it? Rural 
Norfolk’s rubbish for the tube. The surprisingly large number of people 
fortunate enough to earn enough to raise a mortgage big enough to buy somewhere 
that costs £3m couldn’t still earn that in theNorfolk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/norfolk> countryside. They need to service 
those vast debts, and the immense political pressure keeping interest rates 
tiny is only half the battle. They’ve got to keep trousering the kind of salary 
you get by working in the City or practising law, rather than farming or 
running an antique shop.

What’s more, if you bought East Barsham Manor, you wouldn’t just have the 
mortgage to worry about. It’s a Grade I-listed 16th-century mansion set in 
ornamental gardens. It costs nearly two grand a week to stop it falling down. 
So it’s not a viable option for most of those who could just about afford the 
price tag.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-rich-arent-manor-born-david-mitchell-east-barsham-manor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9219d6f3999ad5d71d55b30ad4a5ec85fa39a590%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20super-rich%20won%E2%80%99t%20live%20in%20a%20house%20fit%20for%20a%20king%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-rich-arent-manor-born-david-mitchell-east-barsham-manor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20super-rich%20won%E2%80%99t%20live%20in%20a%20house%20fit%20for%20a%20king%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-rich-arent-manor-born-david-mitchell-east-barsham-manor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9219d6f3999ad5d71d55b30ad4a5ec85fa39a590%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
In fact, the more I thought about it, the more it totally made sense that this 
unique jewel of Tudor architecture – where Henry VIII reputedly stayed onhis 
pilgrimage to Walsingham 
<http://www.walsinghamvillage.org/about/history-of-pilgrimage/>, with seven 
reception rooms, eight bedrooms, a great hall with minstrels’ gallery and five 
acres of grounds, on which there’s also a three-bedroom cottage – is roughly 
equated under our modern value system with a three-bedroom flat in a modern 
block in Pimlico.

Then suddenly it stopped making sense again. Hang on, I thought. High earners 
servicing seven-figure debts to sustain modest accommodation isn’t the main 
force inflating the property bubble. It’s the billionaires who have chosenLondon
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> as a place to shop, and its property 
market as a money laundry. They don’t have to worry about mortgages and the 
tube. They’re looking to buy palaces to hang out in for brief periods between 
superyacht rides. A Norfolk manor house would be fine for them – they could 
helicopter to Harrods in under an hour. The yacht could drop them off at King’s 
Lynn or Cromer.

But that lot don’t want houses like East Barsham Manor, I concluded bitterly. 
They want Belgravia town houses, stripped back, knocked through and ruined with 
onyx and granite and marble. They want screening rooms and gyms, they want 
cavernous dug-out basements for swimming pools and spa treatment suites and 
lightless bedrooms for servants. They want glass and steel and air-conditioning 
and panic rooms.

They don’t see the beauty and history, the irreplaceable preciousness of a 
building like East Barsham Manor, they’re just looking for a large dehumidified 
garage in which to keep their diamante-studded Humvees and leopard-print 
Bentleys. The comparatively modest price tag on this amazing Tudor mansion is, 
I realised, a direct consequence of the vulgarity of the rich – of the shocking 
fact that 99% of the world’s money is in the hands of people possessing 0.0001% 
of the world’s taste.

Commuters save £3,000 on property each minute further out of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/03/commuters-save-3000-for-each-minute-travelled-out-of-london>
How odd that that bothers me so much, I reflected as I wrung the snobbish 
spittle out of my beard. It’s not the world’s growing inequalities of wealth 
that rile me, just that our new global economic overlords spend their 
ill-gotten gains so tackily – and that’s not a moral failing. Still, the 
feeling that these people are vulgar as well as rich makes them, to my British 
sensibilities, hugely more contemptible.

I think that feeling is pretty common (ironically). As a society, we’re more 
comfortable with our former masters, with “old money”. Few of us resent the 
fact that the dukes of Devonshire still live at Chatsworth – they’re just some 
nice old posh people. It doesn’t make us brim with rage, unlike an oligarch’s 
planning application to install a second car lift.

This imbalance of anger makes no logical sense. Whether it’s the old 
aristocracy or the new plutocracy, it’s still people who’ve ended up with 
unimaginable wealth for reasons that are seldom particularly fair. But the 
harsh edges of unfairness are softened by time; lichen tempers its frowning 
crenellations into a smile. After all, when Henry VIII stayed at East Barsham 
Manor, it was brand new — as gleaming and modern as an internet 
billionaire’s penthouse.
 