
Pro wrestling, which requires great athleticism despite its wider reputation 
as a “fake” spectacle, is punishing for its participants. Thelist of performers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Skudrafan1/List_of_professional_wrestlers_who_died_young>
 who’ve died before 50 makes for sobering reading: heart attack, heart attack, 
suicide, liver failure, heart attack, drug overdose.

As Dan O’Sullivan wrote in his definitive essay on the wrestling industry 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/08/money-in-the-bank/>, wrestlers’ lives are 
riddled with “lingering physical ailments, screwjob employment contracts, and 
chugalug drug abuse”, mainly steroids. As for the wrestling-industrial complex: 
“Its only business model is fear.”

All aboard! The Rock is taking a money-spinning Disney ride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/aug/20/the-rock-is-taking-a-money-spinning-disney-ride-dwayne-johnson>
Insecure and exploitative workplaces like this destroy the body, but they’re 
also breeding grounds for toxic male resentment. As Mickey Rourke’s character 
in the 2008 film The Wrestler broods, pointing away from the ring in which he 
makes his trade, “The only place I get hurt is out there. The world don’t give 
a shit about me.”

This is what makes the career of Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/aug/20/the-rock-is-taking-a-money-spinning-disney-ride-dwayne-johnson>
 such a joy to watch. In some sense he’s a “survivor” of that world; he avoided 
steroid use after histeen years 
<http://www.muscleandfitness.com/athletes-celebrities/news/rock-talks-about-his-steroid-free-success>
, so his heart will be in better nick, and his career-ending injury – when his 
adductor and abdominal muscles were ripped from his pelvis during Wrestlemania 
29 – fortunately happened after he was well-established as an actor.

But more than that, The Rock experiences his success – which was by no means a 
done deal – as a gift. He’s such an inspiration, and a model of masculinity 
that transcends the resentment clearly on show everywhere, from the deposed 
politician who spends his time plotting and brooding, to the vindictive 
journalist, to the laid-off factory worker humiliated by his lack of power.

On Wednesday The Rock posted on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/96Yl0Foh5K/?taken-by=therock> that his longtime 
girlfriend, musician Lauren Hashian, is expecting a baby girl. He thanked the 
women in his life, thanked his fans, and cracked a few jokes:


I was raised by and live with amazing and strong women, so the universe felt 
we needed one more... IT’S A BABY GIRL!! THANK YOU guys so much for the awesome 
support and love you’ve sent ... #BringOnMoreEstrogenInOurHome

You can feel the love beaming out of the photo. Same with the video of The 
Rock with a young fan who had been waiting in a parking lot to meet him.

Or when he posts about running a boot camp for young men in prison that has 
reduced recidivism rates:

Very proud of this program, its staff and the impact it has on our prison 
system and more importantly, caring about young lives that matter.

Or when he encouraged 
<http://pittsburgh.cbslocal.com/2015/11/10/the-rock-helps-inspire-local-man-battling-cancer/>
 another fan with terminal cancer to keep working out. Or when he trained with 
a young woman living with a disability, whose mother revealed her daughter’s 
mantra: “I gotta be strong cause the Rock told me to be strong!”


His response was, as always, to say thanks: “Moments like this with Lexi will 
always be the best part of my fame. We all play a part in it ya know? And I 
appreciate I can share it with y’all.”

This stuff goes beyond conspicuous “Fitspiration” and becomes an endless 
expression of gratitude. It’s utterly infectious. I challenge anyone to watch 
this video of The Rock’s dog licking his face and resist the desire to become a 
better person.

The Rock’s status as one of the greatest wrestlers of all time led him to 
Hollywood, where in 2013 he took the title ofhighest-grossing actor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/18/dwayne-the-rock-johnson-highest-grossing-actor-2013>
 in the world. In an interview with Fortune the following year he said that his 
father, also a wrestler, had discouraged him from going into the ring. The 
Rock’s reply was revealing:

“Looking back, ... I understand that he was thinking, ‘Man, I wrestled for 40 
years, and this is what I have to show for it: a tiny apartment in Tampa. I 
don’t want this for you.’

The disappointment and emasculation came through so clearly. As Rourke says in 
The Wrestler: “I’m the one who was supposed to take care of everything. I’m the 
one who was supposed to make everything OK for everybody. It just didn’t work 
out like that.”

More sadness: as a 15-year-old, he and his mother were evicted from their 
Hawaii home because they couldn’t make rent. The Rock resolved to do anything 
to avoid that again, and disciplined his body in the model of movie stars like 
Clint Eastwood and Arnold Schwarzenegger.

It was also moral discipline, a turning-away from the petty crimes in which he 
had previously been involved. Every facet of his being – the moral self, the 
physical self, the performer, the will – is the product of hard, happy training.

He took this attitude to his 2013-14 reality TV show, The Hero, which pledged 
to challenge contestants’ “brains, brawn, and morality”.

“I wanted to make a show that brought out the best in people,” he said in an 
interview 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1613028-the-rock-talks-leaving-wwe-raw-and-whether-wrestlemania-was-his-last-match>
. “When they succeed, when they’re kickin’ ass, it’s awesome ... but when they 
fail, those moments are powerful too.”

We need to talk about masculinity | Laurie Penny
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/16/masculinity-crisis-men> 
The show was a flop, not that it seemed to bother Johnson overmuch. Whatever 
his setbacks, he doesn’t let them get him down. That included his first 
marriage to Dany Garcia, which ended on good terms andcontinues 
<http://www.people.com/people/article/0,,20041195,00.html> in a “loving 
partnership” of friendship and business. He dotes on his daughter with Garcia, 
Simone Alexander, saying earlier this year that “Long ago I recognised how cool 
and special the daddy-daughter relationship is”.

Obviously The Rock isn’t perfect (I have to remind myself of that). But his 
ability to persevere and overcome is not rooted in the kind of hard, sullen, 
antagonistic masculinity of many of his fellow action stars’ personas. It’s 
founded in gratitude – something much more difficult to persist in, when the 
lives of the powerful and powerless alike are so full of doubt and suffering.

That’s why, despite being a huge nerd who hasn’t watched wrestling since I was 
a teenager, I was cheering for The Rock when I found out he and Lauren Hashian 
were expecting a baby: there’s nothing better than seeing grateful people 
receive a gift.

 * This article was amended to note that The Rock, in interviews 
<http://www.muscleandfitness.com/athletes-celebrities/news/rock-talks-about-his-steroid-free-success>
, has said he used steroids in his teenage years.  