
11. BeeUrban, south London


Tucked away in a noisy corner of south London is a haven of tranquility where 
the constant hum of the capital’s traffic is drowned out by the buzzing of bees.

Here, in the garden of the old park keepers’ lodge at the edge of Kennington 
Park, a project is taking place that could transform the way we live in cities.

BeeUrban moved in six years ago with four hives and big ideas about how to 
bring the benefits of bees and nature to urban dwellers.

The organisation, founded by London beekeeper Barnaby Shaw, has doubled the 
number of hives, transformed the outside space to provide year-round bee forage 
and fruit and vegetables for its growing band of volunteers, and built a 
training centre – named the Bee Barn – out of recycled materials. It operates a 
hub for beekeeping activities and other community environmental projects. Every 
Thursday it opens its doors to local people who come to do a variety of 
volunteering activities from gardening to beekeeping, candle making and honey 
harvesting.

“I was always aware of how fascinating and important honeybees were for the 
environment and for humans from an early age,” explains Shaw, 33, the son of a 
south London vicar who also kept bees. “I remember helping to extract honey at 
the end of the summer when I was around six years old.”

 “My father supplied a local city farm with hives. They swarmed one year and 
there wasn’t anyone around to help so I stepped in and caught the swarm and 
brought them back. From then on, I became more intrigued and I gradually took 
over running the apiary myself.”

Shaw taught local young people about how to keep bees. “I was especially 
struck by the impact it had on one lad who was very quiet and withdrawn but he 
came alive when he was around bees and became a very good beekeeper,” he 
recalls.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fwhy-beeurbans-hives-are-creating-a-buzz-across-the-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F15%2F1410802113944%2F1f15add4-6067-4c32-95cc-18f0b8467ec1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20BeeUrban's%20hives%20are%20creating%20a%20buzz%20across%20the%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fwhy-beeurbans-hives-are-creating-a-buzz-across-the-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20BeeUrban%27s%20hives%20are%20creating%20a%20buzz%20across%20the%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fwhy-beeurbans-hives-are-creating-a-buzz-across-the-capital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F15%2F1410802113944%2F1f15add4-6067-4c32-95cc-18f0b8467ec1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 BeeUrban in Kennington, London. Photograph: BeeUrban 
When the Friends of Kennington Park agreed to let him keep hives in the 
disused gardens of the old lodge, and Lambeth Council’s parks department 
allowed him and some volunteers use of the old Victorian building and its 
dilapidated outhouses, the vision for BeeUrban was born.

“Essentially we promote environmental practices around beekeeping in an urban 
setting,” he explains, pointing out the biodigester and solar panels that power 
some of the work on the premises.

 “I knew that I wanted to build a training and visitors’ centre here,” says 
Shaw. “Beekeeping had started to become more popular in urban areas and there 
was a need for more spaces to train people about bees and the environment.”

It was around this time that people were becoming aware that bees were having 
a hard time from a combination of pesticide use, parasites and poor nutrition, 
and anecdotally they appeared to be doing better in towns and cities than in 
the countryside.


In 2008, a million honeybee colonies in the United States mysteriously 
perished – a third of all their hives. Soon there were headlines from around 
the world of colonies disappearing. The vanishing bee phenomenon was dubbed 
colony collapse disorder (CCD). An equally disturbing report in 2013 revealed a
31% disappearance in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/08/honey-bees-threatened-colonies-extinct-2012>
. 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/08/honey-bees-threatened-colonies-extinct-2012>
The American government was particularly concerned because honeybees pollinate 
Californian almonds, which account for 80% of the world’s crop. A global 
investigation was launched. Suspects included pests, parasites, viruses, GM 
crops and malnutrition.


In the UK, the honeybee population also crashed with beekeepers reporting over 
a third didn’t make it through the winter. But the UK government refused to 
accept CCD had reached its shores and blamed poor weather and the parasitic 
varroa mite for the bees’ demise. Following campaigns by environmental groups 
across Europe against the use of bee-toxic neonicotinoid pesticides,the EU 
temporarily banned them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bee-harming-pesticides-banned-europe>
 in 2013.

Reduced pesticide use in towns, coupled with year-round forage in gardens and 
parks means honeybees could have a better chance of survival in urban areas. 
This has led to a massive rise in urban beekeeping. Since 2008, the BBKA’s 
membership has more than doubled to over 22,000 members, many of them in towns 
and cities. The bee population has gradually recovered, but varroa continues to 
be a real problem globally for honeybees.

In 2011, the London mayor’s office launched Capital Bee to train people to 
keep bees on allotments and other food growing spaces in the UK capital; bees 
pollinate most of our fruits and vegetables. Shaw was one of a number of 
beekeepers who received funding from the initiative to train a new generation 
of urban apiarists. Lesley Wertheimer attended his weekly classes in the bee 
barn, which was then just a shell. She is now an active BeeUrban volunteer and 
helped to source many of the reclaimed materials from local business to 
complete the wooden structure and kit it out, from the insulation, to the 
furniture and even the coat hooks. Empty hexagonal-shaped honey jars are 
cleverly bricked into the bee barn’s walls to create the effect of glass blocks.

Wertheimer also develops new community projects and seeks out funding. The 
most successful is Camberwell Subterranea, a project on the nearby Brandon 
estate in Southwark where BeeUrban has located two hives and runs beekeeping 
classes, a carpentry workshop and bicycle maintenance courses to teach 
residents new skills.

“Carpentry trainees built raised beds that the community are now growing food 
in which the bees are pollinating,” Lesley explains. “It’s a virtuous circle, 
where people and bees help each other.”


The scheme was runner up in this year’s Growing Localities Awards, run by the 
City Bridge Trust, which celebrated innovative use of nature and green spaces. 
BeeUrban has been invited by tenants and residents’ associations on a number of 
other estates to help set up edible planting schemes and mentor beekeepers.

An edible, green roof of vigorous growing herbs including mint, thyme and 
marjoram covers the Bee Barn and is still attracting bees well into September. 
Below, courgettes, brassicas, tomatoes and Jerusalem artichokes vie for space 
in planters with current bushes, raspberries, and apple and cherry trees. Burt’s
Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> paid for some of the soft 
fruits and employees helped out in the garden as part of the cosmetics 
company’s support of the British Beekeeping Association’s Adopt a Hive scheme. 
The hub has hosted other corporate volunteering groups and BeeUrban maintains 
hives for a number of companies and organisations on rooftops across the 
capital, including the Southbank Centre and the National Theatre.


In total, BeeUrban has some 30 hives dotted around the capital. This helps to 
fund its community and educational work. BeeUrban’s handful of core volunteers 
can often be found on a summer weekend at a fete stall with an observation hive 
– a glass-panelled box in which frames of bees can be placed for a few hours – 
explaining the links between bees and the food we eat to a crowd of captivated 
adults and children.

What’s next for BeeUrban?

“We’d love to be able to open the hub to more volunteers throughout the 
weekend and to organise school trips to the hives and garden,” says Shaw. “Many 
local children don’t have a garden and haven’t any idea how food grows or the 
role bees play in pollination. And the health benefits of reconnecting with 
nature and being outside are well documented, especially among children, so 
we’d like to do so much more.”

But until BeeUrban can pay an administrator, he says it will be difficult to 
maximise the potential of the bee hub.

He’d also like to make the bee hub carbon neutral. Yet the extension of the 
London Underground looms over the future of the site. BeeUrban’s garden and bee 
barn are smack in the middle of where an emergency shaft for the Northern Line 
extension is likely to surface. BeeUrban is currently negotiating with the 
council for an alternative location in the park.

“It would mean having to build a new bee barn and edible garden from scratch 
and some of the mature trees and shrubs would be lost,” Barnaby explains. “It’s 
not an ideal situation considering how much we’ve all put into creating this 
special place for us and the bees, but bees and the environment are such an 
important issue that we have to keep going.”

The projects in this series: 

1. The community supported farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/01/writers-community-challenge-how-i-helped-bring-in-the-harvest>

2. The bike repair co-operative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/bike-blog/2014/sep/02/bicycle-repair-taking-apart-first-step-putting-back-together>

3. The community garden centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/03/teach-children-about-berries-they-engage-with-nature-connect-with-others>

4. The community forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/04/we-made-a-wooden-table-then-ate-a-meal-on-it-people-were-amazed>

5. The meat-rearing collective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/05/the-pig-society-life-in-south-pork>

6. The owl conservation group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/08/operation-owl-boxes-help-save-beautiful-bellwethers-of-biodiversity>

7. The neighbourhood community scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/10/how-neighourhood-scheme-ended-nightmare-on-ethel-street-halloween>

8. The local beer-growing group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/11/hops-herbs-of-beer-growth-of-local-harvest-groups>

9. The Solar Schools project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/12/the-worlds-first-visually-impaired-ukulele-band-what-next-for-a-school-with-dreams>

10. The clothes swap project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/15/swap-till-you-drop-clothing-exchange-beats-london-fashion-week>

11. The beekeeping group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/16/why-beeurbans-hives-are-creating-a-buzz-across-the-capital>

12. The repair cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/17/joys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea>

13. The ecotherapy garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/18/garden-ecotherapy-here-easier-for-people-to-open-up>

14. The community allotment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/19/garden-learning-space-carrot-for-motivation-instead-of-youre-grounded>

15. The nature reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/22/where-the-wild-things-are-the-nature-reserve-giving-kids-the-wildlife-bug>

16. The school growing project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/23/digging-the-love-the-school-growing-project-taking-learning-outdoors>

17. The traffic reduction project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/23/carbon-cutting-transport-scheme-helping-black-isle-go-green-scottish-highlands>

This article is part of the Live Better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better> Community Project month. 
In September, we are showcasing 17 community projects from around the UK.We are 
asking you to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/competition/2014/sep/24/live-better-community-project-competition-reader-vote>
 for your favourite project. The project with the most votes will be awarded 
£1,000 of funding, and two runners-up will each receive funding of £500.One 
voter chosen at random will receive £150 worth of gift vouchers for Nigel’s Eco 
Store.Terms and conditions here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/01/the-guardian-live-better-challenge-community-project-award-and-prize-draw-2014-terms-and-conditions>
.

With thanks to: 10:10 <http://www.1010global.org/uk>; FOE 
<http://www.foe.co.uk/>; Project Dirt <http://www.projectdirt.com/>; Neighbourly
 <https://www.neighbourly.com/>; UK Community Foundations 
<http://ukcommunityfoundations.org/>; Groundwork <http://www.groundwork.org.uk/>
;Business in the Community <http://www.bitc.org.uk/>; Federation of City Farms 
and Community Gardens <https://www.farmgarden.org.uk/>; the Prince’s Trust 
<https://www.princes-trust.org.uk/>; Garden Organic 
<http://www.gardenorganic.org.uk/>; the Royal Horticultural Society 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/>; the RSPB <http://www.rspb.org.uk/>; Keep Wales Tidy 
<http://www.keepwalestidy.org/home>; The Wildlife Trusts 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/>; and Mind <http://www.mind.org.uk/>. 


Interested in finding out more about how you can live better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better>? Take a look at this 
month’s Live Better challengehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/26/welcome-to-the-live-better-challenge>
.

The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable 
living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 