
Stories about the declining bee population and its effects on the environment 
trickle through the news cycle nearly every day. To keep track of the latest 
bee news and make sense of the issues,we're highlighting the major bee stories 
each week, with analysis from the Guardian's Alison Benjamin, co-author of A 
World Without Bees 
<http://www.amazon.com/World-Without-Bees-Allison-Benjamin/dp/B006CDGQKW>, Bees 
in the City: The Urban Beekeepers' Handbook 
<http://www.amazon.com/Bees-City-Urban-Beekeepers-Handbook/dp/0852652313> and 
Keeping Bees and Making Honey 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Keeping-Bees-Making-Honey-2nd/dp/1446303551/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1375193993&sr=1-2>

Marla Spivak: Why bees are disappearing 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/marla_spivak_why_bees_are_disappearing.html>

What happened: 
A TED talk by Dr Marla Spivak, founder of the University of Minnesota Bee Lab 
<http://beelab.umn.edu/> (a Buzzfeeds friend), was posted online last week. 

Her 15-minute talk provides an overview of the benefits of bees and why the 
population is declining. She talks about the harmful class of pesticides of 
neonicotinoids, but also how their presence interacts with other threats to 
bees including: diseases, monocultures and flowerless landscapes.

Spivak said she became involved with bees "on a fluke" after picking up a book 
when she was 18 and learning how complex insect societies could be.

Key quote:

I don't know what it feels like to a bee to have a big blood-sucking parasite 
running around on it and I don't know what it feels like to a bee to have a 
virus. But I do know what it feels like when I have a virus â€“ the flu. And I 
know how difficult it is for me to get to the grocery store to get good 
nutrition. But what if I lived in a food desert? And what if I had to travel a 
long distance to get to the grocery store and finally got my weak body out 
there and I consumed in my food, enough of a pesticide, a neurotoxin that I 
couldn't get home. This is what we mean by multiple and interacting causes of 
death.

Why it matters: 
There is no one cause for why honeybee populations have been dying at alarming 
rates, particularly in the US. Parasites, pesticides and poor nutrition are all 
major culprits. Spivak explains the threats in an easy, accessible way. It's 
important for everyone who wants to help bees to understand that focusing on 
one of the culprits is not the answer. Banning neonicitinoid pesticides alone 
will not tackle the flowerless landscapes, nor the varroa mite which lives on 
our honeybees. We need to change our farming practices, and our stewardship of 
the countryside and urban landscapes, and the way that we manage our honeybees 
to reduce the stress the colony is under. Weak, malnourished bees are no match 
for the mite which spreads viruses that kill the bees. The better we understand 
this, the more chance the bees have.

Bee researcher struggles for funding


What happened: 
Dr Denis Anderson, the leading bee researcher in Australia, said he is 
collecting money from fashion magazine fundraising efforts and community 
parties to pay for bee research he estimates will cost $10m. Anderson said he 
needs that money for breakthrough research that would find a chemical trigger 
that would move feral bees to protect themselves from the harmful varroa mite.

Key quote:

The horticulture industry does contribute funds into a research fund, 
controlled under the roof of the Rural Industries Research and Development 
Corporation. But the amount of money is still a pittance. It's really $350,000 
a year and that includes from honeybee sector.

Why it matters: 
Denis Anderson is a highly respected bee researcher across the world, for his 
work on the relationship between the varroa mite and the western honeybee. In 
the early 20th century, the mite jumped species from the eastern honeybee, 
(Apis cerena) which over millions of years has learned to live with its 
parasite, to the western honeybee (Apis mellifera) when man started 
transporting western honeybees all over the world for pollination and honey 
production. Anderson discovered the mite had also adapted to its new host and 
the new varroa was named Varroa destructor. Since honeybees' pollination 
services are worth hundreds of billions of dollars to the global economy by 
increasing the yields of the majority of commercially grown crops, there should 
be a global government bee fund to support all research that has the potential 
to improve honeybee health.

Researchers discover new bee here in Oklahoma 
<http://kfor.com/2013/09/19/researchers-discover-new-bee-here-in-okla/>

What happened: 
A researcher at Oklahoma state university discovered a new species of bee over 
the weekend. The new bee is named Anthidium-Michener-Orum after influential bee 
biologist Charles Duncan Michener and his wife Mary. This bee does not live in 
a colony, it's more solitary. It also does not make honey

Key quote:

'Although most people think of bees merely as honeybees, in reality there are 
more than 20,000 bee species worldwide,' Dr. Victor Gonzalez Betancourt said. 
'One-quarter of this diversity occurs in North America, particularly in the 
western United States.'

Why it matters: 
In north America there are no indigenous honeybees, they were taken there by 
the pilgrim fathers to pollinate their farm crops. In the Hiawatha poem, the 
honeybee is called the "white man's fly". Yet there was a thriving eco-system 
before the arrival of the western honeybee because there were thousands of 
solitary bees and bumblebees pollinating the native flowering plants which 
provided food for birds, other animals and Native Americans.

Of the 20,000 bee species globally, about 250 are bumblebees, 4 are honeybees 
and the other 19,000 plus are solitary bees. They all play an important part in 
pollinating flowering plants and trees. This discovery of a new solitary bee 
helps to raise awareness that all bees, not just honeybees are important for 
our eco-system. These native pollinators are threatened by habitat loss and 
flowerless landscapes. We need to improve stewardship of the countryside and 
change farming practices to help these bees, as well as the honeybees. Without 
these pollinators, the biodiversity of our ecological system will break down 
and our flora and fauna will disappear.

Bee bonus:

And this week in Celebrities Who Keep Bees, Neil Gaiman. The prolific author 
wrote for the Express UK 
<http://www.express.co.uk/entertainment/books/430163/Who-d-have-thought-it-Neil-Gaiman-gets-a-buzz-from-beekeeping>
 about his love for the winged insects.

People ask me why I like beekeeping. I say people should always have a hobby 
that could kill them. Although as long as you're sensible you'll rarely get 
stung. If I get stung once a year it's surprising and you learn not to flail. 
If you move slowly bees won't get agitated but if you start flapping around, 
they see you as a target and they go for you.
 