
The urge to bluster is universal among reckless men who have risked 
everything. They boom that events have proved them right, as if booming can 
drown the thought that they have made a colossal error. As their mistakes can 
cause the worst damage, politicians, propagandists and the politically 
committed in general are the worst blusterers of all.

The front page of the Daily Express of 8 August 1939 contains one of the 
finest blusters in British history. Lord Beaverbrook, the proprietor, had so 
supported appeasing Hitler he dropped Winston Churchill from his pages for 
warning of the Nazi threat.

Beaverbrook and his journalists were desperate to prove that they had not 
betrayed their country. Under the headline “No War This Year”, the Express 
assured its readers that no less an authority than “Mr Selkirk Panton”, its 
Berlin correspondent, believed that “Herr Hitler, despite all his mysticism, is 
a hard-headed, hard-boiled politician… He will not risk everything over some
hasty action <http://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/11238013>”.

On 1 September 1939, Hitler invaded Poland. On 3 September, Britain and France 
declared war on Germany. As luck would have it, on 3 September 2016 – 77 years 
to the day after its “no war this year” prediction failed so spectacularly – 
the print edition of theExpress led with the headline that Britain was in a 
“Brexit boom”. Along with the rest of the rightwing press and the politicians 
who have led us to this pass, theExpress is loud in its insistence that the 
“doom mongers” had been proved wrong.

Now, as then, we see the same desperation to believe that the Conservatives 
have not betrayed their country and the same refusal to face reality. We are 
not in recession because the Bank of England has pumped cheap money into the 
economy with Weimaresque abandon and reduced interest rates to their lowest 
level ever.

Keynes’s “euthanasia of the rentier 
<https://medium.com/@DuncanWeldon/negative-yields-the-euthanasia-of-the-rentier-political-economy-dc3131d8d85e#.rpiyp0vn0>
” is upon us and might be an appealing prospect if the rentiers whose interest 
payments were vanishing were the misers of 19th-century fiction. As everyone 
saving for a pension is a rentier now, however, the Brexit “boom” rests on the 
bank ordering a miserable future for millions.

The lie direct of the Brexit campaign was that the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> cost us £350m a week. The bigger lie, 
which some Leave supporters may even have believed, was that there were no hard 
choices. We could have it all. Immigration controls, prosperity, access to EU 
markets, without compliance with EU laws… Whatever we wanted, at no cost at all.

Or as Boris Johnson, a politician who has never made the mistake of believing 
whathe says <http:>, told his credulous supporters: “This is a great country 
and great economy and I think people know we can do brilliantly if we take back 
control.”

An honest version of Johnson (if you can imagine such a creature) would have 
gone to the Nissan car workers in Sunderland and said words to the effect of: 
we may be able to deliver the immigration controls you want if we leave the 
single market but there is a risk that you will lose your jobs if we do.

The cynicism of Johnson, Gove and Farage’s failure to lay out the difficult 
decisions shocked the naive. But these men were charlatans fighting a campaign 
they were prepared to win without honour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fwhy-would-eu-appease-deluded-brexiters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0379967052994306d114ccf368b17eebadbfa81b%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20would%20the%20EU%20appease%20the%20deluded%20Brexiters%3F%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fwhy-would-eu-appease-deluded-brexiters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20would%20the%20EU%20appease%20the%20deluded%20Brexiters%3F%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fwhy-would-eu-appease-deluded-brexiters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0379967052994306d114ccf368b17eebadbfa81b%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 ‘Boris Johnson says we are a great country. Not any more.’ Photograph: Adrian 
Dennis/AFP/Getty Images 
What ought to shock even the most cynical observer of public life is that the 
deceit continues to this day.

No government minister has gone to farmers in Wales, lorry drivers in 
Birmingham, Airbus engineers at Filton, let alone car workers in Sunderland, 
and warned them how the differences between a hard and soft Brexit could ruin 
their lives.

Tory politicians stay silent because they lack the intellectual honesty to say 
that Brexit has made Britain smaller. You can see us shrinking in the way 
leaders at the G20 treated Theresa May as an awkward “crasher” who had got in by
mistake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/g20-theresa-may-warns-of-tough-times-for-uk-economy-after-brexit>
; in Japan’s undiplomatic hints that not just Nissan but all Japanese 
businesses in Britain will think about leaving if we leave the single market; 
and in America and Australia’s announcements that securing a trade deal with 
the EU came before securing trade deals with the UK.

Not that we can secure trade deals just like that. If you wish to get a 
measure of the mess we are in, read the papers Nick Clegg has produced on the 
hair-raising practical obstacles ahead.

The right promised it would free us from “Brussels red tape”, to quote one 
example among many 
<http://www.libdems.org.uk/clegg_free_trade_deal_with_the_eu_isn_t_possible_in_two_years>
. Yet a new trade deal will result in “significantly more red tape for British 
companies exporting to the EU as British exporters will have to obtain proof of 
origin certificates from their national customs authorities”, certificates that 
will increase trade costs with the EU by between 4% and 15%.

We cannot strike agreements with 50 countries currently covered by our EU 
arrangements until we strike a trade deal with the EU, because everyone else 
will want to know where we stand.

We won’t strike a deal with the EU, for – what? – three, five 10 years? How 
many jobs will be lost and foreign investors driven away in the process is a 
subject the prime minister needs to start talking about.

Instead of facing up to the scale of the uncertainty, today’s Conservatives 
kid themselves as their ancestors did in the 1930s. Listen to Conservative 
ministers and read the rightwing press and delusion is on display everywhere.

Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> says we are a great 
country. Not any more. What greatness we possessed came from our alliances. By 
voting to leave we have ignored the advice of every friend we had in the world. 
Now we are asking the countries we spurned to help us and they are finding 
reasons to look away.

The right says the EU will want to give us a better deal out than we had in 
because the EU nations will still want their exporters to sell to us. They 
don’t look at how politically impossible it would be for Europe’s leaders to 
tear up EU rules when they are having to face down their own xenophobes and 
Europhobes.

They don’t have a shred of evidence that the EU will appease us. Just a 
forlorn hope and an echo of voices from the time of the British appeasers. They 
were as convinced that they were dealing with “hard-headed, hard-boiled 
politicians”, who would do whatever Britain wanted and not “risk everything 
over some hasty action”. They were as befuddled.

• Comments will be opened later today
 