
By the time you’re using a password, something has gone wrong. It’s the same 
as with a bulletproof vest, or a bouncer outside a bar. I’m not against 
bulletproof vests per se but, if I ever find myself in circumstances where I 
reckon I should put one on before popping to the shops, something will 
definitely have gone wrong – either with the neighbourhood or my own mental 
health.

Passwords bespeak danger. They’re the sort of thing that gets used in wars to 
help spot Nazis in the dark

Similarly, the presence of a muscly, suited man outside a pub doesn’t make me 
think that peace is more likely to reign as I make my selection from their wide 
range of real ales. It makes me think there’ll be a fight and that I shouldn’t 
risk the seafood. (It’s virtually impossible to maintain high culinary 
standards when the chef thinks his efforts might get smashed into someone’s 
face after a goal.)

Passwords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/24/improve-online-security-change-passwords>
 strike me as this kind of precaution. They bespeak danger. They’re the sort of 
thing that gets used in wars to help spot Nazis in the dark; they’re what 
thieves come up with to protect their loot-filled magical caves; they’re 
admittedly also what children employ in games, but these are games about 
gangsters and robbers and crime, not about shopping, buying cinema tickets or 
sponsoring someone’s charity run.

So my concerns about a nightmarish dystopian future were not much allayed by 
the announcement of a new system whereby you’ll have to provide a password in 
order to obtain food. I’m referring to the launch ofAmazon Fresh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/amazon-starts-uk-fresh-food-delivery>
, a new grocery shopping service from the tax-avoiding scourge of the world’s 
high streets. Initially available only in London, the company presumably hopes 
that it’ll soon be rolled out across the UK, like commerce-smothering 
death-pastry, and then throughout the world, and that ultimately all other ways 
of buying anything at all will cease and everyone will stay holed up in their 
homes in feverish anticipation of the next drone-borne aid parcel.

But how is this any different, you may be asking, from online supermarket 
shopping which has been going for years? That also requires a password. That’s 
also sitting in your home waiting for the food to arrive. Why scaremonger now?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Famazon-fresh-onine-security-food-shopping-surveillance-gchq-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda142bf5bcc223f1693ec81da5fdc5fda6599465%2F0_0_1948_2709%2F1948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Amazon%20Fresh%20is%20the%20thin%20end%20of%20the%20veg%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Famazon-fresh-onine-security-food-shopping-surveillance-gchq-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Amazon%20Fresh%20is%20the%20thin%20end%20of%20the%20veg%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Famazon-fresh-onine-security-food-shopping-surveillance-gchq-david-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda142bf5bcc223f1693ec81da5fdc5fda6599465%2F0_0_1948_2709%2F1948.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
The Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> announcement made 
me realise how much comfort I derive from knowing the name and whereabouts of 
the shop from which online groceries ostensibly come. If your online Tesco, 
Sainsbury’s or even Ocado account stops working – perhaps MI5 has frozen it 
because it reckons you’re in Isis – at least you can still go to Tesco, 
Sainsbury’s or Waitrose and buy the food in a password-free, 
non-identity-disclosing cash transaction.

With Amazon, you can’t. You can’t go there, you can’t ring it up. It’s some 
warehouses somewhere, registered for tax purposes somewhere else. That’s 
altogether too shadowy a setup to rely on for food. It would be like signing up 
for a meals-on-wheels service run by a Bond villain.

The prevalence of online passwords is, when you really think about it, an 
arresting sign of the malevolence of the environment in which we spend so much 
of our time. The internet can’t really be policed, its ultra-connected nature 
means that the goodwill of the majority counts for little, since villainy and 
opportunity can find each other instantly. If you do the equivalent of leaving 
your front door unlocked, an infinite number of burglar-bots are immediately 
trying the handle. Why do we want to be somewhere so hazardous? I wouldn’t go 
on a cruise if I had to keep a cutlass to hand in case of pirates.

We all hold dozens of unguessable streams of letters and numbers in our heads, 
or risk haemorrhaging cash and privacy

Even those who represent law and order in the virtual world aren’t very 
reassuring.Robert Hannigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/07/gchq-boss-new-relationship-tech-firms-encryption>
, the head of GCHQ, gave an interview at theCheltenham science festival 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/science> last week in which the most 
consoling phrase he could conjure up was “not yet”. “That apocalyptic vision, 
we are not quite there yet,” was his response to a question about a lone hacker 
wiping out a whole city. “It could be 10 to 20 years off,” was his view on 
“quantum computing”, which would be powerful enough to crack all currently 
available forms of encryption, wiping out privacy for ever.

He complemented this deferred doom-mongering with the familiar blaming of “80 
to 90%” of cyber attacks on people who had easily guessable passwords, and the 
classic security service chief’s nebulous allusion to potential loss of life if 
they don’t get their way. On theEdward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> leaks and subsequent 
reporting, he said: “We do know that terrorists we were tracking before Snowden 
disappeared after… It’s possible people died as a result...” This strikes me as 
an odd combination of blaming private citizens for failing to be zealous enough 
in keeping their own secrets and also blaming private citizens for failing to 
be zealous enough in keeping the state’s secrets.

Sign up to the Guardian's daily email
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/info/2015/dec/08/daily-email-uk> 
I think he’s wrong on both counts. I don’t fundamentally object to the 
government having official secrets – I reckon it’s probably a necessary evil – 
but if the secrets get out, surely the blame lies with the government agencies? 
If they take someone untrustworthy into their confidence, it’s their fault. On 
the other hand, web-based institutions’ insistence that we all hold dozens of 
unguessable streams of letters and numbers in our heads, or else risk 
haemorrhaging cash and privacy, seems a heavy yoke for us to bear for those 
companies’ trading convenience.

Because the online world isn’t necessarily that convenient for the general 
public. Granted, it makes it easier to get things delivered, but at the expense 
of shops where you used to be able to go and buy those things that day. It 
streamlines correspondence, but often in a way that makes the companies we work 
for more efficient, rather than improving our own quality of life. It 
facilitates some chat and fun, but often in environments that are prey 
to bullying, grooming and fraud, and are an unsatisfactory substitute for 
real-world human interaction.

These are flimsy advantages to set against the widespread debasement of 
intellectual property and the facilitation of terrorism and sexual crime. The 
fact that it’s too late to go back now doesn’t mean there’s no point asking if 
it was worth it. Speaking personally, and selfishly, I’d have to own many more 
shares in Amazon and Google to feel that it was.
 