
The overtures started around February time, when Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> had announced that Pep 
Guardiola would become their new manager at the end of the season. Guardiola 
wanted a full-back with searing pace and attacking instincts, somebody to build 
the play out from the back, and he wanted Héctor Bellerín of Arsenal.

To Guardiola, it was the perfect fit – a young player with Barcelona DNA and 
an education in the Premier League. These days, there is little doubt that, at 
only 21, the former Barcelona youth-team player is the finest right-back in 
England. Bellerín was named in last season’s PFA Team of the Year and this 
month he was shortlisted for the Fifpro World Team of the Year, alongside only 
one other Premier League defender – Chelsea’s David Luiz. The team will be 
announced in January.

And so City began Operation Bellerín. They opened talks with his people and 
sought to sell the merits of the move from a playing perspective. Above all, 
they made it clear they would be able to offer him a massive salary – far in 
excess of anythingArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> would 
grant him. The transfer fee would not be a problem. The message from City was 
that they were prepared to pay whatever it took.

Alexis Sánchez ‘very happy’ at Arsenal but says new deal is up to club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/alexis-sanchez-very-happy-at-arsenal-new-deal-up-to-club>
Other clubs were interested in Bellerín, including Barcelona, Manchester 
United and Atlético Madrid. But City were the most persistent. By far. They 
refused to take no for an answer. And they had the cash to be extremely 
persuasive.

The way many major transfers work is that the interested club plug away 
through intermediaries, outlining what they can offer and, once the player is 
keen, they go in through the front door with an official bid to his employer. 
It never got to that point with City and Arsenal over Bellerín.

Arsenal had got wind of things and their stance was resolute: Bellerín would 
not be for sale at any price. Arsène Wenger joked on Friday morning that City 
were “good clients”, having previously taken Emmanuel Adebayor, Kolo Touré, 
Samir Nasri, Gaël Clichy and Bacary Sagna from him. But, he added, those days 
were over.

“Today, we can give financial satisfaction and support ambitions and values 
that can make the players happy at this club,” Wenger said, as he prepared for 
his team’s trip to City on Sunday. “Before, due to the Emirates Stadium build, 
perhaps the financial gap was too big a difference to keep our players. We 
could not compete. We had to sell players.”

It was Bellerín who said no to City and the riches on offer, because he wanted 
to stay at Arsenal. In November he signed a six-and-a-half-year contract, worth 
£115,000 a week but, the Guardian understands, he could have got substantially 
more at City.

Bellerín stayed for a number of reasons, including a slightly unusual one in 
21st-century football – the sense of loyalty that he feels towards Wenger and 
the club. He has not forgotten how the manager stood by him after his 
disastrous full debut in the Champions League defeat atBorussia Dortmund in 
September 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/16/borussia-dortmund-arsenal-champions-league>
 and his poor performance in theloss at Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/06/stoke-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 in December of that year.

Moreover, Bellerín considered how a number of former Arsenal players had fared 
since their departures. He thought about Clichy, Sagna and Nasri – together 
with Cesc Fàbregas and Alex Song. Has the grass been greener for the first 
three at City? Did Fàbregas’s dream return to Barcelona really work out? Song 
also went to Camp Nou, and he did not enjoy regular football.

“You can understand why City tried to sign Héctor over the summer because he 
has developed into a superb talent,” said Terry Burton, who was the head of 
coaching at Arsenal between 2012-14, where he worked with Bellerín. “I’m sure 
he will continue to be a target for clubs of Arsenal’s standing. There’s not 
many better right-backs around to have.

“Am I surprised that he turned down more money from City to stay at Arsenal? 
In the general climate, yes. But in Héctor’s case, no. He’s an intelligent 
player and he understands that if he continues to be the best right-back in the 
Premier League, Arsenal will reward him again in the next contract. He is 
sensible enough to realise that he’s on fantastic wages for a 21-year-old and 
further rewards will come with continued success.

“Héctor feels loved at Arsenal and I think he’s one of those that does need to 
feel loved. He’s built a lot of good relationships at the club and Arsenal are 
hardly the worst one in the world to be playing for. He’s made some good 
decisions. One was signing for Arsenal when he did, as a 16-year-old in 2011, 
and another has been staying with them now.”

Burton, the head of emerging talent at Southampton, remembers the time when 
Bellerín’s decision-making was not quite as sound. He talks about the concept 
of risk and reward, which has long been central to his coaching – in other 
words, when and where it is worthwhile to take a risk.

“We fell out after a NextGen European youth game in Marseille [in October 
2012],” Burton said. “We needed a draw and it was 0-0 in injury-time. Héctor 
tried to nutmeg somebody just outside of his defensive third and they broke 
away to score the winner. I gave him a rocket, which he took. He’s a great lad 
and he’s got a really great attitude. It was an important learning situation, 
where you can hammer home the point. Young players have to learn game 
management.”

Pep Guardiola salutes Arsenal’s commander-in-chief Arsène Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/pep-guardiola-arsenal-arsene-wenger-manchester-city>
Bellerín’s pace and determination to attack were marked when he arrived at 
Arsenal from Barcelona; he was a winger at the time. But the club saw that he 
could be converted into a right-back, and they worked hard on the defensive 
side of his game.

“Could he defend the back post?” Burton said. “Was his body shape right? Was 
he aware of people coming in on him? Could he back in and jump and defend at 
the back post. With his pace, could he get out and close people down in wide 
areas and block crosses? But it was also in possession, and in terms of 
turnovers. He took a lot of chances in defensive areas. It was that 
decision-making, because he did turn the ball over quite a bit in his defensive 
third. He needed the awareness that his first pass, in certain areas, had to be 
a safe one.”

Bellerín has come to tick all the boxes – the speed of his development has 
been astonishing – and, having committed to Arsenal, he has emerged as a symbol 
of Wenger’s latest project. Bellerín has talked of Arsenal feeling like “home” 
and how signing the new contract “was the right thing for me to do”. He 
believes Arsenal are getting stronger each year and closer to the title. City 
will watch him on Sunday with a degree of regret.
 