
Bees pollinate a third of everything we eat and play a vital role in 
sustaining the planet’s ecosystems. Some 84% of the crops grown for human 
consumption – around 400 different types of plants – need bees and other 
insects to pollinate them to increase their yields and quality. These include 
most fruits and vegetables, many nuts, and plants such as rapeseed and 
sunflowers that are turned into oil, as well as cocoa beans, coffee and tea.
Crops grown as fodder for dairy cows and other livestock are also pollinated by 
bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/28/wild-bees-pollinators-crop-yields>
. And it’s not only food crops that rely on bee pollination, cotton does as 
well. As a result,annual global crop pollination by bees is estimated to be 
worth $170bn <http://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/erl_of_bees_low_res_for_web.pdf>
.

But beyond their monetary value for maintaining our fragile food supply, bees 
also make an invaluable contribution to ecosystems around the world. Seeds, 
fruits and berries eaten by birds and small mammals are all from plants that 
are pollinated by bees, making them guardians of the food chain and the 
biodiversity of our species.

Nearly one in 10 of Europe's wild bee species face extinction, says study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/19/nearly-one-in-ten-of-europes-wild-bee-species-face-extinction-says-study>
Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> are industrious 
pollinators because they have co-evolved with flowering plants over millions of 
years. The bees need the flowers for food, while the flower needs the bee to 
reproduce. Unlike other insects, nectar and pollen from flowering plants are 
bees’ only food source; the sweet nectar drink gives adult bees energy. Pollen 
is protein-rich baby food. As the poet Kahlil Gibran beautifully put it: “To 
the bee, a flower is the fountain of life, and to the flower, the bee is a 
messenger of love.”

In the process of foraging for food, bees are designed to pollinate. If you 
watch a female honeybee or bumblebee on a flower, you will see she has balls of 
pollen on her back legs. These are collected in her pollen baskets which she 
takes back to the nest to feed the young after fertilising the flowers. For 
solitary bees, the pollen collects on the hairs on their abdomen.

So how do the bees pollinate? Quite simply, the bee gets covered in pollen, 
from the male part of the flower (the stamen), and deposit the grains on the 
female part (the stigma) of the next flower that they visit. Luckily for the 
plant, bees tend to visit flowers from the same plant when they are flowering 
rather than flit from one plant to another, so the plant is able to have sex. 
Once the pollen is on the stigma it moves down into the ovary where it 
fertilises and forms a seed. A few months later the seed grows into a fruit or 
vegetable. Think of an apple tree; it blossoms, is visited by bees, produces 
apples later in the summer containing pips (the seeds), which if planted could 
slowly grow into a new apple tree.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434468041311%2Fad1712ce-9ae1-441e-911d-1a887156053e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20bees%20important%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Alison%20Benjamin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20bees%20important%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Alison%20Benjamin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434468041311%2Fad1712ce-9ae1-441e-911d-1a887156053e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ancient Egyptian tomb painting. ‘The ancient Egyptians transported their hives 
along the Nile to pollinate crops and buried their pharaohs with containers 
full of honey to sweeten the afterlife.’ Photograph: Philip de Bay/Historical 
Picture Archive/Corbis 
There is an apocalyptic quote attributed to Albert Einstein (although there is 
no proof he actually said it): “If the bee disappeared off the surface of the 
globe then man would only have four years left to live.” It resonates with 
people as a plausible consequence of the bee’s demise. While the timescale is 
wildly exaggerated and fails to take into account man’s ingenuity, it 
highlights how mankind’s survival has been inextricably linked to bees. Cave 
drawings dating back 20,000 years depict images of honey hunting. The ancient 
Egyptians transported their hives along the Nile to pollinate crops and buried 
their pharaohs with containers full of honey to sweeten the afterlife. The 
antibacterial and antiseptic properties of honey have made it as important to 
the apothecary as the chef over the centuries, while beeswax embalmed the dead 
and created artificial light. In the 15th century, the pilgrim fathers took 
their honeybees with them to spread their farming practices and colonise the 
new world. The native Americans called the honeybee the “white man’s fly”. The 
continent had wild bees, but no honeybees, as was the case in Australasia 
before western settlers arrived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434467193307%2F0c9744fa-3c05-42e7-9c2f-4a574f1c25c7-1020x965.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20bees%20important%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Alison%20Benjamin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20bees%20important%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Alison%20Benjamin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434467193307%2F0c9744fa-3c05-42e7-9c2f-4a574f1c25c7-1020x965.jpeg>
 The Owl and the Pussycat by Edward Lear. ‘The Owl and the Pussycat went to sea 
/ In a beautiful pea-green boat, / They took some honey, and plenty of money, 
wrapped up in a five-pound note.’ Photograph: Culture Club/Getty Images 
There are 25,000 different bee species around the world. Only four of these 
species are honeybees, of which the western honeybee (Apis mellifera) is the 
one we took to the US and then on to Australasia. Honeybees make honey. It’s 
their winter food, for feeding the 10,000-strong colony in the hive when it’s 
too cold to fly. Bumblebees don’t make honey we can harvest but they are 
important pollinators, too. Around 250 species of bees are different types of 
bumblebees. Their hairier coats can attract more pollen and they can fly at 
colder temperatures than honeybees. Some species are long-tongued so are better 
at pollinating plants with long, tubular flowers. And they are capable of “buzz 
pollination” – by shaking the pollen from the anthers of a flower on to the 
stigma of another – which is how some crops, notably tomatoes, are pollinated. 
While most bumblebees are wild, some species are increasingly used commercially 
to buzz pollinate. Research shows that under the same conditions, bumbles can 
actually pollinate more flowers per bee than honeybees, though a honeybee 
colony (50,000 bees in the summer) is much larger than a colony of bumblebees 
(only 250).

The vast majority of the world’s bee species are solitary bees. As their name 
suggests they live alone. Many are adapted to pollinate one type of plant and 
their life cycle is synced with the plant so they are able to pollinate it and 
feed their young at the same time. There’s been little research on solitary 
bees, but in March, the first ever assessment of all 1,965 bee species across 
Europe by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) found that 
almostone in 10 of Europe’s wild bee species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/19/nearly-one-in-ten-of-europes-wild-bee-species-face-extinction-says-study>
 – most of which are solitary bees – face extinction as a result of intensive 
farming, insecticide use and climate change.

Most people have heard about colony collapse disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/30/buzzfeeds-bees-colony-collapse-disorder>
, which wiped out a third of all honeybee colonies in the US when it first 
struck back in 2007. The disorder is still not fully understood, but a 
combination of parasites, viruses, poor nutrition and pesticides are thought to 
be behind the widespread death of honeybees in the US, where40% of colonies are 
still dying each year 
<http://beeinformed.org/results/colony-loss-2014-2015-preliminary-results/>.

In the UK, honeybee winter losses have ranged from 10% to 33% since annual 
surveys began eight years ago 
<http://www.bbka.org.uk/news_and_events/press_office/press_releases.php?year=2014&month=6>
. When inclement weather confines bees to the hive during the spring and summer 
they become weak and easy prey for the parasiticvarroa mite 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Varroa> to spread viruses that kill off its host.

But in many ways, the uncertain future of wild bumblebees and solitary bees is 
even more alarming than the honeybee death toll, since beekeepers are able to 
restock their hives each year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434467426618%2F605bcfd1-6746-4fde-80ab-1faf922424b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20bees%20important%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Alison%20Benjamin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20bees%20important%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Alison%20Benjamin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwhy-are-bees-important%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434467426618%2F605bcfd1-6746-4fde-80ab-1faf922424b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Since 1945, 97% of the UK’s wildflower meadows, such as this one at 
Priestcliffe Lees, Derbyshire, have disappeared. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian 
The habitat that wild bees depend on to nest and forage is increasingly 
disappearing due to modern farming practices and urbanisation. Since 1945, 97% 
of wildflower meadows in the UK have vanished. During that time two bumblebee 
species have become extinct <http://bumblebeeconservation.org/about-bees>, and 
of the 24 species left only eight are commonly found. Globally, a quarter of 
the world’s 250 bumblebee species are thought to be facing some degree of 
extinction risk 
<http://www.xerces.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/2014-bbsg-annual-report.pdf>, 
according to the IUCN.

John Muir, a giant of the conservation movement, summed up the importance of 
bees to the human race when he said: “When one tugs at a single thing in 
nature, he finds it attached to the rest of the world.” We harm them at our 
peril.
 