
Quite a few of my feminist friends are fond of a tote bag that reads 
<http://bust.com/style/15292-check-out-this-lord-give-me-the-confidence-of-a-mediocre-white-man-t-shirt.html>
, “Lord, Give Me the Confidence of a Mediocre White Man”. It’s a cheeky nod to 
a scenario familiar to most women: a bombastic but woefully under-informed man 
who is convinced of how much smarter he is than you.

That dynamic that was on full display at the first presidential debate; as one 
Washington Post writer tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/petridishes/status/780483100442787840?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
, “Finally the whole country will watch as a woman stands politely listening to 
a loud man’s bad ideas about the field she spent her life in”. Clinton was 
knowledgeable and poised; Trump was volatile and at times barely coherent.

Despite all evidence that he floundered badly on Monday night, Trump spent the 
entire following day bragging about winning and insisting that his distracting 
sniffling was due to a faulty or tampered microphone. He even doubled down on 
insulting a former Miss Universe, who Clinton pointed out he had called “Miss 
Piggy”, by explaining on Fox News that she had gained “a massive amount of 
weight”.

Lord, give me that confidence!

For women like Clinton who are advised to tone down their intelligence lest 
they come across as unlikeable, the debate and its aftermath mark a promising 
shift in the way that smart women are perceived. Finally, a man who was 
markedly less prepared and talented than his female opponent was called out as 
such. Finally, a woman who has spent her life doing her homework wasn’t made 
out to be a condescending shrew. Clinton’s best line of the night, in fact, was 
that unlike Trump, “I prepared to be president.”

And on Wednesday morning, with multiple polls 
<https://twitter.com/NumbersMuncher/status/781117724701392896> showing that 
Clinton dominated the debate, former Virginia senator John Warner, a Republican,
endorsed her 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/john-warner-hillary-clinton-228819>. 
“She has always throughout her life prepared, done her homework, studied,”he 
said <https://twitter.com/LGamGam/status/781127563590545408>.

It’s a winning time for any woman who has ever been called bossy – the 
“bitches”, the know-it-alls, theTracy Flicks 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/09/election-tracy-flick-and-hillary-clintons-2016-campaign.html>
 andLeslie Knopes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/13/hillary-clinton-parks-and-recreation-hadley-freeman>
. Being studied and nerdy is almost never considered an admirable 
characteristic in a woman, but this week it was.

At least for the most part. Meet the Press’ Chuck Todd couldn’t help but note 
thatClinton seemed “over-prepared” 
<https://twitter.com/MeetThePress/status/780598101937643520> – as if there was 
such a thing when running for the most powerful job in the world. And despite 
the generally positive reactions to her performance, what’s easy to forget is 
how much work Clinton likely did to project the exact right amount of 
confidence without seeming smug, the precise formulation of smiling and silence 
in the face of bold faced lies and idiocy. In all this, too, I’m sure she 
studied up.

And it worked. The pre-debate expectations-lowering around Trump’s performance 
and the post-debate posturing were all in vain. Despite Trump’s bluster and 
bravado, this mediocre man came across as exactly what he is – middling and 
unimpressive. And Trump’s massive sense of entitlement and self-regard wasn’t 
enough to shadow the fact that Clinton is simply better, in every way. Better 
at debating, better at leading, better at outsmarting an opponent.

For women across the country who recognized all too well Trump’s interruptions 
<http://twitter.com/voxdotcom/status/780586441432829952> or Clinton’s practiced 
patience 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/opinion/hillary-clintons-everywoman-moment.html?action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=opinion-c-col-left-region&region=opinion-c-col-left-region&WT.nav=opinion-c-col-left-region>
, the last few days have been validating. Now the world is seeing what we 
always have – and that’s a feeling too big to put on a tote.
 