
The secret CIA files appeared just before Christmas. One detailed 
<https://wikileaks.org/cia-travel/> how CIA operatives could maintain cover, 
using fake IDs, when travelling through foreign airports. Israel’s Ben Gurion 
airport was said to be one of thehardest 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/CIA-trains-agents-to-avoid-security-screening-at-Ben-Gurion-Airport-WikiLeaks-document-shows-385390>
 to trick.

The other document 
<https://wikileaks.org/cia-hvt-counterinsurgency/press-release.html>, from 
2009, was an assessment of the CIA’s assassination program. It raised doubts 
about the effectiveness of the program in reducing terrorism. Likewise with 
Israel’s killing of Palestinians.

In Afghanistan, the CIA discovered that murdering Taliban leaders could 
radicalise the militants, allowing even more extreme actors to enter the 
battlefield. The Obama administration ignored this advice and unleashed 
“targeted killings” in the country. Unsurprisingly, theinsurgency is thriving 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-12-28/nato-ends-13-year-afghan-war-amid-rising-taliban-insurgency.html>
.

These vital insights into the “war on terror” were released by WikiLeaks and 
received extensiveglobal coverage 
<https://news.google.com/news/story?ncl=dF6tLHzuFdv8RTMD92iG2-FTCiO6M&q=wikileaks+CIA&lr=English&hl=en&sa=X&ei=KjurVPa1B8PLmwWLgoHQDg&ved=0CDkQqgIwAQ>
.

Since 2010, when WikiLeaks released Collateral Murder 
<http://www.collateralmurder.com/>, showing American forces killing Iraqi 
civilians, there have been multiple covert – and public – attempts to silence 
the organisation. Julian Assange has now beenstuck 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2014/7/9/wikileaks_julian_assange_responds_to_hillary>
 in London’s Ecuadorian embassy for two and a half years fighting an 
extradition order from Sweden over allegations of sexual misconduct. There is 
an ongoing US grand jury examining the organisation’s role in publishing war 
and State Department cables. On Christmas Eve, WikiLeaksrevealed 
<http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/12/wikileaks-claims-employees-google-mail-metadata-seized-by-us-government/>
 that Google had turned over the Gmail account and metadata of a WikiLeaks 
employee in response to a US federal warrant.

The organisation’s ability to stay afloat – and continue to source and release 
insightful documents – among all this is remarkable.

There is some good news: Visa and MasterCard are being sued 
<http://rt.com/usa/214007-datacell-wikileaks-bank-blockade/> for refusing to 
allow funds to flow to WikiLeaks, and Assange’s lawyers areconfident 
<http://www.abc.net.au/sundayprofile/stories/4152274.htm> that the current 
impasse with Sweden will be resolved (although the irregularities over the case 
aredeeply disturbing 
<http://johnpilger.com/articles/the-siege-of-julian-assange-is-a-farce-a-special-investigation>
).

But the reality remains that the public image of Assange has taken a beating 
after years of legal fights, thebotched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/14/wikileaks-partys-syria-visit-is-a-damaging-and-misguided-pr-coup>
 Australian WikiLeaks political party and constantsmears 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2010/12/the-shameful-attacks-on-julian-assange/67440/>
 by journalists and politicians. We apparently want our heroes to be mild 
mannered and non-combative. We supposedly need them to be polite and not 
uncover countless, dirty abuses by western forces. We clearly don’t forgive 
them for not being perfect. Or perhaps we have a limit to how many war crimes 
we want to hear about with nobody facing justice? That’s hardly WikiLeaks’ 
fault. The group has made mistakes, and will make many more, but as asupporter 
<http://antonyloewenstein.com/wikileaks/> since its 2006 inception, I’m struck 
by its resilience.

WikiLeaks has been warning against the dangers of mass surveillance for years. 
The 2014 Assange book,When Google Met WikiLeaks 
<http://www.orbooks.com/catalog/when-google-met-wikileaks/>, features an 
insightfulessay 
<http://www.newsweek.com/assange-google-not-what-it-seems-279447> on the 
dangers of Google’s desire to lead American interventionist foreign policy. The 
book gained headlines across the world. In the month of its release, the 
organisationoffered <https://wikileaks.org/spyfiles4/> new documents on German 
company FinFisher selling its spying equipment to repressive regimes.

The emergence of NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden and his ability to live a 
relatively free life in Russia is partly thanks to WikiLeaks, which helped him 
escape Hong Kong and claim asylum in Moscow. Snowden remains free tocontinue 
campaigning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/01/nsa-whistlebloewer-edward-snowden-wins-swedish-human-rights-award>
 against the dangers of global surveillance, unlike Chelsea Manning who is now 
suffering in an American prison for bravely leaking American cables. WikiLeaks’ 
Sarah Harrison, a British citizen, lives inexile 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cj5kiQGhLQ0> in Germany due to fears of 
returning home after working to protect Snowden. This is the definition of 
heroism.

Just because WikiLeaks’ Assange and Harrison no longer appear in the media 
daily doesn’t mean their contribution isn’t significant. Take the recent report 
published byDer Spiegel 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/secret-docs-reveal-dubious-details-of-targeted-killings-in-afghanistan-a-1010358.html>
 that showed western policy in Afghanistan aimed to kill as many Taliban 
leaders as possible, regardless of the number of civilians caught in the 
crossfire. The thinking was summarised by the head of the International 
Security Assistance Force (Isaf) intelligence in Afghanistan, who once said 
during a briefing: “The only good Talib is a dead Talib.”

This story built on the 2010 WikiLeaks release of Afghan war logs 
<https://www.wikileaks.org/afg/> and uncovered yet another level of the “kill 
everything that moves <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uXqVb6DvkmM>” mentality 
that’s been unofficial US military policy since at least Vietnam.

The danger of discounting or ignoring WikiLeaks, at a time when much larger 
news organisations still can’t compete with the group’s record of releasing 
classified material, is that we shun a rebellious and adversarial group when 
it’s needed most. The value ofWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> isn’t just in uncovering new 
material, though that’s important, it’s that the group’s published material is 
one of the most important archives of our time. I’ve lost count of the number 
of journalists and writers who tell me their work wouldn’t have the same 
insights without the State Department cables. My recent books have been 
similarly enriched.

States across the world talk of democracy and free speech but increasingly 
restrict information and its messengers.

“This war on whistleblowers is not ancillary to journalism, but actually it 
directly affects it,” saysTrevor Timm 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=93cI1THLSmk>, executive director of the 
Freedom of the Press Foundation. “It’s making it much more difficult for the 
public to get the information they need.”

WikiLeaks remains at the forefront of this struggle. 
 