
What is it about producing medical male contraception 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/male-contraceptive-jab-as-effective-as-female-pill-trial-shows>
 that seems so uniquely difficult? Why is it that decades have passed since the 
female pill became freely available and still the “male pill” is dangled as 
some tantalising hope that it’s going to happen, soon, one day, in the future… 
just not right now?

A male contraceptive jab has been shown to be “almost” as effective as the 
female pill and better than condoms. It would work by lowering sperm count and 
it wouldn’t have to remain as a jab – it could be a gel or a pill. The trial 
had to be halted because of side-effects (acne, depression, increased libido). 
If some women rolled their eyes at this point, who could blame them? Since the 
introduction of the female pill, the wide range of side-effects has always 
seemed less an invitation to decline the chemicals, more a shrugging warning 
about what to expect.

If the truth, or at least the perception, is that men are more squeamish about 
taking chemical contraception, there are other concerns. Similar to most female 
forms of contraception, the male jab would be just about stopping pregnancy and 
wouldn’t act as any kind of barrier against STDs. So it (especially) couldn’t 
be used alone in casual encounters.

Responsible sexually active people would still have to load up with two, maybe 
more, forms of contraception/protection. Then, there’s the other less tangible, 
but no less pressing issue of trust between men and women or, more precisely, 
the distinct lack of contraceptive-reproductive trust that has always existed 
between the sexes.

Is this the omnipresent background hum of contraceptive disharmony – that too 
often, men and women simply don’t trust each other? In the blissful utopian 
vision, people, however casually entwined, tell the truth, do the right thing, 
take full responsibility for their sexual-reproductive health. Back in the real 
world, too often this morphs into a hot mess of paranoia, suspicion, accusation 
and counter-accusation.

On the one hand, there are men who, still today, seem embroiled in paranoid 
fantasies about procreative entrapment – all those “desperate” women getting 
pregnant accidentally on purpose. How many more times? While women like this 
must exist (everything exists), it’s unlikely that, these days, there are great 
hordes of them willing to resort to malevolent subterfuge to have children with 
men who are anything from indifferent, cold and uninvolved to angry, insulting 
and accusatory.

Then there’s the lack of female trust towards men – the feeling that women 
(the ones who must after all deal with pregnancy) couldn’t entrust such an 
important matter to men, who may lie in the moment to get sex. Rightly or 
wrongly, many women feel that they’ve secured front-row seats for the human 
theatre of men who will say and do anything to get laid and that the prospect 
of unplanned pregnancy is too high a gamble to take.

So there it is – the relentless howl of distrust between the sexes, echoing 
down the years. The men who think that women are conniving to become pregnant. 
The women who suspect men will say anything to get sex.

Only the humble condom (that physical and, crucially, visible barrier) has 
ever come anywhere close to calming anxieties on both sides. And while my 
attitude used to be if you don’t trust them, don’t sleep with them, the world 
persists in being more complicated and darker than that.

So much so that, even when it finally exists, the long-awaited male pill could 
only hope to stop pregnancy and remove the chemical burden from women. No small 
matters indeed, but a male pill would still encounter the same problem as the 
female version, in that it’s “invisible” and requires trusting the other person 
implicitly. When the sexes simply don’t trust each other, where is the “pill” 
for that?

Halloween is supposed to be scary
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwill-we-believe-a-man-who-says-he-is-on-the-pill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdaa56dfc43967ae3a7da920bee5633a648b0de9%2F0_137_4098_2459%2F4098.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20we%20believe%20a%C2%A0man%20who%20says%20he%E2%80%99s%20on%20the%20pill%3F%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwill-we-believe-a-man-who-says-he-is-on-the-pill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20we%20believe%20a%C2%A0man%20who%20says%20he%E2%80%99s%20on%20the%20pill%3F%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwill-we-believe-a-man-who-says-he-is-on-the-pill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdaa56dfc43967ae3a7da920bee5633a648b0de9%2F0_137_4098_2459%2F4098.jpg>
 ‘Isn’t Halloween supposed to be about people emulating the thing they fear 
most?’ Photograph: Jean-Christophe Bott/EPA 
I admire Katie Piper, TV presenter, campaigner and survivor of a vicious acid 
attack organised by an ex-partner in 2008. However, I’m not sure that I agree 
with her aboutHalloween <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween> 
costumes featuring realistic burns, scars and disfigurements being “disgraceful 
and offensive”.

“When did Halloween turn into people imitating accident victims?” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3878636/It-s-distasteful-offensive-make-temporary-scars-disfigurements-Acid-attack-survivor-Katie-Piper-BLASTS-Halloween-gore-overs-impassioned-outpouring.html>
 asks Piper, pointing out that she and many others have to live with these 
“differences” all year around.

In truth, Halloween’s parade of mutilated people is nothing new – it’s been 
going on since the US-imported notion of “bad-taste Halloween”. That seems to 
be the deal with modern Halloween – it isn’t just kids covered in sheets, 
demanding sweets with menaces. To my mind, the disfiguring make-up, from fake 
scars, burns and dangling eyeballs, seems no more naff than the idea of “sexy 
Halloween”, with adults parading about in their “slutty witch” or “horny 
vampire” outfits. In my book, this is about as sexy as all that 
vicars-and-tarts rubbish.

Of course, people shouldn’t mock those with real-life disfigurements, but is 
that what is happening here? Are the formal environs of TV, cinema and theatre 
the only spheres permitted to portray horror and injury or are ordinary people 
allowed to play dress-up, too? Moreover, isn’t Halloween supposed to be about 
people emulating the thing they fear most: old-school ghouls, monsters, zombies 
or, indeed, somebody who has been mutilated?

In part, this comes across as light-hearted, quasi-cinematic dressing up, 
employing cheap-as-chips special effects for the most “terrifying” look. In a 
more profound way, in these image-obsessed times, far from mocking people such 
as Piper, this could just be about people taking up an annual opportunity to 
address their own deepest fears.

Money can’t buy you love, only a Lennon letter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwill-we-believe-a-man-who-says-he-is-on-the-pill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65ddbfe679dd28544b4d8647017391553eca3e22%2F0_222_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20we%20believe%20a%C2%A0man%20who%20says%20he%E2%80%99s%20on%20the%20pill%3F%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwill-we-believe-a-man-who-says-he-is-on-the-pill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20we%20believe%20a%C2%A0man%20who%20says%20he%E2%80%99s%20on%20the%20pill%3F%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwill-we-believe-a-man-who-says-he-is-on-the-pill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65ddbfe679dd28544b4d8647017391553eca3e22%2F0_222_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 What am I bid for John Lennon’s letter? Photograph: The Beatles Story/PA 
A 1969 letter written by John Lennon to the Queen 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-merseyside-37787297>, explaining why he 
was returning his MBE, ended up tucked inside a record sleeve among a bargain 
lot of vinyl records at a car-boot sale. Later rescued from an attic, the 
letter has been valued at up to £60,000 and is believed to be a first draft, 
abandoned because the signature was smudged.

In the letter, Lennon said he was returning the MBE because of political 
objections, including British support of the US in Vietnam, and because the 
Plastic Ono Band song,Cold Turkey <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEnNEIVR9EM>
, was slipping down the charts. I’m amused by the journey of this letter – from 
heartfelt political stance by one of the world’s most renowned, controversial 
musicians, to ending up perhaps being tucked inside aNow That’s What I Call 
Music!compilation, on a trestle table, nestling next to pottery dogs and an 
unopened fondue set.

I’m sure that Lennon would have appreciated the irony. It’s a salient lesson 
to us all that however important we think we are, or however important we think 
our actions are, it all ends up at an actual or figurative car-boot sale in the 
end.
 