
Charisma and persuasion matter in politics. Though neither trait guarantees 
fair policies or outlook – think Tony Blairbacking the catastrophic war 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-34565075> against Iraq, or Malcolm Turnbull hailing 
himself as a free speech champion beforepressuring the ABC  
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/malcolm-turnbull-slams-abc-boss-mark-scott-over-indonesian-spy-leaks/story-fni0cx12-1226773767733>
over its robust journalism – image is apparently more captivating than ever in 
the 21st century.

 That’s the mainstream consensus, anyway. The last 12 months have challenged 
this reality. The rise of Jeremy Corbyn to the leadership of the British Labour 
party and Bernie Sanders as a viable US Presidential candidate proves that the 
general public increasingly craves potential leaders who understand economic 
disenfranchisement (likewise theallure of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/donald-trump-why-americans-support>
).

Both men’s popularity is despite them being unconventional left-wing 
politicians, outsiders with little love for the Labour or Democratic elites, 
with strong messages against the political and media establishments.

 Sadly, it’s highly unlikely that anybody remotely as critical of the system 
will appear in Australia to lead one of the two major political parties. A 
relatively buoyant economy – despite agrowing homeless problem 
<http://junkee.com/waleed-aly-australias-war-on-homelessness-on-the-project-last-night/75262>
 and rampantwealth inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/21/australian-inequality-rising-as-top-20-increase-wealth-and-income-report>
 – has insulated Australia from the worst excesses of the global financial 
crisis. As a result, the country is left with leaders who rarely stray from 
reflexive, pro-US and neo-liberal positions on the economy, foreign affairs, 
intelligence and spying.

Tony Blair admits he is baffled by rise of Bernie Sanders and Jeremy Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/23/tony-blair-bernie-sanders-jeremy-corbyn>
 Both the United States and Britain have suffered greatly in the last decades 
from a bi-partisan obsession with supposedlyfree trade 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/why-was-paul-krugman-so-wrong/>, crony 
capitalism and privatisation. America’s infrastructure is literallyfalling apart
 
<http://www.vice.com/read/america-is-collapsing-a-brief-look-at-the-us-infrastructure-meltdown-130>
. The results are clear to see with four out of every 10 households in the UK
below the poverty line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/19/british-families-poor-society-income-level-cost-of-living-benefit-cuts>
 and 46 million Americansequally poor 
<http://www.alternet.org/election-2016/45-million-americans-live-poverty-you-wouldnt-know-it-watching-2016-coverage>
.

 These individuals are mostly invisible in political campaigns and yet Sanders 
and Corbyn are articulating how this happened and what to do about it. 
Austerity is rejected. For example, Sanders hasan economic plan 
<http://www.alternet.org/news-amp-politics/what-mainstream-media-wont-tell-you-about-bernie-sanders-economic-plan>
 that favours high spending for vital services and increasing taxation on 
corporations. Manyyoung people are flocking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/20/bernie-sanders-millennials-young-voters>
 to him.

 Latest opinion polls place Corbyn’s Labour neck-and-neck with the Tories 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/03/polls-show-whats-always-been-true-labour-can-win-jeremy-corbyn>
 despite Corbyn being accused of turning a blind eye toanti-Semitism 
<http://www.thejc.com/news/uk-news/154938/i-will-leave-labour-unless-it-stands-antisemitism-says-lord-levy>
 in his own party. His ascension doesn’t mean that the Labour party isn’t still 
filled with politicians, officials and former leaders wholoathe any deviance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/09/tony-blair-tragedy-of-labour-under-corbyn>
 from the establishment view on politics and are committed to destroying Corbyn 
and what he claims to represent; thepromotion of equality and justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/12/what-does-jeremy-corbyn-think>
 for the majority of the population.

 In Australia, why is it impossible to even imagine a person such as Corbyn or 
Sanders rising to a leadership position? Labor is led by Bill Shorten, a man of 
stunning unpopularity though both the Liberal and Labor parties are, according 
to the latest polls, aspopular as each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/21/malcolm-turnbulls-popularity-falls-into-negative-territory-in-newspoll>
. Prime minister Malcolm Turnbull is pandering to thefar-right base 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/safe-schools-program-why-zealots-are-trying-to-drag-us-back-to-the-dark-ages-20160223-gn1ryq.html>
 of his party, men he fears could topple him. The Greens are languishing in 
third place.

 The prospect of an election on 2 July (or whenever it may be) will bring 
little change to Shorten’s posture. His party’s long-term erroneous belief, 
despite diving membership numbers, is to differentiate itself only marginally 
from political opponents. Therefore, expect continued blind support for the 
Liberal party’s positions on foreign policy, spying for Washington through the 
Five Eyes network, and data retention.

 There are some obvious reasons that a proudly left-wing candidate would have 
little chance in Australia. A reactionary Murdoch empire would aim to topple 
anybody pushing for, say, companies to pay more tax, asking questions about the 
nature of the US alliance over intelligence sharing, spying on neighbours and 
foreign companies. How about ending the privatisation of all prisons, public 
services and immigration detention centres? It would be deemed as radical, 
unfriendly to big business and shunning our biggest ally.

 The majority of Australians oppose 
<http://www.essentialvision.com.au/tag/privatisation> privatising public 
services, believe the government should befar more critical 
<http://apan.org.au/apan-activities/opinion_poll/> of Israeli actions in 
Palestine and want astrong and publicly-funded Medicare 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/medicare-ahead-by-a-mile-in-popularity-stakes-20140510-zr8pm.html>
 anduniversity sector 
<http://www.tai.org.au/content/university-deregulation-polling-brief> (the 
deregulated system for higher education in the US has led to massivestudent fees
 
<http://time.com/108311/how-american-universities-are-ripping-off-your-education/>
 and institutions turning into corporations).

Revealed: how Jeremy Corbyn has reshaped the Labour party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/13/revealed-how-jeremy-corbyn-has-reshaped-the-labour-party>
 Of course there remains vital criticisms 
<http://left-flank.org/2016/03/02/why-im-not-feeling-the-bern/> of the policies 
pushed by Corbyn and Sanders, including their ability to seriously challenge 
the might of corporate donors and big business if they made it to power. Recall 
the Syriza party in Greece promised to unwind harsh austerity thencapitulated 
to even stricter economic strangulation 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/syriza-couldnt-end-austerity-in-greece-heres-why-voters-re-elected-them-anyway/>
.

But can you imagine an Australian political leader pledging to massively 
increase funding for schools and universities, hugely invest in sustainable 
energy solutions, reduce defence spending and not join every failed US 
misadventure in the Middle East? While much of this is the current Greens party 
platform, its failure to attract widespread political support is symptomatic of 
a political and media clique that hates genuine outsiders.

Political uniformity in Australia, with few politicians daring to vote against 
their party on issues of moral or social significance – sending asylum seekers 
to be abused on remote Pacific islands or increased surveillance powers – 
doesn’t create allegiance, but dogma.


 What the rise of Corbyn and Sanders shows is that within the strict confines 
of mainstream politics it’s possible to generate huge public passion for 
politics. Corbyn has invigoratedhuge numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/25/jeremy-corbyn-earthquake-labour-party>
 of young Britons and Sanders attractsmassive rallies 
<http://www.seattlepi.com/local/politics/article/Bernie-Sanders-to-big-rally-Seattle-is-ready-6925288.php>
. In Australia, Turnbull and Shorten are lucky to generate any passionate 
interest in themselves or their parties beyond the true believers.
 