
“Try to own a suburban home,” said an advertisement by the British Freehold 
Land Company in the 1920s, “it will make you a better citizen and help your 
family. The suburbs have fresh air, sunlight, roomy houses, green lawns and 
social advantages.” It perfectly summarises the ideal behind suburbia, which is 
where most people in Britain live today.

Metroland, 100 years on: what's become of England’s original vision of 
suburbia?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/10/metroland-100-years-england-original-vision-suburbia>
The huge suburban expansion of British cities between the wars accommodated 
population growth and enabled people to buy homes at low prices. London doubled 
in area over those two decades and increased its population by 1.2 million 
people. Speculators built semi-detached houses for sale at between £400 and 
£500 which were close, as another advertisement put it, to “tiny hills and 
hollows … pools of water, brambly wildernesses, where in spring nightingales 
sing and the air is sweet with the smell of violets, primroses and hawthorn”.

It is an ideal that has survived snobbery, condescension and hostility. “Just 
a prison with the cells all in a row,” wrote George Orwell of a suburban 
street. “A line of semi-detached torture-chambers …” Cyril Connolly agreed, 
calling them “incubators of apathy and delirium”. HG Wells called an early 
example “a dull useless boiling-up of human activities, an immense clustering 
of futilities”.

Now, according to Towards a Suburban Renaissance 
<http://www.smith-institute.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Towards-a-suburban-renaissance.pdf>
, a report released last week by independent thinktank the Smith Institute, 
suburbs are facing a new kind of threat. Their ideal “has rapidly started to 
fade”, says the report’s author, Paul Hunter. “As inner cities have undergone a 
renaissance, suburbs have frequently been left behind.”

Focusing on Greater Manchester, the West Midlands and Greater London, the 
report identifies stagnating levels of job growth and a significant shift 
outwards from the centres of cities in indicators of poverty.

Once sociologists and planners used to worry about “doughnut cities”, where 
prosperous residents would move out to the suburbs and leave the centre – to 
use another dated term – to suffer “inner-city decay”. Now the process has 
reversed.

Ben Page, chief executive of Ipsos Mori, has a similar view to Hunter’s: “All 
the evidence is that over the last 30 years outer areas have become more 
miserable than inner. It’s one of the most marked things I’ve seen.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsuburbs-architecture-stagnation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F678a781f3266039540c1ae6ffa5edbf2c20a9c45%2F0_346_5242_3146%2F5242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=With%20the%20Good%20Life%20over%2C%20how%20can%20suburbia%20regain%20its%20place%20in%20the%20sun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsuburbs-architecture-stagnation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=With%20the%20Good%20Life%20over%2C%20how%20can%20suburbia%20regain%20its%20place%20in%20the%20sun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsuburbs-architecture-stagnation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F678a781f3266039540c1ae6ffa5edbf2c20a9c45%2F0_346_5242_3146%2F5242.jpg>
 June Whitfield and Terry Scott in the television sitcom Terry and June. 
Photograph: United News/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
Suburbia <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/suburbia> generated its 
literature and filmography, sometimes affectionate, sometimes satirical:The 
Good Life, The Diary of a Nobody, Abigail’s Party, Terry and June, The Stepford 
Wives. It provoked sniggers and stereotypes, such as the bored housewife or the 
“over-eager half-sir”, as a Kensington-based writer said in 1939, who “mows a 
ridiculous lawn on Saturday afternoons”.

Individual suburbs became comedic locations: Private Eye’s Neasden, Peep Show
’s Croydon, Peter Sellers’s Balham, Tony Hancock’s East Cheam. Champions of 
suburbia, such as the writer and broadcaster Paul Barker, have fought back: “I 
cherish suburbia’s vigour and unexpectedness,” Barker wrote in 2009. He called 
it “a land of pleasantness, friendship and hope”.

But Page says: “All these ideas we have about leafy suburbs have changed. They 
are losing their distinctiveness and reasons to be. Family homes have been 
denatured. They have been made into mini apartment blocks and their gardens are 
torn up and turned into car parks for all their residents. The high streets are 
declining. They are turning into dormitories – and not very nice dormitories at 
that.”

Reasons for the changes, according to Turner, include the success of 
government policies to revive inner cities and the effects of “agglomeration” – 
the idea that investment should support places that already have concentrations 
of business and population. Page agrees: “Inner London has become happier, 
safer and cleaner.”

In the inner-London borough of Hackney, an astonishing 89% of residents 
declared themselves satisfied with their area in 2013, compared with 51% in 
2002. In outer areas such as Havering and Harrow, satisfaction went in the 
opposite direction.

Among other factors, government support for central areas has pushed up 
property prices, which has forced poorer residents farther out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsuburbs-architecture-stagnation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb4e97fa1ca7d66ecd1e09cfd2ea9552c5282224%2F0_273_5436_3262%2F5436.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=With%20the%20Good%20Life%20over%2C%20how%20can%20suburbia%20regain%20its%20place%20in%20the%20sun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsuburbs-architecture-stagnation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=With%20the%20Good%20Life%20over%2C%20how%20can%20suburbia%20regain%20its%20place%20in%20the%20sun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsuburbs-architecture-stagnation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb4e97fa1ca7d66ecd1e09cfd2ea9552c5282224%2F0_273_5436_3262%2F5436.jpg>
 A young boy poses proudly at the rear of the family Anglia car on an Essex 
estate in the early 1960s. Photograph: Alamy 
Migration plays a part: people arriving from poorer countries tend to find 
homes in the outer districts; those from richer countries settle in the centre. 
The decline in the provision of social housing in central areas has a similar 
effect. These factors will increase with recent government policies that will 
drive local authorities and housing associations to sell socially-rented homes 
in high-value areas.

Other pressures include the building of retail parks and shopping malls on 
former industrial sites – which tends to affect suburban high streets more than 
those in the centre – and the easing of restrictions on converting offices to 
homes. Major business districts such as the City of London have won exceptions 
that allow them to protect their work spaces. In suburbs, low-value but useful 
places of employment are likely to disappear.

The Smith Institute has been making some of these arguments for a while: for 
example, in a 2014 report called Poverty In Suburbia. Now it is also proposing 
action. It wants a Suburban Task Force along the lines of the Urban Task Force 
of the late 1990s: led by Lord Rogers, this helped promote the revival of inner 
cities. It wants planning policies and investment that specifically address 
suburbs.

It is remarkable that official documents such as the National Planning Policy 
Framework, while talking about urban and rural areas, don’t even mention 
suburbia. The title of the institute’s new report, indeed, refers to the Urban 
Task Force’s 1999 report Towards an Urban Renaissance. Hunter proposes various 
ways to encourage the sort of economic activity that might flourish in suburbs, 
such as small businesses and home working. He wonders if the outer areas of 
large cities might attract the clusters of technology businesses that currently 
thrive in places such as Cambridge and the Thames Valley. He wants simple but 
effective ways to improve public transport, such as better buses and cycle 
routes.

He also favours the ideas put forward by the architectural practice HTA for 
“Supurbia”, whereby existing suburbs are intensified, especially around railway 
stations and other transport connections – for example, by increasing building 
sizes from two storeys to four. This might seem problematic, as it could 
diminish the openness for which people value suburbs. But it addresses some of 
the reasons for which suburbia is criticised: that it uses land wastefully and 
is overdependent on cars. As Page points out, its diffuse layouts mean more 
infrastructure per person – more roads, drains and pavements; longer bus routes 
– which therefore requires proportionally more public spending.

Despite all this talk of decline, suburbs also offer opportunities. They have 
space, which is becoming more precious as the housing pressures on successful 
cities grow. They could offer the things that are getting harder to find in 
inner cities, such as cheap space in which to start a business, and indeed 
relatively affordable homes. Their ethnic and social diversity is increasing. 
Today on BBC radio, Hugh Muir talks of the growing movement of “visible 
minorities” into what he calls “the heartlands of Englishness”.

The biggest question is how the opportunities of suburbs might be realised 
without losing the qualities that prompted John Betjeman to celebrate Metroland 
in his 1973 TV programme or theNational Trust to offer tours of Croydon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/nevermind-the-concrete-national-trust-to-show-the-beauty-of-croydon>
, as it announced last week. How to increase density without losing 
tranquillity, or raise desirability without losing affordability? How to create 
homes and work for new populations while also making suburbs better for people 
who are already there?

There are problems that are not the business of suburbs alone. Current 
government policy is tending to destroy the economic and social diversity of 
central areas, especially in London, with the risk of creating exclusive inner 
and excluded outer rings. In fretting about poverty in suburbs there is also 
the danger that new policies will simply push the poor somewhere else – making 
them less visible rather than better off. There is a long history of such 
confusion, from slum clearances in the 19th century to recent urban 
regeneration.

The answers are not obvious. The Smith Institute’s report does not claim to 
have them all, but it does at least air them. It raises the powerful and 
appealing prospect of the renewal and reinvention of the suburban dream.

“I was to find,” said a satisfied housebuyer in the 1920s, “that residing in a 
suburb adds a thrill and a zest to life. It is an experience in having no 
traditions to live up to.”

Not a bad basis for developing the neighbourhoods of the future.

SUBURBS IN CULTURE

Sitcom stars



Reginald Perrin David Nobbs’s wayward exec, played by Leonard Rossiter in 
BBC’s The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin

Margot Leadbetter Penelope Keith’s aspirational housewife in The Good Life

Hyacinth Bouquet Patricia Routledge’s snob in Keeping Up Appearances

Social commentary

George Orwell wrote in The Lion and the Unicorn (1941)that our sense of 
England “is somehow bound up with solid breakfasts and gloomy Sundays, smoky 
towns and winding roads, green fields and red pillar-boxes.”

Raymond Williams, Culture and Society (1958) “The suburban separation of 
‘work’ and ‘life’ … has been the most common response to the difficulties of 
industrialism.”

Edward Platt, Leadville (2000) “One afternoon in January 1995, as I drove 
along Western Avenue, I did what I had never done before: I parked the car in a 
side street and walked on to the road.”

Poetry

John Betjeman “Where a few surviving hedges/Keep alive our lost Elysium - 
rural Middlesex again.” (Middlesex)

T S Eliot “Trams and dusty trees. Highbury bore me/ Richmond and Kew/Undid 
me.” (The Waste Land)

Philip Larkin “On Saturdays squire ex-schoolgirls to the pub, by private car./ 
Such uncorrected visions end in church, or registrar:/ A mortgaged semi- with a 
silver birch” (Breadfruit)

Vanessa Thorpe
 