
In ancient China, the arrival of a new dynasty was accompanied by "the 
rectification of names", a ceremony in which the sloppiness and erosion of 
meaning that had taken place under the previous dynasty were cleared up and 
language and its subjects correlated again. It was like a debt jubilee, only 
for meaning rather than money.

This was part of what made Barack Obama's first presidential campaign 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2008/11/17/081117fa_fact_lizza> so 
electrifying: he seemed like a man who spoke our language and called many if 
not all things by their true names. Whatever caused that season of clarity, 
once elected, Obama promptly sank into the stale, muffled, parallel-universe 
language wielded by most politicians, and has remained there ever since. 
Meanwhile, the far right has got as far as it has by mislabelling just about 
everything in our world – a phenomenon which went supernova in this year of 
"legitimate rape", "the apology tour" and "job creators". Meanwhile, their 
fantasy version of economics keeps getting more fantastic. (Maybe there should 
be a rectification of numbers, too.)

Let's rectify some names ourselves. We often speak as though the source of so 
many of our problems is complex and even mysterious. I'm not sure it is. You 
can blame it all on greed: the refusal to do anything about climate change, the 
attempts by the .01% to destroy our democracy, the constant robbing of the 
poor, the resultant starving children, the war against most of what is 
beautiful on this Earth.

Calling lies "lies" and theft "theft" and violence "violence", loudly, clearly 
and consistently, until truth becomes more than a bump in the road, is a 
powerful aspect of political activism. Much of the work around human rights 
begins with accurately and aggressively reframing the status quo as an outrage, 
whether it's misogyny or racism or poisoning the environment. What protects an 
outrage are disguises, circumlocutions, and euphemisms – "enhanced 
interrogation techniques" for torture, "collateral damage" for killing 
civilians, "the war on terror" for the war against you and me and our Bill of 
Rights.

Change the language and you've begun to change the reality or at least to open 
the status quo to question. Here is Confucius on the rectification of names:
 "If language is not correct, then what is said is not what is meant; if what 
is said is not what is meant, then what must be done remains undone; if this 
remains undone, morals and art will deteriorate; if justice goes astray, the 
people will stand about in helpless confusion. Hence there must be no 
arbitrariness in what is said. This matters above everything." 
So let's start calling manifestations of greed by their true name. By greed, I 
mean the attempt of those who have plenty to get more, not the attempts of the 
rest of us to survive or lead a decent life. Look at the Waltons of Wal-Mart 
fame: the four main heirs are among the dozen richest people on the planet, 
each holding about $24bn (£15bn). Their wealth is equivalent to that of the
bottom 40% 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2012/jul/31/bernie-s/sanders-says-walmart-heirs-own-more-wealth-bottom-/>
 of Americans. The corporation Sam Walton founded now employs 2.2 million 
workers, two-thirds of them in the US, and the great majority are poorly paid 
people who feel intimidated and are often underemployed, and routinely depend 
on government benefits to survive. You could call that Walton Family welfare – 
a taxpayers' subsidy to their system. Strikeslaunched against Wal-Mart 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2012/10/10/walmart_workers_in_12_states_stage> 
this summer and autumn protested working conditions of astonishing barbarity – 
alleged abuses include warehouses that reach 48C (120F), a woman eight months 
pregnantforced to work 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/09/13/walmart-warehouse-workers-pilgrimage-photos_n_1881306.html?1347649325>
 at a brutal pace, commonplace exposure to pollutants, and the intimidation of 
those who attempted to organise or unionise.

You would think that $24,000,000,000 apiece would be enough, but the Walton 
family sits atop a machine which appears intent upon brutalising tens of 
millions of people – the suppliers of Wal-Mart notorious for their abysmal 
working conditions, as well as the employees of the stores – only to add to 
piles of wealth already obscenely vast. Of course, what we call corporations 
are, in fact, perpetual motion machines, set up to endlessly extract wealth 
(and leave slagheaps of poverty behind) no matter what.

They are generally organised in such a way that the brutality that leads to 
wealth extraction is committed by subcontractors at a distance or described in 
euphemisms, so that the stockholders, board members, and senior executives 
never really have to know what's being done in their names. And yet it is their 
job to know – just as it is each of our jobs to know what systems feed us and 
exploit or defend us, and the job of writers, historians, and journalists to 
rectify the names for all these things.

The most terrifying passage in whistleblower Daniel Ellsberg's gripping book 
Secrets: A Memoir of Vietnam and the Pentagon Papers 
<http://www.amazon.com/dp/0142003425/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20> is not 
about his time in Vietnam, or his life as a fugitive after he released the 
Pentagon Papers. It's about a 1969 dinnertime conversation with a co-worker in 
a swanky house in Pacific Palisades, California. It took place right after 
Ellsberg and five of his colleagues had written a letter to the New York Times 
arguing for immediate withdrawal from the unwinnable, brutal war in Vietnam, 
and Ellsberg's host said, "If I were willing to give up all this ... if I were 
willing to renege on ... my commitment to send my son to Groton ... I would 
have signed the letter."

In other words, his unnamed co-worker had weighed trying to prevent the 
violent deaths of hundreds of thousands of people against the 
upper-middle-class perk of having his kid in a fancy prep school, and chosen 
the latter. The man who opted for Groton was, at least, someone who worked for 
what he had and who could imagine having painfully less. This is not true of 
the ultra-rich shaping the future of our planet.

They could send tens of thousands to Groton, buy more Renoirs and ranches, and 
still not exploit the poor or destroy the environment, but they're as 
insatiable as they are ruthless. They are often celebrated in their aesthetic 
side-effects: imposing mansions,cultural patronage 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/08/30/100830fa_fact_mayer>, jewels, 
yachts. But in many, maybe most, cases they got rich through something a lot 
uglier, and that ugliness is still ongoing. Rectifying the names would mean 
revealing the ugliness of the sources of their fortunes and the grotesque scale 
on which they contrive to amass them, rather than the gaudiness of the trinkets 
they buy with them. It would mean seeing and naming the destruction that is the 
corollary of most of this wealth creation.

Where this matters most is climate change. Why have we done almost nothing 
over the past 25 years about what was then a terrifying threat and is now a 
present catastrophe? Because it was bad for quarterly returns and fossil-fuel 
portfolios. When posterity indicts our era, this will be the feeble answer for 
why we did so little – that the rich and powerful with ties to the 
carbon-emitting industries have done everything in their power to prevent 
action on, or even recognition of, the problem. In this country in particular, 
they spent a fortune sowing doubt about the science of climate change and 
punishing politicians who brought the subject up. In this way have we gone 
through four "debates" and nearly a full election cycle with climate change 
unmentioned and unmentionable.

These three decades of refusing to respond have wasted crucial time. It's as 
though you were prevented from putting out a fire until it was raging: now the 
tundra is thawing and Greenland's ice shieldis melting 
<http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/greenland-melt.html> and nearly 
every natural system is disrupted, from the acidifying oceans to the erratic 
seasons to droughts, floods, heat waves, and wildfires, and the failure of 
crops. We can still respond, but the climate is changed; the damage we all 
spoke of, only a few years ago, as being in the future is here, now.

You can look at the chief executive officers of the oil corporations – 
Chevron's John Watson, for example,who received almost $25 million 
<http://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/news/2012/04/13/chevron-boss-john-watson-made-25m-2011.html>
 ($1.57 million in salary and the rest in "compensation") in 2011 – or their 
major shareholders. They can want for nothing. They're so rich they could quit 
the game at any moment. When it comes to climate change, some of the wealthiest 
people in the world have weighed the fate of the Earth and every living thing 
on it for untold generations to come, the seasons and the harvests, this whole 
exquisite planet we evolved on, and they have come down on the side of more 
profit for themselves, the least needy people the world has ever seen.

Take those billionaire energy tycoons Charles and David Koch, who are all over 
American politics these days. They are spendingtens of millions of dollars 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/03/koch-brothers-100-million-obama_n_1250828.html>
 to defeat Obama, partly because he offends their conservative sensibilities, 
but also because he is less likely to be a completely devoted servant of their 
profit margins. He might, if we shout loud enough, rectify a few names. Under 
pressure, he might even listen to the public or environmental groups, while 
Romney poses no such problem (and under a Romney administration they will 
probably make more back in tax cuts than they are gambling on his election).

Two years ago, the Koch brothers spent $1m 
<http://grist.org/article/koch-brothers-jump-into-prop-23-fight/> on 
California's Proposition 23, an initiative written and put on the ballot by 
out-of-state oil companies to overturn our 2006 Global Warming Solutions Act. 
It lost by a landslide, but the Koch brothers have also invested a small 
fortune in spreading climate-change denial and sponsoring the Tea Party (which 
they can count on to oppose climate change regulation as big government or 
interference with free enterprise). This year they're backing a California 
initiative to silence unions. They want nothing to stand in the way of 
corporate power and the exploitation of fossil fuels. Think of it as another 
kind of war, and consider the early casualties.

As the Irish Times put it in an editorial 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/opinion/2012/0620/1224318256659.html> this 
summer:
 "Across Africa, Asia, and Latin America, hundreds of millions are struggling 
to adapt to their changing climate. In the last three years, we have seen 10 
million people displaced by floods in Pakistan, 13 million face hunger in east 
Africa, and over 10 million in the Sahel region of Africa face starvation. Even 
those figures only scrape the surface. According to the Global Humanitarian 
Forum, headed up by former UN secretary general Kofi Annan, climate change is 
responsible for 300,000 deaths a year and affects 300 million people annually. 
By 2030, the annual death toll related to climate change is expected to rise to 
500,000 and the economic cost to rocket to $600 billion." 
This coming year may see a dramatic increase in hunger due to rising food 
prices from crop failures, including this summer's in the US midwest after a 
scorching drought in which the Mississippi rivernearly ran dry 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/07/16/520241/low-water-levels-on-the-mississippi-river-a-major-threat-to-commerce-this-is-absolutely-not-normal/>
 and crops withered.

We need to talk about climate change as a war against nature, against the poor 
(especially the poor of Africa), and against the rest of us. There are 
casualties, there are deaths, and there is destruction, and it's all mounting. 
Rectify the name, call it war. While we're at it, take back the term "pro-life" 
to talk about those who are trying to save the lives of all the creatures 
suffering from the collapse of the complex systems on which plant and animal as 
well as human lives depend. The other side: "pro-death".

The complex array of effects from climate change and their global 
distribution, as well as their scale and the science behind them makes it 
harder to talk about than almost anything else on Earth, but we should talk 
about it all the more because of that. And yes, the rest of us should do more, 
but what is the great obstacle those who have already tried to do so much 
invariably come up against? The oil corporations, the coal companies, the 
energy industry, its staggeringfinancial clout 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/10/24/1064231/three-ways-big-oil-spends-its-profits-to-defend-oil-subsidies-and-defeat-clean-energy/>
, its swarms oflobbyists 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/08/01/579101/jurassic-park-romneys-bush-era-energy-team-is-dominated-by-fossil-fuel-insiders-and-its-lobbyists/>
, and the politicians in its clutches. Those who benefit most from the status 
quo, I learned in studying disasters, are always the least willing to change.

I'm a Californian so I faced the current version of American greed early. 
Proposition 13, the initiative that froze property taxes and made it nearly 
impossible to raise taxes in our state, went into effect in 1978, two years 
before California's former governor Ronald Reagan won the presidency, in part 
by catering to greed. Prop 13, as it came to be known, went into effect when 
California was still an affluent state with the best educational system in the 
world, including some of the top universities around, nearly free to in-staters 
all the way through graduate school. Tax cuts have trashed the state andthat 
education system 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/175600/andy_kroll_back_to_$chool>, and they 
are now doing the same to our country. The public sphere is to society what the 
biosphere is to life on earth: the space we live in together, and the attacks 
on them have parallels.

What are taxes? They are that portion of your income that you contribute to 
the common good. Most of us are unhappy with how they're allocated – though few 
outside the left talk about the fact that more than half of federal
discretionary expenditures 
<http://nationalpriorities.org/en/budget-basics/federal-budget-101/spending/> 
go to ourgargantuan military 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/defense-spending-broken-down-with-infographic-2012-6>
, more money than is spent on thenext 14 militaries combined 
<http://www.sipri.org/research/armaments/milex/resultoutput/milex_15/the-15-countries-with-the-highest-military-expenditure-in-2011-table/view>
. Ever since Reagan, the right has complained unceasingly about fantasy 
expenditures – from that president's"welfare queens" 
<http://www.cnn.com/2012/01/23/politics/weflare-queen/index.html> to Mitt 
Romney's attack on Big Bird and PBS (which consumes.001% 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kellyphillipserb/2012/10/04/romney-promises-to-cut-taxpayer-funding-for-pbs-but-says-he-still-loves-big-bird/>
 of federal expenditures).

As part of its religion of greed, the right invented a series of myths about 
where those taxes went, how paying them was the ultimate form of oppression, 
and what boons tax cuts were to bring us. They then delivered the biggest tax 
cuts of all to those who already had a superfluity of money and weren't going 
to pump the extra they got back into the economy. What they really were saying 
was that they wanted to hang onto every nickel, no matter how the public sphere 
was devastated, and that they really served the ultra-rich, over and over 
again, not the suckers who voted them into office.

Despite decades of cutting to the bone, they continue to promote tax cuts as 
if they had yet to happen. Their constant refrain is that we are too poor to 
feed the poor or educate the young or heal the sick, but the poverty isn't 
monetary: it's moral and emotional. Let's rectify some more language: even at 
this moment, the United States remains the richest nation the world has ever 
seen, and California – with the richest agricultural regions on the planet and 
a colossal high-tech boom still ongoing in Silicon Valley – is loaded, too. 
Whatever its problems, the US is still swimming in abundance, even if that 
abundance is divided up ever more unequally.

Really, there's more than enough to feed every child well, to treat every sick 
person, to educate everyone well without saddling them with hideous debt, to 
support the arts, to protect the environment – to produce, in short, a glorious 
society. The obstacle is greed. We could still make the sorts of changes 
climate change requires of us and become a very different nation without 
overwhelming pain. We would then lead somewhat different lives – richer, not 
poorer, for most of us (in meaning, community, power, and hope). Because this 
culture of greed impoverishes all of us, it is, to call it by its true name, 
destruction.

One of the great accomplishments of Occupy Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy-wall-street> was this rectification 
of names. Those who came together under that rubric named the greed, 
inequality, and injustice in our system; they made the brutality of debt and 
the subjugation of the debtors visible; they called out Wall Street's crimes; 
they labelled the wealthiest among us the "1%", those who have made a 
profession out of pumping great sums of our wealth upwards (quite a different 
kind of tax). It was a label that made instant sense across much of the 
political spectrum. It was a good beginning. But there's so much more to do.

Naming is only part of the work, but it's a crucial first step. A doctor 
initially diagnoses, then treats; an activist or citizen must begin by 
describing what is wrong before acting. To do that well is to call things by 
their true names. Merely calling out these names is a beam of light powerful 
enough to send the destroyers it shines upon scurrying for cover like roaches. 
After that, you still need to name your vision, your plan, your hope, your 
dream of something better.

Names matter; language matters; truth matters. In this era when the mainstream 
media serve obfuscation and evasion more than anything else (except 
distraction), alternative media, social media, demonstrations in the streets, 
and conversations between friends are the refuges of truth, the places where we 
can begin to rectify the names. So start talking.
 