
This article is part of the Guardian's World Cup 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2014> Experts' Network, a 
co-operation between 32 of the best media organisations from the countries who 
have qualified for the finals in Brazil. theguardian.com is running previews 
from four countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 12 
June.

David Luiz, Chelsea to PSG

The man is a pool shark. Tales of Stephen Hendryesque clearances on the table 
that occupies a prime spot in the Chelsea defender's Putney flat are well known 
among fellow Brazil players. Legend has it that the Tottenham midfielder Sandro 
is one of Luiz's favourite victims. "And he never lets anybody forget when he 
wins, the banter is almost cruel," says Sandro.

Neymar, Barcelona

There will be those pointing out that Brazil these days play more often, and 
against less robust opponents, than a few decades ago, but Neymar's scoring 
rate is impressive. In March his first hat-trick forBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> came against a limping South 
Africa, but it also ensured he reached 30 goals in 47 games â€“ faster than 
Lionel Messi for Argentina and Cristiano Ronaldo for Portugal (74 and 86 
respectively).

Maxwell, Paris St-Germain

A left-back whose composed style won Luiz Felipe Scolari's preference as a 
more conservative alternative to the rampant Marcelo, the PSG man is better 
known in Brazil for his collection of silverware in different countries. The 
32-year-old won titles at Ajax, Barcelona and Internazionale before moving to 
France. At all four clubs he played alongside his friend Zlatan Ibrahimovic.

Hulk, Zenit Saint Petersburg

Neymar is the man who makes teenage girls shriek when Brazil play on home 
soil, but Brazilian women lust after Hulk. More specifically his buttocks. The 
Zenit player, whose shyness makes capturing his voice a challenge even for the 
most powerful microphone, has surprisingly accepted all the jokes and even did 
some jigs for the public in a TV appearance last year.

Carlos Alberto Parreira

A World Cup-winning manager, Brazil's assistant is also a decent painter. He 
has taken part in three exhibitions and his paintings have been kindly received 
by critics. A Monet fan, Parreira once knowingly spent a small fortune on a 
fake oil by the French master. "I knew it was a fake, but I am in love with 
impressionism and the copy looked quite good."

Fernando Duarte writes for uol.com and the Guardian

Follow him here on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Fernando_Duarte>

Click here to read a profile of Thiago Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/31/world-cup-2014-brazil-profile-thiago-silva>

Click here to read the tactical analysis of Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/31/world-cup-2014-brazil-tactical-analysis>
 