
This article is part of the Guardian’s World Cup 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2014> Experts’ Network, a 
co-operation between 32 of the best media organisations from the countries who 
have qualified for the finals in Brazil. theguardian.com is running previews 
from four countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 12 
June.

There were hints of irony in Brazil’s demolition of Spain last June in the 
Confederations Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/30/brazil-spain-live-confederations-cup-final>
. First, after dismissing his predecessor’s Guardiola-induced experiences, the 
Brazil manager Luiz Felipe Scolari witnessed vindication of his theory that 
tiki-taka could be dismantled. Second, the 3-0 drubbing came in the same season 
Barcelona had been blown out of the water by Bayern Munich, the team Big Phil 
had more than publicly professed his admiration for: he actually resorted to 
adaptinggegenpressen to his own needs.

It worked: since taking over the Seleção in November 2012, Scolari has only 
lost two out of 20 games. Differently from his previous stint from 2001 to 
2002, where he could rely upon more experienced players, including defenders 
who could play in a line of three in order to better accommodate the talents of 
Rivaldo, Ronaldinho and Ronaldo, this time Scolari needed to handle a side 
where Neymar is the unmistakable focus of attention.

On paper, Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> play on a 
4-2-3-1 formation, but the most interesting feature is the intensity and 
commitment they have shown to smother opposition when not in possession of the 
ball. Although theSeleção use only two proper centre-backs, Thiago Silva and 
David Luiz, the former Bayern man Luiz Gustavo, now with Wolfsburg, often sits 
back as a sweeper, although his presence in midfield to cover for Paulinho’s 
advances are greatly appreciated too. Oscar and Neymar are the architects of 
creativity up front, with Hulk usually deployed as a mixture of battering ram, 
lethal left foot and someone who can track back and help steal the ball and 
close the spaces Brazil’s marauding full-backs (Dani Alves specifically) will 
invariably leave.

The former Lyon striker Fred is the man Scolari has wanted to act as a No9 
since the beginning. The Fluminense striker repaid the manager’s faith by 
scoring five goals in the Confederations Cup, but a string of niggling injuries 
means he has played only once for theSeleção since June, which means Neymar is 
the focal point. The Barcelona forward’s deployment on the left side of the 
pitch is the more obvious solution but Scolari could still use Neymar as a 
second striker, even though he looks a bit more predictable and vulnerable 
there.

Brazil have scored 54 goals since Scolari’s return, averaging 2.7 goals per 
game while conceding 15 (0.75 per game). They have kept 10 clean sheets 
including in games against France and Spain.Scolari inherited a side struggling 
with inexperience and expectations under his predecessor, Mano Menezes, and 
turned them into a force to be reckoned with in theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>, especially after 
getting supporters excited once again.

Who is the Brazil player who is going to surprise everyone at the World Cup?

Paulinho. His first season at Spurs was better than many people gave him 
credit for and he is a crucial player for Brazil. He can do the defensive dirty 
work, but it is his forays further up the pitch to augment the forwards that 
could be a vital ingredient for the hosts.

Who is the player who is going to disappoint the most?

Neymar, if he doesn’t challenge for Golden Boot and/or Brazil don’t win. As 
unfair as it sounds those are the standards that are set for a player on whose 
young shoulders much of the nation’s hopes rest.

What is the realistic aim for your team at the World Cup and why?

Winning it. Because nothing else will leave the fans happy. Welcome to Brazil!

Fernando Duarte writes for uol.com  <http://www.uol.com.br/>and the Guardian

Follow him here on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Fernando_Duarte>

Click here to read a profile of Thiago Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/31/world-cup-2014-brazil-profile-thiago-silva>

Click here for the secrets of the Brazilian players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/31/world-cup-2014-brazil-secrets-players>
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/31/world-cup-2014-brazil-profile-thiago-silva>

 