
Will Hutton: People from around the world enrich our culture and economy. 
Without them, we face stagnation


Openness is the propellant of great civilisations. Greece and Rome could only 
grow as they did upon the openness of seaborne trading opportunities and 
interchange of peoples, uniquely enabled by the Mediterranean. From the Middle 
Ages onwards, European vitality fed off the open exchange of technologies, 
goods and ideas flowing freely across contiguous borders.

The immigrant-unleashed dynamism of the United States is tribute to the same 
phenomenon. Similarly, open societies, economies and cultures – above all, 
those embedded in networks of growing trade and exchange – will best exploit 
the opportunities of the decades ahead.

This openness – to trade, immigrants, the flow of ideas, new technologies – is 
the essence of Britishness. Britain is formed from the inflow of many peoples 
and cultures – Roman, Danish, Norwegian, Norman, Celt, Huguenot and, more 
recently, Indian, Pakistani and Caribbean. The Industrial Revolution was 
triggered in Britain first, explain today’s historians, because of its unique 
openness to the best of European ideas. Empire, driven by this melting pot 
people, was not just about the sometimes cruel drive for booty and land: it was 
driven by the appetite for trade and then allowing conquered peoples to feed 
their culture into the constantly mutating notion of Britishness. Trade, 
migration and openness were – and are – a crucial part of this open alchemy.

The proponents of Brexit, insistent that Britain regains control of its 
borders to control immigration, even at the price of sacrificing membership of 
the EU’s single market, are, in a fundamental sense, anti-British and hostile 
to our best interests. We live in an era of gathering closure – whether it’s 
Donald Trump wanting tobuild a wall with Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/05/donald-trump-mexico-border-wall-plan-remittances>
, levy sky-high tariffs on imports anddismantle Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/mar/30/us-election-2016-live-clinton-sanders-trump-cruz-kasich-campaign>
, or China’sPresident Xi’s nationalist campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/china-xi-jinping-house-of-cards-attacks-conspirators>
 to reject western ideas. The Brexit invitation is to leave the world’s 
greatest force for openness and liberal trade – the European Union – so 
weakening it and us, in order to embrace the dwindling opportunities of a globe 
that is giving up even holding today’s line in open borders and trade.

The World Trade Organisation, upholder of the world’s open trading system and 
which Brexiters revere as better than the EU as a custodian of trade, has never 
been under more pressure from sly protectionism and breaking of its own rules. 
After 14 years of trying to extend trade rules that might apply to the whole 
world – the so-called Doha round – theWTO abandoned the attempt last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/22/doha-round-world-trade-organisation-nairobi-poor-countries>
 in Nairobi. The future is to be a dog-eat-dog world in which the strong can do 
deals as they please. The dozens of trade deals Brexiters boast will be signed 
to replace those with the EU will be attempted with countries whose interest in 
openness is declining – and certainly not with a newly weakened, isolated 
island. Worse, the WTO, which Brexiters expect to guarantee trade fair play, 
has never been weaker. You cannot protest openness when your actions promise 
closure.

The Brexit position sets up the immigrant as the unwelcome foreign ‘other’, 
against whom it is acceptable to object

The most conspicuous example is immigration. A country that is attractive to 
immigrants signals its health. A growing population is again good: it delivers 
a growing economy, vitality and demographic youthfulness. The opposite – a 
stagnating or declining population – is a guarantor of economic stagnation and 
ageing. Immigrants boost economies and enrich cultures, as proved vividly by 
the comparative experience of Britain today withstagnating, migrant-free Japan. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/nov/30/britains-economy-what-happened-japan>

Certainly, immigration cannot be limitless. But Britain, experiencing annual 
net immigration of some half of 1% of its host population, is hardly 
experiencing that. Yes, wages of sectors exposed to the direct competition of 
immigrants – no more than 10% of the labour force, but significant nonetheless 
– are lower than they would have been. Yes, migration has created pressures in 
housing and public services. Both are solvable. To reap the benefits from 
immigration, the government must invest in housing, public services and 
infrastructure and support the incomes of those in sectors directly hit. It may 
be forced to take measures to manage the inflow, as the government does with 
non-EU immigrants and as it has already negotiated with the EU. But these 
should be pragmatic derogations from the principle of openness. It does not 
imply indulging cultural objections to immigrants because they were not born 
here, any more than we would indulge hostile feelings to gays, disabled people 
or the elderly as “natural”.

The Brexit position is that immigration is a problem. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/26/tata-steel-ministers-warned-plan-to-help-sale-could-weaken-pension-protections-for-other-workers>
 It sets up the immigrant as the unwelcome foreign “other”, against whom it is 
culturally and socially acceptable to object. There is a reluctant recognition 
that the country needs immigrants, with proposed derogations from Brexit’s 
basic principle of closure by managing immigration, say, like theunforgiving 
Australian points-based system. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/01/what-is-australia-points-based-immigration-system-brexit>
 Ironically, given that non-EU immigration is running at 180,000 a year, 
derogations from closure mean that immigration will not stop. But it will 
continue in an economic and cultural climate hostile to the “other”, 
exacerbating costs and limiting the benefits.

Trade and exchange are about give, take and acceptance of change. Brexiters 
are takers, exploiting widespread unease about change in neighbourhoods most 
damaged by today’s trends, to try to build options for Britain in which the 
traffic is one way, in an international order that Britain does little to 
uphold but everything to exploit. We move from creators of the world system to 
underminers. But the world will not stay the same if we leave the EU: forces 
for closure worldwide will become more intense and menacing.

For what? If a bonfire of alleged EU red tape is to spark an entrepreneurial 
boom that the Brexiters promise, there should already be much more momentum on 
which to build. But Britain’s problems with investment, innovation and business 
building are homemade, rooted in dysfunctional ownership, financial and 
innovation systems and nothing to do with EU membership. But we are unambiguous 
beneficiaries from trade and, hold your breath, immigration. The reason almost 
every economist from across the spectrum of philosophies predicts slower growth 
and even recession as a consequence of leaving the EU is that trade will be 
reduced, and growth will fall.

The core of the EU remains its trade-promoting common market – incomplete, 
perhaps, but a hard-won and magnificent continent-wide economic reality that 
stands even as the world grows more nativist and protectionist. To throw our 
membership away in order to express our hostility to immigration is not only 
economically self-defeating, it is a denial of our best selves. Britain is 
better than this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fbritain-better-off-in-or-out-of-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F301ebd7a0318c42c7c5f9900f1c7df4abde7da73%2F26_740_2181_1309%2F2181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20Britain%20be%20better%20off%20in%20Europe%20or%20going%20it%20alone%3F%20%7C%20Will%20Hutton%20and%20Gisela%20Stuart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fbritain-better-off-in-or-out-of-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would%20Britain%20be%20better%20off%20in%20Europe%20or%20going%20it%20alone%3F%20%7C%20Will%20Hutton%20and%20Gisela%20Stuart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fbritain-better-off-in-or-out-of-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F301ebd7a0318c42c7c5f9900f1c7df4abde7da73%2F26_740_2181_1309%2F2181.jpg>
 A queue outside an unemployment office in Madrid. Photograph: Andres Kudacki/AP
Gisela Stuart: We should vote to leave an institution that has made such a 
mess of adapting to change


Let’s be clear what a vote to leave actually means. On 24 June, we will still 
be Europeans. These islands will still be part of the European continental 
shelf and Eurostar trains will continue to run. The 21st century’s Holbeins and 
Haydns will still come to London just as our Turners and Byrons will travel 
across Europe. British students will take part inErasmus 
<http://erasmusprogramme.com/> programmes, just as the original Erasmus 
exchanged ideas with us and did not first need the EU to make it happen.

To vote to leave is to leave behind a political structure created in the last 
century. A project that in 1957 was noble and honourable, but is now out of 
date. An endeavour that succeeded in building a supranational machine and then 
didn’t notice that the world underneath it had changed.

The last century was the time of the big trading blocs, where Europe thought 
it had to respond to the rise of America and the Soviet Union. Production 
techniques favoured scale, which in turn favoured markets that had similar 
standards and tastes. The world is different now. Technology and communications 
have seen products diversify, consumer tastes diverge and markets become 
increasingly detached from geography, as commerce and relationships move online.

Change has become part of modern life and companies that do well thrive on the 
creative challenge, demanding more innovation and new skills. This is a modern 
networked world, where regulation must be agile and government must be open, 
flexible, inclusive and accountable. It is also one where large bureaucracies 
fail. Political structures such as the EU – centralised, opaque and managed by 
a clique of bureaucrats and elites – will never succeed.

Just as the stresses of the 1980s proved too much for the Soviet Union, the 
European Union is starting to lumber painfully from one mismanaged crisis to 
the next. The eurozone has become a disaster ofquite staggering proportions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/for-sale-greek-islands-hotels-historic-sites-stergios-pitsiorlas>
, aslevels of youth unemployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/mario-draghi-reducing-youth-unemployment-is-a-priority-for-everyone>
 remain above 20%, and as high as 45% or 50% in Spain and Greece. It is all the 
more astonishing for being both predicted and avoidable. The EU has no solution 
to the migration crisis even though it was the foreseeable consequence of a 
free-travel area that had no protection for its external border. This old 
Europe has the best years behind it and hasn’t accepted that it is now creating 
problems rather than solving them.

The nations of Europe have to find a new way. For members of the eurozone, 
that alternative may lie in accelerating steps towards a common fiscal policy 
and a political union leading ultimately to a united states of Europe. That may 
well be right for them, but would not be right for us.

Britain now has a choice. We have always been an outward looking trading 
nation and when cultures meet, creativity, enterprise and new ideas spring 
forth. The British do not speak to the world just because English is a global 
language, but because we have shown an ability and a willingness to do so for 
centuries.

In or out of the EU, our future growth in trade will come from outside Europe. 
We are the world’s fifth largest economy, with a large deficit in trade with 
the EU. The single market is in long-term decline as a share of the world 
economy and as a share of our total exports. The former EU commission president 
Jacques Delors has suggested that Britain would be able to leave and reach a 
free trade agreement with the EU because, in his view, the UK is “strategically 
and economically important” to theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

I was born in Germany, but I can say with confidence that I am British. Not 
English, or Scottish, but British. Being British is a supranational identity; 
one that overcomes the darker sides of narrow nationalism by embracing concepts 
such as the crown in parliament and the rule of law.

To be British does not mean, and never did, to be part of a blood line. 
Germany only changed its nationality laws in the last 20 years and it wasn’t 
until unification in 1989 that the notion of what it meant to be German became 
identified with being a citizen of the state. Nor did the British, even at the 
height of the might of empire, try to turn the rest of the world into 
“Englishmen”, an approach very different from the French.

For centuries, these isles have always been open to and benefited from 
migration. Today, that is being tested, both by the scale of the movement of 
young Europeans leaving the accession states and the failing eurozone, but also 
because our consent is no longer thought relevant or required.

I find it extraordinary that the left sees nothing wrong with a situation 
where we ask young people from other countries to come here and to take on 
low-paid jobs, while we neglect to create entry-level opportunities and skills 
training for the young people in our cities. This may suit the cosmopolitan 
elites and big companies, but in the long term it is bad for young British 
workers and bad for our economy and European economies.

The EU needs to fix the mess it has made of both the eurozone and its 
free-travel area and leave behind the institutions and habits of the past. 
Until it does so, it will remain locked in an inward-looking obsession, with 
ever greater union based on a model suited to an old Europe of grand schemes 
and committees that ended when the current century began.

We have always been and continue to be Europeans, but we understand that the 
political institutions of Europe are stuck in the past and beyond reform. When 
the Soviet Union collapsed, the first priority for those countries considered 
applicants to join the EU was to join Nato, then – because there was no other 
trading model – they applied to join the EU.

By voting leave on 23 June, and taking back control, we will lead the way in 
showing that there is a more empowering and entrepreneurial model of how the 
nations of Europe can relate to each other. Some will have a single currency 
and pursue deeper political integration. Others, while continuing to co-operate 
and trade, will maintain a democratic mandate and consent over their own laws.

I will vote to leave on 23 June because I want Britain to be a significant 
global player, whether in Nato, the UN or the World Trade Organisation. But I 
am not prepared to give a democratic endorsement to an institution that has 
shown itself incapable of adapting to the modern world, that is failing a 
generation of young people and that responds to each new crisis by doing more 
of the same. Vote to leave on 23 June and take back control.

Gisela Stuart is Labour MP for Birmingham Edgbaston and chair of the Vote 
Leave campaign
 