
“Some ladies don’t like to be asked this question,” says Xian Zhang. “But I’m 
happy to talk about it”. The question isthat question, the one that female 
conductors are always asked, namely: “Why aren’t there more of you?”

Today it is announced that Zhang is the BBC National Orchestra of Wales’s new 
principal guest conductor, a role which will make her one of the UK’s most 
prominent female conductors – she’s the first woman to have a titled conducting 
role with aBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> orchestra – and which 
means she’s going to be asked about the representation of her gender in the 
echelons in the conducting profession a great deal.



“The more we ask these questions, the more people will get used to the idea of 
women conducting, and this will speed up the process of getting more women into 
the profession. We need to bring up the number of female of conductors. There 
are not enough girls doing it well as professionals. Once there are more, then 
we can judge how good they are,” she says.

When girls see other women doing this job, they will feel that they can do it 
too.

Xian Zhang <http://www.harrisonparrott.com/artist/profile/xian-zhang> is 
already a hugely successful and acclaimed conductor. She has a long 
relationship with the New York Philharmonic, regularly works with Concertgebouw 
in Amsterdam and theLondon Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/apr/06/lso-zhang-prokofiev-review>, has 
recently been leading La Bohème atEnglish National Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/19/la-boheme-review-these-bohemians-are-off-their-heads>
, and will join BBCNOW from September 2016.

Unlike in the west, where the vast majority of conducting mentors in 
conservatoires and colleges are men, in China, Zhang had two female conducting 
teachers, and didn’t think about the gender issue. It was only when she moved 
to Europe and America that she saw there was even a problem. “I looked around 
and realised: ‘Oh, maybe I’m the only girl here.’ It never occurred to me 
before. But when girls see other women doing this job, they will feel that they 
can do it too.”

Born in Dandong, China, Zhang made her professional debut conducting The 
Marriage of Figaro at the Central Opera House in Beijing aged 20. She trained 
at Beijing’s Central Conservatory, and moved to the US in 1998. She was 
appointed the New York Philharmonic’s assistant conductor in 2002, subsequently 
becoming their associate conductor and the first holder of the Arturo Toscanini 
chair. As she begins her Welsh role, she will be shuttling across the Atlantic 
– another new appointment, as music director ofNew Jersey Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.njsymphony.org/about-njso/njso-next-music-director>, starts the 
same season.

Since 2009 she’s been music director of Milan’s Giuseppe Verdi Symphony 
Orchestra in Milan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ujaenZA9CTk>. There, she 
says she had to convince audiences as well as musicians, but believes they have 
formed a relationship with her because she is a mother. “I became close to 
them, and I felt strong support, because they respect mothers very much, and 
they love children”.
 ‘Most other orchestras are passive. The BBCNOW musicians want to be really 
involved.’
Xian Zhang. Photograph: B Ealovega/PR 
During Zhang’s three-year appointment in Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/cardiff>, she will conduct the BBC orchestra in 
annual concerts at BBC Hoddinott Hall, St David’s Hall and Brangwyn Hall, with 
repertoire featuring Tchaikovsky, Shostakovich, Rimsky-Korsakov and Berlioz in 
her first season. BBCNOW will also perform at the Proms under Zhang’s baton 
during her tenure and embark on an “on the road” tour around Wales.


She is full of admiration for the technical prowess of the Welsh orchestra: 
working on Saint-Saëns’s Organ Symphony with them, she says “the opening of the 
first movement is very hard to get it right, to get it clean, but they had it 
from the first reading – wow!” And she praises the way the musicians rehearse: 
“They are willing to ask your thoughts as a conductor on sound, on 
interpretation; they are actually curious to find out why you are doing things 
they way you are. That’s really special, because most other orchestras are more 
passive, and will just sit there. These musicians want to be really involved.”

Zhang is also looking forward to planning more adventurous programmes with the 
NOW players than she is able to with her orchestra in Milan: exploring 
contemporary Chinese music such asQigang Chen’s, whose work she brought to the 
Proms with the BBCNOW last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/30/bbcnow-zhang-chen-premiere-prom-15>
, and to working with young Welsh composers, as well as performing the big 
romantic Russian and French repertoire in which she has built upa stellar 
reputation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/apr/06/lso-zhang-prokofiev-review>. 

She is having a honeymoon not just with the orchestra, but with Welsh 
audiences too. “The people are so down to earth, and so warm. They are very 
open-minded. I feel very comfortable in Welsh culture.” The country is lucky to 
have her energy, insight, and open-hearted enthusiasm on the podium, as well as 
her perspicacity as a cultural leader.
 