
Yannick Bolasie could see Wembley Stadium from his bedroom window as a kid on 
Cup final day, not that he cared too much. Back then he was more interested in 
playing “Wembley” – the goalmouth game needing only a ball and two posts – with 
friends on the estate, while thousands of supporters descended on his London 
borough.

This year will be different. On his mum’s birthday, Bolasie will lead Crystal 
Palace’s hopes of a firstFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, 
against Manchester United. The gilded edge on the Eagles’ wing has been one of 
the more dynamic attacking forces in English football this season, and he is 
ready for the biggest game of his career.

Watford outrun as Connor Wickham heads Crystal Palace into FA Cup final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/crystal-palace-watford-fa-cup-match-report>
“The journey I’ve personally taken over the past four years with Palace, it’s 
a dream come true,” Bolasie says. “Scoring early in the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/crystal-palace-watford-fa-cup-match-report>
 did a lot for me personally. Now I am just looking forward to playing in the 
final and expressing myself, enjoying myself and showing the world what I can 
do.”

He has done that in the Premier League and it was no coincidence Palace’s 
downturn this season, beginning in December, coincided withan injury to Bolasie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/27/crystal-palace-zaha-bolasie-bournemouth-alan-pardew>
. Before then, Alan Pardew’s side had been flying but, although recent league 
performances have left a little to be desired, the Cup run has provided renewed 
exuberance.

Bolasie’s journey from playground to professional has not been simple. There 
was no academy for him, no easy path to the top. The DR Congo international, 
born in France but raised in London, started as a youngster at Hillingdon 
Borough and his road took him to Floriana in Malta before a return to England 
with Plymouth Argyle. Loans to Barnet followed, Bristol City signed him in 2011 
and then Palace came calling.

The rest has been for all to see, a remarkable progression from a wide player 
with pace and mesmeric feet to aconsistently brilliant winger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/24/alan-pardew-yannick-bolasie-crystal-palace->
. There have been bumps along the way – Bolasie still smarts at missing out on 
the2013 Championship play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/27/crystal-palace-watford-live-championship-play-off-final>
 when Ian Holloway was the Palace manager – but with Wilfried Zaha back many 
Premier League full-backs have left Selhurst Park with scrambled brains this 
season.

The way I've grown up, the manner I am today reflects on my mother.
Yannick Bolasie 
Zaha is flourishing in south London once more after an ill-fated spell at 
United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/manchester-united-sell-wilfried-zaha-crystal-palace>
 and Bolasie believes having a wide threat on the opposite flank benefits his 
own game. “When we were both in the Championship, in my first season here, 
nobody knew about me, so everybody was concentrating on Wilf,” he says. 
“They’ve seen Wilf go to United, coming back, teams starting to concentrate 
more on me a bit.

“We get along obviously off the pitch but he’s got his life and I’ve got mine. 
We’re at totally different stages: I’ve got two kids so I’ve got 
responsibilities. For myself, I just like to relax and chill out with the 
family.”

It was only when Bolasie was 14 that he began to dream of a football career, 
watching Thierry Henry score a hat-trick 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1qoo7aKApLk> for Arsenal at San Siro against 
Internazionale. Yet this week he has had time to reflect on his ascent,posting 
a picture of a Willesden playground on social media 
<https://twitter.com/yannickbolasie?lang=en-gb> alongside the caption: “Where 
it all began.”

“That is the estate where I grew up,” says Bolasie, who was going to arrange a 
special coach to Wembley on Saturday for his mum, Yolande, before realising it 
would probably be quicker to walk. “From my estate, where my mum still lives 
now, from my bedroom you could see Wembley. I go back a lot, my brothers are 
still there and she does a lot of cooking for me. To try to get a coach doesn’t 
make sense, Willesden to Wembley. You can’t do that really.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fyannick-bolasie-fa-cup-final-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac824ac2cb382de606672671a05dbb445858d235%2F638_13_1916_2395%2F1916.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yannick%20Bolasie%3A%20FA%20Cup%20final%20is%20chance%20to%20show%20world%20what%20I%20can%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fyannick-bolasie-fa-cup-final-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yannick%20Bolasie%3A%20FA%20Cup%20final%20is%20chance%20to%20show%20world%20what%20I%20can%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fyannick-bolasie-fa-cup-final-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac824ac2cb382de606672671a05dbb445858d235%2F638_13_1916_2395%2F1916.jpg>
 Yannick Bolasie celebrates scoring his side’s opening goal against Watford in 
the FA Cup semi-final. Photograph: Richard Heathcote/Getty Images 
“The way I’ve grown up, the manner I am today, reflects on my mother. I’ve 
seen other people grow up and not have respect for human beings. But even 
though I play football, I’m still able to talk to everyone on the estate. 
Whenever I go, I can literally talk to anyone that I meet and everyone I have 
known from my past. It is normal, I casually get on with it.”

Bolasie has designed a customised pair of boots that chart his journey, from 
his mum’s house to Wembley, which he wore during the warm-up before Palace’s 
2-1 semi-final victory over Watford. “On one side of the boot it had the 
journey from my mum’s house to Wembley,” he says. “The road map is highlighted 
in blue and obviously you can see the green and stuff, and on the other side of 
the boot it had the Wembley arch, what I could see from my mum’s bedroom, with 
a Palace flag on it and the Palace fans walking to Wembley.

“Palace offered me the opportunity to come and play and I took it with both 
hands. For me, at the time [of signing in 2012], I didn’t care about what money 
I was getting or whatever it was going on; I just wanted to play football 
because I knew playing games would make me improve, and I think looking back at 
my career at Palace every year I’ve always improved and improved and added a 
lot more things to my game.”

Thousands of Palace fans will travel to Wembley expectant of a big performance 
from their side against a United team who have endured a trying season under 
Louis van Gaal, and had their Cup preparations disrupted by last Sunday’sdummy 
bomb incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/manchester-united-fake-bomb-fiasco-call-for-investigation-old-trafford>
 which led to the leaguefixture against Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/manchester-united-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 being played on Tuesday.

United missed out on a qualification place for next season’s Champions League 
but, whereas the Europa League may not appeal to many at Old Trafford, for 
Palace such a prize would feel more significant.

“You can’t help yourself thinking about those kind of things,” Bolasie says. 
“The main thing is that, if I get that opportunity, it would rub away the hurt 
that I got when I didn’t play in the play-off final. Hopefully my mum will 
enjoy it and hopefully I can make it special.”
 