
Yaya Touré believes he is on a mission to make Manchester City bigger than 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and 
hopes to remain at the Etihad Stadium until José Mourinho and the rest of the 
neighbours at Old Trafford have been fully eclipsed.

Pep Guardiola’s advice that Raheem Sterling be ‘direct and clinical’ pays off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/raheem-sterling-pep-guardiola-manchester-city>
The 33-year-old midfielder becomes a free agent in the summer and Pep Guardiola
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> concedes he is unsure 
whether Touré will remain part of his plans next season – but the Ivorian 
appears in no rush to leave. “I came to this club to make history,” said Touré, 
who after spending some time on the fringes of Guardiola’s squad, is back on 
centre stage. “I want this club to change, I want this club to be bigger than 
United. I know it’s going to be a lot of work but that’s my dream.”

With controversies surrounding Touré’s divisive agent, Dimitri Seluk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/pep-guardiola-yaya-toure-not-play-manchester-city-agent-apologises>
, seemingly smoothed over and his fellow midfielder Ilkay Gündoganhaving 
sustained a serious knee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/manchester-city-ilkay-gundogan-ruled-out-season-cruciate-injury-knee>
, Guardiola appears set to be heavily reliant on a player he excluded from 
City’s squadfor the group stages of the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/02/manchester-city-yaya-toure-left-out-champions-league-squad-pep-guardiola>
.

Touré could not be more delighted at the prospect of resuming his once-pivotal 
role between now and May – and perhaps for even longer. “I like the challenge, 
I love a challenge,” he said. “I want to make something very important. I have 
already won two Premier League titles and I want more than that, another new 
story.

“I feel 20 now,” he added, smiling. “My role is to keep the team moving, win 
the ball, organise, talk to the players, I have the experience. We are a team 
that wants to play football but sometimes you have to tell the players to be 
careful, especially on the counterattack.”

This desire to influence matters from the heart of the action made Touré’s 
time on the bench far from easy. “I belong on the field,” he said. “But even if 
I’m not playing I want to be at the stadium to watch. Even when I’m going home, 
I’m thinking about my football and what I did and how I played and what I could 
change. I always want to progress.

“Of course, I want to be involved but it depends on the manager. I will be 
fully prepared for any situation. I will give 100% for this club, for these 
fans. These fans are the only ones who always sing my name, who give happiness 
to my family. If I can do more for them I will do it. I always fight to make 
the team one step better.”

After working with Guardiola for two years at Barcelona, Touré has been 
intrigued to see how the 45-year-old is coping with the culture shock involved 
in transferring his coaching talents to English football. “I think he’s seen 
how difficult this league is physically but he’s a very intelligent guy, he 
understands football very well,” Touré said.

“He always has to win, to conquer a league, but he’s seen that here in England 
it’s complicated because, as we’ve said before, in England you need to be very 
strong in the second balls, and also the third and the first balls. The 
manager’s idea is that we have to be like Barcelona. It’s going to be difficult 
but with a lot of work we’ll continue that way.”
 