
Western-friendly dictators can die in peace, knowing they’ll be lauded as soon 
as they stop breathing. So it was for Singapore’s founding father Lee Kuan Yew, 
who recently passed away at the age of 91. Tributes poured in from across the 
globe. Barack Obama called him “visionary 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/03/22/statement-president-death-lee-kuan-yew>
” while Australian prime minister Tony Abbott mourned a “friend 
<https://twitter.com/TonyAbbottMHR/status/582106687701569536>”.

Neither man mentioned that Lee presided over an authoritarian state where 
dissent was barely tolerated, where even his commemoration was marked by the 
authoritiesshutting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/22/singapore-lee-kuan-yew-dies-91> 
down events at Speaker’s Corner, the only place in the country where protest is 
permitted.

Singapore may have become a global business hub 
<https://medium.com/@leohollis/singapore-if-thomas-hobbes-built-a-city-e174b6a8690e>
 in a matter of decades, a remarkable economic feat, but growing numbers of its 
young citizensno longer believe 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/25/world/asia/singapore-the-nation-that-lee-built-questions-its-direction.html?ref=world>
 or accept that silence in the face of repression is acceptable. Clean 
sidewalks may not be enough anymore to satisfy a public yearning for more.

After Lee’s death, Singapore arrested a local teenager for daring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/31/singapore-teenager-amos-yee-pang-sang-charged-critical-lee-kuan-yew-video>
 to post a video slamming the deceased leader’s record. Greater freedom of 
speech and rights is on the agenda for its globally connected youth.

This is the problem with dictators admired in elite western circles for being 
able to dismiss the will of the people even more successfully than elected 
politicians; the population eventually wants change.

In the eyes of the west, Singaporean autocracy was less important than the 
building of a stable Asian nation that enriched western and Asian businesses. 
Lee Kwan Yew didn’t need to push this message too hard to convince anybody. 
After all, the west is more than happy to deal with China, another success 
story with a deplorable human rights record andworsening attacks 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/14/world/asia/china-releases-3-of-5-detained-womens-rights-activists.html>
 on civil society.

The tradeoff – stability and prosperity for authoritarianism – is global. When 
Saudi King Abdullah died in January this year, Australian government buildings
lowered 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/flags-at-halfmast-to-mark-death-of-saudi-arabias-king-abdullah-20150124-12xg8o.html>
 their flags to mark the death. Obama flew to the funeral to pay respects to 
the royal family.

Alongside a massive entourage, including the CIA director and a host of 
Democrat and Republican figures, Obama’s goal was toconfirm 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/war_stories/2015/01/barack_obama_s_visit_to_saudi_arabia_the_president_understands_how_important.html>
 the primacy of the special relationship between Saudi Arabia and America and 
reassure the unelected sheikhs that he wasn’t intending to leave them isolated 
against an ascendant Iran, which hasincreasing control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/13/irans-advances-create-alarm-in-saudi-arabia-and-the-gulf>
 over four regional capitals – Sana’a, Baghdad, Damascus and Beirut – as a 
result of Washington’s invasion of Iraq in 2003 that unleashed a chain-reaction 
of shifting alliances.

Saudi Arabia beheads its own people, its legal system is opaque 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/23/world/middleeast/a-murder-a-death-sentence-and-the-unpredictable-nature-of-saudi-justice.html?emc=edit_th_20150323&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=55503776&_r=0>
, it refuses women basic rights, like permission to drive, and tolerates no 
criticism of its rule. Itsabundant oil 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/04/world/middleeast/saudi-arabia-is-said-to-use-oil-to-lure-russia-away-from-syrias-assad.html?emc=edit_th_20150204&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=55503776>
 is used ruthlessly to keep heads of state in line; Obama, Abbott and other 
western heads of state are unwilling to challenge a country that is known to 
export terror.

The response to another autocrat’s death, Indonesia’s Suharto, in 2008, was 
also enthusiastic. Former Australian prime minister Paul Keatingdamned 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/opinion/soehartos-unsung-legacy/2008/02/01/1201801032980.html?page=fullpage#contentSwap1>
 critics who dared condemn the dictator as “a cruel and intolerant repressor” 
when in fact he had “saved Indonesia from destruction”. Left unsaid were the 
million Indonesians killed after Suharto’s bloody ascension to the presidency 
in the 1960s and the occupation of East Timor.

The New York Times obituary noted 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/28/world/asia/28suharto.html?pagewanted=all> 
his rule as “one of the most brutal and corrupt of the 20th century”. This 
didn’t bother Keating, who saluted Soeharto for bringing “stability” on 
Australia’s doorstep.

How dictators are revered in their death wholly depends on their usefulness to 
western interests. When US-backed Iraqi-forces executed Saddam Hussein in 2006, 
few mourned his bloody rule. Yet for decades, Hussein was a close American 
ally, during a time when he was at his most murderous against internal dissent.

Washington even provided 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2013/08/26/exclusive-cia-files-prove-america-helped-saddam-as-he-gassed-iran/>
 the location of Iranian troops to Saddam’s Iraq in 1988, to assist in a 
chemical weapons attack. It was only when Saddam invaded Kuwait in 1990 that 
America designated him an official enemy.

But is the west’s insistence on stability helping reduce violence? Aligning 
with the darkest forces on the planet for the sake of oil, access or apparent 
geo-strategic positioning is guaranteed to achieve the opposite. Western 
leaders inevitably end up preparing grandiose and intrusive plans to control 
the monsters they’ve unleashed. Dirty alliances, escalation and invasions with 
unpredictable outcomes; this seems like all our leaders know. Afterwards come 
the glowing eulogies.

Many leaders are happy to play the Washington game and are feted accordingly. 
Criticism of abuses in Uzbekistan, Ethiopia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Vietnam and 
Israel aremuted 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2011/01/31/americas-other-most-embarrassing-allies/> 
because military, strategic or economic benefits to both sides are integral to 
these relationships. Deaths of their rulers would bring salutatory statements 
from Britain and America. Conversely, Russia is deemed a national security 
threat because it refuses to be bought by economic threats from the US.

When you dance with the devil, you’ll be bitten on the behind. Democratic 
security and moral integrity is weakened when western friends commit abuses and 
they’re ignored or rationalised. You can tell an awful lot about so-called 
western values when leaders fawn at the feet of autocrats when they die.
 