
Can you believe that 2016 is nearly over? Can you? I hope so.

Yes, 2016 has absolutely flown by. It seems like only yesterday that we were 
reeling at January’s news that George Osborne had written a musical – and 
deftly found an extra £50m for the Arts Council if they’d put it on. Of course, 
for many, the real kick in the teeth was that the resultant production was so 
incredibly good. I mean, spellbinding. Moving, human, humane, complex, almost 
novelistic in its scope, yet only 90 minutes long. “We’ve misjudged this man,” 
everyone was saying.

And then March’s budget: brutal, hellish, a screech of vindictive, divisive 
rage, the merciless Commons mace brought down relentlessly on the weak. “How 
could he have written those songs!?” Alex Salmond wept impotently on the floor 
of the house. “Is it his pleasure to make us hum his tunes even as we sink into 
the destitution that his policy brings?”

But it wasn’t all dark and teary contemplations of the self-contradictory 
nature of the human soul – there were lighter moments too. The “Drugged-Up 
Athletes Only” version of the World Athletics Championships, organised at the 
last minute by Vladimir Putin, was an absolute spectacle of what the human 
spirit can achieve through the science of pharmacology – and it was good news 
for Britain too, with GlaxoSmithKline coming an impressive fourth on the medals 
table.

So there have been horrors, joys, failures and triumphs, like most 
years. Pretty predictable really. Yes, it’s like you could have predicted some 
of the things that happened in advance. Let’s look back at some of the quirkier 
stories of the year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Fdavid-mitchell-you-believe-what-happened-next-year-george-osborne-musical-john-lewis-queens-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dc822a74324f6c546e796f539d6fd7eb8dbaf09%2F0_0_2418_3335%2F2418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20won%E2%80%99t%20believe%20what%20happened%20next%20year%E2%80%A6%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Fdavid-mitchell-you-believe-what-happened-next-year-george-osborne-musical-john-lewis-queens-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20won%E2%80%99t%20believe%20what%20happened%20next%20year%E2%80%A6%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Fdavid-mitchell-you-believe-what-happened-next-year-george-osborne-musical-john-lewis-queens-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dc822a74324f6c546e796f539d6fd7eb8dbaf09%2F0_0_2418_3335%2F2418.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Online giants launch new currency backed by data 

May saw an internet-led monetary revolution as Amazon and Google jointly 
launched Datageld, a new virtual currency based on personal information. “It 
was the obvious way of responding to the likes ofBitcoin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/bitcoin>,” said a spokesman for the new 
currency on theToday programme. “You know, untraceable anonymous payment 
systems which can be used to hide terrorist or criminal transactions but which, 
much more seriously, are a way for potentially millions of people to conceal 
their spending patterns from our algorithms. And we absolutelycannot have that. 
I’m serious. We would literally rather pay tax.” Under the new system, 
customers would be able to pay for products with pieces of information about 
themselves – likes, dislikes, medical history, salary, addictions, etc – 
instead of actual money. But what happens when people have no personal 
information left? “Well, if you’ve got nothing to hide, you’ve got nothing to 
sell.”

Catholic church blocks straight marriage 

In a dramatic meeting of cardinals and senior bishops, the Roman Catholic 
church once again turned its back on a more permissive society – and not in a 
sexy or coquettish way. “I think the whole debate about gay marriage really put 
us off the whole institution,” said the cardinal archbishop of Guernsey, “so 
we’ve decided to put a stop to it altogether. And, to be fair, anyone who isn’t 
married by now really has had ample opportunity.” The bishop of Montevideo put 
it more succinctly: “I don’t see why anyone should get together, quite frankly. 
I’ve always been single.”

Stars campaign for minimum price per calorie 

“The time comes when you realise you’ve got to put something back,” declared 
Cara Delevingne in April. “And I’m talking about cake on a supermarket shelf! 
Am I right? Yeah!” The low-fat icon was speaking at the launch of a new 
campaign to impose a minimum price per calorie on retailers. “They’re doing it 
for units of alcohol and obesity is every bit the epidemic alcoholism is,” said 
the CEO of Gastric Measures, a clinic which specialises in stomach staples. 
“And, if this drive is successful, I think people will find that our surgery 
pays for itself.” The campaign received widespread support from the fashion 
industry, Hollywood’s thinnest and those affronted by other people’s fatness, 
though critics claimed that it betrayed a naivety in the face of economic 
realities by setting its proposed minimum price at $1 per calorie. “I don’t 
know what the problem is,” declared a Hollywood insider. “A healthy diet still 
wouldn’t work out as significantly more expensive than a really serious cocaine 
addiction.”

Anonymous set their sights on litter 

Having delivered withering broadsides to both Islamic State and Donald Trump 
in 2015, the hacktivist collective continued liberally to dispense pieces of 
their hive mind throughout 2016. Payday loans firms, politicians who won’t give 
a straight answer, how difficult it is to get through to BT, those awkward lids 
they have on jars of pills and the new look for Cadbury’s Fruit & Nut were all 
given the treatment. But it wasn’t until November that the crusading IT 
enthusiasts identified their next major target: litter. “We are Anonymous. We 
are legion. We all like playing on our computers. Bins are there for a reason. 
You have been warned,” was their chilling sign-off.

John Lewis advert shown instead of Queen’s speech 

One of the biggest surprises of the year came only days ago when, at 3pm on 25 
December, the 2016 John Lewis advert was broadcast instead of the Queen’s 
Christmas message. What was originally assumed to be an act of mindless 
commercialism by all the broadcasters – or “the BBC” as they’re referred to in 
the print media – turned out to be Her Majesty’s decision. “TheJohn Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> advert IS my Christmas 
message. When the tiny elf opened his present from the reindeer & it was his 
own pair of antlers, I wept,” tweeted the Queen at 3.04pm.

Definition of terrorism broadened to include parking offences 

“There’s more than one way to bring down western civilisation,” warned the 
commissioner of the Metropolitan police. “It doesn’t have to be all bombs and 
guns – it could be the slow sapping effect, the gradual clogging of our 
nation’s vital arteries, that comes from illegal parking.” In a speech to the 
Association of Chief Police Officers in September, the commissioner argued that 
it was “complacency, pure and simple” to “assume that an incidence of reckless 
parking was motivated by selfish concerns rather than the spectre of Islamist 
extremism”. He continued: “We are not doing our duty if we don’t fully 
investigate any towed car’s potential links to Isis. And so we demand the legal 
right to do this and the public funding to enable it. Anything less would be to 
surrender the highway code to a barbarous sect which, among a host of other 
perversities, believes in driving on the right.”
 