
I was willing to overlook Donald Trump’s misogyny, banishment of Muslims from 
the country, the demonization of undocumented Latinos and the spotlighting of 
crowd anger to incentivize mob behavior. Those just seemed like the birth pangs 
of a new American democracy. But Tuesday’s New York Times profile of Donald 
Trump’s butler goes too far.

Despite ticking off every clichéd box on the Weird Life Of An Insanely Rich 
Guy checklist, it’s obvious that the billionaire has no idea how to be an 
insanely rich guy. That’s no way to make America great again.


As the New York Times reports, his butler is named Anthony Senecal, and he has 
worked for Trump for 30 years and at the Mar-a-Lago resort for 60. Wrong, wrong,
wrong. My God, what a waste of a butler. If you’re going to go provincial, at 
the very least, havea large mustachioed English man in sweaters 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mr._Belvedere>. Better yet, glue a J Wellington 
Wimpy mustache 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=J+Wellington+Wimpy&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiE9vyd1cPLAhWJNT4KHb3GAngQ_AUIBygB&biw=2144&bih=968&dpr=0.9#imgrc=dY2MXfEEmvWTIM%3A>
 on Chris Christie and hope that the My Fair Lady elocution lessons take hold 
sooner rather than later.


“Freshen up your ale, guv?” Christie’ll say. “Sure thing, CC,” you’ll reply. 
“And put a head on it.”


That’s still small potatoes. Come on, Don, what are all the friggin billions 
for? If you want a butler that’s going to blow everyone’s minds, get a trained 
duck that can smoke a cigarette.


Why voters love Donald Trump's wealth – but despised Mitt Romney's
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/donald-trump-wealth-money-mitt-romney>
Life at Trump’s Florida resort-palace seems almost quotidian. Built a century 
ago by the famousNight Court heiress Markie Post 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Night_Court>, Trump quickly went about making 
Mar-a-Lago his own.


“[Post] imported stone from Genoa, Italy, and 16th-century Flemish tapestries 
that she protected by drawing the drapes in the brightest hours. (They faded 
after Mr Trump bought the place and blasted the living room with sunlight.)”


Good job. Next time, you remove the tapestries and drapes and completely line 
the room with mirrors so, from any point within it, you can hold up a 
magnifying glass and use it to burn ants outside.


And look at this utter waste of a morning ritual. After being delivered 
several papers – some from as far away asNew York City – “Mr Trump would emerge 
hours later, in khakis, a white golf shirt and baseball cap. If the cap was 
white, the staff noticed, the boss was in a good mood. If it was red, it was 
best to stay away.”


Here’s a better idea: why don’t you just shoot the staff? If your duck butler 
is taking a smoke break and notices the scullery maid Lucinda get hit in the 
bodice with a red paintball, it’s a bad day. A white paintball means all-clear.


Or just skip the signaling and shoot the help with tranquilizer darts, then 
make Chris Christie dress up in a red plumber’s outfit and Super Mario mustache 
and drag the bodies out to your giant human chessboard.


Actually, forget the chessboard bit. Seems too 19th century. Build a clock 
tower, climb atop it with a rifle and see how many servants you can tranq 
between 9 and 10am, then have Christie pile them on top of each other and see 
how tall you can make what I like to call “The Laborer Heap.” Then, the next 
day, try to beat that record.


And for the down times? Get creative.


“Mr Senecal knows how to stroke his ego and lift his spirits, like the time 
years ago he received an urgent warning from Mr. Trump’s soon-to-land plane 
that the mogul was in a sour mood. Mr Senecal quickly hired a bugler to play 
‘Hail to the Chief’ as Mr Trump stepped out of his limousine to enter 
Mar-a-Lago.”


Dear Lord, talk about aiming low. At the very least, start at Kiss Me, Son of 
God <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gLcp8Dm-ejU> and work your way upward.


I expect better from Trump. A restless, brilliant mind shouldn’t be presenting 
19th century solutions to ridiculous opulence. A desolated America needs 
monumental greatness, not just luxury. If we’re going to look backward, let’s 
blow past 200 years ago and reach for2,200 years ago and the Qin Dynasty 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terracotta_Army>.


“Mr Senecal tried to retire in 2009, but Mr Trump decided he was 
irreplaceable… ‘Tony, to retire is to expire”, Mr Trump told him. ‘I’ll see you 
next season.’”


Next season? Chump change. Tony, how about we see you forever? How about we 
bake you into clay and brass and wall you into the underground chamber with the 
other terracotta servants who will become our warriors and bring iced-tea 
pitchers for eternity?


We can’t stop with Tony. We’re going to need millions more beautiful, 
luxurious war-butlers like him. It’s the only way to stop China in the 
afterlife.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Flife-decadence-mr-trump-use-your-imagination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75399eb77d8e27363456dcaa83951283d18a218c%2F45_322_2615_1568%2F2615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20call%20this%20a%20life%20of%20decadence%2C%20Mr%20Trump%3F%20Use%20your%20imagination!%20%7C%20Jeb%20Lund&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Flife-decadence-mr-trump-use-your-imagination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20call%20this%20a%20life%20of%20decadence%2C%20Mr%20Trump%3F%20Use%20your%20imagination%21%20%7C%20Jeb%20Lund&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Flife-decadence-mr-trump-use-your-imagination%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75399eb77d8e27363456dcaa83951283d18a218c%2F45_322_2615_1568%2F2615.jpg>
 Photograph: Cristiano Laruffa/Rex Features  