
This month, highlights of the BBC schedule include Black and British 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0499smp>, a season of shows about non-white 
history in the UK, and an adaptation of Zadie Smith’s novel NW.


Racial identity is a key theme of Smith’s story – the central character, 
Natalie (Nikki Amuka-Bird) is a black London barrister who worries that success 
has made her a “fake” – so viewers might assume that NW is part of Black and 
British. But theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> have confirmed that 
it should be seen as a standalone drama.

Black and British: A Forgotten History review – this is what it means to share 
a heritage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/10/black-and-british-a-forgotten-history-review-this-is-what-it-means-to-share-a-heritage>
Given that Smith is a laureate of modern black British experience, this feels 
rather like putting on an Italian food season then claiming that a documentary 
about pasta just happens to be running by coincidence. To avoid confusion, why 
not air NW another time? However, I suspect that the answer to this puzzle lies 
in television’s nervousness about racial matters.

On the website for Black and British 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/aboutthebbc/entries/c9ace3ae-d55c-4470-b698-0d61c3668251>
 – which includes shows fromA Forgotten History 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/10/black-and-british-a-forgotten-history-review-this-is-what-it-means-to-share-a-heritage>
 to Will Britain Ever Have a Black Prime Minister? – commissioning editor Jay 
Davidson explains that the project “celebrates the achievements and experiences 
of black people in the UK, and explores the rich culture and history of black 
Britain more comprehensively than ever before.”

It is the exultation to celebrate that may have disqualified NW. For like much 
of Smith’s work since her debut novel White Teeth, NW is complex and nuanced in 
its racial characterisation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8e3937a02c033553dce70720dbb3968867e0cf%2F0_0_4285_2572%2F4285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zadie%20Smith's%20NW%3A%20why%20isn't%20it%20black%20and%20British%20enough%20for%20the%20BBC%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zadie%20Smith%27s%20NW%3A%20why%20isn%27t%20it%20black%20and%20British%20enough%20for%20the%20BBC%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8e3937a02c033553dce70720dbb3968867e0cf%2F0_0_4285_2572%2F4285.jpg>
 A bold, fascinating psycho-drama … Natalie Blake (Nikki Amuka-Bird) and Leah 
Hanwell (Phoebe Fox) in NW. Photograph: Steffan Hill/BBC/Mammoth Screen 
The two leads are former London classmates, Keisha and Leah. By far the least 
sympathetic of the two, Keisha – who has deracinated her name to Natalie and 
cruises the web for sex with strangers – is black, while the more likable Leah 
(Phoebe Fox) is white. The most significant male black characters include one 
who is feckless, another who is homeless and a third who is a murderous gang 
member.

Smith’s Jamaican-Anglo background means she can create such people with 
relatively little risk of allegations of either racism or appropriation, and, 
being among a range of non-white voices in English fiction, also has the 
defence that her novel is just one representation of contemporary experience. 
However TV, and especially the BBC – described by a recent BBC director-general 
as “institutionally white” – is necessarily more sensitive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67304dab9301c33038e19f153e36b1918a212f4c%2F0_0_4285_2572%2F4285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zadie%20Smith's%20NW%3A%20why%20isn't%20it%20black%20and%20British%20enough%20for%20the%20BBC%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zadie%20Smith%27s%20NW%3A%20why%20isn%27t%20it%20black%20and%20British%20enough%20for%20the%20BBC%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67304dab9301c33038e19f153e36b1918a212f4c%2F0_0_4285_2572%2F4285.jpg>
 The most significant male black characters in NW include one who is feckless, 
one who is homeless and a third who is a murderous gang member. Photograph: 
Steffan Hill/BBC/Mammoth Screen 
With the cast-lists of TV dramas largely white, black characters are more 
likely to be taken as representative, creating a temptation towards positive 
role-models. Black actors in the UK complain that after years of only being 
offered roles as convicts, dealers, gangsters or hospital porters, they are now 
most likely to be cast as chief constables, prime ministers, heart surgeons or 
lawyers. The result is that black characterisation has gone from denigration to 
sanctification, omitting the complicatedly ambiguous characters who are most 
interesting to both actors and audiences.

So what’s bold about NW is that, although Natalie (née Keisha) is a wealthy 
and successful barrister, she spends her nights trawling London for random 
intercourse, and suffers a breakdown induced by self-hatred. This is a 
fascinating psycho-drama that Amuka-Bird plays with courage and subtlety.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F406267fa85a156e7e30b9253f82e032e1b106385%2F0_122_4285_2572%2F4285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zadie%20Smith's%20NW%3A%20why%20isn't%20it%20black%20and%20British%20enough%20for%20the%20BBC%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zadie%20Smith%27s%20NW%3A%20why%20isn%27t%20it%20black%20and%20British%20enough%20for%20the%20BBC%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F406267fa85a156e7e30b9253f82e032e1b106385%2F0_122_4285_2572%2F4285.jpg>
 A laddish chancer … Felix (O-T Fagbenle). Photograph: Steffan Hill/BBC/Mammoth 
Screen 
O-T Fagbenle (superb in the National Theatre’s recent revival of August 
Wilson’s Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/03/ma-raineys-black-bottom-review-august-wilson-national-theatre-electrifying-revival>
) equally relishes the complexity of Felix, a laddish chancer whose moment of 
redemption – an act of kindness to another Londoner – results in violence at 
the hands of a young black man who is allowed no exculpation. This drama never 
makes it easy for viewers seeking a moral traffic warden to lead them through.

Zadie Smith: dance lessons for writers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/29/zadie-smith-what-beyonce-taught-me>
Another disqualification may have been that NW is directed by a white man, 
Saul Dibb, and adapted by a white woman, Rachel Bennette. With the general 
paleness of British TV drama behind the camera, these decisions have 
understandably attracted comment both within the industry and online.

But objectors need to reflect that the recruitment was done by producer 
Preethi Mavahalli and approved by Zadie Smith, both of whom would be hard to 
accuse of unconscious racial bias or appointing in their own image. To end any 
queasiness, though, we would need to reach a stage of being confident that a 
BBC adaptation of Jane Austen or Hilary Mantel would be just as likely to be 
given to a non-white writing and directing team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a9d632fa9628cd237909f78431f60ae8c0a0abd%2F0_0_4285_2869%2F4285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zadie%20Smith's%20NW%3A%20why%20isn't%20it%20black%20and%20British%20enough%20for%20the%20BBC%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zadie%20Smith%27s%20NW%3A%20why%20isn%27t%20it%20black%20and%20British%20enough%20for%20the%20BBC%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fzadie-smiths-nw-why-isnt-it-black-and-british-enough-for-the-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a9d632fa9628cd237909f78431f60ae8c0a0abd%2F0_0_4285_2869%2F4285.jpg>
 Television is too nervous about racial matters … Zadie Smith with her mother 
Yvonne Bailey-Smith and the cast and crew of NW. Photograph: Steffan 
Hill/BBC/Mammoth Screen 
What Dibb and Bennette have done, though, is beyond complaint. NW was never 
going to be an easy adaptation. Whereas TV fiction favours stories that can be 
pitched in one line – Cornishman with shirt allergy returns from war to find 
his tin mine and love life in crisis – the storylines of NW remain elusive even 
after reading its 333 pages. Although the narrative features sensational events 
– the shagging barrister, a street-stabbing – these are described in an 
oblique, high modernist style that includes poems, drawings and a section 
divided into 185 short non-sequential numbered titled paragraphs.

Bennette has had to clarify and simplify the action, but cleverly retains some 
of Smith’s games with structure and her use of various linguistic registers 
including lists, newsprint and web-speak. Charged with filming in a city 
perhaps equalled only by New York for visual familiarity, Dibb makes London 
fresh through unexpected angles and found images of street art and building 
work.

Although the choice of a single 90-minute film rather than a multi-part series 
may have owed as much to accountancy as art, this shape allows the drama to be 
both lean and meaty. The single drama has been revived recently, partly because 
the length has proved attractive to iPlayer users – presumably because it 
offers a more time-economic alternative to the complete series drop – and NW 
demonstrates the potential power of the one-off.

NW is a grown-up piece of TV that provides a broader platform for the work of 
one of the most considerable and original novelists of our time. What it isn’t 
– apparently, oddly – is Black and British. If that is because it isn’t 
celebratory enough, it is still to be celebrated.

• NW is on BBC2 on Monday 14 November at 9pm.

 