
It happened three years ago, with an £85 M&S pink wide-lapel coat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/may/14/marks-and-spencer-coat-kilt> 
– and now it has happened again. After racking up thousands of views on Zara’s 
website and being spotted on the likes ofOlivia Palermo 
<https://fashionbombdaily.com/steal-olivia-palermos-london-fashion-week-zara-urban-collection-high-collar-sweater-and-side-band-trousers/>
, a pair of £59.99 black wide-legged trousers has become The Item – a 
much-desired high street designer knock-off that attracts punters in droves, 
sells out everywhere, and gives the brand responsible a firm grip on the 
zeitgeist.


It works like this: a piece of clothing appears in a high street shop. 
Resembling something on the catwalk or a trend in the ether, it is usually 
placed at the entrance by the security gates. Eminently more wearable (and 
cheaper) than its designer counterpart, and having had a decent run in glossy 
magazines, it gets snapped up. People see it on their friends, and compelled by 
a desire to own something they don’t need, want it, compounded by the fact that 
it is a) now out of stock and b) worn by fashion-cognisant types who can sniff 
out a cult piece a mile off. And lo, The Item is born.

The Zara trousers, with two thick red stripes down the side, have the tics – 
stripe width, shape – ofChloe’s SS16 track pants 
<http://www.wonderlandmagazine.com/2015/10/pfw-chloe-ss16/>, without wading 
into plagiaristic waters. They racked up 1,000 views a week online, and despite 
arriving in store almost two months ago, according to the eCommerce siteLyst 
<https://www.lyst.co.uk/>, they are currently the second most-viewed product on 
the site.

It helps, of course, that they are flattering, that an “American socialite” 
like Palermo who can afford Chloe has bought them, and that Zara is often 
designed with taller, slimmer people in mind so that their wearers act as 
ersatz models. And that, thanks to the fact the athleisure market 
(sporty-looking clothes that would be wholly disastrous worn on the track) has 
exploded, or even peaked – there are currently more than eight variations of 
this sort of pseudo-trackpant atZara <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/zara> 
alone – the market is flooded; there is too much choice. The same is likely to 
happen with a Mango skirt – patent with a looped belt – which has had a 122% 
increase in page views in the last two weeks and is now mostly sold out.

I think people can feel disenfranchised from high-end fashion and thus don't 
feel any guilt about buying 'fakes'
Katherine Ormerod 
Any feeling that the derivative nature of The Item should limit its success 
misreads the consumer mood. “I do think that people can feel disenfranchised 
from high-end fashion and thus don’t feel any guilt about buying ‘fakes’,” 
explains Katherine Ormerod, editorial director at Lyst. “The high street has 
become increasingly brazen with its rip-offs, fuelled no doubt by the countless 
loopholes that allow brands peddling near-identical fakes to evade prosecution. 
For a consumer it is a quandary – if you would never be able to afford the JW 
Anderson buckle skirt, why wouldn’t you opt for Mango’s imitation? Especially 
when it has been reinvented in patent – the season’s hottest fabric?”

While these items aren’t exactly fakes (moreover there is a lag – the M&S coat 
came a year after the catwalk versions, and the Zara trousers are last season’s 
Chloe) the inspiration is palpable. And, in a new twist, Zara keeps restocking 
the trousers – so expect to see them even more.

People also look to certain brands, Zara included, for direction. Zara, 
apparently, plants spies on the front row of fashion shows, and can efficiently 
reproduce an on-trend item in a few weeks. But equally powerful has been the 
recent wave of designer-high street collaborations, which allows labels to 
control things. November sees the arrival of aKenzo x H&M collaboration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/oct/20/kenzo-x-hm-what-to-buy-from-the-new-collaboration-in-pictures>
 and one item – a pink shearling and leather jacket – looks set to be another 
Item.

The M&S pink coat was not the first illustration of the high street cult, but 
was one of the most effective examples of what can be done with excessive PR 
hammering, advertising, celebrity endorsements (Daisy Lowe, nothing short of 
this generation’s everywoman,wore hers a lot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/oct/14/pink-coat-fashion-buy-ask-hadley>
) and, to an extent, mirroring of the catwalk. The 2012 shows were heavy with 
pink coats, from Osman to Jil Sander, and while this coat was not a direct 
rip-off, it bore the correct hue. This coat became the perfect representation 
of our confused love of fashion, of wanting to be on trend without having the 
capital, and wanting to buy into a trend – a whimsical, impractical one at that 
– for under £100. And when you consider what counts as cult on the catwalk –
Vetements’s DHL T-shirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/19/dhl-t-shirt-vetements-fashion-paris-catwalk>
 (ironic) or theHermès Birkin bag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/15/hermes-birkin-handbag-best-investment-returns>
 (huge waiting list, four-figure price-tag) – these are accessible.


Of course, the moment something is branded as cult it automatically renders it 
uncool, at least among certain legions. “We all know they [the trousers] are 
Zara now – there’s something so precise about the cut and finish that could 
entirely pass for designer,” explains Hannah Almassi, editorial director atWho 
What Wear UK <http://www.whowhatwear.co.uk/>, who doesn’t own a pair, but does 
get why the world does. “You can’t place these trousers as high street or high 
fashion, the side stripe and wide-leg silhouette are inherently flattering, and 
tap into athleisure without making you feel like a slave to the trend.”

Still, no amount of advertising or celebrity endorsement can control a cult: 
it just happens and, it would seem, arbitrarily. “Whenever I shop in Zara I 
steer entirely clear of the must-have hot pieces,” explains Ormerod. “You can 
see them a mile away … I’ve been to too many dinners wearing the same outfit as 
someone sitting next to me.”

For every customer who buys into a cult item, there’s a customer who doesn’t 
want to be part of a cult. The strange thing is: for as long as we want what we 
can’t have, we’ll still want The Item – even if, in fact, everyone else has it, 
too.
 