
Geographical context can have a profound affect on your appreciation of a TV 
show. Two episodes intoZoo 
<http://tenplay.com.au/channel-ten/zoo/season-1/episode-2> – the story of a 
rebellious bestial kingdom based on a James Patterson book and dubbed “animal 
apocalypse” – and I realise I’m cheering for the non-human cast.

I’m sure in Sweden, home of free universities, marriage equality and low 
national debt, the show would be regarded as a straight-up horror series. 
Viewed in Australia, where windfarms are considered an energy sourcetoo mature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/12/coalition-bans-clean-energy-finance-corporation-wind-power-investment>
 to invest in (unlike coal, which still has that young ’n’ funky “fossil” 
vibe), an animal takeover seems like a positive improvement.

That this country would be better run under a bestial assembly of stray dogs 
and grumpy farm animals is probably all Zoo has going for it (though let’s 
pause to remember that if a variety of bizarre animals did get into government,
Mr Dog on the Moon <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/first-dog-on-the-moon> 
would be out of a job). Unless viewed through this prism though, the show 
itself is a bit naff.

Zoo: animals attack in CBS's undemanding new sci-fi show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/30/cbs-zoo-animals-attack-summer-tv>
Perhaps Ten shouldn’t have advertised it as “TV’s mystery event of the year” 
for starters. A plot that centres around the idea of animals turning on people 
isn’t really mysterious, hence Jaws, Jurassic Park, Planet of the Apes, King 
Kong and Furry Vengeance. Them hating our guts is about as old as us wanting to 
put them into sandwiches. The only way this could have been a mystery was if a 
rhino sidled up to a poacher, patted him on the back and said: “Keep up the 
good work. We don’t like ourselves much anyway.”

Instead, it’s all rather predictably executed, with the vanguard of the 
violent fauna comprising dogs and big cats. The intro sequence asks us to image 
what would happen if animals “decided to fight back” but most species seem to 
be lacking commitment to this all-out war. No one’s been harassed by a goose, 
head-butted by a dolphin, nor has anyone in the series come home drunk to find 
that a clew of worms have somehow broken into their living room and assembled 
to spell “sod off” on the carpet.

What little intrigue there is so far seems to be hampered by the clunky 
delivery. The main character, Jackson Oz, keeps watching old video lectures of 
his supposedly crackpot father, in which there are hidden clues. Except they 
aren’t hidden. His father keeps mentioning a “defiant pupil” which Jackson 
mistakes to mean a student, when it actually means an animal’s eye dilating in 
a weird way.

Did daddy need to be so tediously enigmatic? Why not say: “Lions’ eyes go a 
bit funny when they want to overthrow humanity and install a feline 
dictatorship”? He’s ambiguous purely for plot purposes.

There’s other stuff that jars, most specifically the moment in the second 
episode where, thanks to suggestive editing, lions are suddenly able to operate 
smartphones. A terrifying prospect if they can: I don’t want to go on to 
Instagram and see a mauled zebra carcass with a nostalgic filter over it 
hashtagged #lionlunch). Fortunately here, they just made a call to attract the 
attention of Jackson so he could rescue a friend from a tree.

On a side note, I think there needs to be a rule that, like the Wilhelm scream 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cdbYsoEasio>, you can only use the MGM lion 
roar <http://youtu.be/OVCxJ1aT24A>once per episode, unlike in Zoo where, if you 
played the MGM lion roar drinking game, you’d be in an alcoholic coma within 
the first few minutes. Is that the only lion anyone’s ever successfully 
recorded?

So far, Zoo isn’t so much the mystery event of the year as a subpar episode of 
The X-Files crossed with Doctor Dolittle. That aside, it is rather fun watching 
humanity get its comeuppance, and I’ll continue to watch, purely so I can cheer 
for an army of puppies to wreak their terrifyingly cute vengeance on humankind. 
Makes me wonder what my puppy could have against me:I clean up after him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jun/01/the-week-in-australian-tv-the-good-the-bad-and-your-future-binge-sense-8>
, feed him, let him live rent free. Actually, come to think of it, he’s taken 
over already.
 