
The dark continent. The hopeless continent. A scar on the conscience of the 
world. The cradle of humankind. African renaissance,Africa rising. Amazing 
<http://www.economist.com/node/21541015> Africa. I am an African. Scramble 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qpsi2vS07Bk]> for Africa. Out of Africa. Ex 
Africa semper aliquid novi.

There have been countless attempts to define the world's second biggest and 
second most populous continent,often and notoriously from outside. If 
<http://www.granta.com/Archive/92/How-to-Write-about-Africa/Page-1> measuring a 
nation's essence is like pinning a jelly to a wall, then asserting an entire 
continent's character is folly. Africa's 54 countries – even this number 
depends on your point of view – are home to around a billion peoplemanifesting 
thousands of languages and myriad ethnicities 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNoPg42Uh7g&feature=youtu.be>.

This most generalised and pigeonholed of all continents cries out for nuance, 
shade and complexity. South Africa is reputedly the beacon of hope, embarked on 
a judicial inquiry intoits deadliest police massacre since the end of racial 
apartheid 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/sep/07/marikana-mine-shootings-revive-soweto>
.

Somalia is arguably the world's most failed state, but on Monday its troops 
entered the last stronghold of militant Islamists to offer the best chance of 
peace for 20 years.

Elsewhere, Kenya, hub of economic potential, internet entrepreneurs and 
Olympic champions, reeled from a grenade attack on a Sunday school; 
Mozambique's ruling party celebrated half a century of socialism with a lavish 
party worthy of Jay Gatsby; and Zimbabwe's prime minister and would-be 
democratic saviourapologised for leaving a trail of broken hearts in his search 
for a wife 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/africa/2012/09/30/tsvangirai-apologises-over-love-triangle]>
.

It is indeed a long way from Cape Town to Cairo. In-between are hundreds of 
millions of people trying to earn a living, raise families and pursue 
happiness. More newsworthy are the dictators and democrats, dirty wars and 
peaceful elections, Arab springs and sub-Saharan non-springs, abundant mineral 
wealth and ossified poverty, rocket scientists and subsistence farmers, 
thriving cultural industries and dying manufacturers.

The outside world has noticed and those externally imposed narratives of Africa
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> are shifting. Once they were 
dominated by conflict, despotism, disease, televised famine and hapless 
victimhood.

Now, the talk is of African lions, six of the world's 10 fastest-growing 
economies,a booming middle class 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/dec/25/africas-middle-class-hope-continent>
, a slew of natural resource discoveries, the next frontier for investors – not 
aid donors.A new Africa. <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/series/new-africa>

Perhaps the pendulum is in danger of swinging from one extreme to another, 
from pathological pessimism to a Pollyannaism no less dogmatic. Businesses, the 
media and politicians arguably conspire in an "optimism industry" that 
patronises through the soft bigotry of low expectations. It is now a common 
trope to quote the Economist's 2000 cover "The hopeless continent" then compare 
it to the same magazine's "Africa rising" from 2011.

The reality is chequered, awkward, defiant of two- or three-word headlines 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/africa-next-with-investment-outpacing-aid-is-this-a-new-golden-age-for-the-poorest-continent/article4560978/?page=all>
.

Africa accounts for about 2% of world GDP. The revolutions in Tunisia, Egypt 
and Libya may yet prove giant leaps for democracy,but big blows to some of 
Africa's strongest economies <http://www.economist.com/node/21546018>.

This year, Senegal's elections produced a smooth transition of power, but 
neighbouring Mali suffered a coup and loss of ground to Islamist militancy. 
Nigeria powers on with brilliant entrepreneurs co-existing with desperate 
infrastructure and violent extremists seeking to impose sharia law.

To be born female or gay in most African countries is still to be faced with a 
lifetime of cultural and material disadvantage. Human rights are often defined 
by so-called traditionalists, and sometimes governments, as a western 
invention, a colonisation of the mind.

Rapists continue to inflict horror on an unimaginable scale.

Homophobia is often enshrined in religious conviction and colonial-era laws.

Even devout sceptics, however, would be hard pushed to deny the (often 
Chinese) concrete reality of new buildings and bridges, roads and railways 
transforming the face of the continent. Mobile phones make it possible for 
users to communicate with, and send money to, relatives in faraway villages 
with an ease that was once unthinkable. Combined with the internet, they also 
make it harder for tyrannies to bury their crimes.

The number of major African conflicts is down from 12 in the mid-1990s to four 
today. Secondary school enrolment rose by 48% from 2000 to 2008. Deaths from 
malaria and Aids are in decline. In eight of the past 10 years, sub-Saharan 
Africa's economies have outpaced east Asia's. Africa has its super-rich elite, 
its middle-class shopping malls, its age of leisure and obsession with the 
English Premier League.

But too often this growth is jobless, meaning that Africa's fast-growing young 
population has the makings of a demographic timebomb. Nor does economic success 
appear to be any guarantor of democracy or human rights. Sub-Saharan Africa's 
third biggest economy, oil-rich Angola,has been ruled by the same president for 
33 years 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/aug/30/angola-elections-china-oil-growing-inequality>
.

Rwanda, one person's post-genocide miracle of stable efficiency, is another's 
nightmare of internal repression.

One thing is certain. There is now more rambunctious, sharp-elbowed debate 
than there has ever been thanks to phones, email, Facebook and Twitter. The 
Guardian's new Africa Network, launched today, will join the debate – around 
contentious issues such as quality of leadership, the legacy of colonialism, 
identity politics that pitch women's and homosexuals' rights against a form of 
cultural fundamentalism. What is "Africa" anyway and should it look east, or 
west, or within?

The network will showcase strong, sometimes conflicting opinions from inside 
and outside the continent in collaboration with a dozen independent sites. Our 
partners include solo bloggers such asRosebell Kagumire 
<http://rosebellkagumire.com> in Uganda; Tolu Ogunlesi 
<http://toluogunlesi.wordpress.com> in Nigeria; and Minna Salami's Ms 
Afropolitan <http://www.msafropolitan.com/>. There are also collectives such as 
theDaily Maverick <http://dailymaverick.co.za/> in South Africa; the women of 
HerZimbabwe <http://herzimbabwe.co.zw/>; and the provocative Africa is a Country
 <http://africasacountry.com>. Some are from established institutions such as 
the Royal Africa Society'sAfrican Arguments <http://africanarguments.org> or 
media groups such as the Mail & Guardian'sThoughtLeader 
<http://thoughtleader.co.za> and the online magazine Think Africa Press 
<http://thinkafricapress.com>. There's also the development blog A View from 
the Cave <http://aviewfromthecave.com>, voices from the diaspora in Africa on 
the Blog <http://www.africaontheblog.com/>; and the resource site Africa Portal 
<http://africaportal.org>. Add to this mix the Guardian's own correspondents 
and exclusive pieces from regional experts, and we hope you will be informed, 
engaged, provoked, annoyed and moved.
 