
The overspill bag may finally be about to hit the dust. If fashion goes the 
way experts predict, you will no longer need something to carry that gym kit 
around with you. Because, get this, you’ll be wearing it all day.

Athleisure is the buzzword of the fashion industry – a hybrid of sportswear 
and the rest of your wardrobe, it translates to clothes that look a bit sporty 
but don’t need to be accessorised with a yoga mat and a smoothie. This sector 
will grow by around 24% in the next five years, suggests Jessica Fioriti of 
retail analyst Verdict: “It used to be that only sportswear brands like Nike 
and Adidas were popular. We’ve seen a change recently where consumers are 
willing to buy fashion brands doing sportswear.”

Alexander Wang’s collection for H&M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/oct/17/alexander-wang-high-street-sport-h-and-m>
, launched in November, is the kind of thing. Sure, leather joggers and 
six-inch-heeled boots might raise eyebrows on the cross-trainer but, out of a 
collection of more than 100 pieces, it was striking how much was gym-ready: 
sports bras, hoodies, vests, shorts and leggings. There was even a Wang boxing 
bag. “I live in gym clothes,” Wang told the New York Times. “When you go out on 
the street, it’s the uniform now.”

He’s not the only one to think so. With Mary Katrantzou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/feb/12/prints-fashion-designer-mary-katrantzou>
’s collection for Adidas, Richard Nicoll working with Sweaty Betty, posh 
gymwear brands such as Lucas Hugh and an upcoming collaboration between Nike 
and Japanese catwalk brand Sacai, athleisure is suddenly looking less a made-up 
word and more a real thing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fathleisure-beyonce-topshop-style-trend-gym-ready-gear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418926064935%2F3b8d66fa-efcf-4ab4-a141-421b69b24368-1020x990.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Athleisure%3A%20Beyonc%C3%A9%20%2B%20Topshop%20%3D%20surefire%20style%20trend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fathleisure-beyonce-topshop-style-trend-gym-ready-gear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Athleisure%3A%20Beyonc%C3%A9%20%2B%20Topshop%20%3D%20surefire%20style%20trend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fathleisure-beyonce-topshop-style-trend-gym-ready-gear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418926064935%2F3b8d66fa-efcf-4ab4-a141-421b69b24368-1020x990.jpeg>
 Mary Katrantzou’s collection for Adidas. Photograph: Publicity image 
There’s definitely a case for clothes that respond to lives, that take in a 
morning gym session, a day at work and night out. They also fit well into a 
wardrobe in which sportswear has become a staple. “If in the 50s we all had 
pillbox hats and gloves, now we have trainers and sweatshirts,” says Natalie 
Kingham, buying director atmatchesfashion.com 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/womens>.

Kingham argues that the emergence of something like athleisure has been a long 
time coming. “I have friends who go from the school run to the gym, and that 
lifestyle hasn’t been serviced,” she says. Net-a-porter launchedNet-a-Sporter 
<https://www.net-a-porter.com/gb/en/d/Shop/Sport> earlier this year to fill 
that gap, and boasts an “après” area of the site with clothes that, says senior 
buyer (and qualified yoga instructor) Candice Fragis, cater to “women who want 
to be able to wear their fitness clothes after Pilates to lunch with a friend”.

If that’s for the yummy-mummy crowd, Richard Nicoll worked with Sweaty Betty – 
hardly a brand on most London fashion week designers’ radars – to design 
something that fits in with the rest of us. “I would love to be able to run to 
work, do my day and run home without necessarily looking as though I have been 
to Niketown,” he says. “I think performance clothing will become increasingly 
stylish and less ‘sporty’-looking.”

Nicoll might well be right. The biggest boost for athleisure came in October. 
Topshop announced that it would be working ona joint venture with Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/oct/27/beyonce-topshop-ath-leisurewear-philip-green>
 to create a “global athletic streetwear brand” in autumn 2015. “We’ve been 
looking at that sector for a while,” Topshop owner Sir Philip Green told WWD. 
“It’s something we need to be in. Based on what she [Beyoncé] does, how she 
works out, the conversation got into that category.”

Granted, not all of us can include a regime of dancing in high heels and 
working out five times a week in our schedule. But, increasingly, we want to 
look as if we can. Athleisure clothes, ultimately, fulfil that role. “Even if 
we aren’t going to the gym, we’re wearing pieces that look like we have,” says 
Kingham. “That lifestyle has aspirational status now.” Athleisure is the 
perfect solution, really – clothes that cater to a gym bunny’s lifestyle, 
whether you actually live it or not. Couch potatoes head-to-toe in Lycra could 
well become a familiar sight in 2015.
 