
Sales at British fashion brand Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> have improved after a 
return to growth in China and strong demand in Europe, but it warned that the 
outlook for the luxury sector remained uncertain.

Burberry, whose Christmas advertising campaign featured a star-studded cast 
including Romeo Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/03/burberry-celebrates-billy-elliot-christmas-campaign>
, son of footballer David, in its signature trenchcoats and scarves, said 
like-for-like sales were flat in the last three months of 2015. This was an 
improvement on the 4% decline seen in the previous quarter, but missed the 
group’s own targets. Retail sales revenues edged up 1% to £603m.

The company highlighted a slump in Hong Kong and Macau, which dragged down 
sales across theAsia Pacific <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific> 
region overall, even though mainland China and South Korea returned to growth. 
Sales in Hong Kong fell again, by more than 20%, while Japan remained strong. 
Burberry stressed that all its stores in Hong Kong remained profitable.

Europe presented a brighter picture where sales rose, with Italy, Germany and 
Spain particularly strong. In France, which had been strong in previous 
quarters, sales dropped following the Paris terrorist attacks in November. The 
Americas improved to record marginally positive growth. Digital sales 
outperformed in all regions.

The company’s chief financial officer, Carol Fairweather, declined to say 
whether China had turned the corner, although she said “footfall is up in 
China, all good in China in the quarter just reported” before the Chinese new 
year.

Burberry sales hit by Chinese slowdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/15/chinese-slowdown-hits-burberry-sales>
Small leather accessories such as beauty bags, small handbags, wallets and 
passport holders sold well, along with monogrammed scarves, ponchos and 
dresses, while traditional coats were less in demand owing to mild weather in 
the UK, Europe and the Americas. Burberry is broadening its dress ranges and 
has been rushing more lightweight cashmere trenchcoats into stores after they 
sold out quickly, along with new quilts, rucksacks and Banner bags.

Shares in Burberry rose 1% to £11.24 after the figures eased concerns about 
the luxury sector slowdown, which has been driven by a decline in Chinese 
spending. There has been ashift in Chinese shopping habits away from Hong Kong 
and the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/15/chinese-slowdown-hits-burberry-sales>
 towards Japan and mainland Europe.

Burberry’s chief executive, Christopher Bailey, who is also the brand’s 
creative chief, warned: “The outlook for demand in luxury is uncertain and 
underlying cost pressures persist for the sector.”

Burberry has responded to the tough climate for luxury goods by cutting £25m 
of annual costs, through reducing travel expenses and imposing a hiring freeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/burberry-sales-rise-defies-expectations>
 outside its stores. In Hong Kong, it has reduced the size of its flagship 
store and has negotiated new deals with landlords to save rent.
 