
By the late 1980s I had played a series of heroines at the RSC – witty women 
on the brink of marriage, such asPortia 
<http://www.rscshakespeare.co.uk/merchantofVenice.html>, Beatrice 
<http://www.rscshakespeare.co.uk/MuchAdo.html> and Katherine in The Taming of 
the Shrew <http://www.rscshakespeare.co.uk/tamingOfTheShrew.html>. I associated 
acting with entertainment, with being able to turn a line on a sixpence and 
make people laugh. So when I was asked to do Electra I felt quite ambivalent. 
But I thought it would be a change. I'd just done Mary Stuart in Greenwich and 
had begun to see the power of tragedy.

Electra was very hard to rehearse. My brother had recently died in a car crash 
and this was the first production where I had experienced, to an extent, some 
of the high emotions described in the play. I felt more exposed than I had in 
comedy. If you're untrue in a Greek tragedy, it just doesn't deliver at all. 
You have to wait until it strikes a chord deep in the performers' hearts.

When the production opened at the Barbican the effect on the audience was 
extraordinary. People queued overnight for tickets. I'd never been part of a 
production like that. It seemed to strike at the heart of something in society 
and a need for something to do with grief or loss.

Electra played for a month at the Barbican and was then remounted on a tour. 
We took it to Derry in 1992. There had been deaths after a bomb went off in a 
betting shop that year. The whole Oresteia deals with the cycle of revenge, 
with families intent on avenging a killing. We performed as part of the Derry 
festival in a sports centre, with little boys kicking ball against the wall 
outside. At the end, the audience stood in silence. They did not clap. It was 
the most astonishing experience. I said to the audience that if they'd like to 
remain, we'd clean ourselves up and return to talk to them.

Afterwards, a woman came up to me crossly and said, "This is a terrible play. 
What do you know of death?" I said, "Maybe not enough but my brother was 
killed." And a man stepped forward and said, "I was with your father when your 
brother was killed." And it turned out that this man had been with my father 
when he was given this terrible piece of information. And suddenly there was 
this strange collision of my personal life, the play and political tragedy.

Peter Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/aug/09/theatre> said that 
tragedy was more necessary than comedy in a time of affluence. It puts you in 
touch with what needs to be faced – it cleans you, helps you. Electra made me 
realise that a play – with the right cast, in the right moment, in the right 
place – can be like sculpture and painting and literature all at once. As we 
flew out of Derry a few days later I wept for all sorts of reasons. I'd had a 
visionary time. People come to the theatre in the hope that it will have 
something to do with them – and when it touches them, it is both painful and 
brilliant.

• Fiona Shaw stars in Colm Tóibín's The Testament of Mary at the Barbican from 
1 May <https://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=15573>

More from Monologue

• Bernadette Peters: 'Singing Sondheim got to be like meditating' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/bernadette-peters-sunday-in-the-park-with-george-sondheim>

• Peter Egan: 'John Osborne was a like a wounded animal' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/25/peter-egan-john-osborne-deja-vu-play-look-back-in-anger>

• David Ryall: 'Laurence Olivier dragged me into the theatre – literally' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/19/david-ryall-laurence-olivier-theatre>

• Patricia Hodge: 'I always wanted to perform but I was terribly nervous' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/12/patricia-hodge-bush-theatre-rumpole-john-mortimer>
 