
Google will make its long-awaited debut in the mobile phone handset market 
tomorrow when it launches in New York, with its first network partner T-Mobile, 
the first device that runs itsAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> operating system.

Called the G1, the new phone is made by Taiwan's HTC and presents a direct 
challenge to Apple's iPhone and the dominance of the world's largest mobile 
phone maker, Nokia.

The new handset - which is likely to be characterised as the first G-phone - 
has a touchscreen like the iPhone but includes a slide-out Qwerty keypad. The 
phone has previously been referred to as the HTC Dream and the "Kila", the 
project name given by T-Mobile and a reference to the network's hope that it 
will prove an effective weapon against the iPhone.

The phone is expected to go on sale in the US next month with hopes that it 
will be available in the UK by Christmas - depending on demand in the North 
American market. It is expected to cost about $199 (Â£108), which would put it 
on a par with the basic 8GB version of the iPhone sold by AT&T.

The arrival of the G1 is the latest salvo in a fight to control the software 
that will power the next generation of mobile phones, which can access the 
internet. More devices from other manufacturers will follow next year.

When Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> announced its 
plans for Android last year they came alongside the unveiling of the Open 
Handset Alliance, a consortium of mobile phone makers and networks whose stated 
purpose is to "accelerate innovation in mobile and offer consumers a richer, 
less expensive, and better mobile experience".

As part of this plan, they made Android a so-called "open platform", which 
means no one is charged to use it either in a device or as a basis for writing 
applications. As a result, anyone can write programmes that will run on an 
Android phone - from maps and calendars to word-processing software and games.

A similar developer community has already sprung up around the iPhone, whose 
software is controlled by Apple although anyone can write applications that 
will run on it. Users of the phone and the iPod Touch have downloaded the 3,000 
applications available from the iTunes store more than 100m times since it 
opened on July 8 this year.

But iPhone applications are only available through the iTunes store, meaning 
that Apple controls what is available to users. Applications for the G1 can be 
downloaded from anywhere, although there is talk that Google, HTC and T-Mobile 
will set up some sort of applications repository .

Nokia hit back at both Android and the iPhone in June by buying out the 
British mobile phone software company Symbian and announcing it would make its 
operating system - which powers about 60% of the global "smartphone" market - 
free.

The hope for Google is that ultimately Android will help more mobile customers 
get online through their mobile phone.

For many people in the developing world, the only way they are likely to get 
on the web, for the foreseeable future, is through a mobile device.

A quarter of a century on from the arrival of the personal computer there are 
roughly 1bn in use worldwide but that many mobile phones are sold every year. 
And growth in mobile usage is increasingly in the developing world, where 
fixed-line infrastructure is often patchy at best.

Being the first to market will be a source of pride for HTC, the Taiwanese 
company known mainly as a maker of handsets that run on Microsoft's Windows 
Mobile operating system.

LG and Samsung will unveil their first Google-powered mobile phones next year.
 