
JK Rowling <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling> has spoken of the 
"liberating experience" of adopting a nom de plume after it was revealed that 
the Harry Potter creator was behind a critically acclaimed crime novel 
published under the name Robert Galbraith.

The Cuckoo's Calling, billed as the debut novel of Galbraith 
<http://www.littlebrown.co.uk/books/detail.page?isbn=9781408703991>, a 
pseudonym for a man with a background in the army and the civilian security 
industry, won praise from crime writers and critics who hailed the author as a 
new force in the genre.

Writing in the Guardian last week, Val McDermid, the acknowledged queen of the 
pyschological thriller,described the book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/11/val-mcdermid-addicted-crime-fiction>
 as embracing "the best of traditional mystery fiction, private-eye pace and 
the kind of writing that reminds me why I love this genre".

However, it appears that for some it was a bit too accomplished for a debut 
novel, which led the Sunday Times to investigate andreveal the writer's true 
identity 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/Arts/article1287513.ece> as 
Britain's best-selling author of all time 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/celebritymoney/article-2200999/Jamie-Oliver-JK-Rowling-50-biggest-selling-authors-time.html>
.

Rowling expressed regret that she had been found out. "I had hoped to keep 
this secret a little longer because being Robert Galbraith has been such a 
liberating experience," she said. "It has been wonderful to publish without 
hype or expectation, and pure pleasure to get feedback under a different name."

The book, about a war veteran turned private investigator called Cormoran 
Strike, and described by the publisher as based on Galbraith's "own experiences 
and those of his military colleagues", has sold 1,500 copies in hardback since 
it was released in April.

Also showering praise on the book was another crime writer, Mark Billingham, 
who described Strike as "one of the most compelling detectives I've come across 
in years".

It had long been suspected 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/arts/books/story/2007/08/19/rowling-crime-novel.html> 
that Rowling was working on a crime novel. When it was announced that the 
editor of her first book for adults would be David Shelley, who counts McDermid 
and Billingham among his authors and comes from a background steeped in crime 
and thriller writing, the Guardian books writer Alison Flood was so sure it 
would be a crime novel thatshe wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/feb/24/jk-rowling-crime-fiction-clues>
: "Bet you a Harry Potter proof that I'm right."

In the event Rowling's first published book for adults was The Casual Vacancy, 
based on a parish council dispute in the parochial town of Pagford, which was 
released to much hype in October last year. It soared to the top of the fiction 
chartsbut attracted mixed reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/27/jk-rowling-the-casual-vacancy-review-roundup>
.

A clue to why Rowling decided to adopt a pseudonym for The Cuckoo's Calling 
might be gleaned from the reception to her first post-Potter novel. Jonathan 
Ruppin of Foyles said at the time: "No doubt there will be reviewers who have 
already decided to pour vitriol upon [The Casual Vacancy] no matter its merits."

Rowling's sales from the Harry Potter series amount to more than £237m.

The second Cormoran Strike book is to be published next year, although this 
time it can expect a great deal more fanfare.

What the critics said about The Cuckoo's Calling

Every time I put this book down, I looked forward to reading more. Galbraith 
writes at a gentle pace, the pages rich with description and with characters 
that leap out of them. I loved it. He is a major new talent –Peter James, crime 
writer.

Just once in a while a private detective emerges who captures the public 
imagination in a flash. And here is one who might well do that … There is no 
sign that this is Galbraith's first novel, only that he has a delightful touch 
for evoking London and capturing a new hero. An auspicious debut –Geoffery 
Wansell, Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-2318313/CRIME.html>.

In a rare feat, Galbraith combines a complex and compelling sleuth and an 
equally well-formed and unlikely assistant with a baffling crime in his stellar 
debut … Readers will hope to see a lot more of this memorable sleuthing team –
Publishers Weekly <http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-0-316-20684-6>.

Laden with plenty of twists and distractions, this debut ensures that readers 
will be puzzled and totally engrossed for quite a spell –Teresa Jacobsen, 
Library Journal's mystery debut of the month 
<http://reviews.libraryjournal.com/2013/04/books/genre-fiction/mystery/mystery-debut-of-the-month-april-1-2013/>
.

A scintillating debut novel … Galbraith delivers sparkling dialogue and a 
convincing portrayal of the emptiness of wealth and glamour –Marcel Berlins, 
the Times Saturday Review 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/arts/books/fiction/article3760575.ece>.

This debut is instantly absorbing, featuring a detective facing crumbling 
circumstances with resolve instead of cliched self-destruction and a lovable 
sidekick with contagious enthusiasm for detection … Kate Atkinson's fans will 
appreciate his reliance on deduction and observation along with Galbraith's 
skilled storytelling –Booklist.

The plot could have come from an Agatha Christie novel and yet The Cuckoo's 
Calling is absolutely of today, colourfully written and great fun –Daphne 
Wright, Bookoxygen.com <http://bookoxygen.com/?p=4099>.
 