
The first major research study into fashion for mature British women has 
foundthat just 20% feel the high street caters for them well – despite 90% of 
British retailers seeing most growth from the 50-plus sector.


In spite of the surfeit of face creams and anti-ageing treatments on offer, 
just 10% of mature women said they worried about getting wrinkles, while almost 
eight out of 10 (77%) mature women said they would never have any form of 
cosmetic surgery.

Though females aged 50 and over are one of the most powerful consumer groups 
in the UK, spending more than £2.5bn per season on fashion, according to Kantar 
Worldpanel, 61% felt their age group is forgotten by the high street. Almost 
three out of five women do not feel their age group is well represented on 
television (57%) or magazines (58%), and 76% do not think they are well 
represented in advertising – with these figures increasing with age, according 
to a YouGov poll of 2,000 women for the retailer JD Williams.

The poll also revealed nine out of 10 British women aged 50 and over (91%) are 
scared of the health problems associated with growing older, particularly 
losing independence and having to rely on others (69%), and memory loss (64%). 
However, women’s body confidence is higher in their 50s than in their 30s and 
40s, with 52% of women feeling most confident aged 45+.

Angela Spindler, chief executive officer of the N Brown Group – parent company 
of JD Williams, said: “There are more women in the 50+ bracket than ever before 
and it’s abundantly clear that they have felt let down by the fashion industry. 
We’ve made it our mission to address this. Shopping for clothes should be easy 
and enjoyable, whether you’re 16 or 60. Recent years have seen this population 
of women emerge as the most powerful consumer group and the fastest-growing 
fashion sector. No longer does 50 signal the start of the slow decline into old 
age, it now marks the midpoint of a woman’s life.”

She said the report was “a wakeup call to the fashion, retail and media 
industries to give these women what they want. It’s our job to empower; after 
all, ignoring them should be done with peril.”

Despite feeling secure about the way they want to dress (only 19% said that 
they struggle to find their style identity), women aged over 50 reported 
feeling underserved by retailers. Sixty-six per cent of mature women felt they 
would like to see more choice suited to their age group, and just 16% felt 
loyal to one store.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnew-research-claims-the-high-street-makes-women-over-50-feel-ignored%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416481027047%2F2095d4f9-0f89-4d02-bce7-a42e8ec98a36-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20research%20claims%20the%20high%20street%20makes%20women%20over%2050%20feel%20ignored&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnew-research-claims-the-high-street-makes-women-over-50-feel-ignored%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20research%20claims%20the%20high%20street%20makes%20women%20over%2050%20feel%20ignored&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnew-research-claims-the-high-street-makes-women-over-50-feel-ignored%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416481027047%2F2095d4f9-0f89-4d02-bce7-a42e8ec98a36-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Twiggy appearing in an advert for Marks & Spencer Photograph: Marks and Spencer
Marks & Spencer was the first retailer on the UK high street to launch spanx 
armwear to cover so-called bingo wings or flabby upper arms and enable older 
women to wear sleeveless dresses with confidence. Sometimes criticised by 
female shoppers for offering dowdy clothes, it has been revamping its fashion 
offering and is currently showcasing itsnew womenswear collection for 
spring/summer 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/nov/19/the-best-of-the-new-ms-collection-in-pictures>
.

A spokeswoman for M&S said: “We speak to over 55,000 customers a month and our 
older customers tell us they are looking for exactly the same things as the 
rest of our customers – stylish, quality clothes, with flattering fits. Our 
ranges are developed to appeal to a broad range of customers. For example, our 
Twiggy for M&S Collection offers wearable, flattering fashion and our Classics 
range captures a timeless elegance with a nod to seasonal trends, with pieces 
that are stylish, smart and comfortable.”

 * The survey for JD Williams was carried out online in October 2014, 
involving more than 2,000 women aged 50+. This ran alongside a smaller 
comparative survey involving 540 women aged 18 to 49.
 