
Pollution, economic woes, political uncertainty and a crisis of confidence 
have cast a smoggy grey cloud over Paris, like the rest ofFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, of late. But it was not always this 
way.

An exhibition that opened this week has served as a timely and contrasting 
reminder to pessimistic Parisians of the former glory of their capital. The 
event, Paris 1900, is being staged at thePetit Palais 
<http://www.petitpalais.paris.fr>, a magnificent, often overlooked, palace on 
the right bank of the Seine, and shows the City of Light at its brightest 
during the period known asLa Belle Époque 
<http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belle_%C3%89poque>.

At the start of the 20th century the eyes of the world were on the French 
capital. The Universal Exhibition, for which the Petit Palais and its even more 
impressive neighbour, the Grand Palais, were built, made the city a showcase 
for the world.

Cézanne, Monet, Renoir, Pissarro and Toulouse-Lautrec, among many others, 
experimented with symbolism, and what would become recognised as the 
Impressionist movement. Grand stations like the Gare d'Orsay – works of art in 
their own right – were being built, while Fulgence Bienvenüe, the "Father of 
the Métro", was overseeing his first underground line.
 Visitors to Paris travel to the 1900 Universal Exhibition in bath chairs. 
Photograph: Hulton-Deutsch Collection/CORBIS 
Arts of all disciplines and sciences flourished. Travel and adventure were 
opening up swaths of the southern hemisphere, which were often quickly 
colonised. Absinthe was driving artists mad, mind-altering drugs were taken, 
poverty and prostitution were given the oil painter's gloss.

But it was to be a brief supernova before the horrors of the first world war 
brought darkness and slaughter to the continent.

Strolling through the exhibition's six "pavilions" at the recently renovated 
Petit Palais, it is clear the outward-looking, imaginative and self-assuredParis
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> of 1900 is a world away from today's 
city, battered and bruised by a global economic recession and erring towards 
gloom.

"Paris in 1900 was enjoying a period of great joy, of huge optimism," said 
Christophe Leribault, recently appointed director of the Petit Palais, who 
gathered the 600 exhibits in 12 months.

"It was a time of cultural abundance, of arts, of science, of invention, of 
colonisation of parts of the world by France, Britain and Belgium. This 
exhibition is a celebration of that time and highlights the mythical nature of 
Paris and La Belle Époque.
 Café de la Paix, Paris, c1900. Photograph: Harlingue/Roger Viollet/Getty 
Images 
"It is this image of Paris, with all its attractions, the beaux arts, the 
artistic salons, right down to the prostitutes and bordellos, that we wanted to 
celebrate."

He added: "Looking back there were of course signs of trouble, but nobody then 
could have guessed the horrors of war that were to come. Parisians were 
optimistic, confident, discovering things, looking forward."

The optimism of La Belle Époque did not last. Today, France is battling to 
keep its reputation as the centre of the civilised, cultured world, buta walk 
around its capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/15/paris-1900-belle-epoque-exhibition-petit-palais>
 shows how much of its former glory shines on.

The exhibition at the Petit Palais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/feb/15/paris-1900-art-exhibition-petit-palais-gallery>
, built for the 1900 universal exhibition and named Musée des Beaux-arts in 
1902, will run until 7 August.
 