
Usually, when you interview a standup comedian – any artist, for that matter – 
they tell you how dedicated they are to their craft. How they've wanted to do 
this since they were kids, how it's in their blood. So it takes a bit of 
adjusting toSara Pascoe <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sara-pascoe>, who – 
despite being a smart, successful standup in her early 30s with a burgeoning TV 
career – says none of these things. She would, she tells me with a cringe,hate 
to have a TV show with her name in the title, and she'd rather work at the 
Royal Shakespeare Company than reappear on Live at the Apollo. Her dearest 
ambition is to write a book. "I started comedy as a hobby, really," she says, 
"and it still doesn't seem like a proper job."

If this sounds earnest on the page, it doesn't in person. Pascoe is the first 
to send up her lofty ambitions. We're talking a few days before she takes her 
new show to Edinburgh. This will be her fourth fringe running, but only last 
year did she really find her voice, after a couple of false starts that traded 
in winsome surrealism-lite. Then cameSara Pascoe the Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/aug/14/sara-pascoe-edinburgh-festival-review>
, a terrific autobiographical show that mined Pascoe's bolshie-but-vulnerable 
adolescence to protest the insidious pressures facing modern women. Suddenly, 
here was a major-league standup, addressing things she cared about in a manner 
that was simultaneously subtle and silly, combative and intelligent. Meeting 
her, it's easy to see where the show came from – she's erudite, opinionated, 
ranges widely across subjects and constantly makes fun. But it's also 
surprising that she took time to make herself heard.

"I wasn't a good enough comic to do that earlier," insists Pascoe, now 32. She 
began performing standup in 2007, and it takes a while to learn how to express 
meaningful opinions on stage. "If you've been doing comedy for 20 years," she 
says, "people come because they want to hear what you think about something. 
But if people don't know you, when you say, 'What I think is ...', you see them 
going: 'Who cares?'"

So she had to be furtive, and smuggle opinions into her sets. "People learn 
more when they're enjoying themselves. That's more powerful than saying, 'I'm 
here to talk to you about Syria, guys ...'" This year, Pascoe is testing those 
boundaries with a show about subjectivity. "I wanted to talk about animal 
rights and why I'm a vegan. And about how, when you form an opinion, you then 
stop taking in information from other sources – which means if you're wrong, 
you stay wrong. But none of those subjects are funny, so it'smutated into a 
show based on a Nietzsche quote <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/nietzsche/> 
– 'There are no facts, only interpretations' – and has lots of stories with 
that as the central premise."

It's sounding as if the need to get laughs might be frustrating Pascoe a 
little. Is that what's behind her lack of commitment to comedy? Yes and no. On 
the one hand, she jokes: "I would have been an essayist in the 18th century. 
Maybe I'd have had one gag in the piece, but essentially I'd be saying 
something." On the other, she insists on comedy as a means of saying important 
things. I mentiona recent London Review of Books piece 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v35/n14/jonathan-coe/sinking-giggling-into-the-sea>, in 
which the novelist Jonathan Coe argued – with reference to Boris Johnson's 
multiple appearances on Have I Got News For You? – that comedy is "anything but 
a force for change". Pascoe isn't having any of it. She cites her 2012 show, 
which addressed body issues and media portrayals of women, andBridget 
Christie's show this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/06/bridget-christie-review>, as 
examples of comedy that can participate in the current feminist revival. 
"Before I started doing standup, I thought there was lots of negativity. Then, 
when I started doing it, I realised it could be a power for change."

Pascoe grew up in Essex (her father, Derek, was vocalist for the 70s pop group 
Flintlock). When she was 18, she became an actor; her first job was as a street 
performer at what was then the Millennium Dome. But work was hard to find. 
When, early in her standup career, she was contacted by an agent keen to 
represent her, she thought it was a prank byher friend and fellow standup 
Cariad Lloyd <http://cariadlloyd.com/>. "It just changed my life," she says 
now. "The first meeting I had, she said, 'Other people want to sign you, so 
just take your time.' I was like, 'Eh? No one'sever wanted to sign me.'" TV 
roles followed – inThe Thick of It <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qgrd>, 
theOlympics sitcom Twenty Twelve <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01f87nh>, 
and later a regular gig onChannel 4's Standup for the Week 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/stand-up-for-the-week>. Better than that, 
though, she says, was performing in a comedy festival at the RSC. "It was 
incredible. I improvised Shakespeare really badly, I kicked over my wine, I got 
to say, 'Alas, poor Yorick.' That's the kind of stuff I get excited about."

Pascoe's ambitions are considerable. She is starting her first novel. She 
writes plays. She has also recently done comedy gigs for the Labour party, and 
"once people know who I am and I'm used to public speaking", she fancies 
getting into politics. "It's really interesting watching all these politicians 
talk. It's very easy to appear slimy when you're trying to be slick." Pascoe's 
plan is to get standup work where she wants it, so "a steady amount of people 
come to my shows, and I can make enough of a living that everything else is my 
time. And it's not reliant on, 'What if they don't book me next season?' and 
'What if I don't do TV ever again?'"

And if she does do TV, she wants it to be as good as the American standup 
Louis CK's sitcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jan/19/louie-is-finally-coming-to-uk>
, or30 Rock <http://www.nbc.com/30-rock/> – where "in every episode there are 
interesting discussions going on about language, gender politics, race … I 
would have to be certain that what I was doing was that good." Even then, she 
wouldn't countenance a self-titled series. "It makes me feel sick, all 
mock-horror. "When producers go, 'It's called The Sara Pascoe de-de-de', I go, 
'No, it's not! That would be horrible. I would slag that off on the internet – 
and I'm me!'" The same motivations see Pascoe habitually turn down work on 
panel shows and "anything that's horrible about women".

This all sounds remarkably down on comedy, an impression that – when pressed – 
Pascoe is eager to correct. She loves standup for its meritocratic character 
and democratic reach. "When I was at university, I did essays on political 
theatre. And it was really frustrating that the ideas weren't reaching the 
people they were talking about. Standup is the one place where you are talking 
to every level of society." Perhaps it is a proper job after all.
 