
Mary Wilson, singer

In the early days of Motown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/motown>, it 
felt as if all the girl groups were having hits apart from us. The Marvelettes 
hadPlease Mr Postman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=425GpjTSlS4>; Martha and 
the Vandellas hadDancing in the Street 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CdvITn5cAVc>. We were playing shows and people 
were going crazy, but in the office we were beginning to be known as the 
"no-hit Supremes".

Mr Gordy [Motown boss Berry Gordy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/may/01/motown-detroit-soul-berry-gordy>
] believed in us, and so he put us in with his best songwriting team,
Holland-Dozier-Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/sep/21/artsfeatures3>. The first song 
they showed us wasWhere Did Our Love Go 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=izzKUoxL11E&feature=kp>, which we didn't want 
to record – it sounded sweet and bubblegum. At this point, Berry also appointed 
Diana Ross as the lead singer, with Florence [Ballard] and I providing backing. 
That became difficult later on, when we felt we weren't being allowed to sing 
enough, but it wasn't a problem in the early days.

We recorded Where Did Our Love Go and it became a hit, which changed 
everything. Once H-D-H found that formula for us, we had five consecutive [US] 
number ones.Baby Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=23UkIkwy5ZM&list=RD23UkIkwy5ZM> was our second 
hit and our first UK number one. Again, we initially felt that the song was a 
bit cute, but the upbeat feeling of the music is counterbalanced by the lyrics: 
someone pleading with a lover not to leave them. It's the Motown way: the music 
is beautiful but the words are stories about life and hurt, which reflect the 
way life is. The combination of the two made the music last.

The Holland brothers produced everything. Eddie worked on the lyrics; Brian 
the music. Lamont [Dozier] did a lot of the background parts, so he may have 
suggested the famous "Oooooh oooooh" intro.

We recorded the song live with some of the Funk Brothers 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Funk_Brothers>, the name given to the pool of 
Motown musicians. James Jamerson played bass on all our stuff, Hank Cosby 
played tenor saxophone, Mike Terry the distinctive baritone saxophone solo and 
I think Pistol Allen was on drums. It's hard to remember specific sessions, but 
sometimes we would get a song in a couple of takes. Other times, we would 
record a song 30 times, then come back the next day and do it another 50 – as 
many as 100 takes in all.

Baby Love's distinctive beat was people footstomping on the floor. H-D-H would 
just grab whoever was around. Motown was such a creative environment like that. 
I remember, one day, Mr Gordy saying: "I have this nine-year-old genius coming 
in," and little Stevie Wonder proceeding to play every instrument in the 
studio. Nine years old and blind. Motown was like Disneyland and we felt 
privileged to be there.

Performing on the Ed Sullivan Show 
<http://www.edsullivan.com/artists/the-supremes> in 1964 was enormously 
important. Prior to that, you saw very few black people on television, [other 
than] actors playing maids or janitors. So to have three well-dressed, 
glamorous black women in gowns come on and be stars was significant.

I've spoken to Whoopi Goldberg and Oprah Winfrey and they've both said that 
that moment really showed them as black people that they could succeed. Prior 
to that we were not considered citizens. We couldn't dream of being rich and 
famous.

Shelly Berger, Supremes manager


Mr Gordy's favourite saying was, "The cheapest thing we have is tape." He 
didn't care about mistakes on recordings; he wanted to capture emotion. He made 
artists do take after take to the point where it became a joke, but he never 
did it for the sake of it. Similarly, he would pull a record off the radio and 
out of the shops and say, "This is not right. You've got to redo this."

So there is a first version <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J4CVtZOTBNE> of 
Baby Love that maybe could have been a top 10 hit. The girls were coming off a 
huge smash with Where Did Our Love Go, so were guaranteed airplay. But he 
wasn't happy and sent them back to record it again.

If you listen to that early version of Baby Love and then the version that was 
released, it's day and night. The saxophone and the claps are different and the 
first version doesn't have what became one of the most famous intros in popular 
music. But that's Berry. He was always reaching for something more and pushing 
his writers and artists to do the same, and that's why the music was so 
successful and has lasted.

People on the outside just see the glamour, but there was a tremendous work 
ethic. [Artists'] lives were very regimented: the studio, the road and the 
hotel. You're going from adoration to being alone in the space of an hour. It is
not the easiest of lives <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Florence_Ballard>. 
With the Supremes you were not just talking about stardom. It was 
top-of-the-heap stardom.

• The album The Nation's Favourite Motown Songs is out on Universal.
 