
Honda's live skydiving advert was watched by an average of 2.2 million viewers 
onChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> last night, May 29.

The live spelling out of the word Honda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/honda> by a team of skydivers grew the 
audience by 8% across the three-minute ad break during Channel 4 show Come Dine 
With Me.

Honda's £500,000 stunt aired between 8.10pm and 8.13pm, during which time 
ratings increased from just over 2 million to 2.2 million viewers, according to 
unofficial overnights.

In total, the advert added 168,000 viewers - a feat Channel 4 called 
"extraordinary" when compared with other advertising breaks during Come Dine 
With Me.

Overall, Come Dine With Me drew 2.2 million viewers and an 11% audience share 
between 8pm and 9pm, with another 100,000 tuning in an hour later on Channel 
4+1.

Come Dine With Me's figures were dented slightly by the start of ITV1's 
Britain's Got Talent at 8.30pm.

The hit talent show once again grew its audience for the fourth of the nightly 
eliminations rounds before Saturday's final.

Britain's Got Talent won 9.7 million viewers and a 41% audience share between 
8.30pm and 10pm - up 400,000 on Wednesday night.

Viewing peaked at 10.5 million viewers in the quarter hour from 9.30pm, as 
presenters Ant and Dec revealed the winner of the people's vote.

Britain's Got Talent's 9.7 million average was up 1.8 milion viewers and 8.1 
share points compared with the Thursday live semi-final last year.

The "BGT effect" meant BBC1 suffered what is believed to be its worst peaktime 
audience share between 7pm and 10.30pm on a Thursday night since records began.

BBC1 had a 17.5% peaktime share, compared with ITV1's 32.2% - the commercial 
channel's best Thursday night since December 2005.

Britain's Got Talent also left BBC1's Holby Blue trailing in its wake. The 
police show fell from 2.7 million viewers when it started at 8pm to 2.3 million 
by the time it ended at 9pm, averaging 2.6 million overall.

Perhaps even worse for Holby Blue, it was soundly beaten by BBC2's popular 
Springwatch, which averaged 3.6 million viewers across the hour last night.

Holby Blue was followed on BBC1 at 9pm by crime drama The Invisibles, which 
drew 2.5 million viewers.

The Invisibles was down 600,000 viewers on last week when it was up against 
ITV1's James Nesbitt drama Midnight Man, rather than Britain's Got Talent.

However, The Invisibles did beat BBC2's Heroes, which scored 2.2 million 
viewers; and Channel 4's Cutting Edge documentary Gridlock and Road Rage, which 
had 1.5 million.

Gridlock and Road Rage narrowly beat the 1.4 million viewers who tuned into 
Five's House.

Britain's Got Talent also helped to boost ITV1's News at Ten to its best 
Thursday performance since January with 3.5 million viewers and an almost 18% 
audience share.

But BBC1's 10pm bulletin still took the ratings spoils, with 4.2 million 
viewers.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 