
We haven’t got all that long so, in the interests of saving time, may I assume 
you’ve all had the Margot Tenenbaum memo? HowGwyneth Paltrow’s mink-clad, 
barrette-wearing, chain-smoking character is fashion’s muse of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/24/fantastic-mr-wes-anderson-how-tenenbaum-chic-took-over-the-catwalks>
, etc. Yup? Marvellous. Because wittering on about Margot is all well and good, 
but I’m not sure it gets us very far in terms of what we are actually going to 
wear. Are you going to buy, let alone wear, a huge great fur coat? Do you, hand 
on heart, think a Fred Perry tennis dress is going to be a useful item to have 
to hand when you come to get dressed on a wet Tuesday in October? Well then. 
Quite.

The glam geek look – pussybows and thick-rimmed specs, long skirts and goofy 
loafers – originated on the Gucci catwalk six months ago in a collection that 
Alessandro Michele said was not actually designed with any Tenenbaums in mind. 
It was not an obviously commercial trend. (As in, it won’t help you pull, it 
doesn’t make you look thin and it’s mostly in colours that make you look ill.) 
And while the show was a critical hit, few expected it to chime with the masses.

But since the spring – in neat parallel, funnily enough, with the emergence of 
Jeremy Corbyn as a mainstream politician despite the wonky tailoring and 
general last-one-to-be-picked-for-rounders vibe – the geek look has struck a 
chord. The new season collections are a riot of nostalgic nerd chic. The look 
is part bookworm, part superpower. ThinkViolet from the Incredibles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pictures/image/0,8545,-10405059634,00.html> or
Napoleon Dynamite <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/nov/26/1>.

We are family: the cool clans inspiring this season's fashion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/26/fashion-all-ages-high-street-dynasty-hollywood-addams>
Think it, I said. Don’t actually wear that: you’ll look ridiculous. To make 
the glam geek look work, you need to edit out the stuff that looks as if you 
found it in a teenage bedroom (bobble hats) or attic (paste brooches). Stick 
with turtlenecks under pinafores for daytime; prim blouses under mannish 
trouser suits for work; Lurex knits under crazy fake furs for parties. Break 
free of tasteful greys and embrace colour combinations last seen on Routemaster 
bus upholstery: yellow with bronze, scarlet with bottle green. Still not the 
easiest look to carry off. But compared to a mink and plastic hair slide, we’re 
laughing.

• Jess wears printed blouse, £42, topshop.com <http://www.topshop.co.uk>. Cord 
skirt, £154, peterjensen.co.uk <http://www.peterjensen.co.uk>. Pointed heels, 
£165,russellandbromley.com <http://www.russellandbromley.com>

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 