
Once in a generation a museum fails to grab a masterpiece and regrets the 
choice for ever. In the 1920s, the Louvre missed the chance to purchase Les 
Demoiselles d’Avignon and thus allowed one of Picasso’s greatest paintings to 
go to New York and become a treasure of the Museum of Modern Art. Now, the V&A 
has rejected an opportunity to add another kind of modern masterpiece to its 
collection –the outfits of Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/03/va-rejects-offer-to-showcase-margaret-thatchers-clothing>
.

V&A rejects offer to showcase Margaret Thatcher's clothing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/03/va-rejects-offer-to-showcase-margaret-thatchers-clothing>
The museum has said it politely declined the offer of Thatcher’s clothes 
because it “is responsible for chronicling fashionable dress, and its 
collecting policy tends to focus on acquiring examples of outstanding aesthetic 
or technical quality”. But this does not follow. The V&A has snubbed the chance 
to exhibit a dark icon of modern cultural history. Surely, the clothes that 
defined Thatcherism are just as historically important asDavid Bowie’s platform 
heels <http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/david-bowie-is/> or Alexander 
McQueen’s corsets 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-alexander-mcqueen-savage-beauty>
?

The late photographer Helmut Newton would certainly disagree with the V&A’s 
curators about Thatcher’s status as a fashion symbol. Newton claimed that 
photographing the formidable Conservative prime minister was the scariest 
assignment he ever got.He made her look steely, authoritative, cold and 
magnificent <http://www.margaretthatcher.org/images/thatcher-by-newton.jpg> – 
every centimetre the embodiment of “sado-monetarism”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmargaret-thatcher-power-suits-worthy-v-and-a-clothes-museum-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446555658977%2F7a43a81c-761e-47f7-b0f8-0522aab5336e-1032x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Margaret%20Thatcher's%20power%20suits%20are%20worthy%20of%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmargaret-thatcher-power-suits-worthy-v-and-a-clothes-museum-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Margaret%20Thatcher%27s%20power%20suits%20are%20worthy%20of%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmargaret-thatcher-power-suits-worthy-v-and-a-clothes-museum-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446555658977%2F7a43a81c-761e-47f7-b0f8-0522aab5336e-1032x2040.jpeg>
 A grey wool suit from Thatcher’s wardrobe. Photograph: Christies/PA 
Newton, famous for his black-and-white images of sado-masochist scenarios, 
recognised that Thatcher belonged in the same imaginative universe as his 
sensualised fashion shots. The V&A is missing a trick here. In recent years it 
has become ever more adept at merging high art and popular culture and 
exploring fashion as the clothing of the collective unconscious. So why not 
stage a show calledMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> Is ...?

Thatcher’s image was remade in and by power: in the 1970s, as education 
minister and when running for the Conservative leadership,she was seen as a 
“housewife” 
<http://www.beatrixcampbell.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/Margaret-Thatcher_Housewife-21.jpg>
 – and played up to this cosy patriarchal notion. But as “Thatcherism” took 
shape, she was seen more and more as a Newtonesque power figure, a Boudicca of 
the right, administering “handbaggings” that tellingly associate her “feminine” 
accessories with harsh violent discipline.

The shock of monetarism became impossible for some men to separate from the 
horror of being subordinate to a woman. It was the male Tory cabinet who 
created the image of Thatcher as dominatrix. Christopher Hitchens claimed it 
was rooted in reality – for in his memoirs he claimsMrs Thatcher once “spanked” 
him 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/sexes/archive/2013/04/that-time-margaret-thatcher-spanked-christopher-hitchens/274779/>
 in the House of Commons.

No style icon but an image-maker: why Margaret Thatcher was the wrong fit for 
the V&A
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/03/no-style-icon-but-an-image-maker-why-margaret-thatcher-was-the-wrong-fit-for-the-va>
The V&A is being dishonest about its own collections. Sure, it has Chanel 
dresses but it also hasa jumpsuit worn on stage by Mick Jagger 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2009/3/18/1237378312574/VA-Theatre-The-VAs-new-th-010.jpg?w=700&q=85&auto=format&sharp=10&s=abbf1b7cf0a51ca30bcba949debb16a2>
, a poster for a Lou Reed concert, a pair of Byzantine slippers and thousands 
more items that mix aesthetic, historic and cultural value.

It is clearly not the venue for a Thatcher shrine – but there are genuine 
cultural reasons to exhibit her accoutrements. She really was a style icon in 
the 1980s and her clothes do have a deep resonance with all that happened in 
that defining decade – and all that she made happen.

It does not matter if you love or loathe her: Thatcher made contemporary 
Britain what it is. It is mean to deny the historical significance of her suits 
and handbags – a narrow ideological decision. Margaret Thatcher is more 
important than David Bowie, and to pretend otherwise makes the V&A look 
prejudiced and trivial.
 