
To the National Security Agency analyst writing a briefing to his superiors, 
the situation was clear: their current surveillance efforts were lacking 
something. The agency's impressive arsenal of cable taps and sophisticated 
hacking attacks was not enough. What it really needed was a horde of undercover 
Orcs.

That vision of spycraft sparked a concerted drive by the NSA and its UK sister 
agencyGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq> to infiltrate the massive 
communities playing online games, according to secret documents disclosed by 
whistleblower Edward Snowden.

The files were obtained by the Guardian and are being published on Monday in 
partnership with theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/10/world/spies-dragnet-reaches-a-playing-field-of-elves-and-trolls.html?_r=0>
 andProPublica 
<http://www.propublica.org/article/world-of-spycraft-intelligence-agencies-spied-in-online-games>
.

The agencies, the documents show, have built mass-collection capabilities 
against the Xbox Live console network, which has more than 48 million players. 
Real-life agents have been deployed into virtual realms, from those Orc hordes 
in World of Warcraft to the human avatars of Second Life. There were attempts, 
too, to recruit potential informants from the games' tech-friendly users.

Online gaming is big business, attracting tens of millions of users worldwide 
who inhabit their digital worlds as make-believe characters, living and 
competing with the avatars of other players. What the intelligence agencies 
feared, however, was that among these clans of elves and goblins, terrorists 
were lurking.

The NSA document, written in 2008 and titled Exploiting Terrorist Use of Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> & Virtual Environments, stressed 
the risk of leaving games communities under-monitored, describing them as a 
"target-rich communications network" where intelligence targets could "hide in 
plain sight".

Games, the analyst wrote, "are an opportunity!". According to the briefing 
notes, so many different US intelligence agents were conducting operations 
inside games that a "deconfliction" group was required to ensure they weren't 
spying on, or interfering with, each other.

If properly exploited, games could produce vast amounts of intelligence, 
according to theNSA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa> document. They 
could be used as a window for hacking attacks, to build pictures of people's 
social networks through "buddylists and interaction", to make approaches by 
undercover agents, and to obtain target identifiers (such as profile photos), 
geolocation, and collection of communications.

The ability to extract communications from talk channels in games would be 
necessary, the NSA paper argued, because of the potential for them to be used 
to communicate anonymously: Second Life was enabling anonymous texts and 
planning to introduce voice calls, while game noticeboards could, it states, be 
used to share information on the web addresses of terrorism forums.

Given that gaming consoles often include voice headsets, video cameras, and 
other identifiers, the potential for joining together biometric information 
with activities was also an exciting one.

But the documents contain no indication that the surveillance ever foiled any 
terrorist plots, nor is there any clear evidence that terror groups were using 
the virtual communities to communicate as the intelligence agencies predicted.

The operations raise concerns about the privacy of gamers. It is unclear how 
the agencies accessed their data, or how many communications were collected. 
Nor is it clear how the NSA ensured that it was not monitoring innocent 
Americans whose identity and nationality may have been concealed behind their 
virtual avatar.

The California-based producer of World of Warcraft said neither the NSA nor 
GCHQ had sought its permission to gather intelligence inside the game. "We are 
unaware of any surveillance taking place," said a spokesman for Blizzard 
Entertainment. "If it was, it would have been done without our knowledge or 
permission." 

Microsoft declined to comment on the latest revelations, as did Philip 
Rosedale, the founder of Second Life and former CEO of Linden Lab, the game's 
operator. The company's executives did not respond to requests for comment.

The NSA declined to comment on the surveillance of games. A spokesman for GCHQ 
said the agency did not "confirm or deny" the revelations but added: "All 
GCHQ's work is carried out in accordance with a strict legal and policy 
framework which ensures that its activities are authorised, necessary and 
proportionate, and there is rigorous oversight, including from the secretary of 
state, the interception and intelligence services commissioners and the 
intelligence and security committee."

Though the spy agencies might have been relatively late to virtual worlds and 
the communities forming there, once the idea had been mooted, they joined in 
enthusiastically.

In May 2007, the then-chief operating officer of Second Life gave a "brown-bag 
lunch" address at the NSA explaining how his game gave the government "the 
opportunity to understand the motivation, context and consequent behaviours of 
non-Americans through observation, without leaving US soil".

One problem the paper's unnamed author and others in the agency faced in 
making their case – and avoiding suspicion that their goal was merely to play 
computer games at work without getting fired – was the difficulty of proving 
terrorists were even thinking about using games to communicate.

A 2007 invitation to a secret internal briefing noted "terrorists use online 
games – but perhaps not for their amusement. They are suspected of using them 
to communicate secretly and to transfer funds." But the agencies had no 
evidence to support their suspicions.

The same still seemed to hold true a year later, albeit with a measure of 
progress: games data that had been found in connection with internet protocol 
addresses, email addresses and similar information linked to terrorist groups.

"Al-Qaida terrorist target selectors and … have been found associated with 
Xbox Live, Second Life, World of Warcraft, and other GVEs [games and virtual 
environments]," the document notes. "Other targets include Chinese hackers, an 
Iranian nuclear scientist, Hizballah, and Hamas members."

However, that information wasn not enough to show terrorists are hiding out as 
pixels to discuss their next plot. Such data could merely mean someone else in 
an internet cafe was gaming, or a shared computer had previously been used to 
play games.

That lack of knowledge of whether terrorists were actually plotting online 
emerges in the document's recommendations: "The amount of GVEs in the world is 
growing but the specific ones that CT [counter-terrorism] needs to be 
methodically discovered and validated," it stated. "Only then can we find 
evidence that GVEs are being used for operational uses."

Not actually knowing whether terrorists were playing games was not enough to 
keep the intelligence agencies out of them, however. According to the document, 
GCHQ had already made a "vigorous effort" to exploit games, including 
"exploitation modules" against Xbox Live and World of Warcraft.

That effort, based in the agency's New Mission Development Centre in the 
Menwith Hill air force base in North Yorkshire, was already paying dividends by 
May 2008.

At the request of GCHQ, the NSA had begun a deliberate effort to extract World 
of Warcraft metadata from their troves of intelligence, and trying to link 
"accounts, characters and guilds" to Islamic extremism and arms dealing 
efforts. A later memo noted that among the game's active subscribers were 
"telecom engineers, embassy drivers, scientists, the military and other 
intelligence agencies".

The UK agency did not stop at World of Warcraft: by September a memo noted 
GCHQ had "successfully been able to get the discussions between different game 
players on Xbox Live".

Meanwhile, the FBI, CIA, and the Defense Humint Service were all running human 
intelligence operations – undercover agents – within Second Life. In fact, so 
crowded were the virtual worlds with staff from the different agencies, that 
there was a need to try to "deconflict" their efforts – or, in other words, to 
make sure each agency wasn't just duplicating what the others were doing.

By the end of 2008, such efforts had produced at least one usable piece of 
intelligence, according to the documents: following the successful takedown of 
a website used to trade stolen credit card details, the fraudsters moved to 
Second Life – and GCHQ followed, having gained their first "operational 
deployment" into the virtual world. This, they noted, put them in touch with an 
"avatar [game character] who helpfully volunteered information on the target 
group's latest activities".

Second Life continued to occupy the intelligence agencies' thoughts throughout 
2009. One memo noted the game's economy was "essentially unregulated" and so 
"will almost certainly be used as a venue for terrorist laundering and will, 
with certainty, be used for terrorist propaganda and recruitment".

In reality, Second Life's surreal and uneven virtual world failed to attract 
or maintain the promised mass-audience, and attention (and its user base) 
waned, though the game lives on.

The agencies had other concerns about games, beyond their potential use by 
terrorists to communicate. Much like the pressure groups that worry about the 
effect of computer games on the minds of children, the NSA expressed concerns 
that games could be used to "reinforce prejudices and cultural stereotypes", 
noting that Hezbollah had produced a game called Special Forces 2.

According to the document, Hezbollah's "press section acknowledges [the game] 
is used for recruitment and training", serving as a "radicalising medium" with 
the ultimate goal of becoming a "suicide martyr". Despite the game's disturbing 
connotations, the "fun factor" of the game cannot be discounted, it states. As 
Special Forces 2 retails for $10, it concludes, the game also serves to "fund 
terrorist operations".

Hezbollah is not, however, the only organisation to have considered using 
games for recruiting. As the NSA document acknowledges: they got the idea from 
the US army.

"America's Army is a US army-produced game that is free [to] download from its 
recruitment page," says the NSA, noting the game is "acknowledged to be so good 
at this the army no longer needs to use it for recruitment, they use it for 
training".
 