
A 105-year-old man has made history by cycling more than 14 miles round a 
track in an hour.

Robert Marchand set the first hour record in the over-100s category in 2012, 
then beat it himselftwo years later at the age of 102 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2014/jan/31/centenarian-breaks-own-cycling-hour-record-in-pictures>
, when he covered more than 16 miles. While his distance in Wednesday’s ride 
was not as great as those two, the new over-105s category had been specially 
created for him to reflect the magnitude of his feat.

Cheered by hundreds of fans, the Frenchman completed 92 laps round the 
velodrome at Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, near Paris.

“I did not see the sign warning me I had 10 minutes left,” said Marchand. 
“Otherwise I would have gone faster, I would have posted a better time. I’m now 
waiting for a rival.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F105-year-old-man-sets-record-cycling-14-miles-hour-robert-marchand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd86f197a70501d820fea21bef598f56cf5c62023%2F585_250_4414_2648%2F4414.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=105-year-old%20man%20sets%20record%20by%20cycling%20more%20than%2014%20miles%20in%20an%20hour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F105-year-old-man-sets-record-cycling-14-miles-hour-robert-marchand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=105-year-old%20man%20sets%20record%20by%20cycling%20more%20than%2014%20miles%20in%20an%20hour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F105-year-old-man-sets-record-cycling-14-miles-hour-robert-marchand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd86f197a70501d820fea21bef598f56cf5c62023%2F585_250_4414_2648%2F4414.jpg>
 Supporters cheer Marchand. Photograph: Francois Mori/AP 
Marchand’s fans chanted “Robert, Robert” as he neared the end of the ride and 
gave him a standing ovation at its conclusion, before he was mobbed by TV crews.

“He could have been faster but he made a big mistake. He has stopped eating 
meat over the past month after being shocked by recent reports on how animals 
are subjected tocruel treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/17/christmas-season-goodwill-cruelty-animals-vegetarians>
,” his physiologist, Veronique Billat, told the Associated Press.

Marchand was born in Amiens, near the frontline of the first world war, three 
years before its outbreak. He worked as a firefighter in later life, before 
going to live in Venezuela and Canada.


Back in France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> in the 1960s, 
Marchand made a living through various jobs that left him with no time to 
practise sports. He was 68 when he began a series of cycling feats.

While Marchand is not making plans for the future, his coach, Gerard Mistler, 
said he would not be surprised to see him continue cycling. “Setting goals for 
himself is part of his personality,” he said. “If he tells me he wants to 
improve his record, I’ll be game. Robert is a great example for all of us.”
 