
Happy Christmas to you all. Thank you for your patience in 2016 when things 
went awry, for which I apologise. And thanks to those who took time to send 
notes of appreciation for what has been on offer. I have taken some comfort 
from the fact that the number of those complaining that the puzzles have been 
getting too easy is almost exactly the same as the number complaining that they 
have been getting too hard, hoping that this is some evidence at least that we 
continue to face in roughly the right direction. I particularly liked a comment 
last month from ‘slezska’ – ‘The first rule of the Guardian crossword: Paul is 
usually easier than the average Paul and Rufus is usually harder than the 
average Rufus.’

As advance warning, you may like to know that Maskarade’s Christmas offering 
(a jumbo alphabetical with a theme) will be published on Christmas Eve. 
Deadline for entries is extended to 4 January and the solution and winners will 
be announced on 6 January.

_____

A footnote to the discussion of cryptic clues: it concerns what constitutes a 
fair lead to an initial letter or letters being part of the required solution. 
Michael B, who lives in France, has raised the issue with me more than once. 
Take, for example, the letter B. For some time I have accepted that the word 
‘British’ in a clue could indicate that there is a B in the solution (or in the 
required anagram). Obviously, B = British in contexts like the BBC but why, he 
argues, should British = B in a clue when no such specific context is 
indicated? On this principle, he questioned a clue in a recent Picaroon puzzle (
No 27,016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/lookup?crossword_type=prize&id=27016>, 
3 down), where ‘Fully exhaust and dismiss old fellow (3,3,2)’ was intended to 
produce the solution RUN OUT OF. ‘Run-out’ is obviously one way of getting 
dismissed at cricket, but how, he objected, are you expected to know that in 
this clue O = old and F = fellow. He clearly has a point.

My answer, however, is that crosswords, like most human activity, have 
conventions shared by those involved; and that clearly these conventions change 
over time. When I started editing the Guardian crosswords, national identity 
letters linked to car number plates were not generally accepted as crossword 
conventions. Today, I think, A = Austria, E = Spain, PL = Poland and the rest 
have become conventionally accepted, though I might still draw the line, for 
example, at BF = Burkina Faso, or SF = Finland, as being a bit recherché. And, 
back in those olden days, internet country top-level domain codes were not the 
stuff of daily intercourse. Today, though, most setters and solvers would 
accept that .de = Germany and .za = South Africa, though is not perhaps all of 
them, such as .tv (Tuvalu), .tj (Tajikistan) or .ba (Bosnia and Herzegovina).

In the other direction, even accepted crossword conventions eventually die a 
natural death. Early in my time as crossword editor (though I could see its 
great helpfulness to a setter in trouble over a difficult clue, I insisted on 
killing off the convention that ‘charge’ in a clue was a fair way to reach ION 
in a solution. (I did so on the grounds that the convention was simply too 
wrong to be acceptable, since an ion is an atom or molecule, not an electric 
charge.) West = MAE hangs on as a convention, mainly, I suspect, because it can 
be so useful to setters. But the popular memory of the great (in every sense) 
film star must be have faded amongst the under-50s and her association with RAF 
inflatable life jackets in WWII is decidedly dated. I worry, too, about the 
accepted convention that ‘ship’ = SS, as the last launch of one to be powered 
by steam must predate the birth of the majority of our solvers. ‘Army’ or 
‘volunteers’ = TA is another anachronism, since the then Conservative defence 
secretary Liam Fox abolished the Territorial Army over five years ago.

So how should a crossword editor negotiate these shifting sands? The 
traditional shelter in a storm is one of the respectable 1-volume English 
dictionaries, where each alphabetical section starts with a list of words for 
which that letter is an accepted abbreviation. This, however, is of no comfort 
to Michael B in France, because Chambers, for example, sanctions B, O and F as 
legitimate abbreviations for ‘British’, ‘old’ and ‘fellow’. Looking for 
consistency in editing clues, I have come increasingly to depend on another 
Chambers publication, ‘Chambers XWD: a dictionary of crossword abbreviations’, 
produced in 2005 by Michael Kindred and Derrick Knight, both cryptic crossword 
setters of distinction and jointly also authors of ‘Cryptic Crosswords and How 
to Solve Them’ (Chambers, 1993). Their XWD book has become a great comfort to 
me and I comment it to Michael B and any others in doubt!

_____

November’s Genius No 161 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/nov/07/genius-crossword-no-161> by 
Soup got slightly more correct entries than usual (302) by the deadline. First 
in again was ‘PSC’ in Australia at 01:38, followed by ‘m1f’ with Yahoo at 
02:12, ‘mjs’ in New Zealand at 03:47 and ‘pc’ with AOL at 04:12. There were 41 
entries by the end of the first day.

 _____

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 