 Cities is supported by  
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/?source=100RC_Guardian_Banner_9.22&utm_medium=display&utm_campaign=100RC_Guardian_Banner_9.22>
About this content <> 
With her hand stretched upward, the elderly storekeeper in batik dress and 
white headscarf indicates the height of the waters that poured into her home in
Jakarta’s great flood of 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/feb/05/weather.indonesia>. Sukaesih is 
a diminutive figure, but she points to a ridge on the doorframe about two 
metres above the threshold.

The 60-year-old grandmother, who like many Indonesians goes by only one name, 
lives in the down-at-heel waterfront neighbourhood of Muara Baru. Her front 
room-turned-store, where she sells soft drinks and the clovekretek cigarettes 
beloved of locals, looks unassuming, but is at ground zero for the city’s 
battle for survival.

Just across the alleyway is the stone seawall that was reinforced and 
heightened after 2007, but is already cracking, buckling and leaking. The 
fortification is all that stands between these homes and the waters of Jakarta 
Bay, which lap just beneath the rim on the other side. Filthy water already 
seeps through the cracks continuously, leaving streams of muddy run-off flowing 
in front of Sukaesih’s shop. When tides are high, the water pours over.


“We live with this reality every day,” Sukaesih says, looking out at the 
embankment. “Water comes in through the wall all the time, and it comes over 
the top whenever there’s a high tide.”

The biggest problem, however, is that the seawall itself – the only thing 
protecting Sukaesih’s community from inundation – is sinking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e7f2c83429ebe7ac5437cdc0170b105383a6efc%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e7f2c83429ebe7ac5437cdc0170b105383a6efc%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Sukaesih stands on top of a sea wall in the Muara Baru district where she 
lives. When tides are high, the water pours over. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for 
the Guardian 
Forget Venice, which is slowly dropping into its watery foundations at an 
estimated rate of 2mm per year. That’s a drop in the ocean compared to 
Indonesia’s capital, particularly its northern belt, where four million people 
live in neighbourhoods that are now up to four metres below sea level. Areas of 
north Jakarta, including the seawall designed to protect them, are sinking at 
an estimated 25cm a year.

“I have been here since 1981 but I don’t know how long we can stay. The water 
gets higher every year,” Sukaesih says – referring to the danger that is, in 
fact, posed by the ground sinking beneath her feet.

Jakarta is sinking because of subsidence. The city does not pipe in enough 
drinkable water, so Jakartans rely largely on wells which extract water from 
shallow aquifers. The result: the land above it collapses.

As the sinking continues, the danger of a catastrophic flood grows

The problem is exacerbated by the explosion of new apartment blocks, shopping 
malls and even government offices, which – despite official restrictions on 
groundwater extraction – not only draw water from this porous ground but also 
add to the weight compacting it. The concretisation of Jakarta has also led to 
increased run-off, making flooding worse while not replenishing the ground 
water supplies.

As the sinking continues at a rate unparalleled in any other urban area in the 
world, the danger of a catastrophic flood grows, caused not by devastating 
seawater surges or storms – but by monsoon rain-swollen rivers bursting their 
banks because gravity no longer helps them flow out into the bay.

There is a desperate need to supply potable water to the city from reservoirs 
to the east and west. But while plans for pipelines remain in the pipeline, 
some experts claim Jakarta is careening towards the point of no return.

The city: ‘Two years to save northern Jakarta’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F873b80d12121e2af6172b6b8be96c31a8b4ef32d%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F873b80d12121e2af6172b6b8be96c31a8b4ef32d%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A mother and a child walk on a flooded street during a high tide in Muara 
Angke, North Jakarta. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
Set in a basin of low-lying plains criss-crossed by 13 rivers, Jakarta – home 
to 10 million, with a total of 30 million living in the sprawl of Greater 
Jakarta – owes its existence to its waterfront location and geography.

The natural harbour was for several centuries an important port for its Hindu 
and then Muslim rulers, before Dutch settlers seized control and established 
the trading post of Batavia as capital of their East Indies territories.

The perils of flooding are as old as the city. The Dutch, the masters of such 
challenges at home, built a network of canals in an attempt to control the flow 
of waters, but never mastered them. Now, as the city sinks so dramatically, 
Dutch engineers and businessmen are again offering their proposals to defeat 
encroaching waters and reclaim land.

“We all knew that Jakarta was sinking back in the 90s and indeed earlier, but 
nobody was that worried or really had any idea of the extent,” says JanJaap 
Brinkman, a hydrologist with the Dutch research institute Deltares, who has 
spent most of his adult life working on Jakarta’s watery woes.


With more than 50 people dead and 300,000 forced to evacuate their homes, 2007 
was a startling wake-up call

“Then came the floods in 2007. When we studied the data and looked at the 
mapping, we discovered the city was sinking not perhaps by a centimetre or so 
per year, as had previously been thought, but by 5-10cm on average, and much 
more in places.”

With more than 50 people dead and 300,000 forced to evacuate their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/feb/05/weather.indonesia> as waters 
covered more than a third of the city, 2007 was a startling wake-up call. The 
solution on paper was simple – the city must supply clean piped water, and end 
its dependency on groundwater extraction.

Tokyo did just that in the 1960s after sinking more than four metres during 
the 20th century 
<https://www.deltares.nl/app/uploads/2015/09/Sinking-cities.pdf>. Within a 
decade, says Brinkman, pointing to graphs on his laptop, that downward 
trajectory was permanently halted.


But in Jakarta, there has been no significant progress in the nine years after 
the floods, thanks to a combination of financial restraints, competing 
infrastructure demands, and the sclerotic impact of the highly decentralised 
system of government introduced in response to the Suharto dictatorship. 
Brinkman, his good humour at times tested by this inertia, says there are now 
only two years left to act, or it will be too late to save northern Jakarta 
from disaster.
Jakarta's Great Garuda seawall plan 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/jakarta_flood_wall-zip/giv-15726KV0uy4kCBowY>
There is another dramatic and controversial plan to save the world’s 
fastest-sinking city from itself: the so-called Giant Sea Wall and Great Garuda 
projects.

At the heart of the proposals <http://en.ncicd.com/ncicd/tujuan-ncicd/> – with 
an estimated cost of as much as$40 billion 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/ist/?next=/smart-news/jakarta-building-gigantic-bird-shaped-seawall-180957536/>
 – is a massive dike arcing 25 miles across Jakarta Bay which would create a 
vast manmade lagoon, with a new coastal megacity to be built around it on 
reclaimed land.

The project, officially known as the National Capital Integrated Coastal 
Development (NCICD) programme, was backed with aid from the Dutch government, 
embraced by Indonesia’s president Joko Widodo, a former governor of Jakarta, 
and is now being championed by a Dutch-led consortium.

The land reclamation dates back to a stalled plan from the President Suharto 
era to create17 new islets off the city’s coastline 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2013/10/02/jakarta-make-17-artificial-islands.html>
. But it has morphed into a much more ambitious concept for a colossal new 
waterfront city, fanning out from sea wall in the shape of agaruda 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garuda> – the mythical bird of Hindu origin that 
is the country’s national symbol – with a multilane ring road for the 
perennially traffic-clogged capital running along its rim.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98729b4f18c652f3fd7baf0791382b3e548e3f5a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98729b4f18c652f3fd7baf0791382b3e548e3f5a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Residents fill up a water tank with clean water. North Jakarta is sinking, 
mostly due to overconsumption of ground water. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the 
Guardian 
From above, the designers’ illustrations for the Great Garuda project are 
redolent of the artificialPalm islands off the shore of Dubai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/03/dubai-palm-jumeirah-islands-palm-trees-from-space>
. Its prospective developers also looked closer to home for inspiration, 
planning to build glitzy skyscrapers, luxury flats, shopping malls and 
attractions similar to Singapore’sSentosa Island 
<http://www.yoursingapore.com/see-do-singapore/places-to-see/sentosa.html>. 

Champions say the Giant Sea Wall will soon be the only way to save the city 
from catastrophic floods sweeping across the northern belt of land, with the 
new islands providing the financing by tapping into the monies of property 
development tycoons. But the schemes are now mired in lawsuits, scandals and 
moral controversy – particularly over themass evictions 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/01/29/fishermen-stage-protest-against-eviction-thousand-islands.html>
 of traditional fishing villages and waterfront communities, many of which have 
been bulldozed flat.

Critics – a broad coalition of Indonesian scientists, land activists and local 
residents – say it is an outlandish and unnecessary project that would wreak 
environmental and social disaster. They argue the lives of traditional fishing 
communities are being destroyed as mass evictions are imposed, with whole 
neighbourhoods razed and residents relocated more than 10 miles away.


They also claim that walling off the bay would turn it into a “septic lagoon” 
of trapped freshwater. With little sewage treatment for the river water pouring 
into the bay, this corporate attempt to “sanitise” Jakarta’s waterfront could 
end up having exactly the opposite effect.

The rivers: ‘Everyone agrees we need to do this now’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f3eb9ffe05c2e558e00a155e3c06009889aa39e%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f3eb9ffe05c2e558e00a155e3c06009889aa39e%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A worker cleans up trash on a recently revitalised river in West Jakarta. 
Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
What is not in dispute is the need for urgent action. Just in front of the old 
fortification at Muara Baru, thick new pilings are being driven into the 
seafloor to provide a higher and stronger defence against the waters. Few 
people object to this, the start of Phase A of NCICD programme.

“This is the ‘no regrets’ stage, as everyone agrees that we need to do this 
now,” says Tuty Kusumawati, head of the Jakarta planning department, as she 
pores over maps and diagrams of the waterfront.

To deal with the freshwater flooding, heavily polluted and rubbish-strewn 
rivers are being widened, dredged, cleaned and protected with new concrete 
barriers, in initiatives ordered by Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, the governor known 
to all by his nickname, Ahok.

Some critics in its former colony are sceptical about the motives of Dutch 
government-funded consultants and businessmen

For the smaller rivers that have already sunk too far to flow out to sea, 
pumping stations andpolders <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polder> are being 
built, with reservoirs to hold water at times of heavy rain and flooding. But 
some experts say there aren’t large enough pumps or sufficient land available 
to deal with the larger rivers – hence the call for more dramatic intervention.

When presented with the proposal for the Giant Sea Wall, the Indonesian 
government asked the Dutch consultants to deliver a more ambitious concept to 
accompany it. From that request, the design for the Great Garuda was born.

The Netherlands is an undisputed bastion of international expertise on 
fighting the seas and land reclamation. But in its former colony, some critics 
have expressed scepticism about the motives of the Dutch government-funded 
consultants and businessmen proposing such a colossal scheme.

Victor Coenen, the project manager for Witteveen+Bos, the engineering 
consultancy that heads the Giant Sea Wall consortium, shrugs off the criticism. 
“Fine, if they don’t want our help, then we can go elsewhere,” he says. “But it 
is the Indonesian government that has asked for Dutch assistance to deal with 
the flooding, and it is Dutch government money that is helping.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe82f32487a5ec54879b4496bb5bafd69defd1b34%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe82f32487a5ec54879b4496bb5bafd69defd1b34%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘If they don’t want our help, then we can go elsewhere,’ says Victor Coenen, 
project manager of Dutch engineering consultancy Witteveen+Bos. Photograph: 
Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
This week’s visit to Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> 
by a high-profile Dutch trade mission, headed by the prime minister, Mark 
Rutte, is giving fresh impetus to the debate. The Save the Jakarta Bay 
Coalition, an alliance of groups opposed to the scheme, has written to Rutte 
spelling outs their fears and criticisms.

“The Dutch are well known for their flood mitigation measures,” the letter 
notes. “These measures adopt a complex approach, which follows the principles 
of environmental and social protection and good governance. [But] what is 
happening in Indonesia is entirely the opposite. We are deeply concerned about 
the livelihood loss and infringement of human rights, as well as irreparable 
environmental damage, caused by the project.

“We therefore stress that, if your government and the Indonesian government 
insist on building the NCICD, tens of thousands of people connected to 
small-scale fisheries will lose their livelihood.”

The widening and fortification of the city’s rivers has already seen the 
eviction of thousands 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2015/08/20/violent-eviction-poor-kampung-pulo.html>
 fromkampung communities that have sprung up along its rivers and reservoirs. 
Bulldozers are often deployed with just a few days notice and residents ordered 
to move to new concrete public housing, often miles away from the waterfront 
where they work.

According to Brinkman, however, “There are only two options, retreat or 
advance. We either abandon and evacuate north Jakarta, which is a non-starter, 
or we advance out into the bay with the seawall.”

The bay: creating a septic lagoon?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd059ea146f52cc94e604230fa9c48f2278a18c9%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd059ea146f52cc94e604230fa9c48f2278a18c9%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A man collects plastic bottles on Island G, one of 17 artificial islands. 
Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
At Muara Baru, Coenen outlines the arguments for NCICD’s Phase B – the Giant 
Sea Wall – as he conducts a tour of the current fortifications.

“In the old days, the water ran out to sea,” he says. “Now water collects in 
the city from several of these rivers. It can’t get out so we pump it out. But 
for the large rivers, we need ever-higher riverbanks and ever-bigger pumping 
stations and storage lakes.

“We can’t build up riverbanks that are five or seven metres above the 
neighbouring communities, and there is not enough space onshore for the pumping 
lakes. So we’re proposing the Giant Sea Wall to create what is effectively a 
giant pumping lake offshore. Then we can then lower the water level, so those 
rivers can flow again.”

If we can restore the bay and its polluted waters, that would mean something 
good for civilisation in Indonesia
Alan Koropitan 
But this part of the project has been met with scepticism by some prominent 
Indonesian scientists. Alan Koropitan, professor of oceanography atBogor 
Agricultural University <http://ipb.ac.id/>, contends the solution for Jakarta 
Bay is “restoration, not reclamation”.

He says building an outer sea wall and manmade islands would create greater 
pollution and sedimentation as waters are trapped inside the dike, rather than 
being flushed out to sea.

“If, instead, we can restore the bay and its polluted waters, that would mean 
something good for civilisation in Indonesia. I believe that a new economy will 
come from that – in tourism, aquaculture and fisheries.”

Muslim Muin, head of coastal engineering research at the Bandung Institute of 
Technology <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bandung_Institute_of_Technology>, is 
equally unimpressed with the multibillion-dollar proposal. “If the Giant Sea 
Wall is built, it would inflict huge construction and operational costs and 
serious environmental costs. Even worse, it would exacerbate Jakarta’s flood 
risk.

“By building the reservoir, the circulation of water will drastically decrease 
and even reach a point when it becomes stagnant water. The natural cleansing 
process would no longer happen,” he adds, citing the water-borne malarial 
epidemics of Dutch days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28d12ae23e40cdeacb9d50f1960b04f2b607eb69%2F0_62_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28d12ae23e40cdeacb9d50f1960b04f2b607eb69%2F0_62_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A seawall is under construction in Muara Baru. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the 
Guardian 
Coenen too acknowledges the environmental dangers of a “septic lagoon” 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2015/10/07/sea-wall-environmental-disaster-study.html>
 that could be created by walling off the bay. But he contends that the wall 
should be accompanied by measures such as water sanitation. “The point really 
is that very soon, we will have no choice,” he adds.


It is not just an environmental controversy, however. The Giant Sea Wall plans 
have become entwined with ever-more ambitious, and contentious, schemes for a 
radical facelift for the whole waterfront.

The residential move south away from Jakarta’s coast began with Dutch 
colonialists in the 19th century, who preferred to live in greener areas less 
prone to disease and flooding. It was a trend that continued after independence 
in 1945, with most Indonesians choosing to live in what is now South, East and 
West Jakarta.


That left behind a coastline dominated by the city’s industrial port and 
harbour, and populated by fishermen’s slum dwellings. The notable exception was 
the Indonesian-Chinese community that plays a powerful role in the country’s 
business world, including property development.

Prosecutions exposed murky financial ties between the developers and Jakarta 
city budgets

The city’s ethnic Chinese have long lived near the bay and many influential 
families are based there in exclusive gated communities and nautical-themed 
luxury apartment blocks bearing names such as Regatta and Green City.


Talk of a new waterfront city of 17 manmade islets, jutting up to two miles 
out into the bay, began in the mid-1990s. The project stalled after the Asian 
economic crisis but was later revived with an added twist – it could be 
deployed to garner private funding for the NCICD in a country where government 
coffers are always stretched.


Huge industrial dredgers moved into the bay to discharge their loads and start 
creating the first four islands in 2013, but that work wasbrought to a jarring 
halt last April 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-indonesia-reclamation-idUSKCN0XF1BV>. A 
moratorium was declared in the wake of ahigh-profile and ongoing corruption case
 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-indonesia-reclamation-corruption-int-idUSKCN0XO241>
 involving a company executive from one of the showpiece developments bribing a 
local parliamentarian over zoning laws.

The prosecutions exposed murky financial ties between the developers and 
Jakarta city budgets. The government said the reclamation wouldstart again in 
September <http://www.reuters.com/article/indonesia-reclamation-idUSL3N1BQ19Y>, 
but as yet there has been no more work on the scheme. So the four part-built 
islands sit in Jakarta Bay, unfinished and off-limits.

The islands: high-rises, gated compounds and marinas
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2474f6766a40f288d0e7e32062da68fed4352b85%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2474f6766a40f288d0e7e32062da68fed4352b85%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A scale model of a waterfront city planned for one of the 17 artificial 
islands, Island G. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
Visitors entering the air-conditioned oasis of the Riverwalk Bay shopping 
mall, at the base of the Green City complex in the waterfront Pluit district, 
can cast their eye over a model (pictured above) of how the NCICD’s “Island G” 
– marketed as Pluit City – looks in the designers’ eyes. It is a futuristic 
extravaganza of gleaming modernist high-rises, gated villa compounds and yacht 
marinas.

A security guard hovers to enforce the “no photographs” rule, so for a 
close-up view of Island G, it is necessary to head out into the bay with Suhali 
bin Urip, a local fisherman who has worked these waters for 30 years.

The 58-year-old Suhali – his face creased beyond his years by decades at sea 
under the tropical sun – is a prominent voice in the “no reclamation” campaign.

“We’re the ones who live and work here, but nobody is consulting us about our 
futures,” he says. “The elite, the politicians and the rich, are making the 
decisions, but they don’t care about us or understand us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82d9f68064cee7860abf998474ecdaf6c6cac75%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82d9f68064cee7860abf998474ecdaf6c6cac75%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Fisherman Ari Sapilah in Muara Angke. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
Suhali lives with his family in the fishing village of Muara Angke, where men 
make on average $25 to $40 a month working on boats that are now forced to 
venture ever-further out to sea in search of a catch.

Shanty dwellings of plywood, breeze blocks and corrugated metal, often lashed 
together by rope or metal fixtures furnished from scrap, are precariously 
balanced on wooden stilts over a waterfront that serves as toilet and rubbish 
dump.

Suhali’s small wooden skiff, its paint peeling and decking loose, is tethered 
at the end of a rickety path of bamboo poles and old door frames. He yanks a 
few times on the starting cord of the outboard engine, and we sputter off into 
the bay towards our target – our progress in these sensitive waters observed by 
a police motorboat.

Now they are building this land in our waters there are no fish left to catch 
here
Suhali 
The future Pluit City soon comes into view, although for now the islet is no 
more than a low spit of reclaimed sand sitting a few feet above water level, 
with the Regatta and Green City developments looming on the skyline behind it.

“I used to fish just here,” Suhali says, his tiny boat bobbing offshore. “But 
now they are building this land in our waters, there are no fish left to catch 
here.”

During our trip, we encounter only one fisherman casting his nets – as much in 
hope as expectation of a catch. The only other person working out here is a 
scavenger in a rowing boat, collecting washed-up plastic products to sell for 
recycling.


In ongoing lawsuits objecting to the island reclamation scheme 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2015/09/17/fishermen-file-petition-against-reclamation-islet-g-ptun.html>
, the Jakarta Legal Aid association has argued these new islands are occupying 
traditional fishing grounds, while the sediment and dredging work have driven 
away fish from the remaining waters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a520faceeeba556609128cf7b3e5dd4a5f3c757%2F0_58_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a520faceeeba556609128cf7b3e5dd4a5f3c757%2F0_58_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A billboard advertises the proposed waterfront city. Photograph: Kemal Jufri 
for the Guardian 
Back onshore, the pervasive smell of salted fish, boiled first over open 
furnaces, then laid out to dry in the tropical heat, wafts across from nearby 
processing warehouses.


“Our family has been working here for three generations, but you can be sure 
they won’t want us here if they go ahead with these grand plans,” says Haji 
Hernoto, 44. “They won’t like the smell or the sight of us.”

Asked who “they” are, his wife Sitiwardah adds: “Oh you know, the rich, the 
politicians, the developers … The Chinese who are going to buy these 
apartments.”

Her comments reflect resentment and division not just over class and money, 
but also ethnicity. The waterfront developers are nearly all 
Chinese-Indonesians – as is Ahok, the blunt-speaking governor – while the local 
communities facing displacement are overwhelmingly Indonesian Muslims.

Furthermore, the swanky new developments planned for the manmade islands are 
being marketed not just at affluent Indonesians but, with a particular thrust, 
at overseas Chinese buyers from Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong and mainland 
China, via aspirational television advertising that gushes in Mandarin about 
the vision of a “new lifestyle” in Pluit City.

The evictions: like a scene from a wartime blitz
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1257b14c4023ff6fe9453afa9299f57428869ef%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1257b14c4023ff6fe9453afa9299f57428869ef%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A neighbourhood razed by the government in an effort to revitalise the city’s 
rivers. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
While the battle over the shape of Jakarta’s seafront is still being waged, 
its governor is already making his mark with controversial measures to tackle 
flooding challenges inland.


The city’s rivers have long been throttled by both rubbish and people. Tens of 
thousands of Jakartans set up home near and beside water, sometimes building 
out on stilts. These unofficialkampungs developed into thriving, if dirt-poor, 
communities where people live and work.

Some residents used the water to dump their rubbish and their sewage, 
resulting in a foul-smelling, insanitary and unsightly network of rivers and 
canals that also contributed to the city’s chronic floods, as their waters 
could not drain properly and their flow was narrowed by the encroachment of 
homes and factories. Of course, many other Jakartans also contributed to the 
pollution problem, but it was these impoverishedkampung that took the official 
blame.

It’s unfortunate, but you have to destroy some areas to save the city
Victor Coenen 
Ahok deployed squadrons of workers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/04/world/asia/jakarta-indonesia-canals.html?_r=1>
 to clean the rivers of their choking surface carpets of rubbish and water 
hyacinths. It is one of several “quality of life” initiatives that also include 
establishing a city hotline that locals can call to report problems.

But in the governor’s brusque, “get it done” approach to city planning, he has 
also overseen mass evictions from overcrowded watersidekampung. Officials said 
the location of homes on the edge of waterways compounded flooding risks, while 
the residents were in direct danger from the inundations.

Ahok has followed advice from consultants to widen and raise the rivers and 
install levees, so that storm-swollen waters can flow out to sea or be stored 
safely. Across Jakarta, such concrete slabs are being put in place in 
riverbanks by heavy-lifting equipment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca35c38d23d45e525c0efa3e76fa3aee37bd8b06%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca35c38d23d45e525c0efa3e76fa3aee37bd8b06%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 View of a riverside slum neighbourhood in Muara Baru, North Jakarta. 
Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
At City Hall, Kusumawati, the planning chief, outlines the plans for rehousing 
residents from riversides, as well as detailed projects to employ fishing 
communities displaced from the seafront. “We are looking after our citizens,” 
she says. “These new homes are better than the slums where many have lived.”

Coenen, meanwhile, offers a blunt assessment of the challenge facing Jakarta. 
“It’s unfortunate, but you have to destroy some areas to save the city,” he 
says. “These are technical solutions to technical problems. But the city also 
needs social solutions to social problems.”

His words are of no comfort to residents of areas such as the Akuarium 
neighbourhood, near the old Sunda Kelapa harbour at the mouth of the Ciliwung 
river. Hundreds of homes, including some not next to the water,were demolished 
here earlier this year 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/05/03/hundreds-of-north-jakartans-protest-evictions.html>
 as residents and security forces clashed.

Today, Akuarium resembles a scene from a wartime blitz. Many locals are still 
squatting among the debris, while some are rebuilding homes from salvaged metal 
and brick on the ruins of their old ones.

The suspicion is widespread that they were evicted to make way for tourist 
projects in an area near old red-tiled Dutch buildings of the colonial era, 
rather than to keep rivers flowing and combat flooding. Officials have told 
evictees to move to subsidised apartments in low-cost, concrete public housing 
blocks that are being built across the city.

But the new housing offered to some slum residents is up to 12 miles away, in 
locations that would take the people of Akuarium far away from the waters where 
they work in the fishery and tourism businesses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfa73a5e76658e7655c8afad9e5d37dd840be74a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfa73a5e76658e7655c8afad9e5d37dd840be74a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Johariah in front of her makeshift store selling salted fish near the remnants 
of what used to be her home. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for the Guardian 
“We’ve been offered no compensation, despite their promises, and were told we 
must move to new apartment buildings in Cakung,” says Johariah, a mother-of-10, 
referring to a district far inland.

Johariah ekes out a living to support her family by selling salted fish. 
Others living amid the debris tell a similar story; that they rely on being 
close to the water. The abrupt manner of the house clearances, with bulldozer 
squads dispatched along with armed police protection after only a few hours’ 
notice, has deepened the anger – as have rows over ownership and compensation.

The authorities describe these kampung residents as squatters on government 
land. But many have lived here for years, even decades, and insist their right 
to residence was approved by city agencies that levied annual property taxes. 
Some angrily wave their tax bills; others say they bought their homes and even 
received bank loans for them.

“They say we did not have the right to be here, but I paid for my home,” says 
Johariah. “You can’t treat us like this.”

Graffiti denouncing Ahok – as he is known to friend and foe alike – is daubed 
across the walls here. Islamist parties have capitalised on the outrage to fuel 
their campaign against the governor, who is the most prominent Christian in the 
world’s most populous Muslim nation, and enjoys high popularity ratings in much 
of the city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faba5d492895b7981dcba335cda95cb97736a209a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2440bn%20to%20save%20Jakarta%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20Great%20Garuda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fjakarta-great-garuda-seawall-sinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faba5d492895b7981dcba335cda95cb97736a209a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A salted fish processing business in Muara Angke. Photograph: Kemal Jufri for 
the Guardian 
Last week, police named him as a criminal suspect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/jakarta-christian-governor-to-face-blasphemy-trial-over-islam-insult-claim>
 in a blasphemy investigation, for an aside he made about his political 
opponents citing the Koran. The governor, who is running for re-election in 
February, now faces prosecution on charges that can carry up to five years in 
jail. The case is expected further to complicate Jakarta’s waterfront facelift 
plans.


For now, reclamation work on the 17 islets remains on hold, amid reported 
splits within the president’s cabinet – although Jokowi’s support is expected 
to win the day. It is telling that Luhut Pandjaitan, the co-ordinating maritime 
minister and a close confidant of the president, has insisted the moratorium 
will be lifted. “There is no reason for us not to continue with the reclamation 
of the North Jakarta coast,” he said in September.

“It is estimated that all of North Jakarta will sink below sea level by 2030,” 
the president himself said at a cabinet meeting earlier this year. “Because of 
that, the development of the capital’s seaside, which has been delayed for so 
long, is the answer for Jakarta.”

Jakarta at 30 million: my city is choking and sinking – it needs a new Plan B
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/21/jakarta-indonesia-30-million-sinking-future>
But a follow-up cabinet session, expected to take place in late October to 
confirm the government’s position on the NCICD, did not materialise. In the 
always opaque world of Indonesian politics, the power battles behind the scenes 
remain hidden.

There is now speculation that the decision on the Giant Sea Wall will be 
delayed for a year or more, allowing time for further investigations into the 
impact on the environment and the people of the seafront. The Great Garuda 
development that was supposed to take flight from that dike could be grounded 
even longer.

Back in the ruins of Akuarium, as Johariah surveys the scene from her 
makeshift fish stand, local tour guides lead European visitors through the 
rubble, en route from the nearby maritime museum to the boat dock for the old 
harbour.


It is a jarring juxtaposition in the struggle over Jakarta’s waterfront 
future. And all the time, as the view of the crumbling seawall from Sukaesih’s 
shopfront shows all too clearly, this city is still sinking.

Do you live in Jakarta? Share your ideas, thoughts, stories and pictures of 
the cityhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/14/the-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts>
. You can also contribute onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/> using the hashtag 
#GuardianJakarta
 