
‘I’m not from London, I’m from Camden Town. But my home is gone now and I 
can’t go back at those prices’

“I was born just down the road. There are too many stories to share, I 
remember the first ‘silly boot’ hanging outside the shops, the Irish poets who 
drank with me in the pub at 14 and told me to change my name back to proper 
Irish. Friends made things and sold them at the market. Camden Lock was where 
we met friends and made new ones.

Thai food with hippies back from travels in the Stags Head (now flats) where 
Stella McCartney hung out and everybody drank on the pavement outside. The 
vegetarian bulldog and the man sleeping under the pool table. I remember Burger 
King was the first fast food chain and no one ever ate the KFC. I remember the 
cafe in an abandoned tube station and the antiques that made you dream of 
treasures yet unfound … I am not from London I would say, I am from Camden 
Town. Mostly I remember that this was my home, but it’s gone now and I can’t go 
back at those prices.” (Wicksey 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1051198>)

‘I fell in love. Other markets can’t begin to compare’

“In 1990, I was an exchange student from the US studying at Kingston Poly (now 
Uni). I was going to see the Sisters of Mercy at Wembley and went to Camden 
Market for the first time to buy my first leather biker jacket for the event. I 
fell in love. Camden Market was like nothing I’ve seen before or since. I’ve 
been to plenty of markets around the world, but none can even begin to compare. 
As I walked to the concert, I remember how the leather was so stiff it squeaked.

I still own the jacket, although it’s a bit tighter on me and the leather a 
lot softer. Every time I’m back in Blighty, no matter who I see or what else I 
do, I take an afternoon to roam around the stalls at Camden. Camden Market will 
always be one of my favourite places on Earth.” (jasonspeaking/GuardianWitness)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f2ec82b4bb6dbd165a9be1b1f1186e54592a58d%2F0_0_1200_914%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='All%20London's%20subcultures%20existed%20side%20by%20side'%3A%20your%20memories%20of%20Camden%20Market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27All%20London%27s%20subcultures%20existed%20side%20by%20side%27%3A%20your%20memories%20of%20Camden%20Market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f2ec82b4bb6dbd165a9be1b1f1186e54592a58d%2F0_0_1200_914%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘Everyone was doing their thing and living on practically nothing’: Camden 
Lock in the late 1970s. Photograph: SuSucat/GuardianWitness 
‘I bumped into Ice-T outside KFC, who was really nice’

“I moved to north London from Peterborough in the early Nineties and really 
enjoyed the buzz around Camden. I always found the people really friendly. 
Bumped into Ice-T outside KFC, who was really nice and Simon Pegg outside The 
Jazz Cafe, who wasn’t nice at all. My parents and younger sister came to visit 
one summer. I took them to the market where my father, a retired police 
officer, announced to the world he could smell marijuana. Oh, how I laughed!” (
Dawksey <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2508146>)

‘Camden was a Mecca for me, I was hooked’

“I remember my stepmum showing me Camden Market when I was seventeen in 1997. 
She saw me growing up, wearing a lot of black, and listening to bands like The 
Sisters of Mercy and took me on a whirlwind tour of Carnaby Street, Kensington 
and Camden Markets. Camden was a mecca for me, I was hooked from that point. 
Whenever I could, I’d be down there exploring the shops, spending my money on 
CDs from Resurrection Records and going for a cider and black down the 
Devonshire Arms.

After I moved to Islington in 2003, Camden became my nexus. I would head down 
there on Sunday nights to be part of a safe place, surrounded by friends, and 
other like minded people, to drink and dance and laugh the night away. Sadly, 
slowly, things began to change. The number of tourists multiplied, and the 
corporate places and tourist shops began to move in. Now, the interesting shops 
have moved out. Things have changed, and not always for the better.” 
(andyravensable/GuardianWitness)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff374a4394238a9a7dfd9a913c133b1b3f7936b26%2F0_85_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='All%20London's%20subcultures%20existed%20side%20by%20side'%3A%20your%20memories%20of%20Camden%20Market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27All%20London%27s%20subcultures%20existed%20side%20by%20side%27%3A%20your%20memories%20of%20Camden%20Market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff374a4394238a9a7dfd9a913c133b1b3f7936b26%2F0_85_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘I moved to north London in the early Nineties and really enjoyed the buzz 
around Camden’: the market in 1994. Photograph: Uropean/GuardianWitness 
‘The 1992 Spiral Tribe squat rave in the abandoned Roundhouse was legendary’

“In 1992 the rave scene was kicking in and becoming increasingly popular. A 
rite of passage for many local teenagers was to get work at Camden market. When 
I was 17 I found myself working part time at a stall selling cheap electrical 
goods. When Spiral Tribe came to town and squatted the abandoned Roundhouse 
there wasn’t any place better to party.

There were plenty of squat parties all over Camden before and after, but none 
quite as legendary as this one. If I had been more carefree I would have hit 
the road with the tribe; alas home cooking and A levels won the day and I 
stayed to watch Camden Market grow ever more popular, homogenised and safe.” 
(MuttTheUnderdog/GuardianWitness)

‘I once sold a military jacket to Janet Jackson’

“I worked on a clothing stall in Camden Market in the 1980s. Once sold a 
military jacket to Janet Jackson. Wayne Hemingway of Red or Dead fame had the 
stall next door – he used to sell black canvas hockey boots with the rubber 
studs on them.” (smillsy <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1504292>)

‘I remember the dandy dressed guys on the bridge you paid for arguments’

“The stall I loved and miss the most was the bootleg tape stall in the covered 
‘corridor’ that led down to the market south of the canal. They were so 
efficient that a gig on a Friday night was usually for sale on the Saturday. I 
also remember the dandy dressed guys who would stand on the canal road bridge 
and talk at length about any subject the customer suggested ... for cash. You 
could request to be talked at, or have a conversation/argument on your chosen 
subject. They were surprisingly knowledgeable, or perhaps just very good at 
blagging it!” (Simon Bleasdale/GuardianWitness)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7e939097013c81a4d3cea3da598abb6908e0f0d%2F8_0_1183_1183%2F1183.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='All%20London's%20subcultures%20existed%20side%20by%20side'%3A%20your%20memories%20of%20Camden%20Market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27All%20London%27s%20subcultures%20existed%20side%20by%20side%27%3A%20your%20memories%20of%20Camden%20Market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondons-subcultures-readers-memories-stories-camden-market-redevelopment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7e939097013c81a4d3cea3da598abb6908e0f0d%2F8_0_1183_1183%2F1183.jpg>
 ‘All the alternative subcultures of the time existed side by side at the 
Lock’: punks at Camden lock in the late 1970s. Photograph: 
SuSucat/GuardianWitness 
‘In the late 70s everyone was doing their thing and living on practically 
nothing. Now the clothes come from sweatshops, not art schools’

“My mum was a hippie. She had a stall at the Lock Market selling espadrilles 
in the late 70s. I was a teenager, obsessed with punk and two tone. Being on 
Mum’s stall felt like being at the centre of the world. All the alternative 
subcultures of the time – punks, hippies, rastas, rude boys – existed side by 
side at the Lock. They had their own stalls, record shops and pubs, but there 
was a mutual respect.

Camden was a mecca for rebels, artists and dropouts from around the world. It 
was an incredibly creative place. Amazing bands played every night. Lots of 
brilliant young artists and fashion designers had stalls. Everyone was doing 
their thing and living on practically nothing. I still live up the road in 
Kentish Town. A semblance of old Camden remains, but the spirit’s gone. Pretty 
much everything on sale is a cheap import, the clothes come from sweatshops, 
not art schools. The development of the stables is an abomination. It should 
never have become a museum but it’s become a grim parody of its old self, which 
is a shame.” (nora9/GuardianWitness)

Uncool Camden: will redevelopment ruin London's legendary market?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/15/uncool-camden-market-london-redevelopment-market-tech>
‘Memories? Mulled wine for breakfast and shouting at John-Paul Gaultier’

“I worked up at the Stables Market in the mid-Nineties. Some memories: always 
cold, dragging a tonne of tweed jackets up the cobbles in the rain on a clothes 
rail with one wheel missing; everyone was called Steve, Dave or Pete (Beardy 
Pete, Welsh Pete, etc); my pal shouting at John-Paul Gaultier “Discount, qu’est 
que c’est fucking discount?”; mulled wine for breakfast; Cissy Strut by the 
Meters being played all day long by the bootleg tape sellers; the Israeli bloke 
two stalls up telling us about juggling live grenades during national service; 
sitting on the radiator in a pub in Primrose Hill after work until I could feel 
my legs again.” (henrydog <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4777314>)

‘In the 80s Camden market was a dirty, eye-opening place and I loved it’

“Skint teenager, 1980s, freezing cold, damp Sunday afternoons in mid winter, 
all kinds of music playing and blending together, cheap second hand clothing, 
bootleg albums on cassette for £1, cosying up in caffs drinking tea for 50p, 
then the nearly 3 hour trip back to the ‘burbs because of a really crappy 
Sunday service. Camden market was a dirty, eye-opening place and I loved it. 
Haven’t been for years but I knew it was the beginning of the end when an 
Office and Monsoon opened nearby.” (Chazza74 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4006207>)

And, finally …

“The arches at the back of the stables were once used by trekkies for Star 
Trek reenactments – they used to turn up in latex Klingon masks and zap each 
other.” (cavecanem <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2590747>)

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 