
Environmental groups have called Donald Trump’s choice of Rex Tillerson as 
secretary of state “unfathomable” and “an epic mistake” and accused the 
president-elect of creating “a government of, by, and for the oil and gas 
industry”.


Trump announced his nomination of the 64-year-old outgoing 
<http://news.exxonmobil.com/press-release/rex-tillerson-retire-darren-woods-elected-chairman-ceo-exxon-mobil-corporation>
ExxonMobil CEO on Tuesday. If confirmed as the nation’s top diplomat, Tillerson 
would have a key role in international climate talks, and his ties to the oil 
industry and his work with oil giantExxonMobil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/exxonmobil> over the past 41 years have 
left environmentalists worried.

Climate change denial in the Trump cabinet: where do his nominees stand?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/trump-cabinet-climate-change-deniers>
“As a leader of an environmental organization I’m concerned about someone with 
Rex Tillerson’s record being put in charge of our foreign policy,” Michael 
Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club, said in a phone interview.

“A thorough review of ExxonMobil’s operations in Indonesia to the United 
States shows that the company’s drilling and fracking and refining operations 
have had a very serious impact on the environmental health, on local 
populations, and in many cases their human rights as well,” he claimed. The 
company’s security forces wereaccused by villagers 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-exxonmobil-indonesia-idUSTRE7676I120110708> 
in Indonesia of murder and torture between 1999 and 2001, a period when 
Tillerson held senior positions at Exxon but before he became CEO. In 2011, 
Exxon called the accusations “baseless”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump's%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&media=>
Who is Donald Trump’s secretary of state nominee Rex Tillerson? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/who-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
Ken Kimmell, the president of Union of Concerned Scientists, said in a 
statement 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/news/press_release/secretary-of-state-pick-cements-governance-by-oil#.WFBVFKIrLBJ>
 that the choice of Tillerson was analogous to choosing the CEO of a tobacco 
company for surgeon general because of his conflicts of interest. “Why would 
you pick the leader of an oil and gas corporation to spearhead a position 
tasked with national security and global climate action?” he asked.

Abigail Dillen, vice-president of litigation for climate & energy at 
Earthjustice, an environmental law nonprofit, was also worried aboutTillerson’s 
conflicts of interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-quandaries-trump-russia-conflicts-of-interest>
 as secretary of state, as he spent decades making deals for ExxonMobil. 
Tillerson, she said, is “not just linked to the industry, he is the industry”.

“Handing over US global policy to Big Oil is an epic mistake,” Rhea Suh, 
president of the Natural Resources Defense Council, said ina statement 
<https://www.nrdc.org/media/2016/161213>. “This industry has been near the 
center of more conflict than any other in modern time; tapping its chief oilman 
as the nation’s top diplomat sends the wrong message at home and abroad.”

Exxon knew of climate change in 1981, email says – but it funded deniers for 
27 more years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/08/exxon-climate-change-1981-climate-denier-funding>
The climate group 350.org called the choice of Tillerson “unfathomable 
<https://350.org/press-release/350-org-on-trump-selecting-exxonmobil-ceo-to-be-his-secretary-of-state/>
”. 350.org is one of the organizations behind the#ExxonKnew 
<http://exxonknew.org/> campaign relating to the company’s history of 
concealing the full impact of climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/08/exxon-climate-change-1981-climate-denier-funding>
 – something Brune and other environmentalists also expressed concerns over. 
(Exxon has said climate science in the early 1980s was at a preliminary stage, 
but that the company now sees climate change as a risk.)

“Tillerson deserves a federal investigation, not federal office,” 350.org 
executive directorMay Boeve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/08/may-boeve-new-face-of-climate-change-movement-350-org>
 said. ExxonMobil is currently under investigation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/20/science/exxon-mobil-fraud-inquiry-said-to-focus-more-on-future-than-past.html>
 for misleading investors about what it knew about climate change.

Tillerson has acknowledged that climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/28/exxonmobil-climate-change-rex-tillerson>
 is real and caused by human activity in 2012, but he said society would be 
able to adapt to it. During his time as chief executive of ExxonMobil, the 
companyendorsed a carbon tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/10/exxon-mobil-carbon-tax> and 
stated its support for the Paris climate agreement. But Tillerson hassaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/exxonmobil-ceo-oil-climate-change-oil-production>
 that until there are major breakthroughs in green technologies “the world is 
going to have to continue using fossil fuels, whether they like it or not”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Frex-tillerson-environmental-record-exxonmobil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe48fd2b09e595581535a9645350d38e4569a625%2F605_0_4087_2453%2F4087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='An%20epic%20mistake'%3A%20environmental%20groups%20fume%20over%20Rex%20Tillerson%20nomination&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Frex-tillerson-environmental-record-exxonmobil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27An%20epic%20mistake%27%3A%20environmental%20groups%20fume%20over%20Rex%20Tillerson%20nomination&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Frex-tillerson-environmental-record-exxonmobil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe48fd2b09e595581535a9645350d38e4569a625%2F605_0_4087_2453%2F4087.jpg>
 An activist protests outside the ExxonMobil annual shareholder meeting in 
Dallas. Photograph: Jae S. Lee/AP 
Trip Van Noppen, president of Earthjustice, said in a statement 
<http://earthjustice.org/news/press/2016/earthjustice-responds-to-president-elect-trump-s-secretary-of-state-pick>
 that these actions make Tillerson appear “somewhat responsible in comparison 
to the rest of the incoming Trump administration – a sign of just how abysmally 
low the bar has been set by the president-elect and his cabinet.”

Tillerson deserves a federal investigation, not federal office
May Boeve, executive director of 350.org ​ 
 Brune expressed concern that the US would give up its leadership role on 
climate change under Tillerson, and although he said he was not sure what 
Tillerson’s appointment meant for theParis climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement>, he said he 
believed in “the track record of the people they [the Trump team] are putting 
into power, which means they will try to undermine progress any chance they 
get.”

 Trump has said he has an “open mind” about the Paris deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/trump-break-from-paris-climate-deal-unfccc-exit>
, but has pledged to withdraw from it it in the past. He infamously called 
climate change ahoax 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/jun/03/hillary-clinton/yes-donald-trump-did-call-climate-change-chinese-h/>
 “created by and for the Chinese in order to make US manufacturing 
non-competitive”.

350.org pledged to put pressure on senators to “to turn the confirmation 
process into a hearing on ExxonMobil’s history of climate deception”, and 
Dillen of Earthjustice said that her group would be one of the many calling for 
the senate to reject Tillerson’s nomination. Brune said Sierra Club members 
would be mobilized in states across the country to contact their senators. “His 
appointment is anything but a sure thing both because of histies to Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
 and his ties to climate denialism,” Brune said.

Will Rick Perry's pro-wind power stance carry on in the Trump administration?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/rick-perry-wind-power-energy-secretary-trump-administration>
The nomination of Tillerson as secretary of state comes within a week of Trump 
choosing Scott Pruitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
, attorney general of Oklahoma, to lead the Environmental Protection Agency. 
Pruitt hassued the EPA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
 and has claimed that scientists “continue to disagree” about the causes and 
extent of global warming. In fact, theoverwhelming majority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/16/climate-change-scienceofclimatechange>
 of scientists agree climate change is happening and caused by humans.

The heads of Trump’s transition teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>
 for Nasa, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of the Interior 
and the Department of Energy also all question the science of human-caused 
climate change. Trump also selected Rick Perry as the secretary of energy,
another oil-drilling advocate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/rick-perry-formally-announced-as-trump-pick-for-energy-secretary>
, althoughhe also backed wind power as governor of Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/rick-perry-wind-power-energy-secretary-trump-administration>
.

Kimmell of the Union of Concerned Scientists said that the selections of 
Tillerson and Pruitt show that “President-elect Trump is creating a government 
of, by, and for the oil and gas industry”.

For Brune, the cabinet appointments and transition leadership decisions sent a 
clear message. “We are right at a time when businesses and cities and many 
states and most countries around the world are going full speed ahead in 
replacing fossil fuels with clean energy,” Brune said. “The federal government 
of the United States will be reversing course and trying to lead us in the 
opposite direction.”
 