
Tens of millions of workers under the age of 55 could be affected by changes 
to pension age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/28/pension-age-may-be-about-to-rise-again-says-former-minister>
 sooner than previously planned, according to a former minister.


Steve Webb, pensions minister in the coalition government between 2010-15, says
documents produced by the Department of Work and Pensions suggest the 
government is preparing a “more aggressive” timetable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/28/pension-age-may-be-about-to-rise-again-says-former-minister>
 on state pension age changes.


We have been following the conversation you’ve been having in the comments. 
Here’s a roundup of your views – you can click on the links below to expand the 
discussion or to get involved yourself.


‘It’s basically a huge tax increase nobody really cares about [because] it 
[only] effects them in future’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12779755> David Morton  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12779755> 28 November 2016 12:14am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88347221> 
It's basically a huge tax increase but one nobody really cares about it 
effects them in decades to come. It's also a way of making Pensioners 
contribute to deficit reduction without cutting existing pensions. Existing 
Pensioners won't vote to protect pensions of folk 20 or 30 years before 
retirement age. In this sense it's great politics.

And we have to pay for Brexit. Europe has been good for British growth rates. 
*If* they are permanently stunted by a Hard Brexit the tax base will need 
radical surgery.

‘We must fight cuts and lobby for a higher state pension’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1526248> boston  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1526248> 28 November 2016 3:35am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88352660> 
The UK state pension is already one of the lowest in the developed world for 
the amount contributed and increases in the SPA make it worth even less. So we 
must fight these cuts and lobby for a higher state pension.....the recent 
implementation of the flat rate pension was in fact a cut as pension credit 
will disappear. However, we should also do everything we can to free ourselves 
from reliance on the state pension by personal saving and investing. That will 
be impossible for some people and difficult for most, but everyone should 
prioritize frugality and saving to the extent that they can. So fight to 
restore and increase the welfare benefits put in place by post war Labour 
Governments that actually had some socialist policies while at the same time 
saving money and investing in low cost tracker funds.

‘Governments have known this was coming since the 1970s’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1061003> RegLaCrisp  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1061003> 28 November 2016 5:17am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88354625> 
Successive governments have known this was coming since the 1970s. I'm so 
grateful that a teacher warned me (1977, I think it was) that the pension 
system wouldn't be able to cope by the time I got to retirement age (another 10 
years from now).

It's easy to blame the government of the day, but all governments, left and 
right, that have been in power since the 70s should take their share of it too. 
If my chemistry teacher knew, then surely all governments must have known too?

The system was originally set up for us to leave school before 18, work to 65 
and die at 70. Now we all want to study into our 20s, retire at 60, and live to 
85. And that's fine ... but don't expect the original system to be able to 
cope. It's hardly advanced maths to see that it simply can't. Something has to 
give, and working a few more years is preferable to a cull. It should have been 
phased in gradually rather than done in these big lumps we're having to plan 
for now, but that's not today's government's fault.

‘Younger generations are going to be smashed’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3398516> Persianwar  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3398516> 28 November 2016 1:00am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88348786> 
Boomer women are still retiring at 63. Younger generations are going to be 
smashed, meanwhile today's pensioners have retired early and get triple-locked 
pensions, yet STILL think they are somehow victims.

‘I worry about being divided against the older part of the population’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16326948> papalazaru  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16326948> 28 November 2016 1:24am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88349512> 
Dead on, they think younger people don't know they were born, and consistently 
vote for worse conditions for younger people, yet lapped up early retirement, 
higher pensions (75% of welfare is spent on over 60's), higher wages than us 
when they were working, and lower taxes and bills, before all the failed 
privatised stuff, and the slightly revised poll tax,.... I mean council tax.

But I worry about being divided against the older part of the population, 
surely division is exactly what the Tories want.

‘Increased life expectancy does not mean all people getting on for 70 are fit 
enough for a full-time job’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4212444> larenau  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4212444> 28 November 2016 3:14am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88352258> 
Incentives to work until 70 would be welcomed by many fit older people, 
especially those without a really good pension to look forward to, but 
increased average life expectancy does not mean that all people getting on for 
70 are fit enough for a full-time job.
Raising the retirement age to 70 would lead to a great increase in 
applications to retire early for health reasons, which would mean a big 
increase in administration costs for medical examinations, assessments and 
reports etc., which would reduce the savings made considerably.
Also, due to the obesity epidemic, life expectancy is predicted to begin to 
fall in the near future, so how will that be factored in?

‘Truly a sad state of affairs’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15525123> Viewpoint7  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15525123> 28 November 2016 9:52am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88366765> 
It is truly a sad state of affairs to see how the rich, bankers and 
corporations have succeeded in deflecting the blame from their own wrongdoings 
and got the “proles” to fight amongst themselves.

There are huge amounts of money in the economy that are being sucked out by 
these guys and invested in assets or placed off-shore out of the reach of 
government. Those mind-boggling sums are more than enough to provide for decent 
pensions for everyone, defence, NHS, care, housing and much more.

But hey, let the “plebs” squabble amongst themselves and keep blaming 
foreigners, the old, house-owners and whoever is the latest scapegoat fed to 
them by manipulating media rather than the real culprits…

‘All very well if you live life without a medical condition’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13845410> Rachel Lawrence  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13845410> 28 November 2016 1:18pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88383314> 
This is all very well considering you live a life without a medical condition. 
My partner was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes 2years ago at the age of 25. His 
life expectancy is just 69 according to statistics (of course he may live a lot 
longer, with the advancement in medical science) but to think he may never get 
to an age when he can withdraw his pension is scary. Of course people will say 
well you never know when you might die but when you know someone's life 
expectancy will be 10-20 years less. Should that make a difference?

‘Life expectancy is not the same as healthy life expectancy’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4755055> WatTylersSister  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4755055> 28 November 2016 8:48am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88361637> 
Life expectancy is not the same as Healthy Life expectancy and the government 
and media never take that into account. HLE is 54 in Manchester but 76 in 
Richmond upon Thames.

This seems to be about making the working class continue until they die 
(younger in the north) to protect the middle class tory voters pensions.

‘Nobody can be certain that there’ll be a state pension in 40+ years time’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15089465> Tonda99  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15089465> 28 November 2016 12:17am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/88347362> 
Nobody can be certain that there'll be a state pension in 40+ years time. 
Still, live in hope.

Share your views at the original article, here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/28/pension-age-may-be-about-to-rise-again-says-former-minister#comments>
.

 