
A charming and moving 10-minute documentary film, 'Dear Araucaria' about John 
Graham as a crossword setter is due to be released by Guardian Multimedia next 
month.Araucaria died in November 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/nov/26/araucaria-john-graham> at 
the age of 92, ending over 55 years asthe Guardian's most prolific setter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/araucaria>. The last Araucaria puzzle to 
be published while he was alive (Prize 26,107 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/26107>) appeared just 10 days 
before he died. However, a puzzle that he had been working on and had asked a 
friend to complete for him, as he could be longer concentrate sufficiently, was 
published on the first anniversary of his death, 26 November 2014 (Cryptic 
26,427 <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26427>).

In the film, the only voice heard is Araucaria's, reading from some of the 
many fan letters that people sent him, written as from friends who felt they 
knew him personally from doing his crosswords over the years. He also talks 
about his way of working when setting puzzles, including in particular how he 
set the puzzle with which he went public about the fact that he had been 
diagnosed as having terminal cancer of the oesophagus (originally published in 
1 Across, the crossword magazine that he had founded, andreprinted in the 
Guardian in January 2013, as Cryptic 25,842 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25842>). This film will be 
availablefrom 8 June here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/the-guardian-documentary>.
_____

Another Araucaria link: in February (puzzle No 26,495) Paul announced that he 
had entered for the London Marathon on 26 April, intending to run in memory of 
his friend Araucaria and to raise money for Sense, the charity for the 
deafblind.

Thanks to your great generosity he raised over £5,500 – a great tribute to 
your admiration for Araucaria and to your empathy with Paul in his masochism. 
Unhappily, in the last half of April, Paul was struck down by the dread lurgy 
that has been around all winter and has lingered on into the spring. This put 
an end to his training programme. He was advised by his doctor that it would be 
madness to run a marathon without enough training and was threatened with 
divorce by Mrs Paul, if he even suggested ignoring this advice.

All the money you subscribed, however, has gone safely to Sense and Paul has 
assured me that, to meet his obligation, he will mortify the flesh in this 
event next year. He is very grateful to you for your huge support for his cause.
_____ 

Those of you whose connection with the Guardian and Observer crosswords is 
solely online will have noticed recent changes and strains with the site. These 
have principally involved the crossword homepage and the online monthly Genius 
puzzle. 'Why couldn't what was working fairly well before not have been left 
alone?' is the common refrain in most of the griping emails that we have been 
getting.

As you may have heard me admit before, my capacity to understand computer 
software programs and their development is way below average. However, what I 
do understand is that the Guardian is in the middle of a massive upgrading and 
integration of all its online activity in order to give it the capacity to cope 
with the demands of the American-Australian-European centred international 
newspaper brand the group is rapidly developing into. Historically, the 
software to support the crosswords online was (unwisely) written in-house in 
isolation from the main Guardian systems, in to which it was then spatchcocked 
over time in an ad hoc way.

Work is going ahead as fast as possible on the crossword programs to make them 
converge with the main website development but, hard as it may be for online 
crossword enthusiasts to accept, in the great scheme of things the puzzles do 
not have the highest priority for the design and development teams faced with, 
say, getting the paper's amazing systems for reporting the general election 
results up and working properly all round the world, all through the night for 
Thursday 7 May.

Please go on complaining - but you may need a little patience, too.
_____

Congratulations to Margaret Heslop from North Adelaide in Australia, who is 
the winner of the April Genius competition.

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardian.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@guardian.co.uk>. For 
Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 