 Supported by  <http://Vulcan.com> About this content <> 
In a tiny workshop at his home in the Tai Po district of Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong>, 84-year-old Au Yue-Shung shows 
me an ivory carving he has been working on for months. Measuring just 5x10 
inches, Nine Sages in Mount Xiang depicts the 9th-century poet Bai Juyi and 
eight of his peers in full creative flow in Henan province, far from the 
imperial court that Bai once served. The point of the story is that the sages 
tried to maintain their integrity by staying close to nature and art, and away 
from the ugly politics of the time. This is a piece that Au created for himself 
rather than a client. It is his statement about life after going through many 
ups and downs.

Born during the Japanese occupation of China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in the 1930s, Au joined Guangzhou’s 
Daxin ivory carving factory at the age of 13 as an apprentice. With only one 
year’s formal education and with no one caring to teach him, he taught himself 
drawing and carving in his spare time. Unable to afford drawing paper, he drew 
on toilet paper. His gift was soon recognised and by the late 1960s he had 
become a key carving artist at Daxin. Later, at the height of the Cultural 
Revolution, he decided that he had had enough of the political and artistic 
repression.

He first tried to flee China at the beginning of 1972. “From Guangzhou, I 
hiked to Huizhou, then Shenzhen,” he recalls. “It took 13 days. I hid and slept 
during the day and walked after it got dark. I was arrested in Yantian [a port 
in Shenzhen], and was in jail for four months.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F426e5350b8f52e4cd116c81c27d666cf84ecf03a%2F0_405_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims'%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China's%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims%27%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China%27s%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F426e5350b8f52e4cd116c81c27d666cf84ecf03a%2F0_405_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 ‘Money is not everything’… Ivory carver Au Yue-Shung works on Nine Sages in 
Mount Xiang at his home studio in Hong Kong. Photograph: Xiaomei Chen 
His employers refused to bail him out until they realised they needed him to 
make a complicated piece ordered by the government. At the time, ivory carving 
was officially encouraged as one of the few means to earn foreign currency.

Not long after he got out of jail, he again started planning his escape. “I 
had to smuggle myself out of China even though the chance to succeed was only 
30%,” he says, “because I had already been disgraced politically.”

Alone, China's ban on ivory could make life worse for elephants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/06/china-ban-ivory-life-worse-elephants-poaching>
He made his second bid toward the end of 1972, when border controls were 
looser because of the cold weather. He again walked for 13 days, then swam for 
10 hours from Shenzhen to finally reach Hong Kong.

It didn’t take him long to make his name there. “Each piece I did was sold 
before it was finished or immediately afterwards. Taiwanese loved my works. 
Some carvers tried sell their works by claiming to be my pupils, but they were 
not!” He chuckles.

Yet he has never made a fortune from his masterpieces. One of his best and 
most valuable pieces is Platform Sutra, the size and shape of a large book, 
consisting of more than 20,000 Chinese characters and an image of Huineng, the 
legendary sixth patriarch of Chan Buddhism. It was the result of years of 
researching, brainstorming and fieldwork, as well as seven months’ carving. Au 
estimates that it is now worth at least a million Hong Kong dollars (£100,000). 
But however much the collector paid him for it – he says he can’t remember – 
“it probably covered the material and labour only. I let him have it because he 
appreciates my art. Money is not everything,” he says quietly.

His wife nods in agreement. “He had this piece of ivory for over 30 years, but 
didn’t quite know what to do with it, until Guan Weiqiang suggested something 
Buddhist.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcf8e56ae0d987eeffd49fdca8a52ffc01da0971%2F0_0_6016_4016%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims'%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China's%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims%27%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China%27s%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcf8e56ae0d987eeffd49fdca8a52ffc01da0971%2F0_0_6016_4016%2F6016.jpg>
 A close-up of Nine Sages in Mount Xiang. Photograph: Xiaomei Chen 
Guan, the man who ended up with Platform Sutra, won’t say what he paid for it, 
but describes it as the most significant item in his collection. “Many people 
want to buy it from me, but I wouldn’t sell it. You simply can’t evaluate it 
economically. Priceless. It is a masterpiece by a master artist I admire and 
respect greatly,” he says softly as he pours a cup of tea at Geng Suan Tang, 
his furniture shop in south-west Guangzhou.

Fortysomething Guan, a businessman and celebrity chef known as Prince Dim Sum, 
says his collection of ivory is small alongside his carvings in jade, quartz, 
wood and bamboo root. Then he pulls work after work out of his walk-in safe, 
including a 60-layered ivory ball – the largest in the world according to him – 
and a miniature engraving of the Mona Lisa. It must all be worth a fortune.

Guan brushes the thought aside – collecting has nothing to do with money. 
“Collecting is art itself, a gift to appreciate beauty. You are what you 
collect. I was born with this gift.”

But he admits that he hasn’t always been so high-minded. “Before I became a 
mature collector, I had more desire to own the objects than the ability to 
appreciate art. That desire is like a demon. Because of that, I was tricked 
into buying a fake antique Buddha statue in 1991.” With time, he has formed a 
philosophy of collecting: study more than buy; buy expensive genuine art rather 
than cheap imitations; collect rare rather than generic artefacts. “You can’t 
let the demon [of greed] grow in you,” he says. “Because of this, I don’t buy 
that much any more, particularly ivory carving.”

But buying ivory at all is controversial, as is carving it. According to many 
wildlife charities, any trade in products made from elephant tusks, no matter 
how old, encourages poaching.By one estimate 
<http://www.greatelephantcensus.com/final-report/>, more than 100,000 African 
elephants were slaughtered between 2007-14, mostly to satisfy demand for ivory 
in eastern Asia, particularly China. Daniel Stiles, an expert who investigated 
the trade in 2015, estimated thatmore than 90% of all ivory items sold in the 
country were illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/19/elephants-closing-legal-ivory-markets-need-plan-b-elephants>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaa2424da2a4fba86079089798c15b60ca168f3c%2F864_880_5152_3092%2F5152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims'%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China's%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims%27%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China%27s%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaa2424da2a4fba86079089798c15b60ca168f3c%2F864_880_5152_3092%2F5152.jpg>
 Mammoth ivory carvings on display in a Hong Kong antique shop. Photograph: 
Xiaomei Chen 
Last month, after many delays, the Chinese government announced that all 
domestic ivory trading and processing will be outlawed by the end of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/30/china-ban-ivory-trade-2017-elephants-wwf>
, although doubts have been raised about how effectively this will be enforced 
and Hong Kong has a separate deadline of 2021. In the meantime, carvers can 
legally work on tusks imported before 1989, when the international trade in 
ivory was outlawed, but those stocks are dwindling. Au says he uses only 10kg 
of ivory a year at the most, all of which he purchased more than 30 years ago.

There is popular support for the government’s move. Surveys in the country’s 
three biggest cities, Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, found that 95% of the 
residents wanted the government to ban the ivory trade in order to protect 
African elephants. Celebrities ranging from actor Wang Luodan to property 
developer Wang Shi signed up for an International Fund for Animal Welfare 
(IFAW) poster campaign pleading: “Say no to ivory products”.

While agreeing that elephants should be protected, Guan doesn’t want all ivory 
to be outlawed. “Overconsumption [of ivory] would cause the elephants to become 
extinct. But artists like Au should be allowed to use the ivory from elephants’ 
natural deaths.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F206926cc60d70a83d341608b23b5b2247488819a%2F0_0_6016_4016%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims'%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China's%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims%27%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China%27s%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F206926cc60d70a83d341608b23b5b2247488819a%2F0_0_6016_4016%2F6016.jpg>
 ‘You are what you collect’… Guan Weiqiang with some of his ivory. Photograph: 
Xiaomei Chen 
Guan’s idea of a demon that drives ivory collectors may sound fanciful. But I 
heard something very similar from a friend of mine, Chen Zhouqi, deputy 
director of the Guangdong Province Folk Art Rescue and Protection Centre, a 
branch of Guangdong Folk Art Association, whose goal is to protect all types of 
folk traditions, from folklores to traditional architecture. Not long after he 
started working full-time for the centre, Chen was given four small ivory 
carvings – two from elephants and two from mammoths. The first gift was from 
Guan Weiqiang, whom he had interviewed for a book project on ivory carving. It 
was an ivory piece the size of a thumbnail, with one of Mao Zedong’s poems, 
Snow, carved in it. “I gave it away to a little boy I met at a story-telling 
contest in 2007,” Chen says.

Wasn’t that a precious gift to give a child, especially one he’d never met 
before? “You know,” Chen says, “I have a feeling that some artists gave me 
small gifts partly because they knew I was in a position where I could help to 
promote their works. It was almost like bribery – kind of scary. And if you 
display them at home and keep looking at them, you could actually feel greed 
growing in you. You will desire more.”

Like others I spoke to, however, he doesn’t entirely understand why 
campaigners focus on ivory rather than other animal products. “Elephants are 
not the only victims. There are others: whales, tigers, giant salamanders, and 
many more.”

***

Zhang Minhui, like Au Yue-Shung, started his career at the Daxin ivory carving 
factory and is now an ivory carving artist with a high profile in China. He 
joined Daxin at the age of 19 in 1972, the year that Au smuggled himself to 
Hong Kong. His life has taken an altogether grander turn.

As well as running his own carving factory, Flower City Boya Craftwork 
Factory, he has roles in no fewer than 20 associations and organisations. 
Chairman of this, professor of that, he is most notably Guangdong province’s 
only National Inheritor of Intangible Cultural Heritage and Representative of 
Ivory Carving Artists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ff9f478ce599295f9a81c78c0ba311b0df030a1%2F0_379_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims'%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China's%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims%27%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China%27s%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ff9f478ce599295f9a81c78c0ba311b0df030a1%2F0_379_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 ‘Yes, elephants should be protected, but so should the tradition and art of 
ivory carving’… Zhang Minhui at his factory in Guangzhou. Photograph: Xiaomei 
Chen 
His ivory carving style is different from Au’s. While Au only does miniature 
carvings in his tiny home studio with one knife, Zhang and his pupils create 
larger works with electric tools in his spacious factory. He wouldn’t tell me 
how big his ivory stock is. When I ask him what he thinks about the government 
ban, he replies, “Listen to the party, cooperate with the government, strive 
for support and carry on the tradition of ivory art.” In other words, it will 
hurt but he’ll have to make the best of it.

He has expected this ban and prepared for a transition. Decades ago he 
diversified from ivory to carve other materials such as mammoth tusks and ox 
bones. “We have saved some elephant tusks from before 1989 – all legal and 
certificated,” he says. “As we are finishing our last legal ivory stock, we 
will use more ox bones and mammoth tusks.”


Ox bone has its advantages, he says. “It’s much cheaper, and can be bigger. We 
have the technique to integrate many bones into one large piece to create 
carvings much bigger than tusks. Besides, it is the art of carving more than 
the materials that really matters and should be protected.”

Don’t many people still prefer ivory to ox bones or mammoth tusks? “Yes,” he 
admits. “Its texture and hardness are perfect for carving. Its colour is more 
appealing to Chinese.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a4717a783232fe803b82957991e478a65baf3cd%2F320_535_5696_3481%2F5696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims'%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China's%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims%27%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China%27s%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a4717a783232fe803b82957991e478a65baf3cd%2F320_535_5696_3481%2F5696.jpg>
 A mammoth ivory carving at Flower City Boya Craftwork Factory. Photograph: 
Xiaomei Chen 
“I think elephants should be protected,” he continues. “The key is stopping 
poaching in Africa. More should be done in Africa. Much more.Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, not China, is the source of illegal 
elephant tusks. Yes, elephants should be protected, but so should the tradition 
and art of ivory carving. Honestly, we artists don’t need a lot of tusks. Those 
from elephants’ natural deaths are more than enough for our creative works 
because each piece takes months, sometimes years, to finish.”

“You know what consumes the most tusks?” he asks. “Ivory jewelry and 
chopsticks. They are easy to make – particularly chopsticks. Modern machines 
make them in large numbers quickly.”

Even these have their collectors, like Szeto Alec, born in Guangzhou in 1958, 
and now a successful airplane salesman who frequently travels between China and 
the United States. To him the ban is “imperious governance” – a dictatorial 
order similar to the one-child policy. The people have no say in it.

For the past 10 years Szeto has been collecting chopsticks from eBay, yard 
sales and estate sales. “Particularly estate sales,” he notes.


Why estate sales? “So the life of the deceased can be continued! I don’t buy 
expensive or artistic big ivory artifacts. I prefer used objects, chopsticks, 
cutlery, etc. Stuff that has been used has life in it. Each piece has a story. 
There is a sense of the continuity of life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d73a2ee2afbc31e17ee831ed3c5100c93737943%2F0_0_6016_4016%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims'%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China's%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims%27%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China%27s%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d73a2ee2afbc31e17ee831ed3c5100c93737943%2F0_0_6016_4016%2F6016.jpg>
 ‘Stuff that has been used has life in it. Each piece has a story…’ Part of 
Szeto Alec’s collection. Photograph: Xiaomei Chen 
The concept of continuity is something that ivory sculptors and collectors 
mention time and again, though they express it in different ways. For Feng 
Suijun, a 39-year-old sculptor and art professor at Guangdong Peizheng College, 
patina is the word.

“Antiques touched by hand often have a great patina – a sense of history and 
life,” he explains in a restaurant near his home in Guangzhou, before turning 
to his wife, Weng Shaoqiong, who is also a sculptor and art teacher. “We should 
touch our ivory ball more to give it a patina.”

Their ivory ball, a four-layer carving about the size of half a golf ball, was 
a gift from a deputy director of Guangzhou Folk Artists’ Association. He asked 
Feng to explore the possibilities for integrating traditional folk arts with 
modern design concepts, and gave Feng the ivory ball so he could experiment. 
Feng has just finished his design – a pendant wrapped in silver.

“It is a lot of pressure,” Feng says, “but I’d love to integrate and modernise 
Guangzhou’s top three carving arts: ivory carving, wood carving and jade 
carving.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc9a8cf5007b482e1df022c7a19eda4682699868%2F0_0_6016_4016%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims'%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China's%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Elephants%20are%20not%20the%20only%20victims%27%3A%20the%20lament%20of%20China%27s%20ivory%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Felephants-victims-lament-china-ivory-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc9a8cf5007b482e1df022c7a19eda4682699868%2F0_0_6016_4016%2F6016.jpg>
 ‘Why single elephants out for protection? How are elephants more important 
than other animals?’… sculptor Feng Suijun with his wife, Weng Shaoqiong. 
Photograph: Xiaomei Chen 
He won’t comment on the government’s latest move, but is still fuming about 
the IFAW campaign. “It is hypocrisy!” he insists. “Each time I see Wang Shi 
staring from those ads, I feel disgusted. Can’t help it. The look in his eyes 
is just disgusting. The other celebrities are not much better. You know, they 
are the ones who can really afford ivory products, not us.

“I am not saying elephants should not be saved. My question is, why single 
elephants out? How are elephants more important than other animals? What about 
the whales killed and eaten by the Japanese? Also, there have been reports that 
some African countries have been appealing to the world to lift the ivory ban 
so their people can make a living. Are elephants more important than the human 
lives in Africa? Why can’t we have a balance between wildlife conservation and 
a good use of natural resources? Can we find a way to make use of ivory while 
at the same time not endangering the elephants? I honestly think western media 
have gone to an extreme and Chinese media follow them blindly.”

Without the ivory trade ban, would he try ivory carving? He specialises in 
wood sculpture and has never worked in ivory.

“I would!” he says firmly. “You know what I think? It is true that elephants 
are endangered, but the art of ivory carving is in greater danger. Nowadays, 
how many people can sit still for hours to learn it?”
 