
The financial crash of 2008 led many to believe it was wrong to have banks so 
big they were not allowed to fail. What the sector needed, was greater 
competition and diversity. Since then, Bank of England reforms have made it 
easier for new entrants to join the market. A new breed of challenger banks 
have emerged such asMetro Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/metro-bank>
, Aldermore, Atom, Monzo and Starling, offering services to both businesses and 
consumers.

These challenger banks have some advantages over their more traditional 
rivals. They have been able to design digital services from scratch, 
unencumbered by legacy IT systems, old agreements and physical assets from the 
past.


According to a report from KPMG 
<https://home.kpmg.com/uk/en/home/insights/2016/04/a-new-landscape-challenger-banking-report-2016.html>
, released in May this year, by embracing technology, these “digitally focused 
challengers” are able to provide a more personalised customer service. The 
report found that the revenues of new entrants are growing rapidly, although 
they still account for only a fraction of all UK deposits, while the big five 
UK retail banks are experiencing decline.

Good for business

Some entrepreneurs appreciate the innovative spirit of these new companies and 
are switching their business banking accounts. Among them is Lars Andersen, 
founder and owner ofArty Lobster <https://artylobster.com/>, which makes 3D 
sculptors of people’s pets. He moved both his personal and business accounts to 
Metro Bank, founded in 2010, after becoming unhappy with some of the fees his 
previous bank, Santander, had charged. “I was slightly concerned about it being 
a new bank. But I think the requirements for gaining a banking licence in the 
UK are quite strict, so I don’t think it’s more of a risk than a major bank,” 
he says.

Switching bank accounts should not be an issue for most small businesses. 
Companies with a turnover less than £6.5m and fewer than 50 staff can move 
their accounts via the Current Account Switch Service (CASS). The process takes 
up to seven days but guarantees no payments or direct debits are missed in the 
process.

Sometimes it takes people from the outside to remove all the complications and 
put the user first
Ben Little 
Andersen says the switching process was “relatively painless” and since then, 
he’s been particularly impressed with his online account management. “I do 
internet banking and the Metro’s online services are very good,” he says. 
“Also, if I need to speak to someone at the branch, which I did a little bit to 
begin with, it’s fairly quick and painless. These are not words you’d associate 
with a high street bank. On the whole, I haven’t found it life-changing – it’s 
just a bank account. But I think it is slightly better in every way.”

RMP Construction Services <http://www.rmp-cs.co.uk/>, led by Robert and 
Rachael Pinchbeck, took an invoice financing deal with Aldermore Bank, 
established in 2009, in order to finance bigger, more ambitious projects. The 
£7.9m business, founded the same year as its financier, started off by offering 
site engineering services and surveys anddiversified into civil engineering and 
carpentry. But the company’s previous lender, Lloyd’s Commercial Finance, was 
not prepared to give it the support it needed for some of the larger 
construction deals. So RMP approached challenger bank Aldermore and found the 
conversation far more productive.

“One of the things we really liked about Aldermore was that they really 
understood the industry. They came out to see us and we were impressed by how 
much they understood,” says finance director Rachael Pinchbeck. “We use an 
invoice discounting service, which enables us to borrow money against our 
invoices when needed. This is really helpful for cash flow for large 
construction projects. There’s no other way of handling these contracts and 
business growth unless you have considerable cash reserves.”

Sticking together

For some entrepreneurs, the concept of a challenger bank is, in itself, 
enticing. Small business owners can relate to the little guy taking on the big 
corporates and may be inclined to back them. For Ben Little, co-founder of 
innovation consultancyFearlessly Frank <http://www.fearlesslyfrank.com/>, this 
was part of the appeal of Monzo. “Entrepreneurs want a bank that behaves as 
they do, and works at the same speed too – both from a personal point of view 
and business point of view,” he says.

Would you do your banking with a tech startup?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/19/monzo-banking-tech-startup-current-account>
Little uses his pre-paid Monzo card, which he tops up from his current account 
regularly, for both business and personal use. The card connects to an app on 
his phone and he receives push notifications each time he makes a purchase. It 
also itemises all his spending, which he says is useful for budgeting, and he 
hasn’t experienced any high charges when travelling abroad. “I basically live 
on a plane and so it’s good to have a card which is accepted everywhere and 
which doesn’t charge you crazy fees.”

Indeed Monzo, formerly Mondo, may be one of the few banks in the world that 
can legitimately claim to have fans. The business, led by CEO Tom Blomfield, 
raised £1m via crowdfundingin 96 seconds 
<http://blog.crowdcube.com/2016/03/03/mondo-reaches-1m-in-96-seconds/> earlier 
this year, and has a backlog of people wanting to use its services. Little says 
he, too, is impressed by the way the bank approaches its market. “I think it’s 
great to see a company which is promoting itself in an unconventional way. I 
also like backing a challenger; sometimes it takes people from the outside to 
remove all the complications and politics and put the user first.”

Little says he has instructed his finance director to explore how other 
challenger banks, such as Aldermore, can benefit his company and believes other 
small businesses should do the same. “The banks have lost so much trust through 
the PPI scandal and other problems, it’s right that they face more competition. 
They could be doing more but they aren’t,” he says.

“From an innovation perspective, there are currently more startups than ever 
before and the market is wide open for banks that want to embrace it, share the 
vision and behave like us rather than like a corporate.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 