
Asian stocks and the pound sagged again on Tuesday as investors waited for 
Theresa May to lay out plans for Britain exit theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and potentially the single market.


 Britain would not seek a deal that left it “half in, half out” of the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/theresa-may-to-confirm-uk-exit-from-eu-single-market-speech>
, the prime minister’s office said as she prepared to outline her 12 priorities 
for Brexit talks with the bloc.

 Priorities were expected to include leaving the EU’s single market and 
regaining full control of Britain’s borders, reinforcingfears of a “hard Brexit”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/uk-business-leaders-cbi-train-crash-brexit>
 that have pushed the pound to some of the lowest levels against the US dollar 
in more than three decades and weighed on other riskier assets such as stocks.

 Growing uncertainty over the policies of Donald Trump have also hurt 
equities, which had rallied in many parts of the world thanks to speculation 
that the US president-elect would enact bold stimulus and reflationary measures 
once in office.

MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan lost 0.1%, while 
Japan’s Nikkei brushed a five-week low and was down 0.4% at one point.


 “Europe is going to be dominating the headlines today and the focus is 
justifiably on May’s speech, and also on the interviews that Trump gave to 
European newspapers,” said Stefan Worrall, director of Japan equity sales at 
Credit Suisse in Tokyo.

Sterling <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> hovered around 
$1.2050, in striking distance of the previous day’s $1.1983, which was its 
lowest point since 7 October.

 The weaker pound helped take some pressure off of the greenback, which has 
been burdened by investor uncertainty over whether the incoming Trump 
administration would actually be able to implement effective policies.

 The euro was little changed at $1.0604 after dipping about 0.4% overnight.

 The yen benefited from its safe-haven status, holding its gains versus 
against the dollar, euro and sterling.

The Australian dollar, sensitive to shifts in risk sentiment, was down 0.1% at 
$0.7472. Higher iron ore prices had taken the Aussie to a one-month high of 
$0.7519 last week.


 Gold was helped by the heightened risk aversion stemming from Brexit and 
uncertainty over Trump’s plans. Spot gold was $1,203.93 an ounce after climbing 
to $1,207.86 overnight, its highest since late November.
 