
It had become like a daily execution. I found performing on stage excruciating 
yet it provided a sense of relief from myself. Someone else’s words. A costume. 
Being surrounded by other people. After each show, suffering chronic anxiety, I 
returned to my filthy flat and drank to escape, knowing deep down I was hanging 
on by my fingertips.

It was the spring of 1995 and I was in Stratford-upon-Avon playing Mercutio in 
Romeo and Juliet for theRoyal Shakespeare Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc>, directed by Adrian Noble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jul/31/adrian-noble-director-portrait-artist>
. I was delighted to be asked to return to the RSC, but my illness had already 
begun to affect my thinking. I was upset because I hadn’t been asked to play 
Romeo and I rang up Adrian to tell him so. Underneath the bravura, I wanted to 
belong somewhere. Against advice from my agent, I accepted the job. It was 
calamitous because in my soul I didn’t want to do it and crucially (although I 
didn’t know) I wasn’t well enough to do it.

During early rehearsals my mood elevated. I began to feel invincible. I 
wouldn’t (or couldn’t) take direction. Adrian was concerned and quietly 
reprimanded me for not sticking to one line of direction. He brought to my 
attention that I was consistently changing things and being erratic. My insight 
was beginning to disintegrate. I felt removed from the real world. I think 
other members of the company were concerned that someone who was initially the 
life and soul had become withdrawn and isolated. I knew it was difficult for 
people to reach me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fonstage-breakdown-rsc-mark-lockyer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb97bf46ba4eb8fa95481fc9288823c89e3db38c1%2F150_240_2887_4255%2F2887.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20thought%20I%20was%20possessed%20by%20the%20devil'%3A%20my%20onstage%20breakdown%20at%20the%20RSC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fonstage-breakdown-rsc-mark-lockyer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20thought%20I%20was%20possessed%20by%20the%20devil%27%3A%20my%20onstage%20breakdown%20at%20the%20RSC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fonstage-breakdown-rsc-mark-lockyer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb97bf46ba4eb8fa95481fc9288823c89e3db38c1%2F150_240_2887_4255%2F2887.jpg>
 ‘I was shaking with fear that I would forget my lines’ … Lockyer on stage in 
1995. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
By the time we opened the show, I was behaving completely out of character on 
stage and off but feeling powerless to stop it. I was short-tempered and 
argumentative. I stopped washing. Ate little. My flat was a mess and I found 
myself sleeping all day until the show in the evening. Paranoia became a normal 
part of my perception. I thought I was possessed by the devil. I believed 
people in the street knew, that they were talking about me behind my back.

Performing every night and drinking heavily to ease the stress took its toll. 
Those performances were a horrendous experience. Shaking with the fear that I 
would forget my lines, I would get an overwhelming desire to run off stage 
during a scene. I used to stick my nails into my thumb to give me a hit of 
pain, which helped me concentrate; I had scabs from where I drew blood. I 
thought the audience could see right into my soul and knew what a charlatan I 
was.

I thought they were laughing about my disintegrating performance. Of course, 
Mercutio is a tragic character. He knows he’s dying but jokes about it. I felt 
as if I was dying, my life slipping through my fingers, unable to keep control. 
Was I ever any good in the role? I don’t know. But it’s clear that fear, 
tension and emotional exhaustion had eroded anything of creative worth that I’d 
been working on in rehearsals. A psychosis had developed. The unreal really had 
become real.

I stuck my nails into my thumb to give me a hit of pain, which helped me 
concentrate

I went to my mother’s for Christmas. On Boxing Day I collapsed, unable to 
leave my bed for fear that I might die. The GP signed me off work with that 
all-encompassing word: stress.

I did numerous absurd things. I found myself hitchhiking a lot. I never knew 
where I was going. I didn’t care. One day I was picked up by an eccentric 
character called Sacha, a travelling masseuse. By the time we arrived in a 
village in west Wales, I had developed a new character to play: Sergei, from 
Moscow. I was asked to sing a Russian folk song at a local festival. I strummed 
a few chords in A minor and made it up, no fear.

At another point I thought it would be a good idea to start a new life abroad. 
With £30 in my pocket after buying a one-way ticket to Skiathos, I arrived with 
just a T-shirt, shorts and flip-flops. I had a sense of being in freefall. In 
my eyes, my life was worthless: what did it matter anyway? Finally, I was 
diagnosed with manic depression – or, as we call it today, bipolar disorder. I 
had a serious mental illness and was self-medicating with alcohol. It only made 
things worse. While I drank I could never truly be well so I had to stop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fonstage-breakdown-rsc-mark-lockyer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72c8364bdcb3289b82102439400bde0518bdd9f1%2F0_182_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20thought%20I%20was%20possessed%20by%20the%20devil'%3A%20my%20onstage%20breakdown%20at%20the%20RSC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fonstage-breakdown-rsc-mark-lockyer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20thought%20I%20was%20possessed%20by%20the%20devil%27%3A%20my%20onstage%20breakdown%20at%20the%20RSC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fonstage-breakdown-rsc-mark-lockyer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72c8364bdcb3289b82102439400bde0518bdd9f1%2F0_182_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 ‘It’s about something that could happen to any of us’ … Lockyer in Living With 
the Lights On. Photograph: Stephen Cummiskey 
It’s been 19 years since I was diagnosed, and bipolar disorder has affected my 
career in that sometimes because of a relapse I wasn’t available to rehearse 
and perform in plays for long stretches; getting better can take a while. 
Employers on the whole have been understanding and supportive. But there is 
still the stigma. I’ve been lucky, but I know some directors wouldn’t want to 
employ me because they see me as a risk.Mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> is part of life. I believe 
that in coming years it will become something that’s impossible to sweep under 
the carpet.

After my first breakdown, I took the idea of a show about my experiences to my 
friendKen Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/sep/01/obituary.ken.campbell>, who I 
met when he taught improvisation at Rada. He helped me create the beginnings of 
an evening called Living With the Lights On. After playing the show for a 
handful of performances, I realised the climate wasn’t conducive then for such 
material to be performed.


I arrived in Skiathos with £30 in my pocket. I had a sense of being in freefall

Last year, I gave the script to Ramin Gray, artistic director of the Actors 
Touring Company <http://www.atctheatre.com/>. We shaped a new production and 
took it around the UK. Living With the Lights On is about something that could 
happen to any us. I love performing the show. It’s not like acting per se, it’s 
more like having a chat. It’s only my take – I don’t think my experience is 
special or different. But I experienced an amazing story of life. I feel 
compelled to tell it.

I’m at the door to greet and shake the hand of every audience member as they 
come in and to offer them a cup of tea and a biscuit because it immediately 
breaks any formality. No need for a set. Just simple lighting and a couple of 
props. I’m not pretending to be anything other than me. I laugh at myself and 
the hilarious, tragic and absurd things I saw and did. I play all the 
extraordinary people I met on my bipolar rollercoaster.

• Living With the Lights On is at the Bike Shed, Exeter 
<https://www.bikeshedtheatre.co.uk/shows/living-with-the-lights-on-2/>, until 3 
December (01392 434169). Atthe Young Vic, London 
<http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/living-with-the-lights-on>, 7-23 December 
(020-7922 2922).
 