
A charity worker buying his first home has had his £67,000 life savings stolen 
after fraudsters hacked into emails sent between him and his conveyancing 
solicitor.

Howard Mollett’s case will send a shiver down the spine of anyone who is in 
the process of buying a home, or planning to do so, and comes hard on the heels 
of a warning from the solicitors’ watchdog that “conveyancing theft” involving 
hacked emails is now the most common cybercrime in legal circles.

Mollett, who works for a humanitarian charity, says that so far just £7,800 of 
his cash has been recovered. As he had already signed up to a mortgage and 
exchanged contracts on the one-bedroom flat he was buying, he had to borrow the 
money from his father and sister to ensure that the purchase didn’t fall 
through.

Banks' online security is failing customers, says Which?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/20/banks-online-security-is-failing-customers-says-which>
“My dad is 72, has had health issues for a number of years and was supposed to 
retire in December, but has had to postpone that now as his nest egg is gone. 
As a consequence, my parents may have to sell their home,” says Mollett, 40. 
“So it’s really important that we get the funds back or be compensated for his 
sake in particular.”

Mollett and the solicitors accuse each other of being at fault. The fraudsters 
used the email address of a member of staff at the solicitors that Mollett had 
been dealing with, prompting him to say that “all the evidence I’ve seen points 
to it being the solicitors that were hacked, not myself”. However, the law firm 
concerned, Middlesex-based Sethi Partnership Solicitors, denies there was any 
flaw in its IT systems, adding: “[We] assert that it was in fact Mr Mollett’s 
own careless actions that led to his loss.” The firm also says that the banks 
“should take more responsibility”.

There’s a name for this type of email hacking scam involving the theft of 
homebuying cash, according to the Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA): 
“Friday afternoon fraud”. This reflects the fact that most completions take 
place that day – something that plays into the hands of criminals because it 
buys them more time to avoid detection.

Mollett was in the final stages of buying the flat in south London when the 
fraudsters struck. His offer on the flat was accepted in April 2016 and, on the 
recommendation of his mortgage adviser, he appointed the Sethi Partnership as 
his conveyancing solicitors.

Mobile banking in the spotlight as fraudsters pull £6,000 sting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/02/mobile-banking-fraud-o2-nationwide>
On 29 September he transferred £45,000 from his Barclays account to his 
solicitor’s legitimate bank account at HSBC. However, a message from his bank 
popped up on his screen telling him that the funds could take up to three days 
to clear. He had to make the transfers online as he was travelling abroad for 
work and realised that if that was the case for all the remaining tranches of 
money he would miss his completion date.

Mollett says the solicitors had emphasised how important it was to ensure all 
the funds reached them on time, so he emailed the Sethi Partnership that same 
day asking about the best way to get the rest of the money – a total of £74,837 
to cover the remaining deposit, stamp duty, fees etc – to them promptly to meet 
the deadline.

It was at this point that the fraudsters contacted him, using the email 
address of the member of staff at the solicitors whom he had been dealing with 
all through the process – though Mollett was unaware the emails had been 
hijacked. This email stated that the firm’s usual bank account could not 
receive Chaps or Bacs payments, and advised him to pay the money into its 
Yorkshire Bank account.

The following day, 30 September, he transferred £42,000 to this Yorkshire Bank 
account, and then sent a confirmation of transfer by email to the member of 
staff at the Sethi Partnership. He received a reply – purporting to be from the 
firm, but again from the fraudsters – confirming receipt of his email.

On 1 October he transferred a further £25,000 to the Yorkshire Bank account, 
and again received confirmation of receipt of his email.

The following day Mollett received a further email purporting to be from 
Sethi, though again in fact from the criminals, stating that amounts of less 
than £10,000 should be directed to the firm’s NatWest account. So the final 
tranche of £7,837 was sent to a NatWest account. Mollett received an email 
which again appeared to be from his contact at the solicitors, stating: “I 
won’t be at the office tomorrow. On Tuesday I will call you to make 
arrangements for completion on Wednesday. Thanks for the prompt payment and 
have a fun trip back.” (The latter remark was a reference to his work trip.)

This is not an email address similar to, but one letter different from, my 
solicitor – it is her email address
Howard Mollett 
On 4 October Mollett realised something terrible had happened when an email 
arrived from the Sethi Partnership confirming that only the first £45,000 had 
reached its bank account. He quickly spoke to all the banks concerned, but the 
only bit of good news was that the £7,837 that went to NatWest had been frozen 
and was later returned to him. He has not received a penny back of the £67,000 
that he transferred to Yorkshire Bank.

As for his own bank, Barclays, Mollett says: “I feel let down and messed 
around.” He says he was later told that at least £9,000 of his money was 
transferred from Yorkshire Bank to a Barclays account, presumably one belonging 
to the criminals or their associates.

Mollett was introduced to a cyber-security specialist who had previously 
provided advice to his employer, who offered to give him some free help. This 
expert, who wants to remain anonymous, analysed the chain of emails and says in 
his report: “The analysis indicates that a fraudster gained access to [the 
named Sethi employee’s] email account, most likely via her webmail, where the 
fraudster modified and rerouted the emails from her account … The analysis 
showed that it was not Howard Mollett’s email that was hacked. Instead, he 
received valid, authentic emails coming from [the employee’s] email account, 
which were authored by the fraudster.”

Meanwhile, a lawyer offered to help him pro bono and wrote to the Sethi 
Partnership asking that it compensate Mollett on the grounds it had allowed a 
client’s confidentiality to be breached.

Mollett says the fact the emails came from his solicitor’s email address and 
were part of a chain of correspondence were why he didn’t question their 
authenticity. “This is not someone claiming to be the cousin of the President 
of Nigeria asking me to wire money to them. And this is not an email address 
similar to, but one letter different from, my solicitor – it is her email 
address.”

Intriguingly, on or around 4 October, the day the crime was uncovered, the 
Sethi Partnership introduced a warning in bold text at the bottom of its emails 
pointing out the “significant risk posed by cyber fraud, specifically affecting 
email accounts and bank account details. Please note that this firm’s bank 
account details will not change during the course of a transaction and we will 
not change our bank account details via email … We will not accept 
responsibility if you transfer money into an incorrect bank account.” Guardian 
Money has seen copies of emails from a few days earlier that don’t include this 
warning. Mollett says: “If only they had given such a warning of these risks 
before the crime happened.”

Early last month the SRA said conveyancing fraud “can see people lose their 
life savings”. It added: “We also want to see firms making sure their clients 
are aware of the risks. For instance, we would recommend that people avoid 
sharing bank details over email, or transferring money before confirming the 
source of any request.”

Our view is that the situation arose largely due to the carelessness of Mr 
Mollett
The Sethi Partnership 
In a statement, the Sethi Partnership said: “Our view is that the situation 
arose largely due to the carelessness of Mr Mollett.” It said it was aware 
Mollett had to frequently travel abroad for work, “and he regularly uses 
internet access from various unsecured locations, leaving his computer 
vulnerable to hacking … In comparison, our systems have a significant amount of 
security … Therefore we are confident at this stage that the security of our IT 
systems have not been breached, and vulnerabilities are with Mr Mollett’s own 
systems”.

The firm claimed that, as an existing client, Mollett was aware the company 
had only one bank account, with HSBC, with all payments to be made to this, 
adding: “We never disclose our bank details in email communication … Clearly Mr 
Mollett should have been more vigilant and checked the details before making 
the transfer to an unknown account name.”

A Yorkshire Bank spokesman says the money was withdrawn from the account soon 
after the transfer from Mollett. “We were very sorry to hear that Mr Mollett 
has been the victim of a fraud having received a number of fraudulent emails 
from criminals.” He adds: “We work hard to ensure our customers are aware of 
the steps they can take to protect themselves. We are also collaborating with 
the Joint Fraud Taskforce which has been set up to tackle fraud in the UK. We 
enforce a range of fraud prevention measures during both account opening and 
throughout the relationship.”

In a letter to Mollett, Barclays concedes that he received “poor service” in 
relation to the information he was given. A bank spokesman told Money: “This 
scam is a tragic case of criminal theft by a fraudster hacking and amending a 
solicitor’s emails, meaning Mr Mollett paid funds to the fraudster rather than 
the intended recipient, his solicitor. We have every sympathy with Mr Mollett 
and acted swiftly to try to recover funds at the time this was reported.”

The spokesman confirmed some of the funds originally transferred to Yorkshire 
Bank were sent to another Barclays account but, “regrettably, even before Mr 
Mollett first contacted Barclays, these funds had already been paid away”.

How to avoid being conned

Email scam costs couple £25,000 – but no one will help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/fraud-scam-email-barclays-lloyds>
Guardian Money is regularly contacted by people who have been conned out of 
life-changing sums of money having fallen victim to highly sophisticated email 
scams.

The common thread in these cases is that they involve people who have employed 
a legitimate solicitor/builder/accountant etc, with whom they are in email 
correspondence.

Typically, the victim receives a request for payment via email, which doesn’t 
arouse suspicion because they were expecting it. It usually looks authentic and 
is for the correct amount – but behind the scenes the email account of either 
the victim or the business has been hacked, and the bank account number and 
sort code are the crook’s.

Cases featured by Money include that of David and Sarah Fisher from north-west 
London, who lost £25,000 after receiving a genuine invoice for building work, 
then what appeared to be a follow-up email from the same firm but was in fact a 
scam, with a fresh invoice attached that included “our new banking details”. 
They made a payment and their money was gone.

In most cases, the banks operating the accounts the fraudsters use to accept 
people’s money say that by the time they are made aware of a crime, the cash 
has been cleaned out.

If you receive an emailed invoice or request for payment, and it is someone 
you have not previously made a payment to, or have paid before but they have 
changed their bank details, your default position should be suspicion – even if 
you were expecting it. Phone the individual or company and check they have 
asked for the money, and that the bank details provided are correct.

If it is a large sum, send a small amount first, then check that the right 
person has received it before paying the balance.
 