 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c1173f7f72a6ef5e31b87ce95b9f2b92961237c%2F1340_0_2706_3385%2F2706.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98If%20I%20hadn%E2%80%99t%20met%20Michelle%20Obama%2C%20I%20might%20not%20be%20where%20I%20am%20today%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98If%20I%20hadn%E2%80%99t%20met%20Michelle%20Obama%2C%20I%20might%20not%20be%20where%20I%20am%20today%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c1173f7f72a6ef5e31b87ce95b9f2b92961237c%2F1340_0_2706_3385%2F2706.jpg>
Isha Sesay

 A presenter and correspondent for CNN International. She travelled with 
Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> in Liberia 
and Morocco last year for the making of the CNN documentaryWe Will Rise: 
Michelle Obama’s Mission to Educate Girls Around the World 

It will be a strange and sad moment for me, a woman of colour, when Michelle 
Obama leaves the White House. To lose the imagery of a black first family and 
all that Michelle Obama has bought to the table, all she has actively and 
routinely worked for. I’ve been in the States now for 11 years now but every 
time they stepped out as the first family it got me. It never lost its potency. 
She is such an active and participatory first lady. No one knows what kind of 
first ladyMelania Trump  <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump>
will be. No one is saying she won’t carve her own path, but Michelle Obama was 
very special.

I first met her in 2014 when I was invited to the White House to attend a 
formal dinner for a US/Africa summit. All the heads of state from Africa came 
to DC along with their first ladies and I was asked to moderate a panel for Mrs 
Obama and Mrs Bush at the Kennedy Centre. Later an invite came to the formal 
dinner, which was thrilling. At the White House you wait in line to be 
introduced and when I got to Mrs Obama she said “I almost wore that same dress 
tonight!” And I say “No!” and she says “Yes!” and she gave me the biggest hug. 
She was just amazing, very tall, very warm, she just scooped me up into this 
big hug the very first time I met her.

The Obamas celebrate people of colour, they want to include them. Both she and 
the president are skilled at knowing what they can achieve by aligning 
themselves with other successful people of colour, how it amplifies the message 
of what is possible. I think they almost do it as a public service. They 
understand that every time they have Beyoncé with them, or John Legend or Jay 
Z, the message goes further and it opens the minds of kids in the inner cities 
to the possibilities and I think that’s smart.

CNN discussed various projects with the White House and then settled on the 
first lady going to Africa, for her last overseas trip. [In the documentary 
Michelle Obama, along with Sesay and actors Freida Pinto and Meryl Streep, 
meets and speaks with young north African women who describe their struggles to 
get an education.] I got an email asking how I would feel about travelling to 
Africa with the first lady and practically had to pick myself up off the floor.

When we were in Liberia I kept watching how she was trying to connect with the 
girls who spoke, really watching them and willing them on as they struggled in 
some cases. It was very moving because she really wanted them to feel safe and 
able to share. Before we arrived I asked the White House about the protocol for 
the girls who would meet her. How should they address her? Could they touch 
her?’ I was able to tell them that from the White House point of view, once 
you’re in the bubble so to speak [through security], once you are in the room 
with her, you’re good. So the girls could touch her, refer to her freely, there 
were no restrictions placed on interactions with her at all.

We went to hear her talk at the Peace Corps [the US government’s volunteer 
programme] in Monrovia and she just walked into that space and practically blew 
the roof off with her energy levels. I will say, and I’m 41, that whenever I’m 
with her and I listen to her speak you walk out and you are charged by being in 
her presence, by hearing her words of motivation. It’s not just the words she 
utters, it’s her conviction and it’s her life story that backs them up. In 
Morocco I saw how willing she was to share her own insecurities, her own 
challenges with the girls. She said to them: “We’re all girls here together. 
We’re all going to share.” How many first ladies in the world can you imagine 
just busting in and saying: “This is girl-talk time”? And it resonates 
authentically. I think maybe that’s the difference. Other people say it but she 
means it.

I last saw her for a special screening of the film at the White House. She was 
really mischievous. I told her that in Morocco I had been in the souk late at 
night and as I was wandering around a guy asked me: “Are you an Obama?’ and I 
looked left and I looked right and I said: “Yes, I am!” and she roared with 
laughter. And then she walked into the east room and was doing her intro for 
everyone, welcoming Meryl Streep and Andra Day who did the song [Rise Up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lwgr_IMeEgA>] and then it got to me and she 
said: “And by the way, Isha here has been passing herself off as...” I almost 
died.

I am not surprised by her popularity at all. Not now that I’ve met her on a 
couple of occasions. I understand it and I think if more people had the 
opportunity to spend one-on-one time with her there would be more people 
clamouring for her to run, because she is that amazing. I mean when she gave 
that speech during campaigning, when she just laid out her heart and said how 
offended she was by the Trump video, and the speech she gave during the 
conventions. I think those speeches really elevated her. I wouldn’t want her to 
stand though. I think she’ll be far more effective outside the machinery of 
government. Look at what Hillary Clinton went through and the double standards 
that were forced upon her. Now imagine what would happen to a black woman – the 
intersection between gender and race is just a whole other ballgame.

I asked her while we were working in Liberia: “What will your post-White House 
years look like?” and she said: “This.” This is what she’s committed to doing – 
lifting up girls and ripping off the roof and removing all the limitations 
girls feel and others impose on them and expanding their horizons. I hope 
that’s what she’s able to do. It’s what she’s good at and she can make such a 
difference.

Isha Sesay is the founder of WE Can Lead <http://we-canlead.org/>, a 
non-profit organisation working in Sierra Leone to educate and empower girls.

Tamanna Islam 

 A 15-year-old student at Mulberry school in east London. After visiting the 
school in June 2015, Michelle Obama later invited a group of students, 
including Tamanna, to the White House in November that year


Before she came, there was such a buzz. I was in the main school hall with 300 
other students. Everyone was quiet, everyone eagerly awaiting her arrival. When 
she walked on to the stage, we jumped to our feet – clapping, shouting, crying. 
She brought this incredible vibe and the atmosphere was just electric.

Throughout her speech she made eye contact with everyone, and gave these 
little smiles. It made it feel so personal, like she was just talking to you. 
And then, at the end, she hugged every pupil in the front row, including me! 
She pulled me close, looked me in the eye and told me: “I’m so proud of you.”

I was one of the 20 students selected by my teachers to travel to the White 
House in Washington DC. When we met her again, she recollected every single 
detail from her visit: how special it was to see us waving the American flag, 
how moved she was by our performance of Still I Rise [the Maya Angelou poem]. 
It was nerve-racking going through all of the security, but once we were 
inside, Michelle made us feel like we were visiting a friend. In addition to 
meeting her, we were introduced to lots of senior women working at the White 
House, such as in the justice and crime department. It was so inspiring and 
enlightening to see so many women and people from ethnic-minority backgrounds 
in positions of power.

Michelle Obama understands what it is like to be a young Muslim woman in Tower 
Hamlets. “Your story is my story,” she told our school. Growing up in a 
working-class environment in Chicago, she faced her own sort of unfairness, but 
she worked hard and showed the world that she could do anything. And if girls 
like us can raise our aspirations, it shows the rest of Britain, the rest of 
the world, that we can do anything.

Since meeting her, I’ve started to seek out what I can do to make a positive 
change in my community. She taught me I have a responsibility to use my voice 
to break down negative stereotypes of Muslim women, and make change for the 
next generation after that. Her charisma, her energy – it makes you feel like 
you can take on the entire world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa1750485ac0f19025d50ec5af50fbece9dcfab4%2F22_59_997_1247%2F997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98If%20I%20hadn%E2%80%99t%20met%20Michelle%20Obama%2C%20I%20might%20not%20be%20where%20I%20am%20today%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98If%20I%20hadn%E2%80%99t%20met%20Michelle%20Obama%2C%20I%20might%20not%20be%20where%20I%20am%20today%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa1750485ac0f19025d50ec5af50fbece9dcfab4%2F22_59_997_1247%2F997.jpg>
Dr Vanessa Ogden

 Headteacher, Mulberry school


We had been approached by the American embassy a couple of months prior about 
the possibility of helping to launch a project on girls and education, but had 
no idea that Michelle Obama was involved in any way. Over about a two-month 
period, it became apparent that we were one of the top two institutions they 
were looking at – and I still had no idea who was fronting the launch. We 
eventually found out about the visit in May 2015, and had just three weeks to 
get ready for her arrival in June! I learned a lot in those weeks about how to 
manage high-level security. One of my favourite, and most surreal, moments was 
standing in a school conference room, debating with special ops and secret 
service officers about how to manage the security in a working school 
environment. Of course I was nervous – I had a responsibility to make things as 
good as they could be, and it was a very high-adrenaline time. But more than 
anything I just felt hugely appreciative, so grateful for what this could bring 
to the school.

For me, the most important aspect of the first lady’s visit was making sure 
that every girl at Mulberry should have some kind of interaction with her, 
whether it was watching her speech, presenting gifts or performing a song. The 
whole thing, from start to finish, was for the girls. It wasn’t about Mrs 
Obama, it wasn’t about the other important people there, it was absolutely for 
the girls.

That’s the thing about the first lady – she has no ego. These visits for her 
are completely non-hierarchical. They’re about the person she’s meeting, the 
people she’s addressing. She connects with people because of who they are – not 
because of who she is.

For example: one of the things that made the planning so complex was that we 
arranged to live-stream Michelle’s speech into the sports hall, so that every 
girl who couldn’t fit in the main hall could experience it at the same time. It 
was Michelle’s idea to go and surprise all the girls gathered in the sports 
hall at the end of the speech. That’s what makes her so special – she thinks so 
carefully and prepares so well for each visit. They had no idea she was coming, 
and when they saw her, they went absolutely wild.

We visited the White House in November, as part of a 10-day cultural trip to 
the US. Students underwent a rigorous selection process to take part, which 
involved attending an after-school civil rights programme, a written 
application, making a speech in front of a panel of teachers and finally being 
interviewed by myself and the governors.

After a tour of the west wing and a cuddle (and a selfie) with Bo [the Obamas’ 
pet dog], the girls sat down and asked Michelle questions, all of them quite 
serious. At the end, Michelle leaned forward and said, eye’s glittering: “Now 
come on. Let’s talk about the things you want to know.” For 15 minutes the 
girls and Mrs Obama chatted on a personal level, as girls and women do every 
day. I’m afraid we made a pact to keep our discussion secret, so I can’t reveal 
if Barack Obama does the chores.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d91db4694b05382208378d6c5034c244f85e8f1%2F529_129_884_1105%2F884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98If%20I%20hadn%E2%80%99t%20met%20Michelle%20Obama%2C%20I%20might%20not%20be%20where%20I%20am%20today%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98If%20I%20hadn%E2%80%99t%20met%20Michelle%20Obama%2C%20I%20might%20not%20be%20where%20I%20am%20today%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d91db4694b05382208378d6c5034c244f85e8f1%2F529_129_884_1105%2F884.jpg>
Myesha Haque

A 17-year-old student and aspiring lawyer, who hosted the first lady when she 
visited Mulberry school

I couldn’t believe she was there at first. I had to keep blinking and 
blinking. Out of all the schools in the UK, all the schools in London, she 
chose to come to Mulberry, our school! As deputy head prefect, I had been given 
the responsibility to host the first lady. Because of this, I found out about 
her visit earlier than any of the other students, which was so hard to keep 
secret. After taking photos next to the American flag, we began our tour of the 
school. Even just walking beside her, I was star-struck by her charisma and 
charm.

Walking into the main Mulberry courtyard with her was an absolutely 
awe-inspiring moment. The flags were waving, there was cheering, there was 
clapping. Four hundred students all trying to get a glimpse of her. As she met 
people, her eyes lit up. Her face, her body language was so uplifting – you 
could just see how happy she was.
We walked on to our Year 9 project area, where our choir, conducted by a Year 
9 pupil, sang ‘Something Inside So Strong’ and another student read the poem 
‘Still I Rise’ by Maya Angelou. While the girls were performing the First Lady 
hugged me to her side and murmured to me, “I cannot believe this. This is 
amazing.” I was nervous, but that warmth really comforted me. She felt like a 
friend, even though she’s in high power. That hug was an experience I’ll never 
forget, one I’ll cherish for a lifetime.

Her story, of growing up in a working-class environment in Chicago, has made 
me realise I can all overcome all barriers and challenges in my life, that I 
can achieve anything. We’ve been inspired as Mulberry students to carry on her
Let Girls Learn <https://www.whitehouse.gov/letgirlslearn>campaign, even after 
she stops being first lady. Mulberry and Michelle – we’re besties now. We’re 
linked for life.

Ronald Ligon

A 19-year-old graduate of Harper high school, Chicago, and a member of the US 
military. He met Michelle Obama when she visited his school in April 2013, and 
was invited to the White House in June that year


All I said was that my favourite food was french fries. But that was enough to 
make her face split into a big smile and laugh: “That’s my favourite too!” She 
got up and hugged me just because I get the same satisfaction from french 
fries. It was too funny. I just felt like awh, oh my God, this is wonderful.

The first lady came to my school nearly four years ago. She sat down with a 
group of about 20 of us and asked us questions about our lives, about what it’s 
like to grow up in the south side [of Chicago]. For someone that has so much 
power, she cancelled all of that out. She told us to relax, slouch if we wanted 
to, make ourselves at home. “I’m a regular person trying to make a change, just 
like you are,” she said. We didn’t have to use big words or act proper to get 
through to her, we could just be ourselves.

For about three hours we talked to her about the violence in our communities. 
She wasn’t surprised – she grew up in Englewood [Chicago] and lived through a 
bunch of shootings around her house – but she was hurt that we have to go 
through it every single day.

Honestly, If I hadn’t met Michelle Obama, I might not be where I am today. 
Pretty much two weeks after I returned after visiting the first lady in the 
White House, my family got into a big fight with other people in my community. 
We ended up losing our home, and for about four to five months we were 
homeless. The first couple of months I was really low. I didn’t want to go to 
school, I didn’t want to do anything. I had no hope.

But then one day I came back to find my mom on the couch crying, saying that 
she couldn’t provide for us, that she had failed our family. It hurt so bad to 
see her so sad. I remembered, then, how Michelle had told me that no matter 
what hardships you have, there’s always a strong possibility you can overcome 
them. Looking at my mom sitting there crying, I decided to step up. I got back 
into school and I got a job working eight hours a day, seven days a week. I got 
enough money to fix things for my mom and get the house we’re living in now. I 
graduated from school and I enrolled in the military. I got back on track 
because of the first lady’s words, because of the honesty and trust that she 
put in me. I try not to remind myself too much about those times, but whenever 
I’m in a deep situation I always look back on that moment.

I’m still not over how Donald Trump won and how we’re going to lose both the 
first lady and Barack Obama as well. I’m so happy I got to meet her in person, 
twice, but I’m really going to miss them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feee4cf7f220490999d567a9263a6ce754ca1023a%2F326_116_1003_1253%2F1003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98If%20I%20hadn%E2%80%99t%20met%20Michelle%20Obama%2C%20I%20might%20not%20be%20where%20I%20am%20today%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98If%20I%20hadn%E2%80%99t%20met%20Michelle%20Obama%2C%20I%20might%20not%20be%20where%20I%20am%20today%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-who-changed-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feee4cf7f220490999d567a9263a6ce754ca1023a%2F326_116_1003_1253%2F1003.jpg>
Fouzya Toukart

 She met Michelle Obama in Morocco in June 2016 as part of her Let Girls Learn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/michelle-obama-visits-liberia-to-push-for-children-to-stay-in-school>
 initiative and the CNN filmWe Will Rise


I’m the first girl in the family to get a baccalaureate and the first girl in 
the village to get a BA. I come from an illiterate family: my parents are 
farmers in the village, they are poor people. Getting an education was like a 
war for me – it felt like everyone was against me. The mentalities in my 
village are all the same: girls have to marry and have kids and stay home and 
cook, like machines, and that’s it.

In primary school I was top of my class but my family decided I would not go 
to secondary school. It was really hard for me, but I went on a hunger strike 
when I was 12 and I convinced them to let me go. The secondary school was very 
far, seven kilometres each way, and I was the only girl. In the beginning my 
parents were not convinced, but after I kept getting the highest grades, I 
could see in their faces that they were satisfied and proud. I got a BA in 
English in Marrakesh, and my goal is to get a doctorate and be a translator and 
linguist – I speak Amazigh, Arabic, French, English and Japanese.

I met Michelle Obama in Marrakech in June, just when I was doing my final 
exam, and meeting her was like a push for continuing. The thing I remember most 
is that she saw me and said: “Yes, I read a lot about you and I remember you” – 
that was really awesome. I also met Meryl Streep and Freida Pinto, and they 
were very kind-hearted and friendly too. Later I had a week in Washington DC – 
it was my first time flying anywhere – and met Michelle Obama again there. They 
say Washington gets busy and loud, but it was super fun.

Michelle Obama has helped so many people, and she’s always been the person who 
fights for something which is very good for our society. With education we’re 
going to find solutions for so many problems in life. My message for all the 
girls around the world who don’t have the opportunity to go and study, I just 
want to tell them that if I can do it, they can do it too, whatever the 
boundaries they can be overcome.

Cindy Sanders

 A counsellor at King college prep in Chicago. Fifteen‑year-old schoolgirl 
Hadiya Pendleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/31/hadiya-pendleton-inauguration-chicago-shot>
, who attended King, was shot and killed in 2013


I met Michelle Obama during Hadiya’s funeral. She felt compelled to come to 
Chicago and pay her respects to Cleopatra and Nate [Pendleton, Hadiya’s 
parents], not necessarily as the first lady but as a mom, to support another 
mother who had lost her child. It was very moving that she would put all of her 
stuff on hold for the funeral. Two years later she spoke at the graduation of 
the class that Hadiya would have graduated in. It was a bittersweet graduation 
because of this, but everybody was excited, because we’ve never had a speaker 
of this calibre. The students will remember that for ever, that Michelle Obama 
was the graduation speaker for their class. She talked about how she came from 
just this community, and how the students have so many options, and that 
anything is possible with an education. We all got to take photos with her and 
talk to her. She congratulated us, and thanked us for doing a great job with 
the students.

Having a first lady from the south side of Chicago means everything. She’s 
like the people’s first lady, and she’s definitely Chicago’s first lady. She 
was very personable: she was giving hugs, she was giving motivation. And not 
just surface motivation; it was because she had been in a Chicago public 
school. And to see what she accomplished, having a similar background and a 
similar upbringing – it was powerful. It’s very inspiring to see that with hard 
work and determination you can be anything.

In Chicago the whole issue of gun control is so polarised: people are getting 
killed by guns, and we need to do something about this. We don’t want parents 
losing their teenage children. I have a teenager too in the city of Chicago and 
so we definitely need to speak up on that. And when you have the first lady 
championing causes it definitely puts some weight with it.

I’ll miss her being in that office, but the good thing is she’s still going to 
champion those causes – she’s still going to care about helping children reach 
higher, and having counsellors support them. She’s tough but she’s also down to 
earth. And we’ll miss her putting on her jeans and being onEllen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZO5q0B5wfw> and challenging her to dance-offs.

Kyra Caldwell

A 19-year-old former student at King college prep and friend of Hadiya 
Pendleton

When my friend Hadiya passed, Michelle Obama ended up coming to the funeral. 
They had a few people in a separate room before the funeral started, and she 
came in went around and shook our hands. I was with a friend and we were so 
nervous – we were about to shake hands with Michelle Obama, the first African 
American to be first lady in the White House. She came over and gave us both 
hugs, and gave us words of encouragement. The fact that she hugged me was just 
crazy to me. Usually you’d think people who are famous would act fake, but she 
was the complete opposite – when I spoke to her it was very calm and normal, 
very natural. She also came to speak at our graduation and gave a really 
motivational speech, which was really exciting.

Our school had done this FAFSA challenge [a video for the Free Application for 
Federal Student Aid]: it wasScandal-themed [after the US TV political drama 
series] and we sent it in to Michelle Obama. She then sent it to the cast of
Scandal and got them to make a video telling us how good our video was. So you 
had [characters] Olivia Pope and Huck and Abby saying we did a good FAFSA 
challenge – that’s something I’ll always remember.

It’s very reassuring that she’s another woman of colour from the south side of 
Chicago. I feel like once you’re born and raised here you always have a 
connection to it, wherever you go. She went to the same high school as my 
mother, so it makes it seem more real: anybody can go anywhere, no matter where 
you’re from. I also attended Tuskegee University in Alabama, and I found out 
that she had also spoken at a graduation there, so I was thinking: “Is this a 
sign that I’m going to be the first lady next time?”

When I think of Michelle Obama, “reassuring” is the word I think of. She’s 
brilliant – she went to two Ivy League schools [Princeton and Harvard Law 
School] and has done all these great things. It’s definitely something to look 
up to. I’m now studying occupational therapy, and after this the plan is to go 
to a really good physical therapy school so I can get my doctorate. Michelle 
said we can do anything, so I believe it.
 