
A digital consultant from Brighton whom Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> mistook for his daughter on 
Twitter says she is more concerned by the prospect of a climate change denier 
in the White House than someone who makes slip-ups on social media.

Ivanka Majic, 42, a former digital director for the Labour party, said it was 
“very surreal” to discover that thepresident-elect had retweeted a message 
intending to praise his daughter, Ivanka Trump, that included her Twitter name 
instead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/17/donald-trump-mistakes-ivanka-from-brighton-for-his-daughter>
.

Trump quoted a praiseworthy tweet directed to him by Lawrence Goodstein, a 
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> user in Seekonk, 
Massachusetts, that described his daughter Ivanka as “a woman with real 
character and class” late on Monday.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Donald Trump mistakes council worker for daughter Ivanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/17/donald-trump-mistakes-council-worker-daughter-ivanka-video-report>
But Goodstein had mistakenly put @Ivanka, not @IvankaTrump – not a significant 
mistake in light of Goodstein’s 160-odd followers, but of far greater 
consequence circulated by Trump to his 20.1 million.

Overnight Majic’s Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> 
followers more than doubled as she found herself thrust into the spotlight by a 
man who will be sworn in as president on Friday.

She said she was keen to use the attention to speak out on the environment. 
“I’ve got my 15 minutes of fame and this is how I’m choosing to use it,” Majic 
told the Guardian.

Related: Donald Trump mistakes Ivanka from Brighton for his daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/17/donald-trump-mistakes-ivanka-from-brighton-for-his-daughter>

Replying to Trump, she tweeted: “And you’re a man with great responsibilities. 
May I suggest more care on Twitter and more time learning about#climatechange 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/climatechange>.”

She also tweeted data pointing out that 97.5% of publishing climatologists and 
about 90% of all publishing scientists supported the human-induced climate 
change theory.

Majic said Trump’s error was a careless mistake. “One would hope that the 
future president of the US would pay a little more attention, but I’m sure 
anybody could have made the same mistake.

“What is of more concern to me is that we have a president-elect who is a 
climate change denier.”

Majic said that because of her Twitter name, @Ivanka 
<https://twitter.com/ivanka>, she had often been mistaken for Ivanka Trump on 
the social network, but her politics were very different from the Trump 
family’s.

Related: What do Donald Trump's Twitter tastes tell us about him? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/trump-twittersphere-social-media-piers-morgan-rudy-guliani-mike-pence>

She said: “It is not the first time I’ve been included in a tweet to him or to 
his daughter, but it is the first time I’ve been mentioned in something that 
Donald Trump has retweeted. So this isn’t new, but it is new for it to be this 
big.

“My politics are very different from Donald Trump’s. During the election 
campaign I had a Twitter bot that replied to anyone who had @Ivanka and Trump 
in the same tweet, with the message: ‘Don’t know about you but I’m voting for 
Hillary.’

“The other thing I get mistaken for is a Hungarian concrete company called 
Ivanka Concrete, but that’s easy to deal with.”

Majic, whose father was a Croat from Bosnia-Herzegovina, said: “Ivanka is an 
incredible common Slavic name. It is about as boring as you can get. SoIvanka 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ivanka-trump> and I share that at 
least.”

She added: “I came down in morning to find lots of Twitter notifications. It’s 
very surreal. There is no other word for it.
 Donald Trump retweeted a message praising his daughter, Ivanka, that used the 
wrong Twitter name. Photograph: Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images 
“None of this annoying. It is remarkable. Even 10 years ago it could have 
never have happened that a president-elect of the United States of America 
accidentally mentions a fairly normal citizen fromBrighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton>. It is a 21st-century story that 
raises lots of interesting questions … about how you choose your Twitter 
handle, for starters.”

As a freelance digital consultant, Majic advises clients to keep a low profile 
when caught up in social media storms. “I am probably not doing what I would 
advise others to do. I would advise them to switch off their phones and go for 
a nice walk.

 “If one is given a platform for a day, I don’t think me slinging any insults 
or being disparaging towards the president will be helpful, but I do think 
mentioning climate change might invite some people to reconsider their views, 
or learn something, or read something.”

Majic said Trump’s cabinet nominations, notably the choice of the ExxonMobile 
chief executive, Rex Tillerson, as secretary of state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin>
, meant these were “worrying times for the world”.

Majic, who has a young daughter, is also troubled by Trump’s sexism. She said: 
“That a man got elected after making comments that he did about women is really 
worrying.

“A conversation about climate change may be slightly easier to elevate online 
than a conversation about being respectful to women. And that is itself a 
problem, but there you go.”

Majic said she wanted to engage in a “polite” debate rather than trading 
insults with Trump. But she does not expect Trump to continue the conversation. 
“I don’t expect a reply – I don’t think he’s a man who likes to make mistakes,” 
she said.

“I am happy to tweet a polite message to Donald Trump saying: ‘Please pay 
attention to climate change.’ What I don’t want to get embroiled in is some 
flame war about calling him something.

“Of course I’m worried about Donald Trump being president of the United 
States, but let’s hope he does a good job.”
 