
We’re standing in a beautiful, airy dance studio, beneath a ceiling made from 
great sweeping arcs of pale timber. In the spaces between their criss-crossing 
curves, skylights peep down. It is, I can’t help thinking, a good home for an 
artist who doesn’t like to feel boxed in.

Siobhan Davies opened these studios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/apr/03/architecture>, in 
Elephant and Castle, London, in 2006 and has been quietly unpicking dance ever 
since. When people talk about the lack of major female choreographers in dance, 
she is the exception. Fifty years ago, Davies was one of the very first 
contemporary dance students in the country. She made her first works in 1972, 
and co-founded the influential 1980s company Second Stride before launching her 
own group in 1988. At 66, she remains one of the most curious choreographers 
out there, her work, like the woman herself, unflashy and intelligent, her 
inquisitiveness reaching places dance doesn’t often go.

A typical programme at her studios might feature an art exhibition, a 
discussion between a choreographer and a neuroscientist, and a screening of one 
of Davies’ films, like the remarkable All This Can Happen, created entirely 
from early cinema archive and photographs. Having made works for the Royal 
Opera House and Sadler’s Wells, by the early 2000s she pretty much abandoned 
the theatre altogether, and took to showing her work in galleries instead.

Her interest in the body, clearly, does not begin and end on the stage. “It is 
always communicating,” she says, and this is the basis of her latest show, 
which opens at the Barbican in London this month.Material / rearranged / to / be
 <https://www.barbican.org.uk/artgallery/event-detail.asp?ID=19954> is a 
collaboration between Davies and 13 other choreographers, artists and 
scientists that tackles the relationship between body and mind.

“Embodiment” and “the intelligent body” are buzz terms both in dance and 
academia: the idea is that the brain doesn’t have dominion over human 
experience. “We still hugely privilege the mind over everything else,” says 
Davies. “I think the mind is bloody wonderful, but the whole of us lives in the 
world, the whole of us communicates, the whole of us can fantasise and imagine. 
I’d like us to turn the world around.”

The show defies simple explanation, but a starting point is the German art 
historian Aby Warburg and his 1920s Mnemosyne Atlas, in which he collated 
images from different eras and types of art – a renaissance painting, a piece 
of classical architecture, an early 20th century advert or newspaper cutting – 
which all represented similar actions, icons, or gestures (he was particularly 
fond of nymphs). Warburg showed how symbolic images reappear in different times 
and places throughout history.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsiobhan-davies-interview-dancer-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6366d0b2f9425d36723ab3ee3350edf0c7e5a6cb%2F0_56_6000_3599%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Let's%20turn%20the%20whole%20world%20around'%3A%20inside%20Siobhan%20Davies'%20dance%20laboratory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsiobhan-davies-interview-dancer-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Let%27s%20turn%20the%20whole%20world%20around%27%3A%20inside%20Siobhan%20Davies%27%20dance%20laboratory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsiobhan-davies-interview-dancer-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6366d0b2f9425d36723ab3ee3350edf0c7e5a6cb%2F0_56_6000_3599%2F6000.jpg>
 Loop Atlas by Matthias Sperling, part of material rearranged by Siobhan Davies 
Dance. Photograph: Pari Nadei 
Davies creates her own kind of Atlas, a montage of pieces that will play 
alongside each other throughout the day in ever-changing formations. The 
choreographer will herself be performing, in a duet with Helka Kaski, a dancer 
30 years her junior but with the same angular frame and long limbs. One 
collaborator, Matthias Sperling, will film and loop his own dancing live, 
building up layers of moving bodies. Another, Charlie Morrissey, responds to a 
series of instructions on screen, attempting to embody “actions that change the 
course of history”, or “actions performed against my will”.

What all the pieces share is the idea of physical gesture: where it might come 
from and what it might mean. “Warburg was curious about how the artist used the 
behaviour of the body to hold a thought,” says Davies. To help her explore this 
notion, Davies turned to four scientists who share her interests. When dance 
and science collaborate, you often wonder what the scientists get out of it, 
but this does seem to have been fruitful for both sides. “I think it expands 
the way I look at things,” says neurophysiologist Jonathan Cole of working with 
Davies. “She’s so alive, so questioning.”

Each side feeds the other. Matthias Sperling and cognitive psychologist Guido 
Orgs have previously devised experiments together, looking at audiences’ 
responses to dance, and how they change depending on what they know about the 
background of the work, or measuring the satisfaction viewers report on 
watching bodies moving in sync versus individually.

Charlie Morrissey, meanwhile, went into neuroscientist Anil Seth’s virtual 
reality lab at Sussex University, trying out a set-up that gave him the 
experience of having a different body. “Charlie interacted with this in a much 
more illuminating and sophisticated way than other people,” says Seth. “I found 
it very interesting in helping me understand the possibilities and limitations 
of the technology.” Davies does admit, however, that in trying to do good 
science, “we’re not always able to make a good artwork”. But what all the 
scientists say of working with Davies is that it’s great fun: a playground and 
a lab combined.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsiobhan-davies-interview-dancer-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F827f00756923444f98b79d33824538ed67d6b340%2F0_154_1526_1907%2F1526.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Let's%20turn%20the%20whole%20world%20around'%3A%20inside%20Siobhan%20Davies'%20dance%20laboratory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsiobhan-davies-interview-dancer-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Let%27s%20turn%20the%20whole%20world%20around%27%3A%20inside%20Siobhan%20Davies%27%20dance%20laboratory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsiobhan-davies-interview-dancer-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F827f00756923444f98b79d33824538ed67d6b340%2F0_154_1526_1907%2F1526.jpg>
 A scene from Bird Song, 2004. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
There seems to be a genuine air of delight in thinking, discovering and 
engaging with people. This is why Davies gave up making work for the stage: she 
saw all the thought and depth of process that went into creating the work, the 
three-dimensional detail, the human inflection, erased when the “perfect” 
product appeared on stage. Caught up in lighting and costumes and music, she 
says, “I became, I think, too cinematic.”

She now wants to bring her audience closer, in every respect. Davies points 
out that in watching dance there’s no mediating object, no musical instrument, 
no paintbrush, no script, between dancer and viewer. “Both the performer and 
the observer are the same,” she says, but we’re used to seeing dancers push 
their bodies to extremes. “For some people that extremity is just a delight,” 
Davies says. “But for me, I only want to go so far, so I am keeping human 
contact.”

Instead, Davies’ work is human scale: it’s unvirtuosic, her dancers dress in 
normal clothes and shoes, and what they do often looks like they’re busy 
solving a puzzle with their bodies. But it’s far from artless. “You can have 
work based on everyday experience,” she says. “But, in the making of it, 
there’s still a sense of virtuosity. In poetry, one often uses everyday 
language, but it’s the structure and the attention to detail that allows the 
reader to be transformed into another mode of thought.”

This seems a good way to think about Davies’ work: deceptively simple in terms 
of the movement presented, but full of poetry in its ideas and structures. The 
move into the art world – the galleries, studying the work of Aby Warburg – 
feels like coming full circle, she says. She was steeped in visual art as a 
child; growing up in Kensington in the 50s and 60s, her parents and godparents 
– who lived upstairs – were modest collectors (“As you could be in those days”) 
of Graham Sutherland, John Piper, Henry Moore and Barbara Hepworth.

She went to art school, planning to become a set designer, but a friend 
invited her to a dance class one day in 1967. “My legs and my arms bowled up 
and that was it. I was totally immersed. I found a community, which I hadn’t 
found at art school and I just kept going back.”

In Elephant and Castle, Davies has created her own community, encouraging 
choreographers who feel hindered by “the hierarchy of theatres”. But, aside 
from her name on the building, Davies seems an ego-less creator, as excited 
about other people’s work as her own. She has no plans to stop choreographing, 
but is aware she needs to think about the future.

“Now,” she says, “there’s less time ahead than there is behind – and that’s 
very noticeable.” Looking round her studio, she says of her work: “Actually I 
really like this artform. I would love to be one of the people who expanded its 
territory.”

 * Material / rearranged / to / be 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/artgallery/event-detail.asp?ID=19954> is at the 
Barbican, London, 20-28 January.
 