
The link between executive pay and company performance is negligible, 
according to a study that will fuel arguments for reform of corporate wage 
packets.

The chief executives of Britain’s leading 350 companies each took home a 
median pay package of £1.9m in 2014, a rise of 82% on 13 years ago, research 
commissioned by the UK arm of the CFA Institute, the global association of 
investment professionals, found.

But the rise was not mirrored in the fortunes of their employers, with return 
on invested capital – the report’s preferred measure of performance – up by 
less than 1%.

The authors of the report said: “Our findings suggest a material disconnect 
between pay and fundamental value generation.”

The study of businesses listed on the FTSE 350 by Lancaster University 
Management School found that the increase in pay since 2003 was largely down to 
performance-related bonuses. This was despite the fact that “the medianFTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 350 company generated little in the 
way of a meaningful economic profit over the period 2003-2014,” it said.

The report warned that measures typically used by companies to calculate 
performance, such as total shareholder return and earning per share growth, 
placed too much emphasis on “short-term” results. The CFA UK chief executive, 
Will Goodhart, said: “Too few of today’s popular approaches […] genuinely align 
senior executives’ pay with the economic value that they create.”

A green paper published by the government last month signalled that companies 
could be forced togive shareholders more power  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/theresa-may-to-unveil-plans-for-boardrooms-at-large-private-businesses>
over executive remuneration, such as a binding vote at businesses where
directors have faced “significant opposition” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
 to their pay deals.

Companies could also be told to publish their pay ratio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/pay-ratios-could-be-made-public-as-part-of-executive-salary-reform>
 – the difference between the wage packet of their best-rewarded member of 
staff and the least well paid.

But the proposals were watered down from Theresa May’s comments after becoming 
prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/theresa-mays-plans-curb-boardroom-excess-receive-mixed-reaction>
 in July, when she suggested executives should be subject to an annual, binding 
vote on their remuneration.

Stefan Stern, the director of the High Pay Centre, welcomed the report, saying 
companies placed too much emphasis on suspect measures of performance.

“It’s very hard to measure performance intelligently because share prices move 
for all sorts of reasons beyond the control of the chief executive or senior 
management,” he said.

“[Excess pay] is an error based on a false premise that you can construct some 
sophisticated formula that will link performance to pay. We just want firms to 
exercise a discretion that is lacking.

“They’ve fallen back on intricate and elaborate contracts to do the job they 
should be doing themselves, which is to exercise judgment.”

Large pay packets were often about making sure executives do not move to 
another company, rather than a measure of their efficacy, Stern said. Theresa 
May has ruled out forcing companies toput a worker on their boards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/government-defends-apparent-u-turn-over-workers-on-boards>
, as happens in Germany.

But Stern said she could still decide to mandate worker representation on the 
pay committees that decide executive rewards. “Without the voice of ordinary 
people, it’s harder to ground the conversation in reality,” he said.
 