
This is my 27th out of 31 days rough sleeping in central London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. I’m not using any charity facilities; 
I am begging for money to survive – so washing and showering has been in cafe 
toilets with my foot against the door, or sneaking into the hospital as there 
are no free public bathrooms around.

I’m not homeless. I’ve got a countdown on my hand until I stop this project on 
Monday, and take a flight back to catch my 9am anatomy lecture in Aberdeen, 
where I’m studying to be a doctor.


I am raising money 
<http://uk.virginmoneygiving.com/fundraiser-web/fundraiser/showFundraiserProfilePage.action?userUrl=jamesbeavis>
 for the homeless charity Crisis, which each Christmas offers temporary shelter 
tomore than 4,000 people <http://www.crisis.org.uk/pages/christmas.html> who 
have no home. I wanted to do this is because homelessness can affect anybody. 
The number-one cause is relationship breakdown, while more than 80% 
<http://www.homeless.org.uk/facts/our-research/homelessness-and-health-research>
 of the homeless community report having a mental health problem. And thenumber 
of rough sleepers is rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/homelessness-england-rising-scandal-rough-sleeping>
: in London alone, outreach workers saw more than 8,000 people sleeping on the 
streets between April 2015 and last March.

In the last month alone, there have been two headlines about homeless people 
<https://www.timesoftunbridgewells.co.uk/homeless-man-in-tunbridge-wells-had-bedding-set-on-fire/>
 beingset on fire 
<http://www.guardian-series.co.uk/news/14955515.Homeless_man_has_makeshift_camp_torched_in__sickening__attack/?ref=rss>
 in the UK. Homeless people are17 times more likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/23/rough-sleepers-face-high-levels-of-abuse-by-public-study-finds>
 to be a victim of violence, mostly at the hands of the public.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fwhat-learned-sleeping-rough-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc595162da1c00ee48e0e5d3018458813f5ad5e7a%2F0_388_3055_3816%2F3055.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Spat%20on%20and%20ignored'%3A%20what%20I've%20learned%20from%20a%20month%20sleeping%20rough%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fwhat-learned-sleeping-rough-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Spat%20on%20and%20ignored%27%3A%20what%20I%27ve%20learned%20from%20a%20month%20sleeping%20rough%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fwhat-learned-sleeping-rough-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc595162da1c00ee48e0e5d3018458813f5ad5e7a%2F0_388_3055_3816%2F3055.jpg>
 Beavis: ‘There have been times when not a single person has looked at me for 
at least two hours.’ Photograph: Richard Austin 
Four years ago, I decided to sleep rough over Christmas for one week to raise 
money for charity, so this time had to be longer to be more impactful. It is 
not a vanity project; I believe that this way – sleeping rough, leaving friends 
and family behind, begging for food to survive – gives me a better perspective 
on the issue, and could even act as a bridge to others understanding this 
marginalised community better. If nothing else, at least I’ll have raised some 
money to get people into shelters over Christmas where they’ll get warm food, a 
place to rest and a route into longer-term support.


The reality is that society has dehumanised homeless people. They are seen as 
intimidating – but during my time on the streets, it’s not the homeless 
community I’ve felt afraid of; it’s some of the general public who have made me 
feel intimidated and vulnerable. I’ve been spat on, and endlessly ignored. 
There have been times when not a single person has looked at me for at least 
two hours.


To sit on a cold, hard pavement and get out the words “please do you have any 
change?” is tough, especially the first time – you start so quietly. It 
immediately puts you in a position of isolation.

A few days ago, when I was sitting outside Hamleys toy shop on Regent Street, 
someone accidentally knocked over the cup I was using to beg. The woman turned 
back to apologise, saw who I was, and immediately turned around again without 
saying a word, seemingly inconvenienced and annoyed.

This is most people. They pull their daughters and sons away from you. You 
feel dirty, grubby. Because of this, you become extremely paranoid when you 
sleep on the streets. ACrisis report  
<http://www.crisis.org.uk/data/files/publications/714_ITS_NO_LIFE_AT_ALL_violence%20asb_FINAL_sp.pdf>
released before Christmas highlighted the shocking levels of violence and 
harassment aimed at homeless people, with more than one in three rough sleepers 
being deliberately hit or kicked.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fwhat-learned-sleeping-rough-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F848f3b65ca09d761e45d6b7324b4da3ccd252947%2F0_132_3665_2199%2F3665.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Spat%20on%20and%20ignored'%3A%20what%20I've%20learned%20from%20a%20month%20sleeping%20rough%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fwhat-learned-sleeping-rough-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Spat%20on%20and%20ignored%27%3A%20what%20I%27ve%20learned%20from%20a%20month%20sleeping%20rough%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fwhat-learned-sleeping-rough-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F848f3b65ca09d761e45d6b7324b4da3ccd252947%2F0_132_3665_2199%2F3665.jpg>
 Beavis will go straight back to his medical studies in Aberdeen on 9 January. 
Photograph: Richard Austin 
I can’t sleep with my sleeping bag closed because, if someone comes to attack 
me, I’ll be trapped. A guy once threw a glass bottle right next to me when I 
was sleeping. I’m not so scared of being beaten up, but I worry about knives or 
sexual assault. All it takes is for someone to put something in the food they 
give you.


But I feel less vulnerable when there are other homeless people around. I’m 
obviously fresh on the streets, and only 26, so others have brought me extra 
cardboard to sleep on. I was even given a Christmas present by another homeless 
man – a clean sports shirt that had been donated to this man who has nothing.


You have to consider your vulnerabilities – both to the public and the weather 
–when you’re finding a spot to sleep. You need a place that’s sheltered to keep 
dry, and ideally out of the wind. If your cardboard gets wet it’s useless, and 
that’s what stops the concrete from sapping the heat out of you.

At most, I’ve been living off two-to-three hours’ sleep a night, because of 
the noise, the paranoia and the cold. When the weather reached minus 
temperatures after Christmas, I spent my begging money on foil to wrap around 
my wrists, ankles and tummy. It keeps you insulated, but falls apart quite 
quickly.

There are nights when it’s been so cold I’ve had to make myself a cardboard 
tunnel – it leaves you defenceless, but it helps keep the wind out. I’m short 
of breath, my chest is tight and the weight has stripped off me. Recently I 
heard about two deaths of rough sleepers in the cold in Chatham, Kent, just 
before the opening of a winter centre there. Those deaths were preventable.

Every night you get through without an incident makes you more attached to 
that particular sleeping spot. I started improving my last place, under some 
scaffolding near Regent Street. I put a roof on it with bits of cardboard – it 
was becoming more like Bear Grylls than sleeping on a pavement – but suddenly 
it was sealed off and taken away.


Reach out, raise money or remove: how should cities deal with street begging?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/29/how-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness>
Waking up in the morning with no money, I have to go out and beg. It’s hard 
having to do that before you can eat because you feel frantic, you get more 
desperate – and then people don’t give you as much.

If you can get a sign it helps, but I’ve found that you have to keep you head 
down; if someone catches your eye, they’ll walk away quickly. If you walk 
around asking people directly, it can be dangerous because you’re forcing 
strangers into a situation where they have to react to you – they have no 
choice but to acknowledge you. If that doesn’t work, you search for leftover 
food in bins.


Over the last eight years of working with homeless people, and especially over 
this past month on the streets, I’ve gained an enlightened perspective of a 
community that is completely excluded from mainstream society. And I’ve also 
seen a darker side to London; a side that lacks empathy and compassion.

But it’s not always the case. I have woken up to find someone has left food 
near my head. A stranger once brought me a cup of tea they’d made at home. And 
on most evenings, I see volunteers giving care packages and warm drinks to 
rough sleepers. You don’t expect everyone to give you a couple of quid – but 
just by smiling or saying hello, they can help bridge the widening gap that 
society has created.

James Beavis was talking to Naomi Larsson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/naomi-larsson>; read more about his month 
on the streetshere 
<http://uk.virginmoneygiving.com/fundraiser-web/fundraiser/showFundraiserProfilePage.action?userUrl=jamesbeavis>
.Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 