
Tall, spindly and grey, croton trees grow everywhere in Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>. Although they tend to be used for 
little more than firewood or shade, their nuts turn out to be an excellent 
source of biofuel. This overlooked plant could be the answer to Africa’s 
growing demand for cheap, low-carbon energy.

 At least that is what Eco Fuels Kenya <http://www.efkgroup.co.ke/> hopes. 
Founded in 2012, this small company based in Nanyuki, in the foothills of Mount 
Kenya, is pioneering the use of croton oil as a replacement for diesel and 
hopes others will soon follow suit. The startup wants to use the tens of 
thousands of croton trees already growing wild across the nation to improve 
livelihoods and protect the environment.

 The croton industry is still in its infancy but, if the biofuel performs as 
promised, this macadamia-sized nut could help Africa meet several sustainable 
development goals, including clean energy, climate action and poverty reduction.

Biofuel’s troubled legacy

Kenya currently imports all of its oil and, while some rural communities can 
barely afford to buy diesel for their water pumps, car exhausts in the capital 
Nairobi are causing dangerous levels ofair pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/10/no-escape-nairobi-air-pollution-sparks-africa-health-warning>
. “Croton has a lot of potential as a sustainable fuel,” says Michael Jacobson, 
chair of the forest ecosystem management programme at Penn State University.

UK firm's failed biofuel dream wrecks lives of Tanzania villagers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/oct/30/africa-poor-west-biofuel-betrayal>
This is not the first time Kenya has been promised a biofuel revolution. In 
2000, jatropha, a plant native to Central America, was introduced, billed as 
the next big biofuel crop. The Kenyan government took away farmers’ land to 
make space for thousands of acres of monoculture.

At the peak of the jatropha hype there were thousands of farmers in Kenya 
helping to grow the plant. But yields were“dismal” 
<https://springerplus.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40064-016-3687-y> and 
because90% <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082613001051> 
of the jatropha plantations were established on former agricultural land, when 
some of these companies left, they kept their land titles. This meant hundreds 
of farmers were left with no jobs and no place to grow their crops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcroton-oil-biofuels-kenya-food-security-farming-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd760cae279e786687778334d95ed19938a546ef2%2F0_373_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20our%20future'%20%E2%80%93%20Kenya's%20croton%20tree%20touted%20as%20new%20biofuels%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcroton-oil-biofuels-kenya-food-security-farming-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20our%20future%27%20%E2%80%93%20Kenya%27s%20croton%20tree%20touted%20as%20new%20biofuels%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcroton-oil-biofuels-kenya-food-security-farming-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd760cae279e786687778334d95ed19938a546ef2%2F0_373_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
 Croton trees are common in much of central and east Africa, but are often 
overlooked. Photograph: Eco Fuel Kenya 
 Myles Katz, the managing director of Eco Fuels Kenya, says his team has 
learned from jatropha’s failure and purposefully pursued a different business 
model.

“Instead of going the way of monoculture, we have decided to collaborate with 
small-scale holders and minimise the risk for everyone involved,” says Katz. 
His company currently buys nuts from 5,000 farmers in the Mount Kenya and Rift 
Valley regions.

 Croton oil generates 78% 
<http://erepository.uonbi.ac.ke/bitstream/handle/11295/90343/Samoita_Development%20of%20solid%20catalyst%20for%20transesterification%20of%20croton%20megalocarpus%20hutch%20oil%20in%20biodiesel%20production%20and%20blending%20with%20kerosene.pdf?sequence=1>
 (pdf) less carbon dioxide emissions than diesel and has one big advantage over 
other common biofuels: food security. The fact that croton nuts are inedible 
means they can replace the need to make fuel from ingredients that could 
otherwise be food for humans. Croton trees are also already growing all over 
the region so there is (in EFK’s model) no need to create massive mono-cultures 
that could potentially displace other food crops.

Unlike palm oil, croton trees are native to east Africa 
<http://www.worldagroforestry.org/treedb/AFTPDFS/Croton_megalocarpus.PDF>, 
which means that monetising their fruit may also incentivise locals to fight 
deforestation.

Croton pays better than any other crop. This is our future
Martin Kamai 
 While the oil needs to be processed before it can be used in cars, it can go 
directly into diesel generators, water pumps or tractor engines. The company 
sells the oil to safari lodges in the Masai Mara. The price fluctuates but it 
is usually about 10% cheaper than diesel, which is currentlyabout $0.90 
<http://www.globalpetrolprices.com/Kenya/diesel_prices/> (£0.73) a litre in 
Kenya.

Eco Fuels Kenya also sells the byproducts of the fuel production. The seedcake 
paste left from pressing the croton nuts is a protein-rich feed for poultry and 
the grounded husks are sold as an organic fertiliser for depleted soil. “We are 
constantly discovering new uses for croton,” says Katz.

A cash crop to replace coffee?

Croton nuts could also help bring many Kenyans out of poverty. The trees don’t 
require any investment in terms of water or fertiliser and harvest time can 
last up to six months a year, which makes it a steady source of income. What’s 
more, sellers get paid on delivery while coffee farmers often have to wait 
months for their money.

This is why, after years as a coffee grower, Martin Kamai is moving into 
croton. This young farmer and his wife have planted 500 croton trees on their 
property in Nyeri County, central Kenya, and plan to add even more next year. 
“Croton pays better than any other crop,” he says, “this is our future.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcroton-oil-biofuels-kenya-food-security-farming-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb4a98b9f5dcd13e83b724cfcef30fd4e0b9b237%2F0_4_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20our%20future'%20%E2%80%93%20Kenya's%20croton%20tree%20touted%20as%20new%20biofuels%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcroton-oil-biofuels-kenya-food-security-farming-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20our%20future%27%20%E2%80%93%20Kenya%27s%20croton%20tree%20touted%20as%20new%20biofuels%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcroton-oil-biofuels-kenya-food-security-farming-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb4a98b9f5dcd13e83b724cfcef30fd4e0b9b237%2F0_4_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Grounded husks from croton nuts can be used as an organic fertiliser. 
Photograph: Eco Fuel Kenya 
 Still, there are many challenges in the way of croton taking over the biofuel 
industry. The failure of jatropha is likely to make foreign investors, local 
farmers and Kenyan government officials more reluctant to put their weight 
behind another experimental biofuel solution.

Lack of marketing awareness and knowledge about best growing methods for 
croton will also make it hard for the business to scale up. “Investors won’t 
see much gain in small-scale, local projects, and the low price of oil is 
probably dampening their interest in energy alternatives,” warns Carol 
Hunsberger, an assistant professor at Western University who researches 
biofuels inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

 Despite the hurdles, Eco Fuels Kenya continues to grow. In 2016, it processed 
about 1,000 tonnes of nuts (twice as much as the previous year) and helped 
local farmers plant 100,000 croton trees in regions where they plan to expand 
their operations.

Next year, it will open its second processing plant in the lake town of 
Naivasha. The startup wants to set up five plants in Kenya before branching out 
to neighbouring Tanzania and Rwanda. The company declined to share any figures 
on the investment and its profit.

Will croton ever become a global biofuel? It’s doubtful, says Jacobson. But he 
adds that if local entrepreneurs persevere and oil prices go up again, this 
unlikely cash crop could make a real dent in east Africa’s energy supply, 
“which alone is good enough”.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 