
It was after visiting a vineyard in Tasmania’s Tamar Valley with his family 
that 16-year-old Adam Torpy learnt the lesson that still drives him today.

Even though he was not legally allowed to drink, the future wine executive 
immediately realised how the natural landscape was intimately entwined with 
what came out of the bottle and promptly enrolled in a wine course to find out 
more.

“It was like – wait – back up there,” Torpy says today as CEO of Goelet Wine 
Estates Australasia. “I wanted to know the science behind it. It was that 
technical side that really intrigued me as a 16-year-old and fuelled my thirst 
for knowledge on how the process worked.

“What I learnt was that land and fruit quality are not only inherently 
interconnected but probably the most integral and important things.”

After starting in sales and marketing, including building wine businesses in 
the UK and US, Torpy had his first real opportunity to get into production and 
start experimenting when he returned to Australia in 2005 to run Goelet’s 
Taltarni Vineyard in Victoria’s Pyrenees.

Land and fruit quality are not only inherently interconnected but probably the 
most integral and important things.”
Adam Torpy, Goelet Wine Estates Australasia 
Taking inspiration from his Tasmanian upbringing – where farmers’ markets and 
organic produce were all around him – Torpy set about changing the way the 
business looked at sustainability.

Wanting to reduce the use of pesticides, Torpy and his colleagues started 
trialling an innovative idea that has since become the central pillar of their 
vineyard’s environmental strategy.

Instead of using chemicals, the team planted a vegetation corridor full of 
native plants designed to attract predator insects that would do the job for 
them naturally.

And so the “Insectarium” was born.

“We like to refer to it as a holiday resort for bugs,” Torpy says. “It’s 
designed to provide a pollen and nectar source for beneficial insects.”

There are now three of these “resorts” totalling about 2000 native plants, 
including acacia, banksia, grevillea and eucalyptus trees that provide services 
to 35% of the vineyard so far.

Torpy’s goal is to increase this to 100% by 2022, with additional insectariums 
being incorporated into all new vineyard plantings.

The corridors, which are planted in rows next to the vines, are the perfect 
place for natural predators such as wasps and ladybirds to help control pests 
like moths and aphids respectively.

The innovation places Taltarni at the forefront of integrated pest management 
(IPM), a practice that is aimed at balancing financial and environmental 
sustainability.

“It results in a reduction of about 80 per cent of sprays (in the area 
covered) which is quite incredible,” Torpy says. “From a simple thought through 
to the impact we have today I couldn’t be happier.

“Putting value on the land, the soil and conservation is a really good thing. 
We can help create awareness for other people with where we are today.”

As well as the vegetation corridors, Taltarni is also encouraging kangaroo 
grass to grow among the vine rows to create a better organic layer to protect 
the soil from the summer heat and to preserve water.

The vineyard also rotates alternative crops like olives, capers and garlic to 
help conserve soil quality and keep the land productive.

Torpy says customers are increasingly aware of the provenance and the heritage 
of produce brands, and he sees sustainability as a central part of this value.

“The insectarium is what’s driving our sustainability approach to the winery,” 
he says. “We are getting inquiries from around the world and happy to share the 
information. We are very happy to share the results and techniques.

“If we can do integrated pest management practice we can develop better fruit. 
It’s more expressive, the acidity levels are more balanced. Working with better 
fruit means you can make better wines. It’s incredibly pleasing.”

The business is also a proud signatory of the Australian Packaging Covenant 
(APC) to help reduce the effects of packaging on the environment. Taltarni is 
redesigning the outer cartons for its wine bottles to use less cardboard and is 
also introducing a more sustainable printing processes.

Plans for the business over the next 12 months include installing solar to 
power its winery, and to replace conventional vehicles with more fuel-efficient 
quad bikes.

Muddy start leaves rich environmental footprint for conservation head
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/nab-meet-the-changemakers/2016/jun/23/muddy-start-leaves-rich-environmental-footprint-for-conservation-head>
“You have to integrate natural capital into the conversation,” Torpy says. 
“You factor it into long-term planning and as part of your day-to-day 
conversations too.”

The sustainability strategy is being supported by National Australia Bank 
where Taltarni is a business banking customer.

NAB senior agribusiness manager Stuart Postlethwaite says Taltarni is a 
“terrific example” of how modern farming is changing to take into account 
natural capital by investing in measures like biodiversity and putting a value 
on soil conservation.

“The environment for growing food for the world has got to be sustainable for 
the future,” Postlethwaite says. “We need to use nature to our advantage rather 
than fighting it all the time.

“From Adam’s level there has been an attitude to let the farming staff just 
try stuff - nothing is too radical and they give it a go. It’s that mentality 
of innovation and experimentation, and in the natural capital area they are 
leading the field in the industry.”

Investments such as insectariums create a valuable asset to the farmer that 
boosts their resilience to pests and makes their business more productive by 
reducing insecticide costs. Through their Natural Value strategy, NAB is 
seeking to better understand the contribution that natural assets make to its 
customers’ resilience and productivity so that they can support their customers 
to make these investments. NAB is working towards embedding the management of 
natural capital including soil, water and biodiversity into its credit 
assessment processes.

In 2011 NAB was one of two inaugural signatories to the National Capital 
Declaration (NCD), a global statement that recognises natural capital poses 
significant risks and opportunities to the finance sector. To date it is the 
only Australian bank to sign.
 