
In putting Berlin under the microscope in the last of our post-Brexit tours of 
the great cities of Europe, it seems that all roads lead to Kurt Weill. “Berlin 
will forever be associated with the turbulent times of the 20th century,” says @
abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567>, whose suggestions 
have been a mainstay of these surveys. “The Weimar period produced the 
definitive Berlin work – Weill’s Threepenny Opera with its many familiar tunes, 
especially with Lotte Lenya singing Jenny.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTF_jtz0kP9s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTF_jtz0kP9s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTF_jtz0kP9s&media=>
The Threepenny Opera <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Threepenny_Opera>, a 
collaboration between Weill and Bertolt Brecht based on 18th-century dramatist
John Gay’s The Beggar’s Opera <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TW2GIYQTtIY>, 
was premiered at Berlin’s Theater am Schiffbauerdamm in 1928, and after some 
initial resistance was a great success, vindicating Weill’s ambition to reclaim 
opera as an art form for the people (though Berlin’s elite of course delighted 
in its scabrous tale of cutthroats and prostitutes).

@abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567>’s point about the 
cultural and intellectual richness of Germany in the 1920s is well made. While 
society was in ferment and the postwar economy hopelessly unstable, writers, 
artists and composers were producing urgent, vivid work. Far from inhibiting 
artists, the instability and danger proved an inspiration, and fundamental 
questions about the future direction of Germany were being asked.

Much of the musical excitement of the period can be traced back to the 
pianist, composer and conductorFerruccio Busoni 
<http://www.bach-cantatas.com/Lib/Busoni-Ferruccio.htm>, who was born in Italy 
but made Berlin his home from his late 20s until his death in 1924 at the age 
of 58. As well as a wonderful pianist, Busoni was at the forefront of 
introducing contemporary music to Berlin and was also a great teacher of 
composition, numbering Weill among his pupils.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxrFwfeKzRuE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxrFwfeKzRuE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxrFwfeKzRuE&media=>
@abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> calls Doktor Faust 
Busoni’s “summation work”, and that was certainly the composer’s ambition. He 
spent almost a decade working on it, but it was still not quite finished at his 
death. Rarely staged, not often recorded and generally regarded as brilliant 
but uneven – like so much of Busoni’s work – it deserves a hearing.

Busoni’s epic piano concerto <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ohPzurDZzZ4>, 
premiered in Berlin in 1904, is also a wondrous piece – its 70-minute length 
and need for a male chorus in the final movement are presumably the reasons it 
isn’t performed more often. Busoni also wrotefor solo piano 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S9Iq9myu3hE>, though these many works have 
been overshadowed byhis transcriptions of Bach 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sw9DlMNnpPM>. A composer in urgent need of 
reappraisal. Busoni, that is, not Bach.

For a lover of classical music, Berlin is perhaps the most rewarding city in 
the world. @PositivistDinosaur <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4376557>
 certainly thinks so. “[It] not only supports its justly celebrated orchestra 
but three opera houses, all with ticket prices a fraction of those in London, 
and goodness knows how many other musical venues. This summer, Iréne Theorin 
was singing Brunnhilde there at the same time thatNina Stemme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/02/nina-stemme-brunnhilde-ring-cycle>
 was singing Isolde 400 metres down the road. Is there any other city where 
that would have been possible?”


@PositivistDinosaur <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4376557> links 
this glorious present with the intense excitement of the period after the first 
world war. “The interwar years,” he points out, “saw the premieres [in Berlin] 
of operatic works by Berg, Hindemith, Milhaud and Schreker, in that 
extraordinary decade or so of creativity before the Nazis’ rise to power and 
their banning of ‘degenerate music’.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOdinmlIdnYw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOdinmlIdnYw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOdinmlIdnYw&media=>
Alban Berg’s Wozzeck was first performed at the Berlin State Opera in 1925 
under its music director Erich Kleiber, a champion of Berg’s music. It was the 
banning of Berg’s Lulu in 1934 that led Kleiber to resign his post, leave 
Germany and begin a peripatetic exile that eventually ended in Argentina – and 
the reason his son Karl, who grew up to be an equally formidable conductor, 
became known asCarlos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/mar/08/carlos-kleiber-myth-revealed>
. Erich Kleiber was not Jewish, but chose to give up plum posts in Berlin and 
at La Scala because of fascism. Staunch defenders ofRichard Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/23/richard-strauss-composer-classical-music-nazi-war-criminal>
 andWilhelm Furtwängler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/nov/26/classicalmusicandopera2> please 
note.

Paul Hindemith’s relationship with the Nazi authorities 
<http://holocaustmusic.ort.org/politics-and-propaganda/third-reich/hindemith-paul/>
 was more ambivalent – he made various attempts at compromise before opting for 
exile in Switzerland in 1938. His operaMathis der Maler 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7JSPDikVBFc>, based on the life of the German 
Renaissance artist Matthias Grünewald, was a metaphor for his own struggle to 
maintain artistic freedom under the Nazis. While working on the opera, 
Hindemith, who taught at a music school in Berlin, also published a symphony 
with the same title. Perhaps not surprisingly, the symphony tends to get more 
outings than the opera.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbsHGntqx5Yw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbsHGntqx5Yw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbsHGntqx5Yw&media=>
@abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> brackets Hans 
Pfitzner’s 1917 opera Palestrina <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o-_oGOv4q3c> 
and Mathis der Maler together as works that set the freedom of the individual 
artist against an overbearing regime. In Pfitzner’s case, this becomes 
complicated because he made an accommodation with the Nazis far more damaging 
than that of contemporaries such as Richard Strauss, and Pfitzner’s reputation, 
already a little threadbare, has never recovered. Revivals of Palestrina are 
still met with tut-tutting about his pro-Nazi sympathies.

Yet it is a great opera, and the view that it presages the dilemma faced by 
composers under the Nazis is a valid one. The composer Palestrina, the hero of 
the opera, refuses to kowtow to a cardinal who wants him to write a new piece 
to use in a doctrinal battle he is waging against the pope. Palestrina refuses, 
but then writes it anyway while in a dreamlike state, and is saved from 
execution. The metaphor can be read in several ways: there is nobility in 
refusing to bow to pressure, but also nobility in producing a piece that 
ultimately saves the polyphonic music the pope is trying to ban. What is 
incontestable is that the opera contains some inspired music – far too good to 
be kept hidden because Pfitzner later prostituted himself before the Nazis.

As the conductor Christian Thielemann told me when he conducted Palestrina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/jan/04/artsfeatures1> at Covent 
Garden in 2001: “What has C sharp minor to do with fascism? Nothing. I am not 
interested in what composers have eaten or what their political beliefs were. 
Music doesn’t get better because one person was better than another person.”

Two final thoughts before we take our leave of Berlin. @abkquan 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567>, without whose contributions 
these mini-essays would have been very feeble (thanks to him and all the other 
commenters for suggestions), reckons we should include David Bowie, wholived in 
the city in the late 1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/13/david-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo>
. The obvious discs to include are his Berlin trilogy – Low, “Heroes” and 
Lodger. But even more appropriate – and neatly circular – is Bowie’s version of 
Weill’s Alabama Song. Truly essence of Berlin.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNCEURBYEGo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNCEURBYEGo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNCEURBYEGo&media=>
He also thinks we should mention the performance of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony 
thatLeonard Bernstein conducted in Berlin on Christmas Day 1989 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IInG5nY_wrU> to mark the tearing down of the 
wall between the eastern and western halves of the city. “That was a time of 
hope, of integration, of cultural and intellectual exchanges,” writes @abkquan 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567>. “Sadly, a quarter of a 
century later, the west is again building walls metaphorically or, as Trump 
proposed, literally.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIInG5nY_wrU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIInG5nY_wrU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIInG5nY_wrU&media=>
Brexit and Trump! How blessed we are. But the wheel will turn again. It always 
does. The small-mindedness of Trump and the Brexiteers cannot for long compete 
with the largeness of spirit of a Bernstein. Or, indeed, a Beethoven.


Previous cities in this series: London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/01/musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-london-stephen-moss>
 |Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/14/musical-tour-europe-great-cities-paris>
 |Venice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/29/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-venice>
 |Helsinki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/24/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-helsinki>
 |Prague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/sep/08/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-prague>
 |Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/sep/23/stephen-moss-musical-tour-europe-great-cities-hamburg-brahms-beatles>
 |Rome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/oct/06/stephen-moss-musical-tour-europe-great-cities-rome-respighi>
 |Vienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/oct/21/stephen-moss-musical-tour-europe-great-cities-vienna>
|Amsterdam  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/nov/04/musical-tour-europe-great-cities-amsterdam-andriessen-concertgebouw>

Thanks to everyone who has contributed to this series. 
 