


Oil chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T12:55:12/embed.html>
The price of Brent crude tumbled below $30 per barrel for the first time in 13 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/oil-price-dips-below-28-to-13-year-low-as-markets-brace-for-iranian-supply>
 at the start of 2016 as worries over a supply glut intensified. The lifting of 
sanctions on Iran in January meant the oil producer could ramp up crude exports 
into a market already awash with supplies thanks to high production from US 
shale oil and the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec). But 
prices recovered as the year progressedon signs of diminishing stocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/26/oil-price-rises-above-50-dollars-barrel>
 and on growing expectations Opec wouldlimit output 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/29/oil-prices-rise-6-opec-agrees-limit-crude-output>
. An agreement to cut supplies was reached at the end of the year between Opec 
and a number of non-members,sending oil to a 17-month high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/oil-price-surges-opec-non-opec-agree-deal-cut-output>
 above $57. The price is up 54% over the year.
gold chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T15:16:25/embed.html>
A tumultuous year in global politics boosted demand for gold – seen as a safe 
haven in troubled times – andsent its price soaring for much of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/gold-key-trends-brexit-us-election-price>
. Appetite for gold was also boosted by low interest rates. Investors could get 
little or no return on cash and other assets that pay interest and so instead 
sought out investments such as gold. The precious metal lost some of its shine 
after markets digested Donald Trump’s victory and the prospect of big 
government spending and interest rate rises in the US. As the US dollar and 
bond yields eased off in the final days of 2016, gold got a small fillip, 
ending slightly higher over the year as a whole.
sterling chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T15:17:19/embed.html>
The pound has tumbled since the EU referendum, hitting 31-year lows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/uk-stock-markets-soar-as-sterling-slumps-to-record-low>
 this year.A US interest rate rise in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/us-federal-reserve-raises-interest-rates-second-time-since-2008>
 led the dollar to extend gains against sterling. The pound is down around 17% 
against the dollar since the Brexit vote. Conversely,the FTSE 100 share index 
has soared to record highs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/29/ftse-100-record-closing-high-house-prices-dow-jones-business-live>
. Much of the FTSE’s rise has been down to the pound’s weakness: many of the 
firms listed report in dollars and so their earnings are flattered by the 
currency movements. The weak pound also encourages international investors to 
pick up UK-listed stocks and other assets such as property.
Dow Jones chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T15:20:25/embed.html>
The US stock index has soared to new highs in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/why-has-dow-jones-hit-a-record-high-following-trumps-victory>
, flirting with the 20,000 level. Worries about a potential wave of 
protectionism under president-elect Donald Trump have been more than offset by 
Wall Street’s hopes that huge infrastructure spending and deregulation will 
boost the US economy – in the short-term at least. Since the election, banks 
have been among the top risers on US stock markets, helped by rising interest 
rates and expectations that Trump will relax regulations.
Baltic Dry chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T13:13:43/embed.html>
The Baltic Dry index is looked to for early warning signs of trouble for the 
global economy. It measures dry freight costs for commodities such as coal, 
rice and wheat and, when it drops, economists start worrying about a slowdown 
in world trade and, by extension, in global economic activity. February was one 
such moment, whenthe index hit a record low 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/baltic-index-idUSL8N15P3Z4> of 290 points. It 
recovered as the year went on, with a spike in November after Trump’s victory 
but, at 961 points, it remains well below its peak of 11,793 points in May 2008.
China GDP chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T13:35:58/embed.html>
The year began with fresh concerns about the extent of China’s economic 
slowdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/08/china-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices>
, sending shockwaves through global markets. Economists expect GDP growth for 
the full year to come in at under 7% again and fall further next year, in a 
marked contrast to the expansion of 14% experienced a decade ago. The slowdown 
was widely expected as China’s economy matures but the nature of its growth has 
worried investors. As growth falters, Beijing has turned to debt-fuelled 
stimulus. That government spending drive combined with soaring property prices 
and record bank lending has promptedwarnings about China’s debt mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/16/chinas-debt-is-250-of-gdp-and-could-be-fatal-says-government-expert>
.
Mexican peso 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T13:31:12/embed.html>
Mexico’s currency had the dubious honour of acting as a barometer for Donald 
Trump’s chance of victory in the US presidential race. After the Republican 
candidate threatened to build a wall between the US and Mexico and to scrap or 
rejig trade deals, the peso came under repeated pressure andslumped to an 
all-time low against the dollar after Trump’s win 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/global-forex-idUKL8N1DA1X0>. More recently, the 
peso has steadied as Trump appears to rein in his campaign trail rhetoric but 
analysts warn the Mexican currency faces more volatility once the new president 
is inaugurated in January.
Japan banks 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T13:30:27/embed.html>
Low interest rates make it harder for banks to make a profit on the difference 
between the rates that are paid on savings and the rates that can be charged on 
loans. For evidence of what that means for banks’ share prices, look no further 
than Japan in 2016. Japanese banking stocks were already under pressure from 
years of electronic money printing by the central bank and tumbled further 
early in the year as theBank of Japan imposed negative interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/bank-of-japan-shocks-markets-by-adopting-negative-interest-rates>
 on them to encourage lending to businesses. But in September,the bank changed 
tack from its aggressive stimulus programme 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-japan-economy-boj-idUSKCN11R0BU> and shares 
across the sector staged a recovery on hopes the pressure on their 
profitability will now ease.
eurozone inflation chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T15:19:17/embed.html>
The European Central Bank has taken unprecendented measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/european-central-bank-cuts-interest-rates-zero-mario-draghi>
 to bolster anaemic growth in the currency bloc and to push up stubbornly low 
inflation. Despite ultra-low interest rates and a vast programme of electronic 
money printing, inflation remains well off the ECB goal of “below, but close 
to, 2% <https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/strategy/pricestab/html/index.en.html>”. 
Economists also point to core inflation, which excludes volatile items such as 
energy, and hasstuck around just 0.8% since the summer 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/File:Euro_area_annual_inflation_and_its_main_components_(%25),_2016,_November_2015_and_June_2016-November_2016-1.png>
, suggesting there is little underlying upward pressure on prices. The ECB 
recentlyannounced it was curbing the amount of stimulus it provides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/ecb-surprises-markets-by-scaling-back-qe>
 but its president,Mario Draghi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mario-draghi>, insisted the central bank 
remained ready to beef up its support if inflation fails to pick up.
Italy unemployment chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T13:39:58/embed.html>
The crushing defeat for the Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/euro-falls-to-20-month-low-after-italy-referendum-defeat>
 in a referendum on constitutional reform in December came amid stagnating 
living standards andone of the highest unemployment rates in the eurozone 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/7752348/3-01122016-AP-EN.pdf/5f785386-b824-4b65-a09d-99d8bed9958a>
 (pdf), at 11.6%. The situation among under-25s is worse still, with youth 
unemployment at more than 36%, compared with 29% five years ago. France has 
also experienced a rise in youth unemployment in recent years – the latest 
figures put it above 25% – a trend expected to influence voting patterns in the 
2017 presidential election.

 