
1. Rock’n’Roll Singer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NpA3q0TQ-GA>

Though the Young brothers, Angus and Malcolm, had formed AC/DC in 1973, their 
story really begins with the arrival of Bon Scott in September 1974. Scott was 
a veteran of the Australian rock scene – he’d sung with the Spektors, the 
Valentines and Fraternity without ever reaching any level of real success. He’d 
also worked in a fertiliser plant, and in May 1974 had a motorcycle accident – 
riding drunk after a row – that left him in a coma for three days. So, 28 years 
old by the time he joined AC/DC, he was well acquainted with the vicissitudes 
of life, and quite how long the way to the top was if you wanted to 
rock’n’roll. The anger at spending years on the fringes and the joy at getting 
another shot burst through in his lyrics in the earlyAC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc> records. The group’s first Australian 
album, High Voltage, came out in February 1975, but their second, TNT (released 
in December of the same year) was where Scott really found his voice. It opened 
with It’s a Long Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock’n’Roll) and Rock’n’Roll 
Singer, which were pretty much Scott’s manifestoes of the rock’n’roll life – 
grubby, dirty, venal, but a whole lot better than the alternative. “Well you 
can stick your nine-to-five living / And your collar and your tie / And you can 
stick your moral standards / ’Cos it’s all a dirty lie,” he sings on 
Rock’n’Roll Singer, those last two words given an almost camp inflection. (It’s 
often overlooked that Scott was, at his best, an excellent lyric writer, and – 
just as important – brilliant at phrasing in his delivery.) And, in one of the 
all time great asides in rock, he comes off the second chorus of “Gonna be a 
rock’n’roll singer / Gonna be a rock’n’roll star” with the perfect 
justification for his ambition: “I hear it pays well!”

AC/DC: 'If there's a bad-parenting issue, they blame rock'n'roll'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
2. Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYeMhiWWP8s>

The third AC/DC album brought a title track that became a staple of their live 
set, still a centrepiece performance on last year’s shows with Axl Rose. It was 
also an illustration of another facet of Scott’s persona – the confrontational, 
violent one. That was a feature of other songs on the record – Problem Child 
and Squealer (the latter featured one of the most unpleasant lyrics Scott ever 
wrote: “She said she’d never been / Never been balled before / And I don’t 
think / She’ll ever ball no more / Fixed her good”). On Dirty Deeds Done Dirt 
Cheap, though, the malevolence was turned to comic effect, which was perhaps 
why it remained in the live set with the much more amiable Brian Johnson 
singing. Well, comic effect is relative, of course – Scott was saying he’d be 
happy to kill your wife or girlfriend for you if you were fed up of her 
nagging. It’s the riff, though, that drives Dirty Deeds before going into those 
verses with the stuttering drums that link the band back to the 60s R&B that 
was their bedrock – this could be the Pretty Things, but amped up and 
exaggerated.

3. Live Wire (Live from Atlantic Studios) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2GiBVM7ICMs>

Live from Atlantic Studios was recorded in New York in December 1977, a 
radio-only promo disc that was much bootlegged before finally getting an 
official release as part of the 1997 box set Bonfire. Live Wire had been the 
fourth track on both the TNT album and the international edition of High 
Voltage, but it always sounded like an opener, and it began Live from Atlantic 
Studios as a showcase for the economical brutality of AC/DC live. Hearing the 
band perform like this – just the four instruments and the voice, without 
evident overdubs, is a reminder why there were those who linked them with punk, 
despite AC/DC’s disavowal of anything in common with the genre. Cliff Williams 
picks out the bassline – a single humming note – before three softly strummed 
chords come in. Bass and guitar pick up intensity, the riff strips back to two 
chords, but more insistent, foreboding, before the full band comes in and the 
riff kicks in properly. It’s the simplest of songs – a bare handful of chords 
reshuffle through its length, and the sustain in Malcolm Young’s rhythm guitar 
provides the bedrock – and unshowy. Restraint was at the heart of the best 
AC/DC songs, and Live Wire is all about restraint. What makes this version so 
perfect is that it combines that restraint with a rawness the studio recording 
didn’t quite capture.

AC/DC's Malcolm Young was a master of discipline and economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/sep/24/acdc-malcolm-young-master-of-discipline-and-economy>
4. Down Payment Blues <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3zZ9awjr4hc>

I’ve written before that 1978’s Powerage is the best AC/DC album, and I’ve had 
no cause to change my mind. For an entire album, Scott left the double 
entendres to one side, writing instead about hardscrabble and desperate lives, 
where escape is no more than a dream. The album is short on “big numbers” – 
only Sin City became a setlist regular down the decades – and the riffs were 
often dialled back. Though the bluesy shuffle that had featured on every 
previous album was expunged in favour of strict four-to-the-floor (this was the 
album where the classic AC/DC sound was forged), it was also AC/DC’s real blues 
album. Atlantic Records weren’t happy and complained about the lack of obvious 
singles. AC/DC responded by writing and recording Rock’n’Roll Damnation, which 
was put on later pressings in place of Cold Hearted Man. Riff Raff was the 
record’s fiercest rocker, but Down Payment Blues was its centrepiece, a 
desperate cry of poverty (“Feeling like a paper cup / Floating down a storm 
drain / Got myself a sailing boat / But I can’t afford a drop of rain”) in 
which the guitars build and release, and Scott’s delivery gets more anguished 
with every chorus until he’s nearly weeping.

5. What’s Next to the Moon? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cm4hkZ0ooYE>

The most understated song on Powerage, and one of the most subdued in the 
whole AC/DC catalogue, was also its best, with one of Scott’s most elusive and 
allusive lyrics, mixing pop culture references – film noir, silent movies, 
Saturday evening serials, superheroes – into a confession of murder, topped off 
with a sigh at the pointlessness of it all: “What’s next to the moon?” The 
imagery is so vivid and violent it’s hard not to be grimly fascinated by the 
picture Scott lays out from the brilliant opening verse: “Well I tied my baby 
to the railroad track / Cannonball down the line / Giving that woman just a one 
more chance / To give it to me one more time / Engineer wishing he was home in 
bed / Dreaming about Casey Jones / Wide-eyed woman lookin’ a mile ahead / 
Thinking ’bout broken bones.”

6. Whole Lotta Rosie (live) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cy_l8Cr7L0I>

The riff of riffs, the best loved AC/DC song of all, the track that launched 
Kerrang!, whose first issue was a list of the greatest songs ever, with Whole 
Lotta Rosie at No 1, the song to which everyone knows you shout “Angus!” in the 
gap in the riff at the opening. The truth is, though, that the studio version 
from the 1977 album Let There Be Rock is just a little flabby – there’s no good 
reason for it to last five and a half minutes – but the version from the 1978 
live album If You Want Blood (You’ve Got It) trimmed it back to a compact four 
minutes of excitement. It’s better, because the song itself – Scott’s hymn to a 
fat Tasmanian woman who had slept with 28 famous men before making Scott her 
29th – is actually quite slight, padded out by an Angus Young guitar solo that 
lasts the final two minutes of the song. AC/DC had already taken a pass at the 
riff in 1976, on the song Dirty Eyes, which remained unreleased until the 
Bonfire box. The decision not to release it at the time was proof of AC/DC’s 
judgment: the riff was there, but not yet refined into the taut, monumental 
edifice of Whole Lotta Rosie – it was worth waiting for the right version, 
rather than rushing it out. A little work and they had the most exciting chord 
sequence in rock.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeMPjs55hNzQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeMPjs55hNzQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeMPjs55hNzQ&media=>
7. Hell’s Bells <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=etAIpkdhU9Q>

OK, there will be some – many of you, all of you – who criticise the omission 
of anything from Highway to Hell, the album that pushed AC/DC to the precipice 
of global stardom. And, yes, the title track is eternal. But Highway to Hell 
turned out to be dry run for the second biggest selling album of all time and 
unquestionably the greatest comeback in rock history. Scott died in February 
1980, yet by April the band were back in the studio with a new singer, Brian 
Johnson, and by the end of July their new album was out. But it wasn’t 
Johnson’s voice that captured the imagination so much as the combination of the 
fearlessness of the band’s return, their strongest and most accessible set of 
songs yet, and a production from Robert John “Mutt” Lange that buffed said 
songs into a bright, radio-friendly sheen. Nevertheless, they opened the album 
not with one of those pop-rock anthems, but with something much darker – a 
tolling bell, a mournful guitar line, and riff that takes nearly 90 seconds to 
introduce the new singer. Its power is only marginally diminished by the fact 
that the lyric is about Johnson being frightened by a storm while flying to 
Nassau to record the album.

8. Back in Black <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pAgnJDJN4VA>

Nowhere was Lange’s attention to detail more evident than on Back in Black’s 
title track. Many AC/DC fans – me among them – prefer the sound of the 
recordings produced by Harry Vanda and Angus and Malcolm’s older brother 
George, but it took Lange to make them sound like the biggest rock band in the 
world, as well as one of the very best. Back in Black managed to combine the 
space and musical concision of the great AC/DC songs with a sonic breadth and 
depth. More to the point, it was staggeringly precise – listen to the 
interaction between Phil Rudd’s drums and the guitars on that hiccup in the 
verses and how the guitars, despite swinging just a little off the beat 
throughout, are always in exactly the right place. It sounds like something 
from one of the earlier albums, but somehow mechanised, a search for rock 
perfection that’s as much mathematical as musical. Lange would later take this 
approach to extremes on his work with Def Leppard, where it sometimes seemed as 
if the actual contents of the songs took second place to their construction, a 
kind of Frankenstinian approach whereby if you bolted the right bits together 
you’d end up with a superhuman rock record. Still, the sales figures suggest he 
knew exactly what he was doing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpAgnJDJN4VA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpAgnJDJN4VA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpAgnJDJN4VA&media=>
9. Thunderstruck <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v2AC41dglnM>

Let’s not pretend that AC/DC had a glorious 1980s. There was the inevitable 
problem of following Back in Black – their third album with Lange, For Those 
About to Rock We Salute You, suffered a paucity of top-notch songs, and the 
band themselves wanted to break from his way of working. They produced 
themselves on Flick of the Switch, a rawer album that had a troubled gestation 
and which saw their audience shrink. Subsequent albums were padded out with too 
much filler and too few huge songs, the kind that fill their live set. It took 
until 1990 before they managed to pull out a song that bore comparison with the 
best songs of a decade earlier. Thunderstruck begins with a tricksy opening 
pattern from Angus Young – one that has fans debating whether he’s picking or 
using one hand to play it with hammer-ons and pull-offs (the answer? Well, on 
AC/DC live films, he’s picking, though some say he plays it both ways at 
different times). As with other great AC/DC songs, it’s one where they have 
such confidence in the opening that they let it run on – and on and on. Though 
the rest of the band come in, they keep Angus’s pattern running on until the 
first chorus erupts at 2m40s. This song and Rock N Roll Train from 2008’s Black 
Ice were the only songs from after For Those About to Rock that would gain 
regular places in AC/DC’s setlists from the 1980s onwards.

10. Stiff Upper Lip <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S2Z8WIlaPH4>

In late 1999, the band reunited with George Young for the first time in 22 
years, after he was brought in to produce their 14th studio album following the 
death of the original producer, Bruce Fairbairn. The result was the best 
sounding AC/DC record since Back in Black, and their bluesiest since they had 
parted ways with George. Once again, AC/DC sounded sparse and spare, like a 
band recording in a room rather than trying to employ the latest technology. As 
Angus Young told me in 2014 of the band’s recording techniques: “You find a 
good room, a good sounding room. That’s part of the process. There was a big 
thing, specially from the 80s when more technology was coming into the record 
business – you’d blink and there’d be new gadgets coming along. And there was 
that tendency when engineers would think, ‘Ah, they’re out of the room, I’ll 
just plug in this new reverb unit.’ We need a good soundin’ room. You need the 
engineer to go round the speaker box and find the best speaker in the box; they 
get old microphones, especially on drums; same with the amps. You want it flat. 
We were a band, when we started with my older brother, he had said: ‘I could 
sit here and twiddle and put bits of EQ here and play you back this ultra lush 
sound, but I’ll be fooling you.’ The best way is to just get used to listening 
to it dry. If that guitar sounds a bit rough, try and get it in that room 
first. If it’s that speakerbox, try another speakerbox. Try a different 
microphone, try a different position on it. Find the best sound before you 
start going in there and adding gadgetry. A lot of it is that.” And on Stiff 
Upper Lip, AC/DC sounded like they had gone back to basics. Its title track 
opened with a snaking blues line, overlaid with Johnson’s lascivious gargle – 
both reminiscent of ZZ Top – before the band kick in, one of those propulsive, 
mid-tempo rockers that they made their stock in trade. Always different, always 
the same.
 