
It’s been another fascinating year for Academics Anonymous, with our writers 
taking on topics as diverse as social media, strike action and sexual 
harassment. To all of our contributors: thank you. And if you’d like to shine 
your own light on some dark corner of university life,do get in touch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
.


It’s hard to single out favourites, but here are the 10 that struck the 
loudest chord this year.

I’m a serious academic, not a professional Instagrammer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/aug/05/im-a-serious-academic-not-a-professional-instagrammer>

“Have you seen that #seriousacademic is trending?” asked a colleague. And that 
was how we found out about the Twitterstorm started by this entry. The writer 
was tired of being advised to share their work on social media, and sick of the 
ubiquitous phones at higher education events.

“When did it become acceptable to use your phone throughout a lecture, let 
alone an entire conference?” they asked. “No matter how good you think you are 
at multi-tasking, you will not be truly focusing your attention on the speaker, 
who has no doubt spent hours preparing for this moment.”


Share your ideas: how to write for the Higher Education Network
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
Cue a day of heated debate on Twitter, in the comments section – and even in a 
retaliation blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/aug/05/im-a-non-serious-academic-i-make-no-apologies-for-this>
 from science writer Dean Burnett.

Bomb threats, breakdowns and bongs: the life of a university security guard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/15/bomb-threats-breakdowns-and-bongs-the-life-of-a-university-security-guard>

Way back in January, we received a pitch from a secret security guard – who 
went on to spawn his ownseries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/series/security-leak>. 
It’s easy to see why.


“Welfare is my favourite part of the job,” he wrote. “Every September, at the 
start of freshers’ week, you see the kids who aren’t going to join a society, 
and who won’t be doing neknominate down the union. Slouched with loneliness. 
Time-bombs, we call them: if you can reach out to them and get talking about 
Liverpool FC or Walter White, you can stop them going down a bad road.

“Most of the time we’re the only ones who spot them, because we’re here 24/7. 
Unless they crack up between the hours of 8.30am and 5pm, they just get emails 
from other departments.”


Remind me, Mr Cameron: what am I trying to ‘Prevent’? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/04/remind-me-mr-cameron-what-am-i-trying-to-prevent>

The government’s Prevent programme was the subject of considerable discussion 
in the sector this year, little of it positive. Our writer had just attended 
mandatory training on the topic and was struggling with the concept.


“Big Brother is watching and we are being asked to watch with Big Brother 
too,” they wrote. “But who decides what is radical? I wonder if we aren’t 
already engaged in a war, one that we can’t win. The enemy isn’t an 
international faction or student radicals. The enemy is difference, and that 
enemy comes from within.”

I’ve finally admitted that I’m a dyslexic academic – and I’m terrified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/19/ive-finally-admitted-that-im-a-dyslexic-academic-and-im-terrified>

In February, we published this moving piece from an academic who had finally 
disclosed to their HR department that they had dyslexia – after keeping it 
quiet for 23 years.

“A voice in your head is shouting ‘idiot’ but you don’t believe in giving up 
in the face of adversity, so you go on for another hour,” they wrote. “The 
stress is causing the text to move and float around. You can no longer 
understand the words in the original email. What to do? Ask a colleague ? No, 
they will think you are dumping work on them. Or they may do it, but it doesn’t 
seem fair. There is nowhere to go – how do you explain that words are jumping 
all over the page?”

Cheer up, my academic colleagues! We’re so lucky to do this job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/08/cheer-up-my-academic-colleagues-were-so-lucky-to-do-this-job>

Mostly this series shines a light on difficult issues, but from time to time, 
someone wants to celebrate a positive aspect of their working lives. This one 
came from an academic who loves their job and wishes more colleagues felt the 
same.

“Our work has societal value – that is clearly a good thing,” they write. “It 
is also a shield for your ego when faced with friends from your undergraduate 
days who are now earning millions in the City. Remember this higher calling. It 
will take the sting out of the fact that your peers can afford houses in 
Oxford/holidays/Waitrose.”

Students! Your lecturers are on strike because they are struggling to survive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/26/students-your-lecturers-are-on-strike-because-they-are-struggling-to-survive>

In the midst of May’s strike action from academics across the country, we 
published a piece from someone on the picket line, speaking directly to 
students:

“Let’s imagine that I get lucky, and am offered a couple of summer jobs 
teaching elsewhere, or marking school essays. Let’s say the jobs overlap. Now I 
have a lot of work and little time for sleep. I have to pack my things, move to 
a different city, only to be uprooted and move again in September when a 
university wants want to employ me as a lecturer again. This means moving house 
twice within three months, with no holiday, two jobs, no time to prepare 
lectures for September and no research.


“And what does this mean for you, the students? In September you will listen 
to lectures that are hastily put together and delivered by people who are on 
the brink of exhaustion. So much for the quality of teaching.”

For the first time in 18 years, I don’t feel welcome in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/21/for-the-first-time-in-18-years-i-dont-feel-welcome-in-britain>

As the referendum loomed, we heard from an academic who feared the worst if 
the UK voted to leave the European Union – it makes for tough reading in 
retrospect.

“I have been told: ‘It’s not about people like you, it’s the others.’ I am, 
apparently, a ‘useful’ foreigner. So who are the others? The Polish plumbers? 
The Lithuanian fruit pickers? The Spanish nurses? The Greek doctors?


“Even in the event of a vote to remain, it will be difficult to control the 
forces that have been unleashed in this campaign. And it is difficult to 
imagine what the UK would turn into after a Brexit. What is certain, however, 
is that it will no longer be the country that embraced me – and that I fell in 
love with – all those years ago.”

Sexual harassment is rife in universities, but complaining means risking your 
career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/aug/26/sexual-harassment-is-rife-in-universities-but-complaining-means-risking-your-career>

We have delved into a truly harrowing subject in 2017: sexual assault on 
campus. The response from academics at every kind of university, across the UK, 
has been overwhelming. One of our bloggers wrote:

“Things can get pretty out of hand at conferences, but even I was surprised 
the morning I saw a young woman who had been left with bite marks on her face 
from the advances of a male lecturer, 20 years her senior. She said she blamed 
herself for not having pushed him back quickly enough.

“Why do we not speak about this? Rather, why do we not speak out about it in 
public? We do in private.”

Dear student, I just don’t have time to mark your essay properly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/20/dear-student-i-just-dont-have-time-to-mark-your-essay-properly>

“When I was a student, I assumed that my work was meticulously checked and 
appraised, with the due consideration it deserved, by erudite scholars who 
perhaps wore tweed,” said an anonymous academic, in the middle of a marking 
marathon. The piece, in the form of a letter to students, set out to reveal the 
less-than-glamorous trutha.

“I wonder now if it was actually marked by someone like me: a semi-employed 
thirtysomething on a zero-hours contract, sitting at home in pyjamas, staring 
at a hopeless pile of marking, as hopes of making it to the shops for a pint of 
milk today fade.”

My dirty little secret: I’ve been writing erotic novels to fund my PhD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/02/my-dirty-little-secret-ive-been-writing-erotic-novels-to-fund-my-phd>

“I am leading a double life,” began a piece we published in September. “I have 
published three novels before the end of my PhD.

“Academia is full of people who produce literature, from critically-acclaimed 
poetry to intellectual novels. That’s not what I’m talking about. I write 
bodice-rippers. Paperback romance novels that seek to titillate and entertain 
(both me and the reader). I create what is commonly referred to as pulp 
fiction.”

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 