
Like the head of residents’ associations everywhere, Yoshio Ookouchi is not 
entirely happy. He grumbles about the poor bus service for the older people who 
make up the majority of tenants in two blocks of flats and 14 houses on his 
estate, owned and run by the local authority.

It’s not easy, he points out, for residents to get to the nearest supermarket 
or doctor. “From our community viewpoint, we have been a little disappointed by 
the services provided by the city,” says Ookouchi. “We understand they have 
been busy, but we feel there is room for improvement.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb91fa5489946de5ada1f403fee12c0f312c56b%2F0_62_3598_2159%2F3598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Fukushima%3A%20the%20tenants%20rebuilding%20a%20destroyed%20community&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Fukushima%3A%20the%20tenants%20rebuilding%20a%20destroyed%20community&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb91fa5489946de5ada1f403fee12c0f312c56b%2F0_62_3598_2159%2F3598.jpg>
 Yoshio Ookouchi, head of the residents’ association in Usuiso, Japan. 
Photograph: The Guardian 
That may sound like the kind of issue raised by any residents’ association. 
But where Ookouchi lives is different. He represents 103 households in Usuiso, 
which, until March 2011, was a small beachside village in the Fukushima 
prefecture, or county, just 65km south of theFukushima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fukushima> Daiichi nuclear reactor. On 
11 March 2011, life in Usuiso was changed forever by the earthquake and massive 
tsunami that devastated much of the Japanese east coast. There used to be 350 
houses down by the beach in Usuiso. They were nearly all torn down, as was the 
local school. By the end of that afternoon, 115 people were dead or missing.


On a bleak, cold January day in Usuiso, almost six years after that 
devastating afternoon, what used to be a beautiful curved sandy beach is now a 
construction site. Bulldozers are busy shifting earth to the top of the new 
earthworks intended to provide protection against future flooding. On the other 
side, inland and away from the sea, new houses will be built along with a 
school.

Japan marks fifth anniversary of tsunami and nuclear disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/japan-fifth-anniversary-tsunami-nuclear-disaster>
In the meantime, many of the former residents from the village are living half 
a mile up the road, in the new public housing built by the Iwaki City 
government as temporary dwellings for those hit by the disaster. These 
temporary homes, which are small but well-built flats and houses, took three 
years to develop, not least because of the difficulty of finding the title 
holders to the land, many of whom had perished in the disaster. But that wasn’t 
the only problem, explains Koiso Matsudo, deputy manager of housing and 
maintenance at the city authority. Not only did the cost of material and labour 
go up because of all the reconstruction taking place across the region, but it 
was also difficult to get enough construction workers. “Because of the negative 
press [following the nuclear disaster], construction workers were afraid to 
come to this area,” he says.Radiation levels have been monitored closely  
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0114407>since 
the disaster and have not deterred many of the former residents of Usuiso from 
wanting to stay in their village.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b23487879b45128a3454f67f5bfb6ad58814065%2F124_309_3122_1873%2F3122.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Fukushima%3A%20the%20tenants%20rebuilding%20a%20destroyed%20community&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Fukushima%3A%20the%20tenants%20rebuilding%20a%20destroyed%20community&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b23487879b45128a3454f67f5bfb6ad58814065%2F124_309_3122_1873%2F3122.jpg>
 Koiso Matsudo, deputy manager of housing and maintenance, Iwaki City, in one 
of the temporary flats built for Usuiso’s residents. Photograph: The Guardian 
 Building began in June 2013 and a year later, people were able to move into 
the 85 flats and 14 houses, with priority given to older people and families. 
Rents vary according to tenants’ income. The lowest rent is Y3,100 (£22) a 
month, and the highest is Y67,000 (£480).

Ookuchi explains that there was a strong desire on the part of residents to 
stay in the village, despite the lack of amenities. Matsudo agrees. “This 
wasn’t a convenient area, even before the earthquake,” he says.


But the city government was determined to listen to residents and accommodate 
their wishes as much as possible. More than five years on, some of the 
householders who lost their houses in the disaster have taken financial 
compensation and moved away. However, Matsudo says many of the elderly 
residents would not receive enough to be able to rebuild their own houses or 
raise a mortgage. The slow rate of rebuilding permanent homes has been 
frustrating for everyone, he acknowledges. “If all had gone well [with the 
construction of permanent replacement homes], there should have been no need 
for this kind of housing,” he says. “But we didn’t have that luxury.”

Despite all the difficulties, many of the former Usuiso residents continue to 
stay and now they are not just rebuilding their community, but strengthening it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa31e3791fd21e0411bc9f668f8373fb7342f452%2F129_0_3506_2104%2F3506.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Fukushima%3A%20the%20tenants%20rebuilding%20a%20destroyed%20community&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Fukushima%3A%20the%20tenants%20rebuilding%20a%20destroyed%20community&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffukushima-locals-rebuild-community-destroyed-japan-earthquake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa31e3791fd21e0411bc9f668f8373fb7342f452%2F129_0_3506_2104%2F3506.jpg>
 One of the two blocks of flats providing temporary housing for Usuiso 
residents displaced by the disaster of March 2011. Photograph: The Guardian 
Those who lived in this small village before the disaster were pretty 
independent-minded, says Ookouchi. Now, they have been brought together. Events 
run by the community include a local festival that college and high school 
students help organise, bringing a much-welcomed shot of youthful spirit into 
the village. There are pictures of the older and young people, all with beaming 
smiles, on the wall of the community centre that has been built as part of the 
public housing. There’s a regular newsletter for residents and a small, 
moveable shrine.

And while the bus service still isn’t great, a local supermarket sends a 
four-tonne truck twice a week with supplies for the local residents to buy. “My 
personal view is that the bonds and unity between the residents has got 
better,” says Ookouchi. “People used to be independent and not as involved in 
local events as residents in other districts. So there have been some 
positives.”

 * Jane Dudman was in Japan as part of a Japan Local Government Centre study 
tour <http://www.jlgc.org.uk/en/activities-and-events/japan-study-tour/>. Her 
expenses in Japan were paid for by the Council of Local Authorities for 
International Relations, which had no say in the content of this article. 
Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 