
We have long been told a compelling story about the relationship between rich 
countries and poor countries. The story holds that the rich nations of the OECD 
give generously of their wealth to the poorer nations of the global south, to 
help them eradicate poverty and push them up the development ladder. Yes, 
during colonialism western powers may have enriched themselves by extracting 
resources and slave labour from their colonies – but that’s all in the past. 
These days, they givemore than $125bn (£102bn) in aid 
<https://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/aidtopoorcountriesslipsfurtherasgovernmentstightenbudgets.htm>
 each year – solid evidence of their benevolent goodwill.

This story is so widely propagated by the aid industry and the governments of 
the rich world that we have come to take it for granted. But it may not be as 
simple as it appears.

The US-based Global Financial Integrity (GFI) and the Centre for Applied 
Research at the Norwegian School of Economicsrecently published 
<http://www.gfintegrity.org/press-release/new-report-on-unrecorded-capital-flight-finds-developing-countries-are-net-creditors-to-the-rest-of-the-world/>
 some fascinating data. They tallied up all of the financial resources that get 
transferred between rich countries and poor countries each year: not just aid, 
foreign investment and trade flows (asprevious studies 
<http://www.rrojasdatabank.info/wesp2011chap3.pdf> have done) but also 
non-financial transfers such as debt cancellation, unrequited transfers like 
workers’ remittances, and unrecorded capital flight (more of this later). As 
far as I am aware, it is the most comprehensive assessment of resource 
transfers ever undertaken.

The flow of money from rich countries to poor countries pales in comparison to 
the flow that runs in the other direction

What they discovered is that the flow of money from rich countries to poor 
countries pales in comparison to the flow that runs in the other direction.

In 2012, the last year of recorded data, developing countries received a total 
of $1.3tn, including all aid, investment, and income from abroad. But that same 
year some $3.3tn flowed out of them. In other words, developing countries sent 
$2tn more to the rest of the world than they received. If we look at all years 
since 1980, these net outflows add up to an eye-popping total of $16.3tn – 
that’s how much money has been drained out of the global south over the past 
few decades. To get a sense for the scale of this, $16.3tn is roughly the GDP 
of the United States

What this means is that the usual development narrative has it backwards. Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> is effectively flowing in 
reverse. Rich countries aren’t developing poor countries; poor countries are 
developing rich ones.

What do these large outflows consist of? Well, some of it is payments on debt. 
Developing countries have forked out over $4.2tn ininterest payments 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/DT.INT.DECT.CD?locations=XO> alone since 
1980 – a direct cash transfer to big banks in New York and London, on a scale 
that dwarfs the aid that they received during the same period. Another big 
contributor is the income that foreigners make on their investments in 
developing countries and then repatriate back home. Think of all the profits 
that BP extracts from Nigeria’s oil reserves, for example, or that 
Anglo-American pulls out of South Africa’s gold mines.

But by far the biggest chunk of outflows has to do with unrecorded – and 
usually illicit – capital flight. GFI calculates that developing countries have 
lost a total of $13.4tn through unrecorded capital flight since 1980.

Most of these unrecorded outflows take place through the international trade 
system. Basically, corporations – foreign and domestic alike – report false 
prices on their trade invoices in order to spirit money out of developing 
countries directly into tax havens and secrecy jurisdictions, a practice known 
as “trade misinvoicing <http://www.gfintegrity.org/issue/trade-misinvoicing/>”. 
Usually the goal is to evade taxes, but sometimes this practice is used to 
launder money or circumvent capital controls. In 2012, developing countries 
lost $700bn through trade misinvoicing, which outstripped aid receipts that 
year by a factor of five.

Forget 'developing' poor countries, it's time to 'de-develop' rich countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/developing-poor-countries-de-develop-rich-countries-sdgs>
Multinational companies also steal money from developing countries through 
“same-invoice faking”, shifting profits illegally between their own 
subsidiaries by mutually faking trade invoice prices on both sides. For 
example, a subsidiary in Nigeria might dodge local taxes by shifting money to a 
related subsidiary in the British Virgin Islands, where the tax rate is 
effectively zero and where stolen funds can’t be traced.

GFI doesn’t include same-invoice faking in its headline figures because it is 
very difficult to detect, but they estimate that it amounts to another $700bn 
per year. And these figures only cover theft through trade in goods. If we add 
theft through trade in services to the mix, it brings total net resource 
outflows to about $3tn per year.

That’s 24 times more than the aid budget. In other words, for every $1 of aid 
that developing countries receive, they lose $24 in net outflows. These 
outflows strip developing countries of an important source of revenue and 
finance for development. The GFI report finds that increasingly large net 
outflows have caused economic growth rates in developing countries to decline, 
and are directly responsible for falling living standards.

Who is to blame for this disaster? Since illegal capital flight is such a big 
chunk of the problem, that’s a good place to start. Companies that lie on their 
trade invoices are clearly at fault; but why is it so easy for them to get away 
with it? In the past, customs officials could hold up transactions that looked 
dodgy, making it nearly impossible for anyone to cheat. But the World Trade 
Organisation claimed that this made trade inefficient, and since 1994 customs 
officials have been required to accept invoiced pricesat face value 
<http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/cusval_e/cusval_info_e.htm> except in very 
suspicious circumstances, making it difficult for them to seize illicit 
outflows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Faid-in-reverse-how-poor-countries-develop-rich-countries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F452499e9c9f4bb4f1329f94923febb512639af57%2F0_330_4951_2971%2F4951.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aid%20in%20reverse%3A%20how%20poor%20countries%20develop%20rich%20countries%20%7C%20Jason%20Hickel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Faid-in-reverse-how-poor-countries-develop-rich-countries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aid%20in%20reverse%3A%20how%20poor%20countries%20develop%20rich%20countries%20%7C%20Jason%20Hickel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Faid-in-reverse-how-poor-countries-develop-rich-countries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F452499e9c9f4bb4f1329f94923febb512639af57%2F0_330_4951_2971%2F4951.jpg>
 Protest about tax havens in London in 2016, organised by charities Oxfam, 
ActionAid and Christian Aid. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
Still, illegal capital flight wouldn’t be possible without the tax havens. And 
when it comes to tax havens, the culprits are not hard to identify: there are
more than 60 in the world <http://treasureislands.org/>, and the vast majority 
of them are controlled by a handful of western countries. There are European 
tax havens such as Luxembourg and Belgium, and US tax havens like Delaware and 
Manhattan. But by far the biggest network of tax havens is centered around the 
City of London, which controls secrecy jurisdictions throughout the British 
Crown Dependencies and Overseas Territories.

In other words, some of the very countries that so love to tout their foreign 
aid contributions are the ones enabling mass theft from developing countries.

The aid narrative begins to seem a bit naïve when we take these reverse flows 
into account. It becomes clear that aid does little but mask the 
maldistribution of resources around the world. It makes the takers seem like 
givers, granting them a kind of moral high ground while preventing those of us 
who care about global poverty from understanding how the system really works.

Poor countries don’t need charity. They need justice. And justice is not 
difficult to deliver. We could write off the excess debts of poor countries, 
freeing them up to spend their money on development instead of interest 
payments on old loans; we could close down the secrecy jurisdictions, and slap 
penalties on bankers and accountants who facilitate illicit outflows; and we 
could impose a global minimum tax on corporate income to eliminate the 
incentive for corporations to secretly shift their money around the world.

We know how to fix the problem. But doing so would run up against the 
interests of powerful banks and corporations that extract significant material 
benefit from the existing system. The question is, do we have the courage?

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 