
Andy Murray could always do with some British company at major tennis 
tournaments but he lost one of his two compatriots in the men’s draw, Aljaz 
Bedene, before they had cleared the afternoon cutlery from the hospitality 
suites on day one of the 2017Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

Bedene dug himself in and out of more holes than a motorway navvy before the 
gnarled and resolute Victor Estrella Burgos prevailed 7-6 (9-7), 7-5, 0-6, 6-3. 
A computer glitch incorrectly recorded that none of their 278 rallies in three 
hours and 10 minutes of highly competitive tennis lasted longer than four 
shots, a statistic given the lie by the exhausted mien of the combatants.

Andy Murray v Illya Marchenko: Australian Open first round – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/16/andy-murray-v-illya-marchenko-australian-open-first-round-live>
It was a crushing loss for Bedene, whose off-court, in-court legal jousting 
with the InternationalTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Federation in a bid to qualify to play Davis Cup for his adopted country has 
plainly drained his spirit. Having taken possession of his British passport in 
March, 2015, he had considered his case a formality. It is still in limbo, as 
his career.

Bedene had set points in each of the first two frames but could not control 
his normally lethal forehand as one errant shot after another flew from his 
racket. He finished with 64 unforced errors, 42 of them on his forehand.

And it had all started so well for him.

Estrella Burgos, the fourth oldest man here at 36 – behind Tommy Haas, Radek 
Štěpánek and Ivo Karlovic – is never the less a super-fit, scurrying scrapper 
capable of upsetting all but the very best. The Dominican Republic veteran, six 
places ahead of his younger opponent at 103 in the world rankings, suffered 
under the weight of Bedene’s crisp ground strokes in a lively opener on Court 
5, with the clatter of the suburban trams drifting through to lend a club-like 
atmosphere to proceedings. But he drew on his considerable experience to 
extricate himself from a string of tight situations.

Estrella Burgos saved six of seven break points in the first set, won three 
games in a row, forced a tie-break and held his nerve to go ahead after an hour 
and 10 minutes.

Bedene, whose first serve had deserted him, struggled to stop the rot, and 
blew another break opportunity at the start of the second set. Within half an 
hour, a minor crisis had turned into a worrying meltdown and he trailed 1-4 
against a teak-tough opponent nine years his senior and with a limited but 
disciplined array of shots. He fought back, but Estrella Burgos was flying and 
was two sets up after two hours.

Then the game – and Bedene – came to life. In the space of 26 minutes he had 
bagelled Estrella Burgos, who had done a ton of running and looked as if the 
pressure of leading was beginning to drain his stamina.

Andy Murray, world No1: his remarkable year in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/nov/21/andy-murray-world-no1-his-remarkable-year-in-pictures>
However, Bedene had physical problems, too. He was feeling his back between 
games and the power seemed to ebb from his serve as the temperature on the 
uncovered outside court moved past 30 degrees Celcius. His challenge was to 
muster all his reserves to win his first match here after four previous 
failures. It was beyond him.

The heat did not slacken in mid-afternoon and it was the older player who 
looked most up against it, losing his eighth game in a row after two hours and 
41 minutes, before holding to trail 1-2 in the fourth. However, he then won 
another brace to level, lifted by the prospect of winning his first match here 
in three attempts, and was back on serve at 4-3. He found enough extra gas to 
serve out, relieved to convert his third match point in what had been an 
enthralling, error-filled fight.
 