
He compares feminism to cancer, called transgender people “retarded” and once 
labelled a BuzzFeed reporter a “thick-as-pig-shit media Jew”. So when 
“alt-right” figurehead Milo Yiannopoulos, who relentlessly delights in wild 
provocation, landed a $250,000 (£203,000) book deal with Simon & Schuster, the 
publisher understandably – and almost immediately – issued a statement 
distancing itself from the views of the writers they publish: “The opinions 
expressed therein belong to our authors, and do not reflect either a corporate 
viewpoint or the views of our employees.”

UK publishers shy away from 'alt-right' star Milo Yiannopoulos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/04/uk-publishers-shy-away-from-alt-right-star-milo-yiannopoulos>
But S&S’s disavowal sits uneasily with an assertion made by Louise Burke, head 
of its conservative imprint Threshold, which is publishing Yiannopoulos’s 
Dangerous. “This is an area where it really helps to be a believer. I don’t 
feel you can be successful in this particular genre if you are opposed to the 
message,” Burke said, when the imprint was created in 2006.

Of course, S&S is chasing sales. The financial demands of its parent company 
CBS are strenuous. On the one occasion I was granted an audience with CEO 
Carolyn Reidy during my three years working at the company’s Rockefeller Center 
HQ, she pointed out a “Mind the Gap” doormat at the entrance to her capacious 
top-floor office. Its slogan, she explained grimly, was repurposed from the 
London underground to emphasise the necessity of aligning the company’s 
revenues with her targets.

Threshold has certainly helped to deliver on that front, with five New York 
Times No 1 bestsellers in the past six years, including books by Dick Cheney 
and Laura Ingraham. It also published Donald Trump’s 2016 campaign book, Great 
Again: How to Fix Our Crippled America. Their success has been replicated at 
conservative imprints of other major houses, with their equally muscular names: 
Sentinel at Penguin, Broadside at HarperCollins and Crown Forum at Random 
House, all seeking to emulate the granddaddy of rightwing publishing, 
70-year-old independent Regnery, which has seen 30 bestsellers in the last 10 
years.

Rightwing blockbusters are often penned by retired politicians and TV 
personalities, especially from Fox News. Punditry and memoir by the likes of 
Glenn Beck, Ann Coulter,Sarah Palin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sarahpalin> and Megyn Kelly have sold 
strongly regardless of whether the US is led by a Democrat or a Republican. The 
year Barack Obama took office, Michelle Malkin, Bill O’Reilly, Mark Levine and 
Dick Morris appeared together in the New York Times’s top 10 bestsellers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Falt-writing-how-the-far-right-is-changing-us-publishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F816b5e4fe2d769794d0b8110f9ba0b337f8af554%2F0_307_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alt-writing%3A%20how%20the%20far%20right%20is%20changing%20US%20publishing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Falt-writing-how-the-far-right-is-changing-us-publishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alt-writing%3A%20how%20the%20far%20right%20is%20changing%20US%20publishing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Falt-writing-how-the-far-right-is-changing-us-publishing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F816b5e4fe2d769794d0b8110f9ba0b337f8af554%2F0_307_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Books for believers … Pat Morgenstern of Middleville, Michigan reads Sarah 
Palin’s Going Rogue soon after its publication in November 2009. Photograph: 
Bill Pugliano/Getty Images 
Part of the success of rightwing publishing rests with the fact that while the 
left, diverse and fractious, reads across a larger group of authors, 
conservatives tend to focus on a few big names. Book-business execs can’t say 
no to the cash cows this herding breeds, no matter if it offends their more 
genteel sensibilities. After publishing a spoof of Sarah Palin’s Going Rogue 
(titledGoing Rouge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/michaeltomasky/2009/nov/17/sarah-palin-going-rouge>
) at the independent house I cofounded subsequent to leaving S&S, a senior 
executive at Palin’s publisher HarperCollins whispered to me at a party that 
everyone in his office was reading our book. But that was about as strong as 
the industry pushback got.

So why all the furore over Yiannopoulos? Those objecting to Dangerous seems 
more concerned about its anticipated tone than any pernicious, new ideas it may 
contain. With the start of the Trump presidency comes fear of a new, more 
vituperative tenor in the mainstream, cementing a national lurch to the right. 
The American far right is characterised by,as Angela Nagle puts it 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/angela-nagle-what-the-alt-right-is-really-all-about-1.2926929>
, “a slippery use of irony”; its “hip elitism” allows prejudice to be disguised 
as harmless entertainment. Yiannopoulos, with his Hugh Grant-like bashfulness 
and potty mouth, perfectly fits this tawdry bill.

The last time a rightwing revolution was heralded, back in the early 1980s, it 
was not difficult to trace its intellectual precedents. The University of 
Chicago economics department, and well-funded research organisations such as 
the Cato Institute and the Heritage Center, were part of a network that 
prepared the free-market fare served up by Reagan and Thatcher. At the 
beginning of the decade, Heritage published Mandate for Leadership, a blueprint 
for reducing the federal government. It ran to 20 volumes, with an abridged 
version of 1,000 pages becoming a paperback bestseller.

Forty years later, today’s American conservatives don’t appear to have much 
new to say, beyond their brasher style.The far right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/far-right> has had to look to writers from 
abroad, including Europeans such as Tom Sunic, Alain de Benoist and Julius 
Evola. Brit-born Yiannopoulos credits the late Christopher Hitchens as an 
example of the valuable help being offered to the American right from overseas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Falt-writing-how-the-far-right-is-changing-us-publishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90665366726278420bb7778673e422d8ac54fda7%2F0_333_3100_3871%2F3100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alt-writing%3A%20how%20the%20far%20right%20is%20changing%20US%20publishing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Falt-writing-how-the-far-right-is-changing-us-publishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alt-writing%3A%20how%20the%20far%20right%20is%20changing%20US%20publishing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Falt-writing-how-the-far-right-is-changing-us-publishing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90665366726278420bb7778673e422d8ac54fda7%2F0_333_3100_3871%2F3100.jpg>
 Milo Yiannopoulos, pictured in north London. Photograph: Richard Saker for the 
Observer 
Conservative voices are not limited to nonfiction. As writer Val McDermid puts 
it, the threat of “the world turned upside down” makes thrillers friendly 
terrain for conservatives. Retired military men such as Stephen Coonts, as well 
as younger voices such as the late Vince Flynn – beloved by George W Bush – and 
self-described “conservatarian” Brad Thor sell in big numbers, with their tales 
of manly ex-service types taking on the terrorists.

Where the cool individualism of Ayn Rand and Christian writers such as CS 
Lewis once reigned in science fiction and fantasy, brasher, pulpier works by 
rightwing writers such as John Ringo, Brad R Torgersen and Larry Correia are 
now finding favour. United by their shared distaste for what they regard as the 
mainstream’s crippling obeisance to political correctness, as well as their 
adeptness at internet promotion, these younger authors are vocal about feeling 
disenfranchised with the genre: Correia himselfstarted the Sad Puppies movement 
<http://monsterhunternation.com/2015/04/09/a-response-to-george-r-r-martin-from-the-author-who-started-sad-puppies/>
, to tackle what he perceived as a liberal bias in sci-fi writing, andTorgersen 
continued it 
<https://bradrtorgersen.wordpress.com/category/tornadoes-in-teacups/sad-puppies-3/>
. As the latter complained: “Science fiction isn’t dangerous any more. It’s 
been pasteurised and homogenised … The formerly disenfranchised have … cast out 
everyone who does not flatter a given set of progressively-couched orthodoxies.”

The latest instalment of Correia and Ringo’s Monster Hunter Memoirs series 
features “50-foot bipedal crocodiles” with “more monsters popping up than 
crawfish at afais-do-do 
<https://matadornetwork.com/notebook/19-words-expressions-learn-traveling-louisiana/>
!” So they’re not always overtly political. But their appeal utilises the same 
flash-bang delivery and emotive narratives as today’s rightwing politicians – 
the image of the red-blooded hero, battling dark and alien evil.

The persuasiveness of today’s new right rarely depends on the coherence or 
depth of its thought. Though Donald Trump – with co-authors – has published 
more than a dozen titles of his own, the next US president is not a book guy. 
In an interview last summer, Trumpexplained that he does not need to read 
extensively 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/donald-trump-doesnt-read-much-being-president-probably-wouldnt-change-that/2016/07/17/d2ddf2bc-4932-11e6-90a8-fb84201e0645_story.html?utm_term=.5ca0f72804c8>
 because he reaches the right decisions “with very little knowledge other than 
the knowledge I [already] had”. Countering this kind of relentless self-belief 
requires more than evidence-based rationality. It is the very definition of 
“post-truth”, as put together by Oxford Dictionaries last year: “Objective 
facts are less influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to emotion 
and personal belief.”

“Politics lies downstream from culture,” Andrew Breitbart once said. The 
political establishment of the US now belongs firmly to the right. It remains 
to be seen whether its opponents can develop a culture capable of wresting it 
back.
 