 Cities is supported by  
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/?source=100RC_Guardian_Banner_9.22&utm_medium=display&utm_campaign=100RC_Guardian_Banner_9.22>
About this content <> 
A battered Dodge Challenger roars past as I head out on the nine-lane highway, 
riding past shuttered shops and decaying restaurants and row upon row of 
vacant, overgrown housing lots.

Normally I wouldn’t even consider cycling on such an expanse of road, but it’s 
not so bad inDetroit <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/detroit>. After all, 
the birthplace of America’s car industry doesn’t have that many cars any more.


My ride along Jefferson Avenue passes the low bulk of Chrysler’s car assembly 
factory. Along with General Motors’ Hamtramck plant, it is all that remains of 
the once-great industry which supported this city. Where there were285,000 
jobs, now there are just 10,000 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2013/07/19/we-saved-the-automakers-how-come-that-didnt-save-detroit/>
.

In 1940, Detroit was the fourth largest city in the US; now it doesn’t even 
make the top 20. From a peak of1.8 million inhabitants, the population now 
stands at 677,000 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/story/news/local/detroit-city/2016/05/19/detroit-population-rank-lowest-since/84574198/>
.

But the city is resurgent – and its near-total collapse may unwittingly have 
created one of its most powerful and unique assets. Thewell-documented flight 
to Detroit’s sprawling suburbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/apr/03/the-death-of-a-great-american-city-why-does-anyone-still-live-in-detroit>
 killed the city inside, but it also left space. The wide rivers of asphalt 
carved deep into the city were designed to transport a population three times 
its current size.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ceac041a7a96bf857d15315a81818b8e9de788a%2F0_146_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ceac041a7a96bf857d15315a81818b8e9de788a%2F0_146_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Detroit’s regenerated riverside. Cycling is up 400% since 2000. Photograph: 
Nick Van Mead 
Now the city’s new director of planning, Maurice Cox, wants to take all this 
space and transform Jefferson Avenue, and a number of other major arteries, 
into European-style “grand boulevards”. Cox says he can reduce motor traffic 
here to four lanes without affecting journey times – which would leave five 
lanes for wider pavements, protected cycle lanes, more greenery and space set 
aside for future streetcars or a bus rapid transit (BRT) system.

Across the city, Cox has decreed that all future bike lanes must be physically 
separated from motor traffic. With little active opposition, the pace of change 
will be fast; by the end of next year, Detroit will have 25 miles of new 
segregated cycle facilities. Advocates say this will catapult the city from 
70th in the US rankings of protected lanes to a likely place in the top five, 
above Minneapolis and Portland.

Cox envisions a Detroit taken “back to the future”, before the car became king 
and when cycling and walking coexisted. “We still have the framework for that 
kind of city, but we haven’t nurtured it for decades,” he says. “In so many 
cities we have cars, pedestrians and cyclists jostling for space, but here they 
can all have part of the street.”

Detroit recycled


I arrive at Detroit Metropolitan Airport with two heavy bags and instructions 
to try to get everywhere on foot, bike or public transport. The Motor City tore 
up its streetcar system in the 1950s; today it has no metro and no tram, apart 
from ashort elevated loop <http://www.thepeoplemover.com/map.html> serving a 
small central area. Construction is set to finish next year on a streetcar 
project to connect fast-regenerating Downtown with Midtown, but thethree-mile 
M1 system <http://m-1rail.com/> won’t reach into the hardest-hit 
neighbourhoods, or go anywhere near the airport.


Ground transportation gets a pretty low-key show on the airport website 
<http://www.metroairport.com/GroundTransportation/PublicTransit.aspx>, so I 
pick up a copy of Visit Detroit magazine, which has a welcome page from the 
Suburban Mobility Authority for Regional Transportation, Smart. The airport 
information page gives driving directions and explains the options for car 
rental (around $60 a day) and taxis ($50 Downtown). Smart itself runs a public 
bus service, but that doesn’t even get a mention.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7768e77a0c8593b2c8624291f7d240b96129804c%2F0_334_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7768e77a0c8593b2c8624291f7d240b96129804c%2F0_334_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Detroit recently emerged from 18 months of bankruptcy. Photograph: Barry 
Lewis/Corbis via Getty 
The Smart timetable online says a bus is due in 30 minutes – it shows up after 
an hour. The driver explains I’ll have to change to a DDOT city bus to get 
Downtown; I pay my $2.25 and get on board with the three other passengers, all 
wearing the uniforms of airport fast-food concessions. As we pick up more 
people there are a lot of complaints about lateness; the bus driver takes pity 
on those who don’t have enough money for a ticket and waves them through. I get 
off and change to the city bus system – another 30-minute wait in the dust and 
detritus beside a busy highway. It’s three hours before I make the hotel.


We'll always be the Motor City. We don't have to lose our automotive soul
Maurice Cox 
The issue briefly caught the attention of the international media last year 
whencar worker James Robertson told 
<http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/oakland/2015/01/31/detroit-commuting-troy-rochester-hills-smart-ddot-ubs-banker-woodward-buses-transit/22660785/>
 how he walked 21 miles as part of his daily commute. Readers rallied round and 
raised $350,000. He bought a Ford Taurus and now drives to work in a fraction 
of the time. He alsogained a lot of weight 
<http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/detroit/2016/02/06/walking-man-james-robertson--detroit-troy-buses-oakland-county-smart-ddot-ford-taurus/79505152/>
.

An estimated 40% of people living in the city don’t have access to a car – 
that’s 270,000 Detroiters. People who wait this long for a bus mostly don’t 
have a choice.

The next day sees Detroit’s first ever Open Streets event. On a sunny Sunday 
afternoon, families, young people, old people, black, white, Latino, turn out 
on bikes to ride four miles of closed roads from Downtown, through the hipster 
haunt of Corktown to Mexicantown in the south-west. The route passes in front 
of the grand oldMichigan Central Station 
<http://historicdetroit.org/building/michigan-central-station/>, derelict since 
the last passenger train ran in 1988, killed by the car and intercity flights. 
Because times were so tough and no one wanted the land, historic structures 
like the station, thePackard factory 
<http://www.freep.com/story/money/business/2016/08/06/packard-plant-redevelopment-detroit/87913012/>
,Fisher Body 21 
<https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/redeveloping-vacant-factories-community-assets>
 and scores of others still stand – another of Detroit’s problems has created a 
potential asset.

Mayor Mike Duggan, the man who brought Cox in from New Orleans, makes an 
appearance. He tells me about20-minute Neighbourhoods 
<http://detroit.curbed.com/2016/6/15/11946166/mayor-detroit-neighborhoods-walk-bike>
, a plan to regenerate areas in the neglected north of the city – from Six Mile 
toEight Mile <http://rapdirt.com/eminem-talks-8-mile-truth-and-fiction/3029/> – 
so anyone can safely walk or cycle to shops, schools, the park or the library 
within 20 minutes, and enjoy a good quality of life without access to a car. 
Around 100 historic homes will be renovated, and blighted buildings that are 
not recoverable will be demolished. A new neighbourhood park and green cycleway 
will be created from unused land.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0a9bdcba70ea5874122a3224c367a2a740c4a8a%2F0_0_3264_2224%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0a9bdcba70ea5874122a3224c367a2a740c4a8a%2F0_0_3264_2224%2F3264.jpg>
 Mike Darga rides past the derelict Albert Kahn-designed Fisher Body 21 plant, 
where his father worked for 30 years. Darga givesauto heritage tours for 
Wheelhouse Detroit <http://www.wheelhousedetroit.com/tours/> 
Inspired by a visit from former New York transport commissioner Janette 
Sadik-Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/11/cycling-fights-new-york-mean-streets-janette-sadik-khan>
, Duggan authorised officials to use her experimental approach: forget 
time-consuming engineering risk assessments, put down some traffic cones and 
see what happens. The early signs from Fitzgerald – a neighbourhood which lost 
a large part of its population, and has the lowest rates of car ownership – are 
positive.

It’s about the 40% in Detroit who don’t have access to a car … and they have 
just as much right to mobility as drivers
Raquel Castaneda-Lopez 
“This younger generation grew up in the back of their parents’ cars being 
taken to school and to shops, and they don’t want that any more,” Duggan says. 
“They want to walk and cycle. We can’t compete with the suburbs on their terms, 
but we can offer young people bikeable and walkable neighbourhoods, and that’s 
at the heart of what we’re trying to do.”


Raquel Castaneda-Lopez, the city council member for District 6, sees mobility 
as a matter of human rights. A vibrant Latino community in her area was cut in 
two in the 1970s by the 18-lanes of the I-75 and I-96 highways.A pedestrian 
bridge <http://www.lusas.com/case/bridge/bagley_street.html> now allows safe 
access, reuniting people on both sides.

“When you design for the car you get divided cities,” she says. “Roads divide 
communities. For me it is about access to mobility, which is a human right. 
It’s about the 40% in Detroit who don’t have access to a car. These people need 
to get to the grocery store or school or work, and they have just as much right 
to mobility as drivers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c17037a8be3e682e5f9f591c7b5822d2932dc61%2F0_0_4000_2670%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c17037a8be3e682e5f9f591c7b5822d2932dc61%2F0_0_4000_2670%2F4000.jpg>
 Detroit Bikes workers complete a contract for cycle share giant Citi Bike. 
Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty 
When Zak Pashak wanted to start making and selling an affordable bike from 
American steel, Detroit was his first choice. “People here know how to make 
stuff,” he says. “It’s steel work – it’s welding, tooling, engineering and 
design – and then there’s all the spinoff firms, the lawyers, the packing, the 
shipping … It makes sense.”

The former music promoter set up his Detroit Bikes <http://detroitbikes.com/> 
factory in a west-side neighbourhood blighted by abandonment and crime. We get 
there past rows of overgrown, vacant lots and burnt-out houses left to slowly 
collapse.


Pashak has invested heavily in machinery to cut, bend, weld and paint steel 
tubes into finished bikes; hand-built frames hang in rows like carcasses at a 
butchers. He employs around 40 people – as many as he can locally – and hopes 
to expand that to 200.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96d7ca01a8ddcbb34e60a4f4f963be994eadc205%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96d7ca01a8ddcbb34e60a4f4f963be994eadc205%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 The Dequindre Cut. Photograph: Pravin Sitaraman/Detroit Riverfront Conservancy 
Tony Sheldon, a 46-year-old from Seven Mile, ran a welding machine team for 
American Axle until production was outsourced to China in 2008. He earns a 
fraction of what he used to make in the automotive industry but is happy here. 
“The auto industry was worth billions of dollars,” he remembers. “The pay was 
better of course and the scale of the bike industry is much smaller – but 
that’s over now. We can’t do that any more, so that’s it.”

Pashak hasn’t turned a profit yet but believes bicycles could be a positive 
part of Detroit’s future. “It’s a $50bn a year industry globally but 99.5% of 
bikes are made in Asia, mostly China and Taiwan. If we can carve off even a 
little bit of that then it would have a big impact,” he says. “The US bike 
industry has got a lot of potential. Bikes can be a great part of the economy 
of Detroit.”


The city has been steadily reinventing itself since the riverside was 
renovated as part of the city’s 300th anniversary in 2001. The city’s flagship 
project, the Dequindre Cut, is a former rail line transformed into a paved path 
and cycle track. In a sign of the times, aluxury apartment building 
<http://www.orleanslandingapts.com/orleans-landing-detroit-mi> taking shape 
nearby is selling itself with promises of communal cycle parking alongside 
images of granite worktops and a pool.

The Detroit Greenways Coalition is working on extending the route into a 
26-mile loop <http://detroitgreenways.org/inner-circle-greenway/> and the 
city’s even getting a bike share next spring. Last month it sneaked into the 
top 50 ofBicycling magazine’s Best Bike Cities of 2016 
<http://www.bicycling.com/culture/news/the-50-best-bike-cities-of-2016/slide/24>
 after census data pointed to a 400% increase in ridership since 2000.

Todd Scott, executive director of the Greenways Coalition 
<http://detroitgreenways.org/>, says cycling in Detroit is more successful now 
thanany time since the 1890s 
<https://detroithistorical.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/1948-132-043.jpg>, when 
Henry Ford built his first car,the Quadricycle 
<https://www.thehenryford.org/collections-and-research/digital-collections/artifact/252049>
, from bike parts and rode to his factory on two wheels.


“Right now the city can remove a parking lane if it wants, give the space over 
to cycling, and know no one’s going to make an angry call to their local 
councilman,” he says. “Vacant lots don’t complain.”

Houston, we have a solution
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fd2267009337a0a3f83a0b8220c7ad378ac8016%2F0_117_4938_3175%2F4938.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fd2267009337a0a3f83a0b8220c7ad378ac8016%2F0_117_4938_3175%2F4938.jpg>
 Elevated highways in front of the Houston skyline. Bayous pass underneath, 
creating freeways for the city’s cyclists. Photograph: Alamy 
I fly into Houston <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/houston> and follow 
signs to the public bus stop. Again I’m the only passenger not wearing a 
worker’s uniform. The bus takes the scenic route to the shiny glass and steel 
centre of America’s oil capital but it’s comfortable, smells strongly of 
cleaning products and – compared with $50 for a taxi – is a bargain at just 
$1.25.

Like Detroit, cars are hardwired into the fabric of the city: the addiction is 
structural, not just cultural. Houston is laced with wide ribbons of asphalt, 
but many here are elevated on towering concrete columns, and at rush hour when 
I arrive the freeways look like parking lots.

Unlike Detroit, this habitual boomtown is growing fast. It is forecast to 
overtake Chicago tobecome the third largest city in the US 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-houston-idUSKCN0RD0E420150914> and can 
lay claim to be one ofAmerica’s capitals of sprawl 
<http://www.houstontomorrow.org/livability/story/sprawl-capital-of-the-world/>. 
Houston, though, is alsothe nation’s most racially and ethnically diverse 
metropolitan area 
<http://kinder.rice.edu/uploadedFiles/Urban_Research_Center/Media/Houston%20Region%20Grows%20More%20Ethnically%20Diverse%202-13.pdf>
 and, as waves of new residents arrive, they bring ideas – like expecting to be 
able to get around on foot, bike and transit.

Houston has tripled the size of its Metro light rail 
<http://www.ridemetro.org/pages/rail.aspx> over the past few years, and opened 
two new lines. There’s a new bike share system which has just gained approval 
for a threefold expansion, taking it out to the Medical Center and Texas 
Southern University. And the city looks set to approve its firstBike Plan 
<http://houstonbikeplan.org/> for more than two decades. New mayor Sylvester 
Turner has called for a“paradigm shift” 
<http://www.houstontx.gov/mayor/stateofmobility2016.html> in how Houston gets 
around, stressing that the city can’t solve its congestion problems simply by 
building more roads.

The whole American dream – that you can live in the suburbs, drive a nice car, 
get around easily – that’s just not true
Mary Blitzer 
“We have been the poster child for car-centric poor planning for so long,” 
says Carter Stern, chief executive of theB-Cycle 
<https://houston.bcycle.com/buzz> bike share scheme, “but now we’ve got all 
these people coming from outside the city with new ideas and they really expect 
to be able to walk around, to cycle, to enjoy being outside in public space. 
Houston was behind but things have started coming together … It is going to 
change the way Houstonians view their city.”

Then there are the bayous: slow-moving streams which cut right into the heart 
of Houston. Transformed into linear parks by previous mayor Annise Parker and 
millions of private money, these flood facilities offer spectacular green 
spaces in the shadow of Downtown skyscrapers. They are popular at weekends but 
– with better connections to the varied neighbourhoods they pass through – 
could better act as freeways for bikes, delivering cycle commuters safely to 
the centre of the city.


Houston is even walkable in small, isolated pockets. Forget the fake urbanism 
ofCity Centre <http://citycentrehouston.com/>, a swanky development of 
strollable shops, cafes and restaurants on the edge of town which can only be 
reached via vast multi-lane freeways and is as good as inaccessible on public 
transport. Areas like Rice Village – built in the 1930s before the trolley 
system was torn up – are great to get around on foot. If you’re lucky enough to 
live in Midtown, Montrose or West U, their quieter tree-lined side streets are 
perfectly pleasant places to walk and cycle. It’s just that not many people do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09fa033919f5af53591c86d19ecce1b4a7212262%2F0_336_5120_3076%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09fa033919f5af53591c86d19ecce1b4a7212262%2F0_336_5120_3076%2F5120.jpg>
 Suburbs near Houston … the Texan city is one of America’s capitals of sprawl. 
Photograph: David R Frazier Photolibrary/Alamy 
The city is not without its challenges, though. The Downtown area is 
crisscrossed by a grid of four- and five-lane one-way streets. The cars are big 
and people drive fast. Oversized SUVs called Silverado, Denali and Tundra are 
popular – names chosen to inspire adventure in the minds of their drivers, but 
whose approaching roar raises the heart rates of people crossing or cycling for 
all the wrong reasons.


Within a couple of blocks of where I’m staying are four large, surface-level 
parking lots and three multi-storey car parks. If you park on the 10th floor it 
can take 20 minutes just to get out at the end of the day.

The typical cycling experience involves 20 minutes where it’s fine and then 
five minutes of terror
Patrick Walsh 
Mary Blitzer, advocacy director of Bike Houston <https://bikehouston.org/>, 
tells me that outside the loop formed by the I-610 freeway, it gets harder to 
walk or cycle. People tend to live on small suburban streets which lead nowhere 
except a six-lane arterial highway.

“This is Texas and people love their big cars. They drive fast and they don’t 
like to stop for pedestrians,” she says. “Houston has a terrible traffic 
problem. The whole American dream – that you can live in the suburbs and drive 
a nice car and get around easily – that’s just not true. It’s a pain in the ass 
to get around this city by car.

“I don’t think most people want to be sitting in traffic jams, though, and we 
need to give them options. People will choose to walk, cycle or ride public 
transport if it’s easy and it’s comfortable – but they’re not going to choose 
the miserable option.”

Houston is richer than Detroit, but an estimated 33% of its population don’t 
have access to a car. State senator Rodney Ellis, a long-time cycle advocate, 
represents some of the wealthiest and some of the poorest areas in the city. As 
he takes me on a ride round some of Houston’s historically black 
neighbourhoods, an impatient driver blasts his horn behind us and close passes 
at speed. It’s the only bit of road rage I witness in three days cycling in the 
city.


“People think this road belongs to cars,” Ellis says. “But that’s changing. If 
you get more people out riding bikes, that will change further – but to get 
more people cycling, you need safe infrastructure.”

Many people cycle here without lights late at night or early in the morning, 
as they make their way to and from poorly paid jobs. There are a lot of deaths 
and many are not investigated. Cyclists make up 0.8% of commuter journeys in 
Houston, but account for 2.5% of traffic casualties – a disproportionately high 
number which does not even take account of these “invisible cyclists”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ee0e58e6a6a632634a08f08a1487ee9e40e407c%2F0_0_2745_1666%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ee0e58e6a6a632634a08f08a1487ee9e40e407c%2F0_0_2745_1666%2F2745.jpg>
 State senator Rodney Ellis cycling in Houston. Photograph: Nick Van Mead 
Houston’s planning director, Patrick Walsh, admits the city’s existing cycle 
infrastructure is below or at minimum standard, and that “the typical cycling 
experience involves 20 minutes where it’s fine and then five minutes of terror. 
It is the most challenging part of the ride that stops people from trying it.”

However, the adoption of a Complete Streets 
<http://houstoncompletestreets.org/> programme has institutionalised the 
consideration of pedestrians, cyclists and public transport when new roads are 
constructed or existing ones remodelled. The city is also altering development 
regulations to reduce the emphasis on parking and allow it to design streets 
which make it harder for drivers to speed.

But change will not come fast. “I think in 20 years you’ll see an incredible 
transformation in places like Midtown,” says Walsh. “We’ll have lively places 
where people want to walk out to have dinner, or get to work – but we are not 
there yet. At some point we are going to have to make choices about how people 
get around, but it has to be incremental.

“If we tried to change overnight, we would have push-back. Cars are going to 
remain the primary mode of transportation for a while.”

Nobody walks in LA
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F104975f6115404b848c9603d2c3855cdcf27b177%2F0_0_5362_3562%2F5362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F104975f6115404b848c9603d2c3855cdcf27b177%2F0_0_5362_3562%2F5362.jpg>
 Rush hour on Hollywood Boulevard. Photograph: Alamy 
Silver Lake has a reputation as one of LA’s most walkable areas, but that’s 
really not saying a lot. Deborah Murphy ofLos Angeles Walks 
<http://www.losangeleswalks.org/> meets me at the farmer’s market off Sunset 
Boulevard.

The roar of traffic is a constant accompaniment and, as we wait to cross the 
six lanes of Sunset, a woman in her 80s with a walker starts her journey from 
the other side. At peak hours the queues of drivers behind their metal and 
glass is endless, and outside rush hour cars shoot by at 40 or 50mph.

The woman is not even halfway across when the countdown warning starts, and 
she’s still on the road when the first cars accelerate away. She makes it to 
safety, visibly relieved, but if her husband hadn’t been on hand to help her up 
the kerb, she would have been stuck.

The elderly – and children walking to school – account for disproportionately 
high numbers of those killed and seriously injured on LA’s streets. Almost 200 
people a year are killed in traffic crashes in the city and 33% are pedestrians 
(even though journeys by foot make up only 18% of trips). Cars are theleading 
cause of death for two to 14-year-olds 
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/livable-city/la-oe-podemski-walkable-city-20160912-snap-story.html>
.

The area has made some improvements: the triangle where the market takes place 
was closed to traffic in 2011, and a number of crosswalks were painted after a 
brace of deaths. A mural depicts Danny, the triangle’s unofficial homeless 
caretaker, who was knocked down and killed crossing to the 99 cent store.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83e213a3ce57a6a1c7727a0a4e7176fc9446aa70%2F24_29_1266_567%2F1266.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83e213a3ce57a6a1c7727a0a4e7176fc9446aa70%2F24_29_1266_567%2F1266.jpg>
 Primary mode of transport in Los Angeles County (left), and those killed or 
seriously injured in road crashes (right). Illustration: LA Vision Zero 
Murphy points out the problems that make it hard for people to get around on 
foot: signposts bisecting the narrow sidewalk which make it impassable to 
wheelchairs and buggies; smashed and wildly uneven paving slabs; 40-ft high 
streetlamps which only light the road; non-existent crossings where pedestrians 
should have legal right of way; dropdowns which force vulnerable people into 
the path of oncoming traffic … It’s a long list.


LA’s adoption of Vision Zero <http://visionzero.lacity.org/>, and a new 
Mobility Plan, aim to change that. Sunset Boulevard is one of a number of 
streets set to get redesigned with wider sidewalks, protected bike lanes and 
slower traffic. A year ago the junction atHollywood and Highland 
<http://la.curbed.com/2016/5/27/11801912/hollywood-highland-scramble-crosswalk> 
– where one pedestrian a month was being killed or seriously injured – was 
turned into a Tokyo-style scramble crossroads. There have been no serious 
injuries since.

It’s not just on sidewalks that this most car-centric of all cities 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/03/15/news/us-commutes-traffic-cars/> is making 
changes. LA Metro is working on the largest rail infrastructure project in the 
country: two major extensions opened this year – on the Gold Line in San 
Gabriel valley and the Expo Line to Santa Monica – and three more are under 
construction, including a connector to Los Angeles international airport. The 
city built its first protected bike lanes last year, with six more set for the 
next six months – and a bike share system started operation Downtown this 
summer.

And as Americans go to the polls on Tuesday to choose a new president, voters 
in Los Angeles County will also vote onMeasure M <http://theplan.metro.net/> – 
a half-cent sales tax raising $860m a year for transportation projects. If it 
gets the two-thirds majority it needs, then this vast, polycentric metropolis 
could be transformed over the next 40 years with a whole host of new highway, 
metro, light rail, streetcar, BRT, cycling and walking projects.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcca4697e4eb4f4d8d09b058715cc01450688b261%2F0_0_5120_3413%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcca4697e4eb4f4d8d09b058715cc01450688b261%2F0_0_5120_3413%2F5120.jpg>
 Cyclists on the coastal cycle trail through Venice Beach. Photograph: Jon 
Hicks/Getty Images 
I see more people on bikes in Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> than in Houston and Detroit 
combined – but riding the busy streets among trucks, SUVs and fast-moving cars 
reminds me too much of London. I’d rate it the least cycle-friendly of the 
three.


In the past year, protected bike lanes have been created on Reseda, Los 
Angeles Street, and along the side of the Expo Line to Santa Monica. Facilities 
like that – and safe cycle paths running along the LA River and the beach – are 
great, but existing bike paths elsewhere are painted lanes orsharrows 
<http://losangeles.cbslocal.com/2013/07/24/shared-bike-lanes-cause-confusion-for-cyclists-motorists-and-traffic-officers/>
. Even the colour of paint is an issue, with the city still fighting battles 
againstHollywood film makers, who complain that bright green bike lanes “ruin 
the shot” 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/hollywood-fights-la-bike-lane-570520>.

Despite the lack of safe infrastructure, the Los Angeles County Bicycle 
Coalition <http://www.la-bike.org/> says cycling’s commute share rose from 0.7% 
to 1.3% between 2010 and 2013. That fell back to 1.2% last year, but the LACBC 
is optimistic that new protected lanes in the pipeline will boost figures 
further.

I see Ciclavia events as like a gateway drug for cycling
Joe Linton 
“If this is the number of people cycling without very good infrastructure, 
then you will really see that jump when we have better lanes,” says executive 
director Tamika Butler. “When you ask people why they don’t bike, their number 
one issue is safety. When you make it safer the demand will be huge.”

Joe Linton, editor of LA Streetsblog <http://la.streetsblog.org/>, thinks the 
city is only just catching up with how groups of Angelenos have been using 
their streets for years. “People have walked and biked in LA for 100 years and 
more,” he says. “Biking and walking took an upturn in the 1980s and 90s, but 
the city didn’t notice and kept planning for cars. The backlash led to the last 
bike plan but the city is still waking up from this ‘we only need to think 
about cars’ hangover and is still more car-oriented than not.”

Linton welcomes safe bike lanes and new metro lines – and describes the city’s 
hugely popularCicLAvia <http://www.ciclavia.org/> events as like a “gateway 
drug” for cycling – but two decades-plus of campaigning has left him frustrated 
at the pace of progress.

“I feel like there’s a hundred reasons we keep building for cars,” he 
explains. “Transport laws, state and federal regulations and standards, parking 
requirements … We’ve fought back and got rid of maybe 20 of these, but we are 
still behind. It’s like we’ve cracked the windshield, but we haven’t broken 
through.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70cd693334117e504b78705c4f30a93956665828%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%E2%80%99s%20road%20trip%3A%20will%20the%20US%20ever%20kick%20the%20car%20habit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Famerica-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70cd693334117e504b78705c4f30a93956665828%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 A freeway in Los Angeles, where almost 80% of journeys are made by car. 
Photograph: Alamy 
I hop on a 704 Rapid Line bus downtown to meet Seleta Reynolds 
<http://www.lamag.com/citythinkblog/563784/>, the city’s head of 
transportation. The day before I was waiting to get off the same bus when a 
woman tapped me on the shoulder and handed me the wad of $20s that had slipped 
out of my pocket on to the seat.

Today the bus is full of people, mostly Latino, reading books, checking their 
phones, chatting, sleeping … There are also a significant number of people in 
their 20s and early 30s – themillennial generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/millennials-the-trials-of-generation-y>
 I’ve seen all week on the Expo and Red metro lines, who seem to feel driving 
interferes with smartphone screen time.

“There are hundreds of thousands of people in LA who have to get around 
without a car,” says Reynolds, as we survey the city’s latest protected bike 
lane on Los Angeles Street from her office on the 10th floor of Thom Mayne’s 
futuristic“death star” building 
<http://www.ladowntownnews.com/news/from-deathstar-to-screen-star/article_cdf49780-8b05-5b01-a14e-8a9f37c4f809.html>
. It boasts cycle-specific lights and floating bus stops.

I don’t know that people really love driving in LA any more
Seleta Reynolds 
There has been a fall across the board in the number of Americans holding 
driving licences 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/01/the-decline-of-the-drivers-license/425169/>
, but the shift has been most marked among young people. As Deborah Murphy 
jokes, a few years ago non-drivers were considered “car-less”, now they’re 
“car-free”.

Reynolds is keen to stress there is “definitely not a war on cars”, but she 
says the reconstruction of the 405 freeway – and the much-feared threat of “
Carmageddon 
<http://www.laweekly.com/news/405-freeway-closure-will-make-july-16-17-the-carmageddon-of-traffic-mayhem-in-los-angeles-2391578>
” – taught Los Angeles that it cannot simply build itself out of congestion. 
“There’s a huge latent demand for road space which shows up if you increase 
capacity,” she says. “Now the 405’s finished, the traffic is just as bad as it 
was before.”

That lesson has long been learnt in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
, where increasing numbers of urban planners are focusing on efforts to reduce 
the space given over to individual motor vehicles and talk is of thefirst steps 
towards truly car-free cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/09/car-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen>
.

The fact is, though, that Los Angeles remains the most congested city in North 
America <http://corporate.tomtom.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=961546>. Maybe 
it’s like the scene inLA Story <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0102250/>, I 
suggest, where Steve Martin climbs into his car to drive next door. Is it a 
city which – despite the deaths, the air pollution and all that time wasted in 
traffic jams – is so addicted to the car that it could never change?

End of the car age: how cities are outgrowing the automobile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
Unlike other city officials I’ve met on this trip, Reynolds at least 
acknowledges the existence of a “stick” – in the form of more expensive 
parking, and perhaps even a congestion charge one day – alongside the carrot 
(better transit and safer facilities for walking and cycling).

“To reduce the number of single-occupancy vehicles, for example, research 
shows carrots can cut that by 7 or 8%, but sticks can have a 30% effect. We 
need the carrotand the stick. It’s a question of providing good options but 
having some really good public policy discussions about the stick … and that’s 
tricky.”

All three cities are taking some impressive measures to encourage walking, 
cycling and public transport – from Detroit’s land grabs and protected bike 
lanes, to Houston’s bayou conversions, and LA’s metro extensions – but this is 
the first time I’ve heard “the stick” mentioned.

If this sprawling shrine to freeways that look like parking lots is even 
considering what it would take to push people out of cars – could there yet be 
hope for the rest of America’s cities?

“The truth is,” says Reynolds, “I don’t know that people really love driving 
in LA any more.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion 



 