
Andy Murray was relieved rather than elated to come through a ragged opening 
match in his 12th Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> here campaign, beating the 
determined Ukrainian Illya Marchenko 7-5, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2 on a sweltering 
afternoon.

It took him two hours and 47 minutes to subdue a player ranked 95 places below 
him and whom he had defeated for the loss of seven games in under two hours in 
their only previous meeting, in the second round six years ago. That was before 
Murray, who had peaked at No2 in the world a year earlier, had won the first of 
his three slams. He arrives this time as world No1, finally, and with ambitions 
to end his run of five losing finals, four of them against the player he 
deposed at the top of the rankings, Novak Djokovic.

Fourth seed Simona Halep first big name to falter at Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/fourth-seed-simona-halep-first-big-name-to-falter-at-australian-open>
The host channel interviewer at courtside, John Alexander, wondered what the 
newly knighted Murray wanted to be called. “Andy,” he said, as he has done when 
repeatedly asked the same question. “I’m very sure. I don’t know when the 
investiture is. Whatever works for the schedule.”

All that might change, he joked, was that his wife, Kim, might tone down her 
courtside enthusiasm, which reached fever pitch in his match against Tomas 
Berdych two years ago. “No more swearing for Kim in my matches, I suppose,” he 
said.

Of his ascent to the summit, he said, “The last three or four months were 
tough, physically and mentally, but great at the same time. The ranking doesn’t 
change anything. I’ve lost here a few times. I’m hoping to go one better this 
time.”

Murray next plays the Russian qualifier, Andrey Rublev, who beat Yen-Hsun Lu 
4-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7-0), 6-3.

The most uplifting result of the day arrived a little earlier on Show Court 3, 
where Alex De Minaur, the 17-year-old Australian who has everyone wondering if 
he can go all the way in the game, shocked Gerald Melzer 5-7, 6-3, 2-6, 7-6, 
6-1.

“Words can’t describe how I’m feeling right now,” the shy teenager said. 
“Definitely the happiest moment of my life.” Last week De Minaur beat the 
former world No18, Benoit Pairre. Melzer was as good a scalp, having taken 
Murray to a first-set tie-break in Doha earlier this month.

Asked how he felt being described as Australia’s brightest young prospect, he 
said, “I’m just happy playing tennis. I don’t want to put a lot of pressure on 
myself. I’m happy playing match by match, point by point. We’ll see where the 
journey takes me.”

Defending Australian Open champion Angelique Kerber survives scare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/defending-australian-open-champion-angelique-kerber-tennis-survives-scare>
In the short term, it takes him into a second-round match with Sam Querrey – 
who brought Djokovic’s world tumbling down at Wimbledon last year and on Monday 
took four sets to beat the Frenchman Quentin Halys. If De Minaur were to 
conjure another minor miracle, he would almost certainly be sharing a stage on 
Wednesday with the player who ended the Serb’s long reign as No1.

Murray started his match in Rod Laver Arena with three double faults in the 
first four minutes to gift Marchenko a surprise lead, but consecutive aces to 
hold in the third game briefly settled his nerves. It was a dire start all 
round and it wasn’t until Marchenko produced a delicately chipped half volley 
in the seventh game that the slumbering audience had much to enthuse about.

Serving for the set, Murray switched off long enough to let Marchenko brighten 
up a dull match on a blindingly sunny day with a hard-struck forehand down the 
line, and the Ukrainian aced for 5-all. A stroll had become a yomp.
Marchenko’s 23rd unforced error, a forehand long, gave Murray set point after 
53 minutes, and his 24th, an identical shot, finished the job.

But the squandering continued apace in the second set, Murray letting 
Marchenko slip away to a 3-1 lead. On the changeover, he was agitated in his 
seat, muttering, “shocking movement, shocking movement”.

There were further distractions, as Murray motioned a security guard to move 
away from his team box. When he beat Marchenko here in 2011, it was a horde of 
giant bugs that put him off his game. What bugged him on Monday was the tennis 
of Marchenko.

After battling back to 5-5, Murray handed him his fifth break point before 
holding with a sublime lob. He lifted his level in the tie-break, then powered 
on to win the third set.

Aljaz Bedene loses to Victor Estrella Burgos in Australian Open first round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/aljaz-bedene-loses-to-victor-estrella-burgos-in-australian-open-first-round>
Earlier, the British men’s contingent was cut by a third when Aljaz Bedene 
fell to the stubborn Victor Estrella Burgos in four sets of varying quality and 
serial frustration. The Dominican Republic veteran, the fourth oldest player in 
the draw at 36 behind Tommy Haas, Radek Stepanek and Ivo Karlovic, spotted 
Bedene nine years but recovered brilliantly from a third-set bagel to win 7-6 
(9-7), 7-5, 0-6, 6-3.

Bedene, who spent an inordinately long time afterwards being drug-tested on a 
drainingly warm day before coming to his press conference, said he had not long 
ago considered quitting tennis altogether, at just 27, because his long legal 
battle to play Davis Cup for Great Britain ended in failure last March.

“After the ITF hearing in Dallas and getting the negative reply, everything 
just dropped for me really,” he said. “I took long holidays before the US Open; 
usually players don’t do that but I needed it. I needed to forget tennis. There 
were moments where I didn’t think I would play tennis again because I really 
wasn’t enjoying it.

“I was just not feeling great on the court and I thought, ‘What’s the point if 
you’re not enjoying it?’ I decided, if I’m going to play tennis I want to enjoy 
it. One of the things is I don’t want to focus on Davis Cup any more. It takes 
too much out of me.

“But I’ve found a new way with Nick Cavaday and it’s working really well.”

Not, however, on Monday.

Roger Federer’s long-awaited return from injury could hardly have gone better 
as the 17-time grand slam champion beat Austria’s Jürgen Melzer. Federer had 
not played a competitive match in more than six months and while there were 
certainly signs of rust on Rod Laver Arena, the 35-year-old Swiss emerged 
unscathed with a 7-5, 3-6, 6-2, 6-2 victory. It remains to be seen how 
Federer’s form, and fitness, reacts to tougher opponents but there should be 
some leeway too in the second round, where he now faces the American qualifier 
Noah Rubin.

Federer played at the Hopman Cup, an exhibition event in Perth, earlier this 
month but this was his first official match since Wimbledon last year, after 
which he chose to sit out the rest of 2016 in a bid to overcome niggling 
injuries to his left knee and back.

“It was nice to be playing tennis again on a centre court like this, I 
couldn’t be happier to be here now,” Federer after his first-round victory. 
“It’s been a long road but I’m in the draw which is a beautiful thing. First 
rounds are never easy so I’m happy to live another day. Any match is a good 
match. Even if I had lost today it would have been good because I’m back on the 
court.”

The 2014 Australian Open champion, Stan Wawrinka, flirted with an early exit 
when trailing in the fifth set before seeing off the stout challenge of the 
world No35, Martin Klizan, and left an impression on his opponent as well as 
the enthralled crowd in the Margaret Court Arena.


At four-all in the fifth set, Wawrinka, who was serving and struggling, 
slammed a smash directly at Klizan, striking him in the groin and the Slovak 
left-hander sunk slowly to his knees. The Swiss stepped over the net to 
commiserate, Klizan accepted his sympathies, and on they went to the final 
bell. Wawrinka held, and Klizan served to stay in the match.
doublefault28 (@doublefault28) 
#Wawrinka <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Wawrinka?src=hash> #Klizan 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Klizan?src=hash> #AusOpen 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AusOpen?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/CrahzeeEYx 
<https://t.co/CrahzeeEYx>
 <https://twitter.com/doublefault28/status/820958339324579840> January 16, 2017
 <https://twitter.com/doublefault28/status/820958339324579840> 

At the business end of a keenly contested encounter, Wawrinka found another 
gear. He was 25-19 in career five-setters, Klizan 4-7, but there was still not 
a lot in it in the match that mattered. A classic single-handed Wawrinka 
backhand gave him match point, kissing the line. Klizan, clearly dispirited, 
dumped a forehand and it was done.

Wawrinka won 4-6, 6-4, 7-5, 4-6, 6-4 in three hours and 24 minutes. He has 
never lost in in the first round of this tournament in 12 visits, but this was 
a close-run thing. On Wednesay he plays the American Steve Johnson, who earlier 
beat Federico Delbonis, of Argentina, 6-3, 6-4, 6-4.
 