
Andy Murray’s progress at grand slams is rarely serene, but this one might be 
about to get unexpectedly rocky. The world No1 goes into the second round of 
the Australian Open after anervous three-set victory against the world No93 
Illya Marchenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/andy-murray-makes-hard-work-of-illya-marchenko-in-australian-open-first-round>
 and will be confronted on Wednesday by a combative Russian teenager with a 
track record of belligerence and a history of boxing, Andrey Rublev.

Murray, a keen fight fan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/andy-murray-boxing-tennis-wimbledon>
, was unaware that the 19-year-old Rublev is the son of a former amateur 
pugilist of the same name and, even though he is a similarly keen student of 
his own sport, he might not know that junior has stirred a little controversy 
in his short career.

Andy Murray and Roger Federer made to work in Australian Open first round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/andy-murray-makes-hard-work-of-illya-marchenko-in-australian-open-first-round>
Two years ago at a Challenger event in Moscow, the Argentinian Renzo Olivo 
complained that young Rublev had been “intimidating”, without levelling 
specific allegations. He was upset that no action was taken against him.

Fernando Verdasco was also upset with Rublev’s behaviour when he lost against 
him in Barcelona earlier that year. “I am surprised how rude he is for a 
17-year-old,” the Spaniard said at the time. “He shows little respect for his 
opponent.”

Rublev, who is mystified by the criticism, says of his boxing background: “My 
dad was a boxer – I was even doing boxing as well. He never pushed me but we 
practised sometimes also. He boxed a long, long time ago when it was not Russia 
but the USSR.”

He might reasonably be afforded the benefit of the doubt given his age, and he 
said in his defence: “I didn’t say anything bad about [Verdasco], but sometimes 
you show your emotion.”

So, it could all get quite tasty in Rod Laver Arena on Wednesday. Murray said 
he knows “a little bit” about Rublev, who goes through on the back of a 4-6, 
6-3, 7-6 (7-0), 6-3 win against Lu Yen-hsun.

“I’ve never hit with him or played against him, but I’ve seen him play before 
and he goes for it. He doesn’t hold back. He hits a big ball,” Murray said.

He does – but not accurately enough to get him past 152 in the world yet. 
Still, he is only 19 and clearly has talent. Murray recalled his own teenage 
years and what it was like taking on the big names in his sport. “I played Rafa 
[Nadal]here when I was 19 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jan/22/tennis.australianopen20072>. He 
was only one year older than me at the time, but he was right up at the top of 
the game. I played a five-set match with him on the centre court. It was one of 
the first times I played the top players in one of the big events, the slams.

“I did pretty good, played well. It gave me a lot of confidence. I remember 
those matches, [David] Nalbandian at Wimbledon, as well. I played a few of them 
when I was a teenager.”

Rublev says of Murray: “I have watched many of his matches since I was a kid, 
but my favourites were Rafa Nadal and Roger Federer. Now he is the best player 
for the moment. If you take history, it is Federer. I cannot say what to expect 
because I have never played one of the top guys. It is a different level. I am 
not even on the ATP Tour yet.”

Many incidents and episodes have driven Murray to great heights in his 12 
years on the circuit but, at the peak of his powers, a curious element has been 
added to the equation: the inspiration of failure.

The world No1 might finally win this title because, in five previous finals, 
he has fallen short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
. Nobody in the modern era has lost six finals at the same slam, and Murray 
does not want it to be him.

It might seem a strange engine for motivation, and at odds with outside 
perceptions, but losing four times inAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> finals against Djokovic – 
his oldest rival and the player he deposed as world No1 late last year – and 
once against Federer seems to have breathed life into his tennis at a venue he 
genuinely likes.

Murray said of his 7-5, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2 win against Marchenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/andy-murray-makes-hard-work-of-illya-marchenko-in-australian-open-first-round>
: “I don’t think it was the best match, to be honest.”

He hit three double faults to drop serve inside the first four minutes and 
took a worryingly long time to find any rhythm, conceding: “I didn’t move that 
well. That’s how it felt, anyway. But sometimes that can also be down to the 
conditions, as well. The ball’s flying through the air a little bit quicker, 
coming on to you faster than what it was the last few days. Maybe I wasn’t 
reacting as quickly as I would have liked.”

Murray explained that his tetchiness on court – several times he admonished 
himself for his “shocking movement” – did not reflect discontent, or concern 
about his preparation, which is invariably meticulous.

“I played some really good stuff in Doha, played Novak and [Tomas] Berdych, 
some of the best in the world, top 10 players. Sometimes in conditions like 
today you can feel a bit flat, energy-wise.

“Because it’s draining, you know you are trying to get through it, you need to 
encourage yourself to have more energy. The more energy you have the better 
you’ll play and finish the match off quicker. Maybe I could have had more 
energy, started off more energetically. I’ll try and do that the next match.

“Today was really hot. We practised this morning, 10.45 to 11.30, and it was 
really cool. I went out 20 minutes before my match and it was really hot. Then 
you have the temperature of the surface and you feel it for sure, especially 
the first time.”

It might be about to get a little hotter against young Rublev.
 