
Anne Brontë started writing her first novel some time between 1840 and 1845 
while she was working as a governess for the Robinson family, atThorp Green 
<http://www.mick-armitage.staff.shef.ac.uk/anne/cast-3.html> near York. I 
imagine she must have made her excuses in the evenings, and escaped the drawing 
room, where she had to do the boring bits of her pupils’ sewing, and often felt 
awkward and humiliated – excluded from the conversation because she was not 
considered a lady, yet not allowed to sit with the servants either, because 
governesses had to be something of a lady, or how could they teach their pupils 
to be ladies?

Anne must have stolen away to her room and pulled out her small, portable 
writing desk. Leaning on the desk’s writing slope (which was decadently lined 
in pink velvet), Anne could go on with her novel. She had to write in secret 
because she was skewering her haughty employers and her peremptory pupils on 
the page. Although her job was difficult and thankless, she had realised that 
it was providing her with excellent material, that she was telling a story no 
one else was telling. As she laboured away in her neat, elegant handwriting, 
Anne must have felt that she was writing a novel that would go off like a bomb.

Agnes Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/27/anne-bronte-agnes-grey-review> 
sticks close to the facts of Anne’s life. The eponymous heroine is a 
clergyman’s daughter, just as Anne’s father,Patrick Brontë 
<http://www.haworth-village.org.uk/brontes/patrick/patrick.asp>, was the 
perpetual curate of Haworth in Yorkshire. Anne doesn’t specify where Agnes 
grows up, but she does say she was “born and nurtured among ... rugged hills”, 
so when I read the novel, I imagine the Yorkshire moors. Both Anne and Agnes 
were originally one of six children. Anne lost her two eldest sisters when she 
was five. Agnes has lost even more siblings; she and her older sister Mary are 
the only two who have “survived the perils of infancy”. Both Agnes and Anne are 
the youngest. When Agnes says she is frustrated because she is “always regarded 
as the child, and the pet of the family”, considered “too helpless and 
dependent – too unfit for buffeting with the cares and turmoils of life”, it 
feels like Anne talking. She always chafed at being patronised.

Anne grew up poor. Agnes’s family are not rich to begin with, but things 
really get desperate when her father Richard loses their meagre savings on 
a dodgy investment and slumps into depression. So the women take over. Agnes’s 
capable, enterprising mother Alice slashes their expenses. Then they start 
working out how they might make more money. Mary goes for the most genteel work 
she can find: she starts selling her watercolours. Agnes turns to one of the 
only other jobs open to middle-class women: she decides to become a governess. 
Her family scoff that she’s much too young, but she persuades them. She arrives 
at her first job, with the Bloomfield family (in real life, they were the 
Inghams), feeling a “rebellious flutter” of excitement. But instead of an 
adventure, Agnes gets a crash course in how cruel the world can be, and how it 
got that way.

One of Agnes’s pupils, Tom Bloomfield, enjoys torturing birds. One day his 
vile uncle, who encourages Tom’s cruelty, gives him a nest of baby birds. When 
Agnes sees him “laying the nest on the ground, and standing over it with his 
legs wide apart, his hands thrust into his breeches-pockets, his body bent 
forward, and his face twisted into all manner of contortions in the ecstasy of 
his delight” and he won’t be reasoned with, something rises within her. She 
grabs a large flat stone and crushes the birds flat.

Agnes Grey is brilliant on the horror of a first job: she is wrongfooted, 
overworked, underpaid and out of her depth

This brutal mercy killing is almost too violent to read. Agnes Grey’s first 
critics thought it went too far, but Anne insisted that “Agnes Grey was accused 
of extravagant overcolouring in those very parts that were carefully copied 
from life, with a most scrupulous avoidance of all exaggeration”. And when the 
novelistElizabeth Gaskell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/elizabeth-gaskell> 
asked Anne’s sister Charlotte if the scene with the nestlings had really 
happened, Charlotte replied that no one who had not been a governess really 
knew the dark side of so-called respectable human nature.

Anne was after more than shock value; she wanted to show that Tom’s cruelty 
was sanctioned, even encouraged, by his family. Agnes realises that Tom’s 
cruelty is all of a piece; whether he is torturing birds, hitting his sisters 
or kicking his governess, he wants to “persecute the lower creation”, because 
he sees women, girls and defenceless animals as his to exploit, abuse and 
oppress. After months of being wrongfooted, slighted, dissatisfied, bored, 
overworked, underpaid and out of her depth –Agnes Grey is brilliant on the 
peculiar horrors of a first job – Agnes has started to understand how the world 
works. Her consciousness has been raised. And then she is fired.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fanne-bronte-agnes-grey-jane-eyre-charlotte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8f5f9f5a7ff433cfa58b2c0cf371af696d0e162%2F298_0_4369_2622%2F4369.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anne%20Bront%C3%AB%3A%20the%20sister%20who%20got%20there%20first&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fanne-bronte-agnes-grey-jane-eyre-charlotte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anne%20Bront%C3%AB%3A%20the%20sister%20who%20got%20there%20first&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fanne-bronte-agnes-grey-jane-eyre-charlotte%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8f5f9f5a7ff433cfa58b2c0cf371af696d0e162%2F298_0_4369_2622%2F4369.jpg>
 Emily, Anne and Charlotte in To Walk Invisible. Photograph: BBC/Michael Prince 
Anne was fired from her first job too. Undaunted, she boldly advertised for 
a job asking for double her previous salary, and was soon working for the 
Robinsons. The Robinsons’ fictional counterparts are the Murrays, and Agnes 
mainly teaches their two daughters. The youngest, Matilda, is a tomboy, who is 
just as cruel in her way as Tom Bloomfield. When she gleefully lets her dog 
savage a baby hare, it’s clear that in resisting the pressure to be ladylike 
she has tipped into wanting to be as violent and careless as the men around 
her. The eldest, Rosalie, is being pushed into marriage with a rich man who 
happens also to be a rake and philanderer, and while she can she is determined 
to flirt with every man in sight. Agnes finds it hard to sympathise when 
Rosalie decides to break the heart of the new curate, Mr Weston, especially as 
she quite likes him herself.

Oh, Mr Weston. He’s kind, he’s generous and he speaks from the heart. Agnes is 
at her most endearing when she is falling for Mr Weston. He offers her an 
umbrella, and she’s so flustered that all she can say is: “No, thank you, 
I don’t mind the rain.” The older Agnes acerbically remarks: “I always lacked 
common sense when taken by surprise.” Agnes’s battle with Rosalie over Mr 
Weston could come out of aJane Austen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten> novel. I’m sure Anne read 
Austen, and admired how mercilessly she satirised those who were obsessed with 
status, rank and class. Rosalie thinks she can steal Mr Weston from Agnes, 
because, like Tom Bloomfield, she also thinks she has the right to “persecute 
the lower creation”. The Murrays are disrespectful to Agnes, making her feel 
“like one deaf and dumb who could neither speak nor be spoken to”; as though 
she has “ceased to be visible”. Anne’s evocation of this, and how it eats away 
at her sense of self, has the tang of lived experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fanne-bronte-agnes-grey-jane-eyre-charlotte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa22890f54992dd4cbfb7fd07f9046e983905843%2F0_0_3864_4684%2F3864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anne%20Bront%C3%AB%3A%20the%20sister%20who%20got%20there%20first&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fanne-bronte-agnes-grey-jane-eyre-charlotte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anne%20Bront%C3%AB%3A%20the%20sister%20who%20got%20there%20first&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fanne-bronte-agnes-grey-jane-eyre-charlotte%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa22890f54992dd4cbfb7fd07f9046e983905843%2F0_0_3864_4684%2F3864.jpg>
 The real Brontës in a portrait by their brother, Branwell – Anne is on the 
left, beside Emily and Charlotte. Photograph: Corbis via Getty Images 
Anne stuck it out with the Robinsons for five years. She only left because 
she made the mistake of persuading them to employ her feckless brother,Branwell 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Branwell_Bront%C3%AB>, as tutor to their son and 
he spectacularly messed up by having an affair with Mrs Robinson. In her 
prayerbook, Anne wrote that she was “sick of mankind and their disgusting 
ways”. When she resigned, she carried home, tucked away in her portable writing 
desk, a work in progress she was calling “Passages in the Life of an 
Individual”. This would becomeAgnes Grey.

Back in Haworth, Anne found all her siblings at home and unemployed. Her 
brother was convinced he’d lost the love of his life and was drowning his 
sorrows at the local pub. But Anne and her sisters decided to use a legacy from 
their aunt to write, and to publish a joint book of poetry together. They used 
pen names starting with the same letters as their real names.Poems by Currer, 
Ellis and Acton Bell 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poems_by_Currer,_Ellis,_and_Acton_Bell> was 
published in 1846. It only sold two copies. But by then the sisters had started 
writing every day again, just as they had as children when they had composed 
wild, fantastical stories and poems, set in their own imaginary worlds.

Anne wrote, walked the moors, did her share of the housework and wrote some 
more. Every night, she and her sisters paced round and round the dining room 
table, reading their work aloud and offering criticism and ideas. As Anne 
reworked “Passages in the Life of an Individual” intoAgnes Grey, Emily wrote 
Wuthering Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/16/emily-bronte-wuthering-heights-100-best>
 and Charlotte wrote her first novel,The Professor. Soon they were sending out 
all three manuscripts, wrapped in brown paper. They were rejected again and 
again.

Later that year, Charlotte was in Manchester, looking after her father as he 
recuperated from an operation, when she started a second novel. Back home, she 
started reading aloud what she’d written – and Anne must have been quite 
surprised. LikeAgnes Grey, Jane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/16/charlotte-bronte-bicentenary-birth-jane-eyre-by-sarah-waters-margaret-drabble-jeanette-winterson>
 was also about a plain heroine, who was also a governess, and who also spoke 
directly to the reader. Later, a story would spring up about Charlotte telling 
her sisters that she was going to break new ground and portray a heroine who 
wasn’t beautiful. But Anne had got there first. The moment where Agnes gazes 
forlornly into her mirror and can “discover no beauty in those marked features” 
is one of the most heartfelt in the novel, and pre-empts Jane calling herself 
“poor, obscure, plain and little”.

One reason Agnes Grey has never received the acclaim it might is that 
Charlotte’s novel came out first

One reason Agnes Grey has never received the acclaim it should have done is 
that Charlotte’s novel came out first. Charlotte had managed to find a decent, 
efficient publisher, while her sisters had unfortunately signed their novels 
over to a chancer called Thomas Cautley Newby. He dragged his heels untilJane 
Eyre became a bestseller, at which point he realised he might make some money 
out of publishing two more novels by the mysterious Bell family. So Anne’s 
first novel came out in December 1847, along withWuthering Heights, two months 
after Charlotte’s.Agnes Grey was reviewed as a pale imitation of Jane Eyre. One 
critic even unwittingly guessed at the sisters’ relationship by saying Agnes 
was “a sort of younger sister to Jane Eyre”, adding, upsettingly, that she was 
“inferior to her in every way”.The critics of the day barely noticed Anne’s 
political engagement – her sharp portrait of a class-ridden society, or her 
argument that when education is not valued, children grow up ill-equipped for 
life, unable to be happy or kind. Anne had written an exposé of governessing, 
in contrast to Charlotte’s highly romanticised view of the profession. The
reports of the Governesses’ Benevolent Institution 
<https://www.bl.uk/collection-items/reports-from-the-governesses-benevolent-institution>
, a charity set up to help governesses in 1841, make it clear that very few 
real governesses were blessed, like Jane Eyre, with a handsome, intelligent 
boss, a motherly housekeeper and just one sweet pupil. Agnes’s experience was 
much closer to the truth, and many women had an even worse time of it. 
Charlotte hated governessing and in her letters she railed against its petty 
humiliations, backbreaking work and appalling pay. But none of that made it 
into her novel. Anne wanted her novel to speak to some of the 25,000 women 
working as governesses in the 1840s and to their employers too. Instead,Jane 
Eyre became the governess novel.

Agnes is a quieter heroine than Jane Eyre or Wuthering Heights’s Cathy 
Earnshaw, but she burns with her own anger.Agnes Grey is often a furious novel, 
and a feminist novel. Its main concern is how a woman can do what Agnes wants 
to do at the start: “to go out into the world; to act for myself; to exercise 
my unused faculties; to try my own unknown powers”. It asks big questions: how 
can you search for empowerment when the world is cruel and unfair, and the odds 
are stacked against you? Can you get what you want without hurting other people 
in the process? How can you find love? Which brings me back to Mr Weston. It’s 
striking that, while Anne’s sisters created heroes who were dark, brooding and 
malevolent, Anne provided her heroine with a hero who was actually nice to 
women. This still feels revolutionary.

• A new Vintage Classics edition of Agnes Grey 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/agnes-grey-460947.html> is published on 12 
January.Take Courage: Anne Brontë and the Art of Life 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/1108618/take-courage/> by Samantha Ellis is 
published by Chatto & Windus on the same date.
 