
Golf Magazine recently ran its annual feature, the The Most Beautiful Women in 
Golf <http://www.golf.com/most-beautiful-women>, an inspiring and stunning read 
about women who have impacted the golf industry with just their looks alone.

A couple of professional golfers were scattered into the mix, such as LPGA 
pros Danielle Kang, Cheyenne Woods, Belen Mozo, and sisters Jessica and Nelly 
Korda.

Then came the captivating photos of Julie Crenshaw, wife of former PGA Tour 
player Ben Crenshaw. Julie was described as “waiting to embrace [Ben] behind 
the 18th green” when he played in his final Masters tournament, as any good 
wife should do. Former Miss America, Kira Kasantsev made her debut in the 
spread, quoted as an “avid golfer”. And Holly Sonders, who is an NFL sideline 
and golf reporter, made her fourth appearance in a row, wearing the perfect 
golf attire: a bikini.

What is further disappointing about the spread is that the golf pros showcased 
are dynamic young women, with talents and interests far more captivating than 
their looks. For instance, Woods is active in the charityGolf Fore Africa 
<http://www.golfforeafrica.org/>, whose main goal is to provide clean drinking 
water on the continent. Kang is an avid photographer who also maintains a 
lifestyle blog <http://foreseasonsblog.com> with fellow tour player Michelle 
Wie, which gives an inside look at the lives of professional golfers.

From Tiger Woods to the Solheim Cup: 10 golfing hopes for the year ahead | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/11/10-golfing-hopes-for-2017-tiger-woods-solheim-cup>
Golf media has a complicated relationship with women: it simply does not know 
what to do with them. Golf Magazine, Golf Digest and the Golf Channel are all 
guilty of reducing women to their looks alone. Women Crush Wednesday was a 
regular feature on the Golf Channel website, highlighting aspiring female 
golfer pros with racy Instagram accounts; Golf Digest has only had 23 women on 
its cover in its 66-year history (nine of those covers were shared with men, 
and three were given to non-golf pros: Sonders, social media starlet Paulina 
Gretzky and model Kate Upton);Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> 
Magazine shares the same problem of rarely featuring female pros on its cover 
and usually gives them coverage when the focus is on physical beauty, rather 
than athletic accomplishments.

I played on the LPGA tour for one season and the developmental tour for two 
years before that. During my time on tour I felt better coverage for female 
golf pros could actually help grow the game for women. Since golf is male 
dominated, and the recreational golf population is only 20% female, golf media 
focuses on appealing to men. Perhaps magazines and websites think that if they 
started providing real coverage on LPGA golfers men would lose interest. Maybe 
they’re right, but they would no longer be marginalizing women. Women make up 
50% of the population, so in business terms it does not make sense to 
completely undermine us by only viewing us as bodies to be objectified and 
gawked at.

Before I played on tour though, I saw firsthand how the golf media uses women 
as props. I competed on a reality TV show,The Big Break 
<http://www.golfchannel.com/tv/big-break/>, on the Golf Channel. Think of it as 
a survivor of the fittest for golfers, who participate in a series of 
challenges to move on from show to show.

When filming began one thing was transparent: a couple of the women were 
selected not for their talents, but rather their physical attributes. The women 
were asked to don bikinis and lie on their back and tummies; one young woman 
twirled around a palm tree.

The most sexed up they tried to make me involved a spray tan, which in turn 
made me look like a golfer on Jersey Shore.
 The author during her time on The Big Break. Photograph: Anya Alvarez 
As well as reinforcing my belief that playing golf in a bikini does not look 
comfortable, my experience on The Big Break also made me determined to fight 
for better and equal coverage for my fellow female golfers. So while golf media 
continues to ignore the women in the sport who are compelling beyond their 
beauty, I’ve compiled a shortlist of women who are making moves in the male 
dominated world. All while wearing business suits and golf attire …

Aubrey McCormick & Gina Rizzi 

McCormick is a former professional golfer, who has used her contacts to foster 
conversation surrounding sustainability. Rizzi is president of Arcus Marketing 
Group LLC, a firm that focuses on social responsibility and environmental 
sustainability.

Together they founded IMPACT360 Sports <http://www.impact360group.com/>, which 
looks to drive impact on environmental, social and economic sustainability 
through sports. Most recently they landed a contract with the Olympic Club in 
San Francisco, which will host the women’s US Open in 2021.

Annika Sorenstam 

Sorenstam is arguably the most successful female golfer on and off the course. 
During her time as a professional, she won 89 tournaments and became the second 
woman to play in a PGA Tour tournament, at the Colonial Invitational in 2003.

Outside of her playing days, Sorenstam has completed three golf courses 
through her businessANNIKA Course Design 
<http://annikasorenstam.com/coursedesign/>; became a 50% owner in Capillary 
Concrete, which helps reduce water usage on golf courses; developed a high-end 
golf clothing line called the ANNIKA Collection; and opened the ANNIKA Academy, 
which has helped produced some of the junior golfers in the United States.

Tiffany Mack Fitzgerald 

Tiffany Mack Fitzgerald is on a mission to get more African American women on 
the golf course. Having spent more than 20 years in corporate America, she 
understood the role golf played in building successful professional 
relationships. In 2013 she foundedBlack Girls Golf 
<http://www.blackgirlsgolf.net/>, an organization that provides news, 
information and clinics for women who are interested in learning, practicing, 
and playing. In four years, Black Girls Golf has grown to a community of nearly 
3,000 members in 33 states and Canada.

Diana Murphy

In 2016 Murphy became the second woman to serve as president of the United 
States Golf Association in its 122 year history. As president she assumed the 
leadership role to serve over 300 professional staff, and 1,200 volunteers. 
While her lasting impact remains to seen, her leadership at one of the largest 
golf organizations shows golf is slowly changing – and so should the coverage.
 