
At least four people have been killed after gunmen opened fire at government 
offices in the Mexican beach resort of Cancun, a day afterat least five people 
died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/reports-shooting-bpm-music-festival-mexico-playa-del-carmen>
 in a shooting at a music festival nearby.

Rodolfo del Angel Campos, chief of police for the state of Quintana Roo, said 
gunfire broke out at the state attorney general’s office in Cancun, a city that 
is one of the most popular seaside destinations for foreign tourists inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>.

 Police intervened, and the alarm was sounded, activating federal police and 
the armed forces, del Angel said, adding that other installations were also 
attacked. Television broadcast outbreaks of afternoon gunfire in Cancun.

On the Mexican border, it takes more than a wall to make sense of this tangle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trump-wall-mexico-border-history>
 One policeman and three suspected gunmen were killed, and a further five 
suspects arrested, state governor Carlos Joaquin told Mexican television on 
Tuesday evening.

 “The state is under control and in order,” Joaquin said, adding that he had 
arranged with the Interior Ministry to send federal forces to reinforce 
security. “People from Cancun and our visitors can go about their lives as 
normal.”

The centre of the city was tense on Tuesday night. Shortly after the gunbattle 
at the prosecutors’ office, a convoy of police trucks descended on the Plaza de 
lasAmericas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas> mall where hundreds of 
shoppers had fled after people reported hearing gunfire. Soldiers in full 
battle gear cleared the property.

Later, an official with the prosecutor’s office said the mall scare proved to 
be a false alarm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdeaths-gunfight-cancun-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0deaa8cb89533c13006f102dc332371caf78179c%2F0_0_3845_2662%2F3845.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20least%20four%20killed%20in%20gunfight%20in%20Mexican%20resort%20of%20Cancun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdeaths-gunfight-cancun-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20least%20four%20killed%20in%20gunfight%20in%20Mexican%20resort%20of%20Cancun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdeaths-gunfight-cancun-mexico%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0deaa8cb89533c13006f102dc332371caf78179c%2F0_0_3845_2662%2F3845.jpg>
 Mexican soldiers evacuate civilians from a shopping mall after reports of 
gunfire. Photograph: STR/AFP/Getty Images 
 Joaquin, who took office in September, described the attacks as a reaction by 
gangsters to his crackdown on organised crime, which he said had enjoyed 
impunity for years.

 The ruling Institutional Revolutionary party (PRI) has been reviewing 
disciplinary action against Joaquin’s predecessor, former PRI state governor 
Roberto Borge, whom the opposition has accused of fraud and corruption. He 
denies any wrongdoing.

 Lying on the Caribbean coast of eastern Mexico, Quintana Roo has suffered 
sporadic violence in the past few years as drug cartels battle for control of 
the lucrative local market.

 Changes in power have been known to inflame turf wars between gangs as they 
fight for supremacy.

 On Monday, at least five people were killed and 15 wounded when a gunman 
opened fire in a nightclub in the resort of Playa del Carmen. The shooting was 
not being investigated as a suspected terror attack.
 