
Of all Australia’s venomous animals, bees and wasps pose the biggest threat to 
public health, causing more than twice the number of admissions to hospital as 
snake bites and the same number of deaths.

The first national analysis of 13 years’ data on bites and stings from 
venomous creatures has found that just over one-third (33%) of almost 42,000 
admissions were caused by bees and wasps, compared with 30% by spiders and 15% 
by snakes.

Though snake bites caused 27 deaths between 2000 and 2013, nearly twice as 
many per hospital admission as other venomous creatures, researchers found 
fatalities from snakes were rare given that there are 140 species of land 
snakes in Australia.


People were more likely to die from an encounter with a horse or dog, said Dr 
Ronelle Welton, a public health expert at the University of Melbourne’s 
Australian venom unit, who led the study.

Sydney man dies after redback spider bite, although not yet clear bite to blame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/12/sydney-man-dies-after-redback-spider-bite>
Stings from bees and wasps caused 12,351 admissions and 27 fatalities. There 
were three deaths caused by jellyfish, a further three by ticks and two by 
ants. A manreportedly died from a redback spider bite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/12/sydney-man-dies-after-redback-spider-bite>
 in April last year – the first such fatality in more than 30 years – but it 
fell outside the study period.

Welton said Australia was known internationally as “the epicentre of all 
things venomous”, but had a surprising lack of data about related injuries and 
fatalities, which meant national guidelines for prevention and treatment were 
inadequate.

She said she was surprised to find that more than half the fatalities occurred 
at home, and two-thirds (64%) in major cities and inner-regional areas where 
healthcare was readily accessible.

Bites and stings were much more likely to occur between April and October, and 
dangers varied by state and territory. Anaphylaxis from bee stings was common 
in South Australia, while in Queensland there were more snake bites. No 
fatalities were recorded in Tasmania but there were instances of anaphylaxis 
caused by jumper ants.

Tick bites that trigger severe meat allergy on rise around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/07/tick-bites-that-trigger-severe-meat-allergy-on-rise-around-the-world>
Men aged between 30 and 35 were the most likely to be bitten or stung.

More than half (34) of the deaths were the result of an allergic reaction that 
caused anaphylactic shock, which researchers pointed to as evidence of a 
widespread and under-reported problem of allergies in Australia.

Three-quarters of snake bite victims died in hospital, compared with only 44% 
of those who died from an allergic reaction to an insect sting. Welton 
suggested that could be because bees were perceived to be more “innocuous”.

“Most people don’t really fear them in the same way they fear snakes,” she 
said. “Without having a previous history of allergy, you might get bitten and, 
although nothing happens the first time, you’ve still developed an allergic 
sensitivity.

“We need to understand why people are dying from bee-sting anaphylaxis at 
home.”

Prof Daniel Hoyer, of the University of Melbourne’s department of pharmacology 
and therapeutics, said the “number one surprise” of the research was that there 
were so many deaths caused by insect bites.


Thunderstorm asthma: 'You're talking an event equivalent to a terrorist attack'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/27/thunderstorm-asthma-oure-talking-an-event-equivalent-to-a-terrorist-attack>
The incidence of potentially life-threatening allergies in Australia was 
“enormous” and a much bigger problem than many people perceived, he said, 
pointing to the fatalities caused by“Melbourne’s thunderstorm asthma” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/27/thunderstorm-asthma-oure-talking-an-event-equivalent-to-a-terrorist-attack>
 in November.

More than 8,500 people were taken to hospital after the mass asthma event 
triggered by severe thunderstorms and at least eight died, many of whom did not 
know they were susceptible.
 