
If there remains a stoical band of Australians who believe in the inherent 
superiority of Athleticus australis, 2016 must surely have given them pause. 
Seldom have so many Australian athletes given so much for such little return.

We’ll get to the woes of Australia’s First XI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australia-cricket-team> and the Wallabies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australia-rugby-union-team> soon enough, but 
the new world order – which looks remarkably like the old one, when you put 
aside the halcyon years of the 1990s and early 2000s – was most starkly 
illustrated at the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro, when Australia’s 421-strong 
team won 29 medals, eight of them gold.

Australia's well-planned, well-funded Olympic over-achievement is finished | 
Paul Connolly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/australias-well-planned-well-funded-olympic-over-achievement-is-finished>
Or should that be “just eight of them gold”? It may depend on whether one’s 
expectations had been raised by the Australian Olympic Committee which, naively 
putting their best offer first, predicted as many as 16 gold medals.

Although it represented Australia’s worst showing at an Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> since Barcelona in 1992, 
there was a case to be made that, amid the popped-balloon atmosphere back home, 
it wasn’t such a bad return – especially now that so many other nations, such 
as 2012 hosts Great Britain and 2020 hosts Japan, have caught on to Australia’s 
investment-inspired success at the 2000 Sydney Olympics and subsequent Games. 
Did we really think that Australia’s previous over-achievement was down to 
something in our Vegemite?

Certainly Rio had its share of disappointing moments, including the inability 
of swimmers Cate Campbell and Cameron McAvoy – and teams such as the 
Hockeyroos, Boomers, Opals and 2016 Champions Trophy-winning Kookaburras – to 
get on the podium.Football’s Matildas also failed to finish in the medals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/rio-2016-matildas-knocked-out-by-brazil-in-thrilling-quarter-final-shootout>
 but then they hadn’t been saddled before the tournament with imprudent 
expectation, so in the end they were regarded as heroic failures as opposed to 
just failures.

It helped that they went down fighting, playing some exciting football to make 
the quarter-finals before losing a heart-racing penalty shoot-out to the home 
team – whose goalkeeper, Bárbara, repeatedly came off her line during the 
shoot-out like a drunk motorist failing a sobriety test on the shoulder of a US 
highway. But Australia had their chances all the same. At 4-4 in the shoot-out, 
Katrina Gorry missed a penalty that could have sent theMatildas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/matildas> into the semis. Soon after, 
centre-half Alanna Kennedy was denied by Bárbara, putting Australia out of the 
tournament.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa480924813f5bfe1d013c66ab42f604f722ef52d%2F0_277_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia's%20sporting%20year%20in%20review%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20fairytales%2C%20flops%20and%20fiascos%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%27s%20sporting%20year%20in%20review%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20fairytales%2C%20flops%20and%20fiascos%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa480924813f5bfe1d013c66ab42f604f722ef52d%2F0_277_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Matildas defender Alanna Kennedy cannot hide her anguish after missing a 
crucial penalty in Belo Horizonte. Photograph: Eugenio Savio/AP 
The performance of Australia’s swim team was not cast in such a noble light. 
The most prominent underachiever was 100m freestyle world record-holder Cate 
Campbell who, though anchoring the women’s 4x100m freestyle gold medal-winning 
relay,failed to win an individual medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/mitch-larkin-claims-silver-as-campbell-sisters-pipped-in-100m-freestyle>
. “The greatest choke in Olympic history,” she said during her excruciatingly 
self-conscious post-swim interview that brought to mind a hostage video. We 
could only imagine what happened when her brave front, and the cameras, were 
switched off.

Rio 2016: Kim Brennan rises above sinking feeling to claim golden moment | 
Jonathan Horn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/rio-2016-kim-brennan-rises-above-sinking-feeling-to-claim-golden-moment>
But of course Rio wasn’t all bad, and not only because golfer Jason Day, who 
won the Players Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/jason-day-players-championship> 
in May,successfully avoided contracting the Zika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/28/jason-day-zika-virus-rio-olympics-golf>
. Kim Brennan, with a telling combination of grace and power,swept all before 
her in the women’s single sculls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/australias-kim-brennan-wins-gold-in-rowing-as-meares-takes-keirin-bronze>
.Chloe Esposito came from the clouds to win gold in the modern pentathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/australian-chloe-esposito-clinches-gold-in-modern-pentathlon>
. Catherine Skinner overcame her habit of falling just short in major 
competitionsto win the women’s trap shooting event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/catherine-skinner-keeps-olympic-golds-coming-for-australia-with-shooting-win>
.Tom Burton won sailing’s laser class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/australian-tom-burton-claims-sailing-gold-as-opals-basketballers-knocked-out>
.Mack Horton pulled off a stirring win in the 400m freestyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/mack-horton-and-relay-team-get-australia-off-to-golden-start-in-rio-pool>
, and 18-year-old Kyle Chalmers realised his potential before he had a chance 
to know what it was, exemplifying the fearlessness of youth by powering toa 
shock win in the 100m freestyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/kyle-chalmers-crowned-olympic-swimming-champion-at-the-age-of-18>
.

The women’s rugby sevens team, who went in as favourites, surprised no one by 
winning the gold medal match against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/olympics-rugby-sevens-australian-women-win-gold-against-new-zealand>
. But what was surprising was the excitement they generated among casual 
observers whose expectations were surpassed due to the skill, speed and 
physicality with which the Australians played. Former Wallaby Matthew Burke 
later wrote: “I think that win has done as much for Australian rugby as the 
World Cup wins of 1991 and 1999. I say this not as an advocate for rugby in 
Australia, but as a father of daughters.”

Problems endure but 2016 was a big year for women in Australian sport | Merryn 
Sherwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/problems-endure-but-2016-was-a-big-year-for-women-in-australian-sport>
The past year has been a significant one for women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/problems-endure-but-2016-was-a-big-year-for-women-in-australian-sport>
 – and girls with sporting dreams – in Australian sport. As we’ve seen, many 
Australian women excelled on the international front – and to those above we 
can add Tyler Wright, the 22-year-old from the south coast of New South Wales, 
whowon the world surfing title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/australias-tyler-wright-wins-world-surfing-title-after-enduring-difficult-year>
, tennis star Daria Gavrilova, who, with Nick Kyrgios,won the Hopman Cup in 
January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/nick-kyrgios-daria-gavrilova-hopman-cup-australia>
, as well as the women of the dominant Australian netball team, the Diamonds,
who won the Constellation Cup in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/australia-claim-constellation-cup-with-third-victory-over-new-zealand>
. On the domestic front, however, it was less about individual women making a 
mark than a united front of female athletes shouldering their way forward to 
alter, forever, the landscape of sport in Australia.

There was big news in Australian rules football when it was confirmed that a 
national, eight-team women’s AFL competitionwould start in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/15/eight-teams-to-make-up-inaugural-womens-afl-competition-in-2017>
 – with the revolution (or at least one game a week of it) to be televised live 
on free-to-air TV. In September, whetting appetites,an exhibition match between 
the Western Bulldogs and Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/moana-hope-western-bulldogs-afl-womens-all-stars>
 drew 6,365 spectators to Whitten Oval, and more than a million watched live on 
TV. These figures aided the argument of those suggesting that the AFL’s initial
proposed salary of $5,000 to $10,000 for most players was woefully inadequate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/impressive-viewing-figures-for-exhibition-match-at-odds-to-paltry-womens-afl-pay>
.An increase was later announced for the first two seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/welcome-upgrade-to-womens-pay-deal-shows-afl-is-listening>
.

The challenge for the W-League this season is to keep the hype alive | Lydia 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/the-challenge-for-the-w-league-this-season-is-to-keep-the-hype-alive>
Netball, too, heralded a new direction, and a better pay deal for players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/netball-australia-pay-deal-throws-down-gauntlet-to-other-womens-sports>
, announcinga new eight-team national competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/07/new-australian-league-reveals-name-ahead-of-2017-season-super-netball>
 that will also be televised live during its inaugural 2017 season. The league 
will feature current Australian ANZ Championship teams Adelaide Thunderbirds, 
Melbourne Vixens, NSW Swifts, Queensland Firebirds and West Coast Fever, as 
well as new outfits Collingwood, the Giants and Sunshine Coast Lightning (the 
three newbies partnered with Collingwood, Greater Western Sydney Giants and the 
Melbourne Storm respectively).

The W-League commenced its ninth season in 2016, after Melbourne City went 
through the 2015-16 season undefeated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/dominant-melbourne-city-crowned-w-league-champions-in-debut-season>
. The year also saw the completion of the inaugural women’s Big Bash League 
(Twenty20 cricket) competition, won by Sydney Thunder, and the start of its 
second. Television ratings looked promising – in December,the first primetime 
WBBL match enjoyed a big audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/elyse-villani-hits-first-half-century-of-wbbl-season-as-scorchers-gain-revenge>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6957f42d67103caa2621971df12bc3693d06830e%2F0_0_3000_2193%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia's%20sporting%20year%20in%20review%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20fairytales%2C%20flops%20and%20fiascos%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%27s%20sporting%20year%20in%20review%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20fairytales%2C%20flops%20and%20fiascos%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6957f42d67103caa2621971df12bc3693d06830e%2F0_0_3000_2193%2F3000.jpg>
 Moana Hope, right, and Cecilia Mcintosh contest a ball during the AFL women’s 
exhibition match in September. Photograph: Michael Dodge/Getty Images 
If 2016 was a year to remember for women’s sport, it was a year our national 
men’s sides would be happy to forget. Not rugby league’s Kangaroos, mind. They 
returned to imperious waysto sweep all before them in the Four Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/australia-beat-new-zealand-four-nations-title>
.Not the Socceroos, either 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/sep/08/david-squires-on-the-socceroos-strong-start-to-the-final-phase-of-world-cup-qualifying>
. Of the seven 2018 World Cup qualification games they played, they won four 
and drew three, the only eyebrow-raising moments beinga 2-2 draw against lowly 
Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/15/thailand-v-australia-world-cup-2018-qualifying-live>
 and the way Ange Postecoglou’s sweat-drenched white shirt stuck to his frame 
during the Socceroos’1-0 away win against the United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/socceroos-still-searching-for-genuine-west-asian-rivals-after-uae-victory>
.

No, it was the Wallabies and the Australian cricket team who will glad to see 
the back of 2016. After none of Australia’s Super Rugby teams qualified for the 
finals, the Wallabies found the going tougher than couple’s counselling.Swept 
3-0 at home by England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/the-wallabies-play-against-england-was-like-the-worst-rugby-league>
 for the first time,beaten three times by the All Blacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/wallabies-struggle-to-draw-positives-from-flogging-at-hands-of-the-all-blacks>
 andlikened to a clown show by sniping media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/michael-cheika-still-stewing-about-all-blacks-on-return-to-australia>
, Michael Cheika’s team racked up a gloomy total of nine defeats in 2016. Even 
a couple of exciting wins during an end of year Grand Slam tour couldn’t keep 
the blues at bay. It was enough for the Guardian to ask:Has Australia fallen 
out of love with rugby union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/dec/08/australia-rugby-union-england>
?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d98b68c6e9ced5200fe797d259ae1a7dfff2ef2%2F0_136_3548_2128%2F3548.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia's%20sporting%20year%20in%20review%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20fairytales%2C%20flops%20and%20fiascos%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%27s%20sporting%20year%20in%20review%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20fairytales%2C%20flops%20and%20fiascos%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Faustralias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d98b68c6e9ced5200fe797d259ae1a7dfff2ef2%2F0_136_3548_2128%2F3548.jpg>
 2016 was not a great year for Wallabies coach Michael Cheika. Photograph: Paul 
Harding/PA 
Australia’s men’s cricket team were mediocre too, by their usual standards. 
Unsure whether to specialise in Tests, one-day internationals or Twenty20, it 
seemed they decided to do the fairest thing possible and specialise in none of 
them, losing five of 10 Tests, 11 of 28 ODIs and seven of 13 T20s.

After flunking out of the T20 World Cup, the dusty pitches of Sri Lanka proved 
too much for Australia’s Test side. Slow left-armer Rangana Herath had 
Australia’s flat-track bullies spooked and they went out swinging like hacks in 
the long grass.Sri Lanka won all three Tests at a canter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/australia-to-conduct-meaty-review-after-sri-lanka-test-flop>
. If Australia were hoping to bounce back against South Africa on the hard 
pitches back home they were disappointed. Having already wiped Australia 
five-zip in an ODI series in South Africa, the Proteas pulled away to win the 
first two Tests of the three-game seriesprompting mass droppings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/australia-make-six-changes-in-drastic-selection-shake-up-for-third-test>
 andthe resignation of chairman of selectors, Rod Marsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/rod-marsh-quits-as-australias-chairman-of-selectors-in-wake-of-test-defeats>
.Australia won the dead-rubber third Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/australian-test-crickets-next-generation-makes-its-mark-in-adelaide>
,the first Test against visitors Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/australia-get-home-as-pakistan-fall-just-short-in-thrilling-finale-to-first-test>
, and scraped home in the final hour ofthe Boxing Day Test, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/mitchell-starc-leads-australia-to-dramatic-melbourne-test-win-over-pakistan>
 but it’s too early to tell whether Australia’s late revival marks the 
beginning of a new, exciting era or is merely a dead-cat bounce.

But let’s end in a positive frame of mind with a trio of fairytales. How else 
to describe the title-winning seasons enjoyed by Adelaide United in theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>, the Western Bulldogs in the 
AFL and the Cronulla Sharks in the NRL?

First to Adelaide, who began the 2015-16 season without a win in their first 
eight games. In a turnaround of Eliza Doolittle proportions, Guillermo Amor’s 
side, sparked by the goals of Pablo Sanchez and a resurgent Bruce Djite, went 
on to lose just one of their next 19 gamesto clinch the Premiers’ Plate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/brisbane-roar-held-by-melbourne-victory-to-hand-premiers-plate-to-adelaide-united>
. Riding that momentum they completed the double a few weeks later beating 
Western Sydney Wanderers 3-1 in Adelaideto claim their first championship in 
the A-League’s 11-year history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/01/adelaide-united-crowned-a-league-champions-after-grand-final-win-over-western-sydney>
.

During the regular season of the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>, 
perennial battlers the Western Bulldogs were playing the kind of football that 
had their fans entertaining thoughts of a first premiership since 1954. But 
deep down they knew disappointment was coming, for whenever the Bulldogs get 
giddy thinking that Fortune is batting her eyes at them, they discover that all 
along she’s been flirting with the team over their shoulder.

'Did the Doggies win?': Bulldogs fan survives AFL grand final heart attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/did-the-doggies-win-bulldogs-fan-survives-afl-grand-final-heart-attack>
Sure enough, after losing club stalwart and skipper, Bob Murphy, for the 
season in round three, the Bulldogs experienced, in a round 18 loss to St 
Kilda, what coach Luke Beveridge called a “devastating night”. Jack Redpath’s 
ruptured anterior cruciate ligament was bad enough, but when young gun Mitch 
Wallis broke his leg the Bulldogs – not to mention Wallis – were shocked. Tears 
flowed on the sidelines, not just for Wallis, you suspect, but for the 
realisation that, yes, the perennial disappointment of being a Bulldog would 
endure for another year.

A top-four chance for most of the season, the Bulldogs finished seventh and 
headed into the finals knowing no team had carried off the premiership trophy 
from such a position. But then the young Dogs won in Perth against the West 
Coast Eagles. Then they upset reigning premiers Hawthorn, before winning a 
classic preliminary final against the year’s other Cinderella team, the Giants 
of Greater Western Sydney. That left the Sydney Swans, who put up a brave fight 
in the grand final,before they too were overcome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/western-bulldogs-beat-sydney-to-claim-first-afl-premiership-since-1954>
 by the irresistible run and bump and spunk of the team of the mighty west. And 
then there was Beveridge on the daispresenting his medal to Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/luke-beveridges-kindness-to-bob-murphy-a-moment-for-footy-to-be-proud>
, crying again, but for a very different reason. Two months on it must still 
feel like a dream.

Fans of the Cronulla Sharks must feel the same way. A day after the Dogs’ 
drought-breaker, the Sharks – who had never won a premiership in their 
49-year-history – faced the Melbourne Storm in theNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> grand final. For a while it seemed they 
too would live up to their reputations as perennial can-kickers; for so long 
pacesetters during the season the Sharks won just one of six games heading into 
the finals. They settled, however, sneaking past the Canberra Raiders and then 
beating, the reigning premiers, the North Queensland Cowboys, in some style in 
the preliminary final.

In the grand final, however, the dream of a first title looked to be slipping 
away when they were down 12-8 with just 11 minutes to go. But there was still 
time for heroics, and hulking prop Andrew Fifita obliged, carrying five Storm 
players over the line togive the Sharks, and the Shire, their win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/cronulla-sharks-beat-melbourne-to-break-50-year-nrl-premiership-drought>
.
 