
The government is set to look at how to increase pensions saving for the 
self-employed and those with multiple jobs, as part of a review of its flagship 
auto-enrolment scheme.

Employees are now enrolled into pensions with their employer once they earn 
more than £10,000 a year, and unless they opt out they benefit from additional 
contributions to their pension.

Self-employed face retirement poverty without pension reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/self-employed-face-retirement-poverty-without-pension-reform>
Almost seven million people have been enrolled into pensions since the scheme 
began to be phased in in October 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/oct/01/auto-enrolment-pensions-all-you-need-to-know>
, and by 2018 the government expects 10 million people to be newly saving or 
saving more than previously.

However, the self-employed and those with multiple jobs each paying below the 
£10,000 threshold do not currently get enrolled.Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> firm Aviva has estimated that as 
many as 10 million workers – employed and self-employed – are missing out on 
automatic enrolment because of the current rules.

Experts have warned that for the growing number of people working for 
themselves in low-paid jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/self-employed-face-retirement-poverty-without-pension-reform>
 this could mean poverty in retirement.

Confirming a review of the auto-enrolment system, the pensions minister, 
Richard Harrington, said in a statement: “The main focus of the review will be 
to ensure that automatic enrolment continues to meet the needs of individual 
savers. In doing this we will look at the existing coverage of the policy and 
consider the needs of those not currently benefiting from automatic enrolment, 
for example employees with multiple jobs who do not meet the criteria for 
automatic enrolment in any of their jobs.”

He added: “I would also like to use the review to consider how the growing 
group of self-employed people can be helped to save for their retirement.”

The government said information from stakeholders across the industry would be 
gathered in the early part of 2017, and a report setting out recommendations 
published towards the end of the year.

Currently, employees who remain in a scheme are obliged to pay in 0.8% of 
their earnings, while their employer adds 1% and the government adds 0.2% 
through tax relief. These levels will rise in two stages, until from April 2019 
onwards employees will pay in 4%, employers 3% and tax relief will add a 
further 1%.

Harrington said the government would gather evidence on whether current 
contribution rates were high enough, but did not expect to make policy 
decisions on that during the year.


Ex-pensions minister is still worrying about pensions. We should too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/07/ex-pensions-minister-still-worrying-about-pensions-we-should-too>
He also confirmed that the trigger for auto-enrolment would stay at £10,000 
from April 2017.

But Jackie Leiper, retirement planning expert at Scottish Widows, said that 
threshold meant many low-paid workers were locked out. She said research by the 
firm had found that twice as many women as men have two jobs but do not qualify 
for auto-enrolment.

“We believe automatic enrolment should be available to as many people as 
possible, and call on the government to reduce the threshold to the starting 
point of qualifying earnings – the band of earnings which are used to calculate 
automatic enrolment contributions – which is currently £5,824,” she said.

Leiper welcomed the focus on self-employed workers. “As the number of 
self-employed continues to grow significantly year-on-year, this is becoming a 
serious problem that must not be ignored,” she said. “We believe there should 
be more incentives for the self-employed to save, for example by making pension 
contributions deductible when calculating national insurance liability.”

Steve Webb, a former pensions minister and now director of policy at Royal 
London, said the plans for the review of automatic enrolment “deserve two 
cheers”.

“It is very welcome that the pensions crisis among the self-employed is to be 
considered, with new figures published today showing just one in seven 
self-employed people is saving in a pension. It is also good news that the 
review will look at other groups who are missing out,” he said.

“But the elephant in the room is the small amounts of money that are going in 
to these pension arrangements. Even by 2019 the minimum contribution rate will 
be just 8%, far below the required level for a decent retirement for most 
workers.”
 