
Philip Hammond’s first autumn statement has delivered winners and losers. But 
who are they?

GOOD NEWS FOR …

Builders


The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) called Hammond’s spending on 
infrastructure “modest”. But anextra £2.3bn infrastructure fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-social-housing>
 for a promised 100,000 new homes is good news if you know how to build a wall 
or lay sewage piping, or employ lots of people who do.

See also the promises of funding for 40,000 extra “affordable” homes, a new 
road linking Oxford and Cambridge and more broadband fibre installation in 
homes and businesses.

Jane Austen fans

A niche demographic, perhaps, but every vote counts. The most conspicuous 
rabbit Hammond pulled from his hat was £7.6m to“save” Wentworth Woodhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/23/jane-austen-inspiration-receives-76m-funding-in-autumn-statement-wentworth-woodhouse>
, described by the chancellor as “one of the UK’s most important historic 
houses”.

Tax avoidance: Philip Hammond pledges to retrieve £2bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/tax-avoidance-philip-hammond-pledges-to-retrieve-2bn>
The house, Hammond said, was the inspiration for Pride and Prejudice’s 
Pemberley, although it is not the only stately home to make such a claim. 
People “just about managing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/what-philip-hammond-gave-jams-autumn-statement>
” on low incomes are certain to be delighted.

Civil servants 

Hammond is setting aside £412m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammond-brexit-growth-deficit-housing-jams-universal-credit-minimum-wage-live?page=with:block-5835a424e4b0cc60d34762f9#block-5835a424e4b0cc60d34762f9>
 to help Whitehall wonks “strengthen trade policy capacity” and “support the 
renegotiation of the UK’s relationship” with the EU in the run-up to Brexit.

This is surely unrelated to a memo leaked last week that suggested the civil 
service was struggling to cope with the enormous task of leaving the EU, or to
the suggestion 
<https://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/interview/gus-odonnell-interview-be-under-no-illusions-%E2%80%93-brexit-enormous-challenge-civil>
 by a number offormer senior mandarins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/civil-service-unable-to-cope-with-brexit-bob-kerslake>
 that the service is unprepared for the task.

Drivers

To cheers, Hammond announced he would “stand on the side of the millions of 
hardworking people” by cancelling the rise in fuel duty. The fact that this is 
the seventh year in a row in which the government has done so may lessen the 
surprise somewhat, but the chancellor boasted this would save the average 
driver £130 a year.

Motorists may also be cheered by the £220m to help solve traffic “pinch 
points” on strategic roads and a commitment to resurface 80% of the strategic 
road network.

Small businesses give Hammond's autumn statement 6 out of 10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/nov/23/small-businesses-hammonds-autumn-statement-6-out-of-10>
BAD NEWS FOR …

Letting agents


It couldn’t happen to a more popular bunch. Shares in some of Britain’s 
biggest estate agenciesplummeted in response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/estate-agency-shares-letting-fees-foxtons-autumn-statement>
 to the chancellor’s move to ban “as soon as possible” the large fees charged 
by agents when letting properties to new tenants.

The move was welcomed by campaign groups including Shelter, but others warned 
that agents and landlords could pass on the expenses in the form of higher 
rents – an argument advanced, notably, by the housing minister Gavin Barwell in 
September.
Gavin Barwell MP (@GavinBarwellMP) 
@insidehousing <https://twitter.com/insidehousing> Bad idea - landlords would 
pass cost to tenants via rent. We're looking at other ways to cut upfront costs 
& raise standards
 <https://twitter.com/GavinBarwellMP/status/777852917013512192> September 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/GavinBarwellMP/status/777852917013512192> 
Gym bunnies

If your gym membership is through your job, that is. To “promote fairness”, 
the government is ending the tax and national insurance breaks available for a 
range of workplace benefits, including gym memberships, phone contracts, 
computers and private medical insurance contributions.

Pension arrangements, childcare vouchers and the cycle-to-work scheme are 
protected, but perks for company cars (except low-emissions vehicles), school 
fees and accommodation will be excluded from 2021. Get on that treadmill while 
you can.

Austerity, Brexit and 'Jams': readers react to the autumn statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/austerity-brexit-and-jams-readers-react-to-the-autumn-statement>
Pensioners

What seemed like a promise was really more of a threat. Pensioners have 
benefited since 2010 from the so-called “triple-lock”, a guarantee that the 
state pension will go up every year by either inflation, the average rise in 
earnings or 2.5%, whichever is the highest. This is great if you’re older, but 
not if you’re a 20-something on a low wage who feels the baby boomers are still 
hogging all the good stuff.

Hammond vowed the government would “meet our pledge” to protect pensions until 
2020; after that, however, it will need to look at “the challenges of rising 
longevity and fiscal sustainability”. Which sounds awfully like a warning.

Whiplash

Everyone’s favourite soft-tissue neck injury has been quite the thing over the 
past decade, during which time claims to car insurers havesoared by 50% 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-38002662>, costing them about £1bn a year 
and motorists around £40 each in increased premiums.

This, the government says, is “unacceptably high”. What’s more, it doesn’t – 
shock! – believe all the claims are genuine. It’s looking at scrapping or 
capping the right to compensation. Insurers have promised to pass on the 
savings, according to the government. No, honestly, they really will.
 