
TIMENOPENNY (TIMENOGUY)

1 N. Connaughton (Firhouse, Dublin): Privates exposed if shielded by very 
small fig leaf (men open in tiny).

2 B. Jones (Streatham, London): Lovers, naked, inhibited by diminutive thingy! 
(men open in tiny).

3 V. Dixon (Rathmines, Dublin): Male members exposed? They’re covered by 
diminutive fig leaf! (men open in tiny).

VHC

D. K. Arnott: Hands-free is cracking little gadget (men-open in tiny).

D. & N. Aspland: A makeshift leader in Trump I’m expecting initially to have 
no power overseas in New Year (T + I’m + e + no p en (Fr. etc)+ n, y).

M. Barley: No term of exactitude, it – sign of memory misfiring a bit? (anag. 
incl. e, m + penny, & lit.).

R. C. Bell: Widget in can of beer? The change Australia rejected (menop(Aus)e 
in tinny).

T. C. Borland: Element of rigging in money spent on polling battle (anag. less 
s; poll = remove top of).

C. J. Brougham: Partners with patent plugging minute gismo (men open in tiny).

R. J. Heald: Before public, such as David should wear small fig leaf (men open 
in tiny).

E. C. Lance: Corrupt MEP, one engaged in tawdry artifice (anag. in tinny).

M. A. Macdonald-Cooper: Line that’s not rounded and resonant introducing 
version of vacuous narrative poem (anag. incl. n, e in tinny; line = rope).

D. F. Manley: Tiddly around ships unrestricted? Sailors must get that tight! (
men open in tiny; tiddly = alcoholic drink).

S. J. O’Boyle: Doodah band taking money? No, taking the pee! (m in tie + no 
penny; ref. 1970’s Bonzo Dog Doodah Band).

Dr T. G. Powell: A fig leaf or well-placed pinny, one item wanting a bit of 
imagination (anag. less i).

Dr S. J. Shaw: A salt may be resolved to stop many a neat line getting tangled 
with a —— (comp. anag. & lit.).

N. G. Shippobotham: Ropey item spread between two points, with a touch of 
‘Yo-heave-ho!’ (anag. + N open N + y, & lit.).

P. A. Stephenson: An expedient Trump’s first. One with money given a swing to 
secure Pennsylvania (T + I + Penn. in anag.).

P. L. Stone: Thingamy? One recalled in empty name tossed around (one (rev.) in 
anag. incl. n).

R. C. Teuton: Trump’s dropping behind before nominee’s running with Pence on 
board ends in Republican victory – this deflects snarls of ‘rigging’ (T(rump) + 
p in anag. + n, y).

J. R. Tozer: Name conspicuous in vile enmity, I should stop snarling (n open 
in anag.).

Mrs A. M. Walden: Locum collected pin money with bits of temporary night-time 
employment (anag. incl. t, n, e).

A. J. Wardrop: What’s-his-name, obscure English MP, nonentity abandoning 
Tories’ leader (anag. incl. E, less T; ref. resignation of Stephen Phillips MP).

HC

T. Anderson, D. Appleton, M. Barnes, J. M. Brown, Dr J. Burscough, P. Cargill, 
D. Carter, Ms U. Carter, Mrs L. Davis, C. M. Edmunds, J. Fairclough, Dr I. S. 
Fletcher, D. V. Harry, L. M. Inman, J. C. Leyland, M. Lloyd-Jones, B. Lovering, 
P. W. Marlow, C. G. Millin, T. J. Moorey, J. Parke, M. L. Perkins, Ms L. 
Roberts, G. C. Rosser, P. Taylor, A. Whittaker, G. H. Willett, K. & J. Wolff.

Comments

122 entries, and several mistakes. It’s clear that I badly misjudged the 
puzzle’s level of difficulty; many of you commented on how tough they found it, 
though plenty said how much they’d enjoyed the challenge. To my surprise, 
spotting the theme proved elusive for many (despite the title, which I’d 
assumed would be a dead give-away) and for some the penny never dropped at all: 
some entries had TIMENOJENNY and there was even one TIMENOKENNY. I was quite 
pleased at having managed to work so many thematic entries into the 13 x 13 
grid, though I can see that identifying some of the boys’ names whose omission 
left only one or two of the letters of the original defined answers must have 
been tricky. EHEBEE for EPAULE, with two rather crucial unchecked letters, 
defeated quite a few. I know Hebe isn’t in the Names appendix inChambers, but 
she does have her own entry in the body of the dictionary. Both OLEO/OMARIE and 
VIANDS/VBESSDS also claimed a few scalps. NICKEL, with its normal clue, was an 
unintentional red herring. And though no one actually mentioned (or noticed?) 
it, it gave me special pleasure to include the names of both my sons, TOM and 
NED. Favourite clue was ‘Swans turning muter beside one on board ship’ for 
TRUMPETERS/TRUMESMES.

Have I used this idea before? I honestly can’t remember, though I do seem to 
recall a Ximenes competition puzzle from long ago in which alcoholic drinks 
were to be replaced by non-alcoholic ones (or possibly vice versa). Can anyone 
give chapter and verse? I still think it’s quite a nice idea, exploitable in 
different ways, but perhaps the solver needs more help than I gave this time. I 
could for instance have given the lengths of thematic answersbefore treatment, 
but this of course would in many cases have revealed which clues were thematic, 
which I didn’t really want to do. The very low entry seems to indicate that I 
was wrong.

All that having been said, you still came up with some excellent clues. I hope 
the three prizewinners don’t offend any of you or lead you to suppose that the 
judge has a one-track mind, but few others went for this approach and it did 
tickle my sense of humour.

Advance warning that the Christmas competition puzzle will appear on 18 
December, closing date 31 December. There will be no issue ofThe Observer on 
Christmas Day.
 