
It has become a convention for awards commentators to revert instantly to 
snub-complaint mode, but the almost complete no-show for Andrea Arnold’s
American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold>
 on this year’s Bafta nomination list is a disappointment.

Bafta nominations 2017: La La Land dances on but Arrival and Nocturnal Animals 
hot on its heels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/10/bafta-nominations-2017-la-la-land-dances-on-but-arrival-and-nocturnal-animals-hot-on-heels>
Apart from anything else, Arnold has the zeitgeist bragging rights. In May 
last year, before the US president-elect became the single global topic of 
appalled conversation, American Honey created a character who explicitly 
modelled himself on Donald Trump: Shia LaBeouf’s dangerous magazine salesman. 
American Honey deserved more than one nomination for outstanding British film. 
I am sad that Martin Scorsese’s powerful and serious filmSilence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
 was overlooked and that Jim Jarmusch’s excellentPaterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/paterson-review-adam-driver-jim-jarmusch>
 has vanished from the awards radar – though not that Clint Eastwood’s stodgy 
and mediocreSully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/sully-review-pious-hagiopic-that-even-tom-hanks-cant-save>
 was ignored. I would have loved to see Adam Driver up on the best actor 
shortlist, or indeed Mark Rylance for his wonderful turn inThe BFG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/21/the-bfg-review-mark-rylance-towers-over-roald-dahls-classic-tale>
. They deserved it more, frankly, than Viggo Mortensen for the tiringly 
overratedCaptain Fantastic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/captain-fantastic-review-viggo-mortensen>
.

Well, complaints aside, 11 nominations is another sparkling result for Damien 
Chazelle’s delightful musical romanceLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
, which now looks set to duplicate the success enjoyed five years ago by a 
comparable showbusiness movie, Michel Hazanavicius’sThe Artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/22/the-artist-film-review>. 
Telegraph critic Charles Spencer famously called Nicole Kidman’s performance in 
David Hare’s stage play The Blue Room “pure theatrical Viagra”. I would say 
Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone’s performances in La La Land are pure cinematic 
Prozac: a boost of happiness, even when the film is sad, as it often is.

Arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/arrival-review-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-science-fiction>
 takes nine nominations, which shows that this visually ravishing sci-fi drama 
about Amy Adams’ linguistic professor trying to understand aliens might well 
make much more of an impression on Bafta voters than on the electors of the 
Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Arrival is, perhaps above all, a film 
about idealism, about international cooperation, about the US joining forces 
with foreign governments – in particular, China – to save the world. It is, 
moreover, a film that says aliens are not necessarily bad. When Bafta voters 
sit down to watch or rewatch this film in the coming weeks, there could be a 
progressive groundswell to boost Arrival.

Nocturnal Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/02/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-returns-with-wildly-gripping-revenge-tale>
 has also done well with nine nominations, and that has to be a good thing, 
though it is surprising that, as with the Globes, it is Aaron Taylor-Johnson 
and not Michael Shannon who has made it on to the best supporting actor list. I 
am thrilled to see Tom Ford’s brilliant and sophisticated suspense thriller 
surge up the rails like this. It is disturbing, transgressive film-making: the 
nearest thing to Hitchcockian I have seen from a new studio film in some time.

Manchester By the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
 by the increasingly well respected Kenneth Lonergan has done well with six 
nominations; his weighty and sombre grief drama has commanded assent. Like his 
earlier filmMargaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/01/margaret-film-review>, and indeed 
his debutYou Can Count on Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/mar/23/culture.reviews>, it has a kind 
of unflinching seriousness that is making Lonergan the Arthur Miller or the 
Eugene O’Neill of modern American cinema.

Garth Davis’s Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/lion-review-dev-patel-and-nicole-kidman-hunt-oscars-in-moving-adoption-drama>
 – coming in with five nominations – is a quietly excellent film, an emotional 
drama and a weepie, yes, but powerfully and dynamically shot. It tells the 
extraordinary true story of an Indian boy who took overnight shelter in a 
stationary train that then took him across the country as he slept and dumped 
him in a city where he could not explain to anyone where he lived. He was 
subsequently adopted by a Tasmanian couple, and finally as an adult used Google 
maps to find his long-lost mother. It’s a stranger-than-fiction melodrama and 
rather gripping. Perhaps it won’t dominate this awards season, the way Slumdog 
Millionaire once did, but it’s a punchy, heartfelt film.

Why British Baftas frontrunner I, Daniel Blake may betray its own cause | 
David Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2017/jan/10/why-baftas-frontrunner-ken-loach-i-daniel-blake-may-betray-its-own-cause>
Ken Loach’s I, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
 is holding its own on this list with five Bafta nominations, and it would be 
great to see this remarkable man get the best director prize. He has shown his 
extraordinary gift for making cinema matter in the real world: his film has 
been debated in Parliament and around the UK. For others, social realism has 
become close to being an aesthetic mannerism: beautiful images of grim lives. 
But Loach has always insisted that what matters isn’t pretty pictures or even 
beautifully tailored imaginary existences but real life itself – and making a 
change. Cinema has to lead us back to the streets outside.

In some ways, and as so often in the past, the most interesting and exciting 
part of the Bafta nomination list is the outstanding British debut category. 
These are the zombie nightmareThe Girl With All the Gifts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/the-girl-with-all-the-gifts-review-gemma-arterton-glenn-close>
, the excellent Mark Duggan documentaryThe Hard Stop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/the-hard-stop-review-documentary-mark-duggan-london-riots>
, the ruminative and visionaryNotes on Blindness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/notes-blindness-review-film-audio-diaries-theologian-john-hull-blind>
, the emotional dramaThe Pass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-pass-review-ambitious-and-insightful-drama-about-gay-footballers>
 and the superb Iran-set supernatural chillerUnder the Shadow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/under-the-shadow-review-supremely-scary-horror-from-iran>
.

Of these, I have been agnostic about The Girl With All the Gifts, but that is 
still a nomination list to be proud of: a very impressive selection of work 
from young British film-makers, perhaps especially George Amponsah’s 
documentary The Hard Stop, which casts a real light on the alienation and 
division behind the 2011 riots.

So: a lively list, certainly – and a more open field than we thought.
 