
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is keeping a close 
watch on consumer spending amid signs households are dipping into their savings 
and amassing debts to keep spending in the face of rising inflation.

Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney>, the Bank 
governor, said consumer spending had held up since last summer’s vote to leave 
the EU but he reiterated a warning that living costs were likely to rise on the 
back of a weak pound and squeeze households’ real incomes.

In a speech setting out the tradeoff the Bank faces between keeping inflation 
in check and supporting growth and jobs, Carney noted signs that consumers 
continued to power the UK economy.

UK credit binge approaching levels not seen since 2008 crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>
“At present, households appear to be entirely looking through Brexit-related 
uncertainties. The saving rate has fallen towards its pre-crisis lows, and 
consumer borrowing has accelerated notably,” Carney said in a speech to the 
London School ofEconomics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> on 
Monday.

But he reiterated the Bank’s fears that this important driver of growth was 
under threat this year as the pound’s fall since the EU referendum pushes up 
the cost of imports and that is passed onto consumers as higher prices.

Carney pointed to lessons from recent history that such growth tended to be 
both “slower and less durable”.

“This is because consumption growth eventually outpaces earnings growth, 
increasing debt and making demand more sensitive to changes in employment and 
income,” he said.

Speaking a day before official figures are expected to show that inflation 
reached a two-year high in December, Carney noted the Bank’s forecast made in 
November for higher inflation to weigh on people’s real incomes, slowing 
consumption growth. He said that how household spending evolves would be an 
important consideration for policymakers at the Bank over the next year as they 
weigh up how to set interest rates.

His comments about household borrowing come after the latest figures from the 
Bank showed that unsecured consumer credit, which includes credit cards, car 
loans and second mortgages, grew at its fastest rate in more than 11 years.

Debt charities said the signs of a credit boom that is close to levels not 
seen since the 2008 financial crash shouldset alarm bells ringing in Theresa 
May’s government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2015/jan/04/credit-boom-ticking-timebomb-uk-plc>
.

Carney did not elaborate on the rise in household borrowing but said the 
monetary policy committee would continue to monitor the situation.

In his speech, he also defended again the Bank’s decision to cut interest 
rates to a record low of 0.25% in August to shore up confidence and limit job 
losses in the wake of the EU referendum in June. The Bank chose to risk 
allowing inflation to overshoot its 2% target in order to limit the effects to 
unemployment, he said. Not acting then would have cost an extra quarter of a 
million jobs, Carney said.

“Fully offsetting the persistent effects of sterling’s depreciation on 
inflation would have required exerting further downward pressure on domestic 
costs. And that would have meant even more lost output and a total disregard 
for higher unemployment,” he said.

Carney did not give a hint of whether interest rates were headed up or down 
next. Instead he repeated his recent mantra: “Monetary policy can respond, in 
either direction, to changes to the economic outlook as they unfold to ensure a 
sustainable return of inflation to the 2% target.”

Before May’s key speech on the Brexit process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
 on Tuesday, Carney sought to strike an upbeat tone concerning the UK’s 
longer-term prospects outside the EU. “The flexibility and dynamism of this 
economy will help it adjust as its relationship with the EU becomes clearer and 
new opportunities with the rest of the world open up,” he said.
 