
The BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/laura-kuenssberg>, inaccurately reported 
Jeremy Corbyn’s views about shoot-to-kill policies in the aftermath of the 
terror attacks in Paris, according to the BBC Trust.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> regulator concluded that a 
Kuenssberg report for the News at Six in November 2015 breached the 
broadcaster’s impartiality and accuracy guidelines, misrepresenting his view on 
the appropriate use of force against terrorist attackers.

The item included a clip of the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader stating: “I am not happy 
with a shoot-to-kill policy in general. I think that is quite dangerous and I 
think can often be counterproductive.”


Kuenssberg had presented that as Corbyn’s response to a question put to him on 
whether he would be “happy for British officers to pull the trigger in the 
event of a Paris-style attack”, but the Trust concluded that Corbyn had been 
speaking in a different context.

The Labour leader had been responding to a question asking whether he would be 
happy to order police or military “to shoot to kill” on Britain’s streets – and 
not specifically regarding a Paris-style attack in the UK.

In response to an earlier question specifically about the use of shoot-to-kill 
in the event of a terrorist attack in London, which was not used in the 
programme, Corbyn had replied: “Of course you’d bring people on to the streets 
to prevent and ensure there is safety within our society, much better that’s 
done by the police than security services, much better we have strong and 
effective community policing, neighbourhood policing and a cohesive society 
that brings people together.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYiI0OzSozTM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYiI0OzSozTM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYiI0OzSozTM&media=>
 Laura Kuenssberg’s interview with Jeremy Corbyn before it was edited for the 
News at Six 
The complainant, who is not named, but is neither Corbyn nor “anyone on his 
behalf”, said that the news report misrepresented the Labour leader’s views on 
the use of lethal force and that it had wrongly suggested he was against the 
additional security measures which the item had said the government was 
proposing.

The Trust found that the inaccuracy was “compounded” when Kuenssberg went on 
to state that Corbyn’s message “couldn’t be more different” to that of the 
prime minister, who was about to publish anti-terrorism proposals.

The Trust agreed with the complainant, pointing out accuracy in any one 
programme rather than the entire output was particularly important when dealing 
“with a critical question at a time of extreme national concern”.

“According to this high standard, the report had not been duly accurate in how 
it framed the extract it used from Mr Corbyn’s interview,” it said.

In its finding the Trust also said that there was no evidence of bias or of 
intent on the part of the senior BBC journalist, however.

James Harding, the director of BBC news, rejected the Trust’s ruling and 
called Kuenssberg “an outstanding journalist and political editor with the 
utmost integrity and professionalism”.

“While we respect the Trust and the people who work there, we disagree with 
this finding,” he said. “BBC News reported on the leader of the opposition in 
the same way it would any other politician.

“It is striking that the Trust itself said there was ‘no evidence of bias’. 
Indeed, it also said the news report was ‘compiled in good faith’.

“The process is now concluded and BBC News formally notes the Trust’s finding.”

 The BBC had published the entire transcript of the interview earlier the same 
day, which, it had argued, made the context clear.

The BBC said the complaint had been rejected on four separate occasions before 
the Trust’s final ruling.

Kuenssberg, named journalist of the year 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/bbcs-laura-kuenssberg-named-journalist-of-the-year-full-list-of-2016-british-journalism-awards-winners/>
 by the Press Gazette in November, has often receivedhostility  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/jeremy-corbyn-supporters-boo-bbcs-laura-kuenssberg>
from Corbyn supporters, who have also clashed with other members of the 
mainstream media some regard asunsympathetic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/labour-booing-jeremy-corbyn-strategy>
.

This could be the last significant ruling made by the Trust’s editorial 
standards committee. From the beginning of April, its responsibilities to judge 
impartiality, accuracy and bias will transfer to the media regulator Ofcom.

The only sanction from rulings made by the Trust is that of publication. 
 