
5 February 1827
BEETHOVEN: We regret to learn, that the greatest musical genius of the present 
age, Ludowig Von Beethoven [sic], is, by this time, probably no more. He has 
just completed his 56th year. It appears that a Mr. Stumpff, of Vienna, from a 
noble desire to testify the high esteem he entertains for him, procured, at a 
very great expense, the entire Works of Handel, in forty volumes folio, 
Arnold’s excellent edition, handsomely bound, and sent them as a present to 
Beethoven. They were delivered to him free of any expense; but Beethoven at the 
time was laid up with dropsy in the abdomen, and though the operation of 
tapping had been performed, his physicians have pronounced him to be in extreme 
danger; he pointed his finger to Handel’s Works, and said, with feeling and 
emphasis – “That is the true thing.” He signed his name very legibly to the 
document, acknowledging the receipt of Handel’s Works.

23 April 1827
We find, in Russell’s Tour in Germany 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=X98GAAAAQAAJ&pg=PR3&lpg=PR3&dq=John+Russell's+two-volume+Tour+in+Germany&source=bl&ots=I5lzdEo61a&sig=oGKhherJ2UB5puxvLB5-1AZeVmc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiXwJfpuuPMAhWBC8AKHU_rAiYQ6AEIHTAA#v=onepage&q=John%20Russell's%20two-volume%20Tour%20in%20Germany&f=false>
, the following account of the celebrated musical composer, Beethoven, whose 
recent death, in circumstances of poverty and distress, alleviated only by 
English charity, has attracted so much notice. The author seems to have met 
with him in 1822:

“Beethoven is the most celebrated of the living composers in Vienna, and, in 
certain departments, the foremost of his day. His powers or harmony are 
prodigious. Though not an old man, he is lost to society, in consequence of his 
extreme deafness, which has rendered him almost unsocial. The neglect of his 
person which he exhibits gives him a somewhat wild appearance. His features are 
strong and prominent; his eye is full of rude energy; his hair, which neither 
comb nor scissor seem to have visited for years, overshadows his broad brow in 
a quantity and confusion to which only the snakes round a Gorgon’s head offer a 
parallel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F873126c10298c57ba4a5de25a94a1bef77d05359%2F0_281_3592_2155%2F3592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20classical%20archive%2C%201827%3A%20On%20Beethoven%20-%20'he%20must%20be%20humoured%20like%20a%20wayward%20child'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20classical%20archive%2C%201827%3A%20On%20Beethoven%20-%20%27he%20must%20be%20humoured%20like%20a%20wayward%20child%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F873126c10298c57ba4a5de25a94a1bef77d05359%2F0_281_3592_2155%2F3592.jpg>
 Ludwig van Beethoven with the Rasowmowsky Quartet, drawn by the artist 
Borckmann. Photograph: Rischgitz/Getty Images 
His general behaviour does not ill accord with the unpromising exterior. 
Except when he is among his chosen friends, kindliness or affability are not 
his characteristics. The total loss of hearing has deprived him of all the 
pleasure which society can give, and perhaps soured his temper. He used to 
frequent a particular cellar where he spent the evening in a corner, beyond the 
reach of all the chattering and disputation of a public room, drinking wine and 
beer, eating cheese and red herrings, and studying the newspapers.

One evening a person took a seat near him, whose countenance did not please. 
He looked hard at the stranger, and spat on the floor as if he had seen a toad; 
then glanced at the newspaper, then again at the intruder, and spat again, his 
hair bristling gradually into more shaggy ferocity, till he closed the 
alternation of spitting and staring, by fairly exclaiming, ‘What a scoundrelly 
phiz!’ and rushing out of the room. Even among his oldest friends, he must be 
humoured like a wayward child.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911c4866a0589f5e26f3ebffe8d77379907f9654%2F0_0_1496_1988%2F1496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20classical%20archive%2C%201827%3A%20On%20Beethoven%20-%20'he%20must%20be%20humoured%20like%20a%20wayward%20child'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20classical%20archive%2C%201827%3A%20On%20Beethoven%20-%20%27he%20must%20be%20humoured%20like%20a%20wayward%20child%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911c4866a0589f5e26f3ebffe8d77379907f9654%2F0_0_1496_1988%2F1496.jpg>
 Undated sketch of Ludwig Van Beethoven. Photograph: Associated Press 
At the piano, he is evidently unconscious that there is anything in existence 
but himself and his instrument

He has always a small paper book with him, and what conversation takes place 
is carried on in writing. In this, too, although it is not lined, he instantly 
jots down any musical idea which strikes him. These notes would be utterly 
unintelligible, even to another musician, for they have no comparative value; 
he alone has in his own mind the thread by which he brings out of this 
labyrinth of spots and circles the richest and most astounding harmonies. The 
moment he is seated at the piano, he is evidently unconscious that there is 
anything in existence but himself and his instrument; and considering how very 
deaf he is, it seems impossible he should hear all he plays. Accordingly, when 
playing verypiano, he often does not bring out a single note. He hears it 
himself in the ‘mind’s ear.’ While his eye, and the almost imperceptible motion 
of his fingers, show that he is following out the strain in his own soul 
through all its dying gradations, the instrument is actually as dumb as the 
musician is deaf.

I have heard him play, but to bring him so far required some management, so 
great is his horror of being any thing like exhibited. Had he been plainly 
asked to do the company that favour, he would have flatly refused; he had to be 
cheated into it. Every person left the room, except Beethoven and the master of 
the house, one of his most intimate acquaintances. These two carried on a 
conversation in the paper book, about bank stock. The gentleman, as if by 
chance, struck the keys of the open piano, beside which they were sitting, 
gradually began to run over one of Beethoven’s own compositions, made a 
thousand errors, and speedily blundered one passage so thoroughly, that the 
composer condescended to stretch out his hand and put him right. It was enough; 
the hand was on the piano; his companion immediately left him, on some pretext, 
and joined the rest of the company, who, in the next room, from which they 
could see and hear everything, were patiently waiting the issue of this 
tiresome conjuration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f7561d6b3ba75b962bbdbeeca6f45a9b80b8838%2F0_0_2048_1681%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20classical%20archive%2C%201827%3A%20On%20Beethoven%20-%20'he%20must%20be%20humoured%20like%20a%20wayward%20child'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20classical%20archive%2C%201827%3A%20On%20Beethoven%20-%20%27he%20must%20be%20humoured%20like%20a%20wayward%20child%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f7561d6b3ba75b962bbdbeeca6f45a9b80b8838%2F0_0_2048_1681%2F2048.jpg>
 The lost autograph manuscript of one of Beethoven’s most revolutionary works, 
Grosse Fuge in B flat major in his version for piano four hands, Op.134. 
Photograph: SOTHEBYS/HO/EPA 
Beethoven, left alone, seated himself at the piano. At first he only struck 
now and then a few hurried and interrupted notes, as if afraid of being 
detected in a crime; but gradually be forgot every thing else, and ran on 
during half an hour, in a phantasy, in a style extremely varied, and marked, 
above all, by the most abrupt transitions. The amateurs were enraptured; to the 
uninitiated is was more interesting, to observe how the music of the man’s soul 
passed over his countenance. He seems to feel the bold, the commanding, and the 
impetuous, more than what is soothing or gentle. The muscles of the face swell, 
and its veins stand out; the wild eye rolls doubly wild; the mouth quivers, and 
Beethoven looks like a wizard, overpowered by the demons, whom he himself has 
called up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2755d66fa79af1f19aab06d83f87f5ec886002a%2F0_0_1331_829%2F1331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20classical%20archive%2C%201827%3A%20On%20Beethoven%20-%20'he%20must%20be%20humoured%20like%20a%20wayward%20child'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20classical%20archive%2C%201827%3A%20On%20Beethoven%20-%20%27he%20must%20be%20humoured%20like%20a%20wayward%20child%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ffrom-the-classical-archive-beethoven-life-and-death-observer-1827%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2755d66fa79af1f19aab06d83f87f5ec886002a%2F0_0_1331_829%2F1331.jpg>
 The Observer, 23 April 1827.  