
In his 2014 grand jury testimony over the shooting of 18-year-old Michael 
Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, police officer Darren Wilsondescribed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/11/25/us/darren-wilson-testimony-ferguson-shooting.html?_r=0>
 Brown less like a human being than a possessed animal. “He looked up at me and 
had the most intense aggressive face. The only way I can describe it, it looks 
like a demon, that’s how angry he looked.”

The image he conjured of Brown, even after he shot him, was of a man both 
physically superhuman and emotionally subhuman. “He was almost bulking up to 
run through the shots, like it was making him mad that I’m shooting him. And 
the face that he had was looking straight through me, like I wasn’t even there, 
I wasn’t even anything in his way.”

The black American male in the white American gaze 
<https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/09/01/walking-while-black-in-the-white-gaze/>
 has long been an object of fear: excessively sexual, insufficiently cerebral, 
physically imposing, instinctively criminal. It’s no mystery where these 
assumptions came from: if you enslave people, break up their families, 
humiliate, brutalize and denigrate them and spend far more on their 
incarceration than their education, then the mere prospect of them reaching 
their full human potential will strike fear in you.

Barack Obama's original sin: America's post-racial illusion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/barack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system>
Barack Obama hoped his presidency would shift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/03/obama-african-americans-paradox>
 the dial in this regard. When he was trying to persuade his skeptical wife 
about what could be achieved by becoming president, he said: “The day I take 
the oath of office the world will look at us differently. And millions of kids 
across this country will look at themselves differently. That alone is 
something.”

When it comes to black masculinity in particular, the world has certainly seen 
something new these past eight years. The most prominent black man in the world 
is a nurturing father anddutiful, faithful husband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/aug/26/michelleobama.democrats2008>, 
who is intelligent, measured and even-tempered. His successor is a
self-proclaimed sexual harasser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 given to impulsive flashes of anger, with five children from three different 
women.

If you want to know what white male privilege looks like, then take a look at 
the podium on inauguration day. No black man could be elected with Trump’s life 
story (what levels of personal propriety a black woman would have to attain to 
be taken seriously don’t bear thinking about).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fobama-legacy-black-masculinity-white-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febac4e8a9a3036a9568e7ba417fa0f76cc60685c%2F268_334_2732_1639%2F2732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Being%20a%20black%20man%20in%20white%20America%3A%20a%20burden%20even%20Obama%20couldn't%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fobama-legacy-black-masculinity-white-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Being%20a%20black%20man%20in%20white%20America%3A%20a%20burden%20even%20Obama%20couldn%27t%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fobama-legacy-black-masculinity-white-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febac4e8a9a3036a9568e7ba417fa0f76cc60685c%2F268_334_2732_1639%2F2732.jpg>
 Barack Obama at a meeting on building trust between communities and law 
enforcement in the wake of the Michael Brown shooting. Photograph: Chip 
Somodevilla/Getty Images 
Far from the pathologies routinely assumed to be inherent in the black male 
condition – rage, impetuousity, venality – Obama rarely displayedmuch in the 
way of fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/13/barack-obama-cool-to-cold>. 
Often negotiating with himself before he negotiated with others, he was serene 
to a fault, even when openly and brazenly disrespected by those facing him – 
from Israeli prime ministerBenjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/09/us/politics/obama-and-netanyahu-a-story-of-slights-and-crossed-signals.html>
 to his congressional opponents.

In fact, many wished he did a better job of giving voice to the frustration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/sep/26/obama-connect-people-pain>
 that Congress was failing to do the work of the country. “You get the sense 
that this president, while intellectually engaged, is not emotionally engaged 
with what the American people are going through,” Michael Fletcher, the 
Washington Post’s former economics correspondent, told me in 2011. “People want 
to feel there’s someone out there fighting their corner even if that person 
doesn’t win.” This would appear to be more consistent with his actual 
personality than any calculation about what a black male in public office could 
or couldn’t do.

Often negotiating with himself before he negotiated with others, he was serene 
to a fault

Paradoxically, pointed out Salim Muwakkil, a Chicago-based journalist and 
activist who has seen Obama develop politically long before he was nationally 
renowned, his style arguably conforms to another black male stereotype. “It’s 
like thepimp from Iceberg Slim 
<http://www.simonandschuster.com/books/Pimp/Iceberg-Slim/9781451617139>,” he 
told me. “The guy who was not perturbed by anything. Murders would happen in 
his vicinity and he’d carry on as if nothing happened. He brought that 
sensibility to the office in a way that others haven’t. It’s ironic especially 
now people are urging him to warm up, to leave that icy demeanor behind, to 
become that angry black man – that other stereotype. I don’t think he can 
escape these stereotype expectations.”

The irony goes deeper when one considers that, as president, Obama was 
responsible for far more murders of innocent peoplethrough drone strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/10/obama-gun-control-drones-killer>
 than Biggie or Tupac ever could have been during the east and west coast rap 
feuds.

Stereotypes are just that: stereotypes

But the fact that Americans have seen something new in the White House doesn’t 
mean that what they are seeing is actually new in terms of black masculinity, 
or that they necessarily see black men differently as a result. The stereotypes 
that Obama has been ostensibly defying were always just that: stereotypes.

It is true that black people are less likely to marry than whites and black 
men are less likely to live with their partners. But according to theNational 
Center for Health Statistics <https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr071.pdf>, 
when children are under five, black fathers are more likely to feed or eat 
meals with them, bathe, diaper or dress them, and read to them daily than 
fathers in any other racial group, whether they live with them or not. As their 
children get older, black fathers are more likely to take children to and from 
activities daily, talk to them about their day and help them with their 
homework. Black men are also disproportionately likely to be single parents 
than other racial groups.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fobama-legacy-black-masculinity-white-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7ab2ff3731a296f9ffa2dc419e9ba5ef85fbf2%2F0_117_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Being%20a%20black%20man%20in%20white%20America%3A%20a%20burden%20even%20Obama%20couldn't%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fobama-legacy-black-masculinity-white-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Being%20a%20black%20man%20in%20white%20America%3A%20a%20burden%20even%20Obama%20couldn%27t%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fobama-legacy-black-masculinity-white-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7ab2ff3731a296f9ffa2dc419e9ba5ef85fbf2%2F0_117_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Barack Obama and his daughters Malia (left) and Sasha watch first lady 
Michelle Obama deliver her speech at the Democratic national convention in 
2012. Photograph: Pete Souza/The White House 
As such, Obama was less of an example for how black men should live their 
lives – especially in relation to their kids – as an illustration of how many 
actually live their lives (albeit in less fortunate circumstances and with less 
cultural capital).

This is why it was so disappointing when Obama leaned on the stereotypes about 
the negligent black father during hisFather’s Day speech in 2008 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2008/06/text-of-obamas-fatherhood-speech-011094?o=0>
, when he was first running for the White House: “They have abandoned their 
responsibilities, acting like boys instead of men. And the foundations of our 
families are weaker because of it ... We need fathers to realize that 
responsibility does not end at conception,” he said specifically addressing the 
black community as though it, specifically, were remiss. “We need them to 
realize that what makes you a man is not the ability to have a child – it’s the 
courage to raise one.”

Obama was less of an example for how black men should live their lives ... as 
an illustration of how many actually live

Nothing one could argue with this, content-wise. But it’s a speech he’d never 
have delivered to a white church even though the facts suggest they need to 
hear it at least as much.

It is also true that black men are more likely to be in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/15/jail-reflects-collapse-black-communities-us>
 for drug offenses than any other racial group. But black people are no more 
likely to actually use drugs (as Obama, incidentally, did as a young man) than 
any other group; they are just more likely to be criminalized for it. This is 
why it was so heartening to see Obama sign a bill reducing the sentencing gap 
between convictions for powder cocaine and crack cocaine and his former 
attorney general pursuemore lenient 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/02/17/politics/attorney-general-eric-holder-drug-sentencing-prosecutions/>
 sentencing for non-violent drug offenders. This will have a major impact on 
the degree to which black men are able to fulfill their obligations to family, 
community and society like other men.

Whether white Americans see black men differently as a result of his 
presidency is more difficult to quantify. Given the success of Trump’s 
race-baiting campaign, it seems unlikely. Of all the thoughts running through 
Darren Wilson’s mind that fateful day when he unleashed his bullets on Michael 
Brown, it doesn’t seem it ever occurred to him that he might be shooting the 
future president of America.
 