
Joe Smith Jr stopped Bernard Hopkins 53 seconds into the eighth round of their 
WBC international light heavyweight title fight Saturday night. Smith used a
six-punch combination to send Hopkins through the ropes 
<https://twitter.com/HBOboxing/status/810356320196902912> and on to the floor, 
effectively ending the 51-year-old’s 28-year boxing career.

Smith successfully defended his title when Hopkins was unable to return to the 
ring after 20 seconds. Hopkins hit his head on the way down and twisted his 
right ankle — he cited the ankle as the reason he couldn’t finish. A WBC 
official said the injuries incurred forced a TKO.
HBOboxing (@HBOboxing) 
Watch: @beastsmithjr <https://twitter.com/beastsmithjr> knocks @THEREALBHOP 
<https://twitter.com/THEREALBHOP> out of the ring 53 seconds into round 8, 
ending the fight.#Final1 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Final1?src=hash> 
https://t.co/Pj2svLUlC9 <https://t.co/Pj2svLUlC9>
 <https://twitter.com/HBOboxing/status/810356320196902912> December 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HBOboxing/status/810356320196902912> 
“I knew he was a true champion, and if he didn’t get injured he’d be back 
here,” Smith said. “I came here to do my job. This is my coming out party, too. 
I had to finish him. It was either my career was going to end and his was going 
to end, but I needed mine to continue.”

Sport picture of the day: Joe Smith Jr knocks Bernard Hopkins out of the ring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/dec/18/sport-picture-of-the-day-joe-smith-jr-knocks-bernard-hopkins-out-of-the-ring>
Hopkins was reluctant to accept the outcome, initially claiming that he was 
shoved out of the ring. “I was throwing the right hand and a combination and 
then using the rope as an offensive as I’m known for, and making a 
mess,” Hopkins said. “He got frustrated, and I might have gotten glazed with a 
left hook and next thing I know he was throwing me out of the ring.

“The reason I said I’m upset they are giving Smith the TKO is because the 
momentum threw the ropes,” he added. “I didn’t dive through the ropes.”

Hopkins (56-8-2) was looking to wrap his career with one last showing of 
defensive-minded boxing in front of an enthusiastic, star-studded crowd at the 
Forum. Instead, he finished in the same manner he started, with a loss.

“This is my last fight, I promised it would be and you come to that point in 
life where it is final and I’m happy with my retirement,” Hopkins said. “I know 
the fans will know I went out as a soldier, fighting the toughest, baddest 
opponents. I’m not saying I agree, I’m not in denial — Joe was a tough, heavy 
hitting fighter.”

Wearing his old Executioner shorts as a throwback to his earlier fighting 
days, Hopkins looked his age early as Smith (23-1, 19 KOs) was the aggressor 
from the start. Hopkins regained some footing in the fifth and sixth rounds but 
Smith gained momentum and took it with him through the eighth, when he 
pummeled Hopkins in a corner and sent him through the ropes.

There’s no turning back for Anthony Joshua now he is in the big league | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/12/anthony-joshua-wladimir-klitschko>
“I had seen him fall, and I kept hitting him until I saw him go out, and I 
landed that left hook until he went out,” Smith said. “I knew he had time to go 
out, but I hit him with four or five clean shots and they were good shots on 
the button.”

In his prime, Hopkins won a record 20 consecutive middleweight title fights. 
He became the oldest-ever champion when he defended his light-heavyweight belt 
at 49. However, Hopkins hadn’t fought in more than two years, losing to Sergey 
Kovalev in November 2014, in his previous bout.

Oleksandr Usyk (11-0), a 2016 Olympic heavyweight gold medalist out of 
Ukraine, successfully defended his WBO cruiserweight title with a knockout of 
Thabiso Mchunu (17-3) with a knockout in the ninth round, his 10th. Local El 
Monte product Joseph Diaz (23-0), wearing Lakers colors in their former home, 
defended his NABF featherweight title, beating Horacio Garcia (30-2-1) of 
Mexico in the NABF featherweight title by unanimous decision.



 