
Bernard Hopkins should be remembered as the best pure middleweight since 
Marvin Hagler. Although The Executioner might not have beaten the “Marvelous” 
bald one, they would have had a hell of a fight, and there is a case to put 
Hopkins alongside him in the all‑time top 10 of the division. However, his 
legacy will be tarnished by the very quality that made him so formidable for so 
long: pride.

At the Forum in Inglewood, California, on Saturday night, in the eighth round 
of the 65th and last fight of his 28-year career, Hopkins, who will be 52 next 
month,was knocked through the ropes and out of his sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/bernard-hopkins-joe-smith-jr-wbc-light-heavyweight-boxing>
. He was left lying flat on his back on the floor, surrounded by concerned 
officials and TV operatives, as he stared up at a conqueror 24 years younger 
than him, one Joe Smith Jr. It was not the farewell he had anticipated.

Bernard Hopkins knocked out of ring in final fight of 28-year career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/bernard-hopkins-joe-smith-jr-wbc-light-heavyweight-boxing>
Hopkins had done reasonably well up to that point, slipping and sniping as of 
old. One official, Pat Russell, had him 67-66 up, which was charitable. Tim 
Cheatham had it the other way by a point, and Tom Taylor was closer, at 69-64 
for Smith. I gave Hopkins the third, fourth and sixth. But, as smart as he 
boxed, his feet stopped gliding. The blows “stayed on him”, as they say. It 
seemed his beard-fleck grew a little more grey.

Junior was no ordinary Joe, but nor was he that special. A 27-year-old 
construction worker from Long Island, he trades on his Irish roots and fought 
with a robust, unsubtle intensity that has elevated him into the upper reaches 
of what was once the glamour division of boxing. It was too much for Hopkins – 
too much to counter after a solid start, too much to absorb a cluster of solid 
head shots sent him tumbling to defeat and embarrassment, and too much to 
accept with anything approaching good grace.

In a sadly familiar ritual, Hopkins refused to believe he had been beaten 
fairly. He bitched, to use the argot of his Philadelphia streets, as he has 
done before in defeat, against Chad Dawson and Joe Calzaghe. This time, he 
said, he couldn’t carry on because he had injured his ankle, and thus could not 
beat the extended 20-count to get back in the ring, although he wanted to.

He was then afforded the unwarranted get-out by officials who declared the 
result “a TKO because of injury due to a legal blow”. Not for the first time, 
boxing got it wrong. It should have been an unequivocal count-out stoppage, as 
he failed to beat the 20 seconds allowed for being knocked out of the ring. 
Instead, he argued and prevaricated, eating up the clock as inept officials 
scratched their heads.

This is a precis of what Hopkins said, in contradiction of all visual 
evidence, to Max Kellerman after limping through the crowd to his dressing 
room: “I think I was throwing a right hand or a combination and using the rope 
as an offensive defence, like I’m known for. I made him miss and I believe I 
was frustrating him up to that round. Every now and then he got in an overhand 
right, which was his only big punch. He got frustrated when we got in a clinch.

“I might have got hit with a grazed right or a left hook and, going through 
the momentum, he shoved me out of the ring. I tried to grab [the ropes] on the 
way out and I went straight through. I believe I hit my head. I hit my head 
first and my ankle got hit when I hit the ground, a twist. The doctor says it’s 
swollen on the right side.”

Smith, respectful in victory against a one-time great fighter, had a better 
grip on reality: “I landed the left hook there and it finished the job. I hit 
him with four, five clean shots, they were good shots right on the button. I 
didn’t expect him to get up. But he’s a true champion and I knew if he didn’t 
get injured he would be back here in the ring. I had to do my job. This was my 
coming-out party, too.”

Watching back in the London studios of BoxNation, Steve Bunce – who had a 
memorable run-in with Hopkins when he came to London to promote the Calzaghe 
fight eight years ago – observed in his no-nonsense style: “You shouldn’t 
laugh, but it’s all over for Bernard Hopkins. It was kind of fitting that he 
went out that way. He’s been thrown out of the ring before, couldn’t continue, 
he’s got back in, he’s thrown people out of the ring. He’s been involved in 
just about every type of melee possible. He hasn’t stopped anybody since 2004. 
It was inevitable there was going to be some kind of wacky, wacko end.”

Nevertheless, Hopkins was a fine fighter, a shrewd, tough survivor with a keen 
understanding of the sport’s nuances. Any reasonable assessment has to place 
him in the mix with the middleweight greats: Sugar Ray Robinson (the 
pound-for-pound king, as well, across the middle range of weights), Marvin 
Hagler, Carlos Monzon, Stanley Ketchel, Jake La Motta, Harry Greb, Mickey 
Walker, Hopkins and Marcel Cerdan.

His farewell had the air of Robinson’s. Sugar Ray had the last of his 198 
fights in 1965, the year Hopkins was born, but there was precious little left 
of him against Joey Archer, who outpointed him with unseemly ease and went on 
to challenge Don Fullmer and Emile Griffith in three unsuccessful bids for the 
world middleweight title. Joe Smith Jr works in a considerably reduced 
environment.

Some compared his through-the-ropes ending to the night at Madison Square 
Garden in 1951 when Rocky Marciano brought Joe Louis’s grand career to a 
flat-backed finish, also in the eighth round. But it was less conclusive than 
that.

Nobody was champion for longer than Hopkins’s 10 years, two months and 17 
days, or made more than his 20 defences; he was the oldest world champion at 
any weight – nudging George Foreman and Archie Moore out of the record books – 
at 48 years, one month and 22 days, by beating Tavoris Cloud three years ago.

And what of his era?

In the 90s, Hopkins lost to a prime Roy Jones Jr, beat worthy challengers John 
David Jackson (who was in his corner on Saturday night after the fighter had 
unexpectedly split with Nazeem Richardson), Glen Johnson, Simon Brown and 
Antwun Echols. In the following decade, he beat Keith Holmes, an unbeaten Felix 
Trinidad, William Joppy, a fading Oscar De La Hoya, Britain’s under-rated 
Howard Eastman over 12 rounds in 2005, Antonio Tarver, Ronald Winky Wright, 
Kelly Pavlik, and, on a night of sweet but late revenge, Roy Jones Jr. In the 
fading years a strong, young Jean Pascal lost to him; Chad Dawson, another 
tough veteran, won and lost. Jermain Taylor beat him twice; Joe Calzaghe was 
too young and fast for him; two years ago Sergey Kovalev, fearsome and 
undefeated, beat him up and nearly stopped him.

On Saturday night Joe Smith Jr did the unthinkable.

Hopkins, born into adversity that he worked to his advantaged, was not too 
proud to earn a living as a dishwasher. He went to prison. He overcame. But he 
could not get a grip on humility in the ring. That, perversely, is what made 
him so dangerous and, for a long time, so good. One way or another, we’ll miss 
him.
 