
Ruddy-faced tourists in beige shorts, cherry gateaux and lots of trees. Those 
were my, admittedly limited, expectations of the Black Forest. What I didn’t 
anticipate was hurtling down a hillside on a go-kart. Just getting to the 
Hasenhorn Coaster is an adventure. A chairlift transported us to the top, and 
while my partner took selfies in the chair behind, I was focusing very hard on 
trying to enjoy the scenery and not think about my six-year-old son slipping 
under the safety bar and falling to the ground below. Speeding down the 
coaster’s 2.9km looping track on a go-kart was much less alarming than dangling 
30ft above it, so much so that when I got to the bottom I wanted another go.

A rectangle of land about 200km long and 60km wide in the south-west corner of 
Germany, the Black Forest region isn’t a huge area, but the diversity and 
beauty of its landscape have made it one of the most popular holiday 
destinations among Germans. Many come for the hiking – this is the place that 
claims to have invented hiking for pleasure, when Philipp Bussemer from Baden 
Baden opened the first tourist information centre in 1864. A century and a half 
later, 23,000km of walking trails are signposted across its forests, meadows, 
vineyards and lakesides.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6a57a1560e90e872542320948921b4fbfaf73ba%2F0_38_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Forest%20for%20the%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Forest%20for%20the%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6a57a1560e90e872542320948921b4fbfaf73ba%2F0_38_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 The 2.9km-long Hasenhorn go-kart coaster. Photograph: Alamy 
In another sporting precedent, it established the first ski club in central 
Europe in 1891, and now boasts 250km of downhill slopes and 1,700km of 
cross-country trails. In summer the hills and forests are alive with the sound 
of mountain bikers on its dedicated 8,000km of trails. Then there are the 
activity parks and climbing. The lakes, including the largest, Schluchsee, and 
Titisee, offer yet more ways to enjoy the natural environment - from 
Schluchsee’s lido with a giant slide into the lake, to kayaking, canoeing and 
sailing. In short, the Black Forest is a giant adventure playground. Active fun 
is in its DNA.

Despite this giddy array of activities, the region’s reputation in the UK as a 
walking destination means it’s not a natural choice for British families. Yet 
you’d be hard pushed to find a better-value family activity holiday. For one 
thing, more than 350 hotels, campsites and apartments in the region offer 
guests staying two nights or more aHochschwarzwald Card 
<http://www.hochschwarzwald.de/Card> giving free access to over 70 attractions. 
Second, Germans are the masters of the child-friendly hotel. We stayed at the 
Feldberger Hof at the base of Mount Feldberg, which, while not part of the 
well-knownkinderhotel.de <http://www.kinderhotel.de/> network, could not have 
been more kinder-oriented. Some might argue that it is too kinder-oriented. My 
partner took one look at the swarm of small children milling about the 
reception on our arrival and said he needed a drink. At 11am. Further 
exploration of the hotel – with its indoor play area, buffet meals, daily 
programme of fun games and singalongs, and staff with their Happy Team badges – 
made it feel like we were trapped in a giant soft-play centre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feec269ebbae83676012a33c0e44c68ecf2a1342d%2F0_381_1076_646%2F1076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Forest%20for%20the%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Forest%20for%20the%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feec269ebbae83676012a33c0e44c68ecf2a1342d%2F0_381_1076_646%2F1076.jpg>
 The writer’s son on a bug hunt. Photograph: Isabel Choat for the Guardian 
But other guests weren’t as cynical. Most parents we spoke to – both English 
and German – were booked in for a full week, many on repeat visits, and raved 
about the place; and naturally our son thought it was brilliant. He loved the 
play area, the pool and waterslide, and the fact that there was a ready supply 
of kids his age to play with. Not speaking the same language was no barrier to 
instant friendship. For us, the best thing about it was what lay outside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a42157877afaeccafb6de25adac9f00e858e530%2F0_40_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Forest%20for%20the%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Forest%20for%20the%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a42157877afaeccafb6de25adac9f00e858e530%2F0_40_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Prime hiking country… Photograph: Alamy 
The hotel is located in the Hochschwarzwald, or the High Black Forest, at the 
foot of the region’s highest peak, the 1,493m Feldberg. A cable car takes you 
to the top for views across the Feldberg massif and, on a clear day, the Alps 
beyond. Directly behind the hotel is Kletterwald, a sprawling treetop obstacle 
course. Sadly, driving rain and fog meant that this was closed. Instead, we 
ducked in to theHouse of Nature 
<http://www.blackforest-tourism.com/Media/Attraktionen/House-of-Nature> 
opposite the hotel, with displays about the local wildlife and culture, and a 
virtual hot air balloon ride. There we met head ranger Achim Laber for a guided 
walk of the Witchelpfad, a new trail where children follow clues along a 
mile-long forest path bordered by blueberry bushes in search of the 
capercaillie bird, via displays of gnome-like creatures and their dwellings. A 
keen hiker, Achim devised the path while remembering how difficult it had been 
to motivate his own children to go on walks. It worked for our son, who was 
happy to skip through the damp forest in search of tiny doors built into the 
trees, fairies and a model fox in his den.

The next day we headed to Spasspark, where little kids can ride giant tyres 
down a fake grass slope and jump on a large, bouncy dome. That afternoon we 
walked from picturesque St Blasien-Menzenschwand – a traditional village of 
slopey-roofed, timber-framed houses sprouting red geraniums under every window, 
and famed for its domed cathedral – to a waterfall, past fields of wild 
flowers, a goat farm and hillsides thick with fir trees. Again we were grateful 
for a distraction for my son, in the form of a rucksack hired from the tourist 
office (€5) and packed with everything a mini explorer might need. He threw 
himself into trapping insects in his plastic jar with such vim he barely 
noticed he was being made to use his legs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bd3bcbda0e6d4908fd1326b171c0652e704c026%2F0_48_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Forest%20for%20the%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Forest%20for%20the%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fblack-forest-germany-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bd3bcbda0e6d4908fd1326b171c0652e704c026%2F0_48_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 The Witchelpfad Naturpark. Photograph: Hochschwarzwald Tourismus GmbH 
If the Black Forest was forward thinking when it came to outdoor tourism, 
nowadays the focus is on preserving its past. The entire area is so steeped in 
tradition it almost feels frozen in time, with barely a modern blot on the 
landscape. TheHirschen Gasthof <http://www.hirschen-fischbach.de/>, a 
restaurant with rooms 3km from Lake Schluchsee, is a classic example. While the 
wooden interior is arguably more modern than most, we were greeted by a woman 
dressed in a dirndl. Its designation as a “nature park inn” requires it to 
offer at least three regional dishes and use local ingredients, so the menu is 
heavy on rich, meaty dishes like pork fillet rolls stuffed with ham and cheese, 
venison medallions and smoked duck. Those 19th-century hikers might never have 
predicted that the tourists of the future would be squealing down hillsides on 
go-karts, but they would have surely approved that they refuel on such 
traditional hearty fare.

• The trip was provided by Hochschwarzwald tourism office 
<http://www.hochschwarzwald.de/>. A two-bedroom family  
<http://www.hochschwarzwald.de/>apartment at the Feldberger Hof hotel (
feldberger-hof.de <https://www.feldberger-hof.de/en/startpage/startpage.html>) 
costs €262 per night half-board for two adults and one child. Ryanair flies to 
Basel from Stansted
 