
Men on low pay are four times more likely to be working part-time than in the 
1990s, according to a survey that illustrates the trend for low hours and wages 
to go together.

The Institute for Fiscal Studies said 20 years ago only one in 20 men aged 25 
to 55 worked part-time with low hourly wages. Today one in five of this group 
works part-time.

Meanwhile the proportion of middle and high–wage men working part-time remains 
low at less than 1 in 20, which the thinktank said showed that earnings 
inequality among men had risen significantly over a single generation.

Zero-hours workers '£1,000 worse off a year' than employees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/30/zero-hours-workers-1000-worse-off-a-year-than-employees>
Jonathan Cribb, an IFS economist, said: “The number of low-wage men working 
part time has increased sharply over the past 20 years. To understand the 
drivers of inequality in the UK it is vital to understand the growing 
association between low hourly wages and low hours of work among men.”


Anti-poverty campaigners are expected to use the figures to show how men with 
low skills and in areas of the country with few jobs are among the worst hit by 
the loss of well-paid full-time employment.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, has called for rules to close the gap 
between the highest and lowest paid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-calls-for-maximum-wage-law>
 as a way to tackle the soaring salaries and bonuses of company bosses.

But recent figures have shown the inequality gap getting smaller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/10/uk-inequality-working-people-pensions-ons>
 after incomes among the top fifth of earners slid while low earners continued 
to make progress.

The Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics> said median 
disposable income for the poorest fifth of households had risen by 5.1% in the 
year to April 2016 while the richest fifth of households saw their incomes fall 
by £1,000 over the same period.

Is it time for a maximum wage cap? Our panel responds to Jeremy Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-maximum-pay-panel>
However, much of the gap was closed by a significant rise in pensioner incomes 
driven by higher state pension payments and generous payouts from occupational 
schemes, not a rise in earnings by low-paid workers.

Benefits for the low paid, which until recently kept pace with inflation, have 
also influenced the income gap. Successive governments used tax credits and 
housing benefit to close the growing income deficit faced by low-paid 
households, though austerity cuts in recent years have reversed the trend.

Chris Belfield, an IFS economist, said: “In the past 20 years, the incomes of 
the top 1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/04/uk-bosses-will-make-more-by-midday-than-workers-will-earn-all-year-fat-cat-wednesday>
 have pulled further away from the rest. But across the vast majority of the 
population income inequality has actually fallen.

“However, in large part this is because the tax and benefit system has worked 
increasingly hard to offset disparities in the pay brought home by working 
households, and because of the catch-up of pensioners with those of working 
age, as well as falls in worklessness.”

The report found that men’s weekly earnings have diverged across the income 
scales withthe hourly wages of high earners outpacing those of middle earners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/make-high-earners-face-their-low-paid-colleagues>
.

“The rise of part-time work among men on low hourly wages far predates the 
recession and is widespread. The trend has been occurring consistently for 20 
years and is observed for low-wage men across the age spectrum, for single men 
and men in couples, and for those with and without children,” the report said.

 