
Boris Johnson has been criticised after warning the French president, François 
Hollande <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>, against trying 
to “administer punishment beatings” in the manner of “some world war two movie” 
to any country that tries to leave the EU.


The foreign secretary evoked the darkest period of France’s recent history as 
he rejected comments by an adviser to Hollande who said Britain should not 
expect a better trading relationship outsideEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> than it currently enjoys inside.

Britain's Brexit deal must be inferior to EU membership, MEPs told - Politics 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/18/theresa-may-brexit-speech-reaction-pmqs-david-davis-will-not-get-option-of-reversing-brexit-says-david-davis-politics-live>
In an extraordinary outburst at a foreign policy conference in Delhi, Johnson 
said: “If Hollande wants to administer punishment beatings to anybody who seeks 
to escape [the EU], in the manner of some world war two movie, I don’t think 
that is the way forward. It’s not in the interests of our friends and partners.”

There was no immediate response from French officials to the remarks. 

At the conference, Jacques Audibert is understood to have said that Britain 
could not expect to get a better deal outside the EU – a position articulated 
by several European figures including the prime minister of Malta, Joseph 
Muscat.

On Wednesday Muscat told the European parliament: “We want a fair deal for the 
United Kingdom. But that deal necessarily needs to be inferior to membership.”

Hollande, who has not yet responded officially to Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
,said in October that Britain would have to pay a heavy price for leaving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-says-francois-hollande>
, declaring: “There must be a threat, there must be a risk, there must be a 
price.”

Briefing journalists after PMQs, May’s spokeswoman strongly defended the 
foreign secretary and insisted “he was not suggesting anyone was a Nazi”.

“He was making a theatrical comparison to some of those evocative world war 
two movies people will have seen,” she said. The spokeswoman rejected media 
interpretations of the comments, comparing them to the “hyped-up media reports” 
condemned by the prime minister in her Brexit speech on Tuesday.

May called in her Lancaster House speech for her ministers to show restraint 
in their language during the Brexit negotiations: “Every stray word and every 
hyped-up media report is going to make it harder for us to get the right deal 
for Britain. Our opposite numbers in the European commission know it, which is 
why they are keeping their discipline. And the ministers in this government 
know it too, which is why we will also maintain ours.”

Jo Johnson, the universities and science minister, defended his brother’s 
remarks, saying he had been “making a powerful point that we want a rational 
deal. He was using colourful language to get over an important point.”.


But others disagreed. Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, said: “This is 
an utterly crass and clueless remark from the man who is supposed to be our 
chief diplomat.


“I assume Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> says 
these things to deflect from the utter shambles this Brexit government is in 
over its plans to take Britain out of the single market. But this kind of 
distasteful comment only serves to unite Europe further against Britain at a 
time we need friends more than ever.”

Jeremy Corbyn’s spokesman said: “We’re well aware the foreign secretary has a 
habit of making wild and inappropriate comments, and talking about world war 
two in that context is another one of those.

“That’s not going to be something that’s going to improve the climate for 
these negotiations. I don’t think threats or wild comparisons or analogies are 
going to help the situation.”

Wes Streeting, a Labour MP and supporter of Open Europe, said: “It seems the 
foreign secretary has been leafing through his well-thumbed copy of How to Lose 
Friends and Alienate People.

“Nobody who wants to see a good Brexit deal for Britain should welcome these 
crass comments. To get a deal that protects our economy and keeps Britain an 
open, tolerant country, we need to negotiate in good faith and with courtesy 
with our European partners.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fboris-johnson-world-war-two-punishment-beatings-brexit-francois-hollande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25775cc51ea9fa4e5c0215999018c3b69cd2fd1b%2F0_105_4328_2597%2F4328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%20to%20France%3A%20no%20WW2-style%20punishment%20beatings%20over%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fboris-johnson-world-war-two-punishment-beatings-brexit-francois-hollande%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Johnson%20to%20France%3A%20no%20WW2-style%20punishment%20beatings%20over%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fboris-johnson-world-war-two-punishment-beatings-brexit-francois-hollande%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25775cc51ea9fa4e5c0215999018c3b69cd2fd1b%2F0_105_4328_2597%2F4328.jpg>
 Theresa May delivering her keynote Brexit speech at Lancaster House. 
Photograph: Xinhua/Barcroft Images 
Johnson’s remarks are likely to add to growing diplomatic friction between 
France and the UK following a public feud over the wisdom of France calling a 
Middle East peace conference just before Donald Trump takes power in the US. 
The UK refused to send a delegation to the conference anddid not sign the final 
communique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/uk-snubs-middle-east-peace-summit-in-paris-to-keep-trump-onside>
.

It is not the first time the former London mayor has evoked the second world 
war in the context of Brexit. He told the Sunday Telegraph during the 
referendum campaign that the EU was an attempt “by different methods” to unite 
the continent under a single government. He said: “Napoleon, Hitler, various 
people tried this out, and it ends tragically.”

Interviewed on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Wednesday, the Brexit 
secretary, David Davis, also cited the “difficult histories” of other EU nation 
states as evidence for why they would not want to leave the EU.

“There is no other country which is in our position,” he said. “We are an 
offshore island. We have got a great global history and so on. For us, going 
into the EU in the first case it was the common market, we saw it as an 
economic issue. But for most of the countries of Europe it is not just about 
economics. It is about democracy. It’s about the rule of law – countries that 
have come from difficult histories into what for them is the exemplar of modern 
politics – freedom, rule of law, democracy.”

Speaking on Wednesday, Johnson said new tariff barriers between Britain and 
Europe would “cut both ways”, citing imports of German luxury cars into 
Britain. It was “absolutely incredible”, he said, “that in the 21st century 
member states of the EU should be seriously contemplating the reintroduction of 
tariffs or whatever to administer punishment to the UK”.


MPs will not block May's deal for UK to leave EU, says David Davis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/18/mps-will-not-block-mays-deal-for-uk-to-leave-eu-says-david-davis>
He said: “[Britain] can put a 10% tariff on 820,000 cars, Mercs. That’s a lot 
of money for the exchequer. We think we can do a great free-trade deal for the 
benefit of both sides. The more trade, the more jobs on both sides.”

He added that it would be “foolish for the EU to seek to cut off its nose to 
spite its face by punishing the City of London [because] those jobs won’t 
migrate to Paris or Frankfurt but to Singapore or Hong Kong or New York”.

As a result, he said, they were not going to be tempted to leave the EU.

Davis also quoted the former cabinet secretary Robin Butler who, he said, had 
told him: “The civil service coped with world war two; they can cope with this.”

Johnson told the audience in the Indian capital it was “time to stick up for 
free trade”, arguing that Britain and India had enormous potential to boost 
their economic ties, and suggesting the Indian government start by relaxing its 
150% tariff on imported whisky.

Scotch whisky accounts for about 4% of the Indian market, the largest market 
for the liquor in the world. “Now imagine we could just double that or treble 
that by removing those pesky tariffs, giving the Indian consumer more money to 
spend on other things,” he said.

“And, symmetrically, we could have zero tariffs on wonderful Indian products 
like those electric cars or buses or perhaps even bicycles that we’re now 
seeing on the streets of London.”

Such a deal could not be negotiated until Britain formally left the EU, he 
said, but could at least be “sketch[ed] out in pencil on the back of an 
envelope”.

“We may be leaving the EU, we may be taking back control of our borders, but 
that does not mean we want to haul up the drawbridge. We do not want to deter 
Indian talent from our country,” he said.
 