
The new owners of Bradford are lining up the former Bulls player, Henry Paul, 
as the likely candidate to succeed the previous incumbent, Rohan Smith, after 
it was confirmed on Tuesday he would leave his role as coach of the newly 
reformed Championship club.

Smith, who was appointed as coach of the recently liquidated Bulls midway 
through last season, had previously indicated he wished to remain in charge 
upon the club’s reformation before the club’s new owners, Andrew Chalmers and 
Graham Lowe, revealed their identity on Tuesday following a successful bid to 
assume control at Odsal.

RFL finalises deal with unnamed bidder for Bradford Bulls replacement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/rfl-bradford-bulls-replacement-rugby-league>
However, the New Zealanders have decided they will instead look to appoint 
another coach – and despite a potential appointment of a senior player on an 
interim basis, the Guardian understands that Paul, who played for the Bulls 
between 1999 and 2001, is the preferred choice of Chalmers and Lowe to take 
charge.

The owners released a statement on Tuesday confirming the club will look to 
remain full-time in 2017, while beginning negotiations with players and staff 
about new contracts for the upcoming Championship season which Bradford will 
begin with a 12-point deduction in just a few weeks’ time.

“We do not see this as a quick fix and we will work through the immediate 
issue of offering full-time playing contracts to the team,” they said in a 
statement. “This is expected to be accomplished in the next 48 hours and 
following that we will look at bolstering the playing squad as necessary to 
replace those players who have secured contracts elsewhere.”

The Rugby Football League, which approved Chalmers and Lowe’s bid last Friday, 
have now switched their focus to securing the old club’s intellectual property 
rights from the administrator who liquidated the club earlier this month.

Items and rights such as the domain name, logos and franchise name were 
initially sold to a third party who expressed an interest in buying the club 
while it was in administration, but they have subsequently been forfeited back 
to the administrator, leaving the RFL to try to negotiate a deal and purchase 
them.
 