
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> fans have long been inured 
to being let down by their heroes. Even still, there has been a special pang of 
say-it-ain’t-so-Joe disappointment with the announcement from Bradley Wiggins 
that, starting next month, he will be going head-to-head withTowie’s Lydia 
Bright and Spencer Matthews fromMade in Chelsea to see who’s better at giant 
slalom. At stake, the prestigious Cowbell Trophy.

“Skiing is a big passion of mine,” said Wiggins, revealing that he would be 
one of 14 competitors on Channel 4’s reality showThe Jump. “It was a mix of 
that and the other committed names this year that made me want to sign up. 
Major retiring Olympians such as Sir Steve Redgrave have also trod this path. I 
see this as a sporting challenge and want to go out there and win it. Just 
don’t call me a celebrity.”

‘Just don’t call me a celebrity’: Bradley Wiggins takes leap with The Jump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradley-wiggins-the-jump-channel-4-robbie-fowler-louis-smith>
I was a bit taken aback by Wiggins’ decision; not because I thought he was 
bigger or better than that – who doesn’t love some superficial, nonsense 
entertainment? No judgement here – but because he’d been so outspoken about 
such shows in the past. I interviewed Wiggins in May 2015, as he launched the 
new road-and-track squad Team Wiggins, and he was hilariously dismissive.

“It’s people saying, ‘How do you want to be remembered when you retire?’” he 
said. “I never wanted to be a team captain onA Question of Sport and just some 
bloke who could tell funny jokes and be a bit stupid. Have people in the future 
say, ‘Oh, he won the Tour de France’ or whatever. I always thought I wanted to 
be a lot deeper than that. I don’t want to end up making documentaries for ITV4 
jumping off a cliff. I don’t see that as a legacy. That’s just becoming a 
celebrity.”

Well, The Jump’s not on ITV4, and he won’t be throwing himself off a cliff, 
more a modest hillock, but you can understand the confusion.

So Wiggins is a hypocrite, right? Not necessarily. I think we all understand – 
and probably broadly agree with – the point he’s making about our 
celebrity-obsessed age. Wiggins has always taken his idols from the world of 
music, more than sport, and he’s especially enamoured with mod-punk. This era, 
of the late 1970s and early 80s, was just about the last time when the 
expression selling out carried any pejorative weight, as bands refused on 
principle to sign with major labels and turned down lucrative offers from 
advertisers to use their tracks.

With his arcane facial hair and moody photo shoots, Wiggins sometimes acts 
like he’s in a punk band, but the rest of the world has moved on. John Lydon 
from the Sex Pistols has flogged Country Life butter and Iggy Pop has 
encouraged us to take out car insurance. When it came out that the Killers and 
Paul McCartney played a private gig on New Year’s Eve for Roman Abramovich on 
the island of St Barts, no one asked: “How could they do that?” Only, “How much 
do you think they got for it?”

The question is then: why is Wiggins doing The Jump? He’s suggested that, in 
his early dotage, it is the element of competition that appeals to him. And 
certainly there’s proper athletic pedigree in the line-up, some even at their 
peak: ass-kicking Jade Jones, pommel powerhouse Louis Smith and Kadeena Cox, 
the Paralympian who won four golds in Rio,who has been told that she will 
sacrifice her UK Sport funding while taking part in the show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/kadeena-cox-uk-sport-funding-suspended-the-jump>
. There are some bona fide legends too: Jason Robinson, Gareth Thomas and, at a 
stretch, Robbie Fowler.

Wiggins’s contention, though, that this is a hard-forged test of athletic 
mettle does have some chinks. Previous winners ofThe Jump include Joey Essex 
and Joe McElderry, anX Factor alumnus; the fate of Olympic legends has 
typically been early elimination due to injury, as we’ve seen with Redgrave, 
Rebecca Adlington, Linford Christie and Beth Tweddle.

Damian Collins wants more information on Fluimucil from Team Sky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/damian-collins-information-team-sky-fluimucil>
The underlying reason for Wiggins’s involvement, then, is much more likely to 
be reputational. Back in September,the Fancy Bears hackers leaked his repeated 
use of hardcore asthma medication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/fancy-bears-chris-froome-bradley-wiggins-tues-cycling>
 between 2011 and 2013 – sanctioned by the controversial therapeutic use 
exemptions and taken, Wiggins insists, to counter his allergy to pollen. The UK 
Anti-Doping inquiry into the case is still ongoing and we are still no wiser 
about what was in the mystery package delivered to Team Sky at the end of the 
2011 Critérium du Dauphiné. Until that is cleared up, he “will always have a 
question mark hanging over him”, in Sir Chris Hoy’s words. Smith,who appeared 
to mock Islam in a video last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/louis-smith-banned-british-gymnastics-video-mocking-islam>
 finds himself in a similar PR quagmire.

Presumably, Wiggins, judging from previous comments, wouldn’t have chosen to 
appear onThe Jump, but the show – which, let’s face it, has now become 
unmissable TV – could prove a welcome distraction from more serious concerns 
and a prime-time reminder of what a brilliant deadpan wit he can be, when he’s 
in the mood.

The situation Wiggins has found himself in reminds me of an exchange I had 
with Rob Brydon last year. He had written and appeared in so many brilliant 
shows that I wondered why he agreed to do those awful ads for P&O Cruises? 
“I’ve been accused of selling out for doing adverts,” Brydon shot back. “From 
what? What do you think I am? I’m the little bloke from Wales who tries to make 
you laugh.”

Just as we should never really be surprised when sports people disappoint us 
as role models, we shouldn’t ride them too hard to maintain impeccable 
legacies. Whatever his reasons for taking on Caprice at winter sports – 
self-worth, school fees, crisis management – if Wiggins feels he wants to add 
the Cowbell Trophy to his gold medals and yellow jerseys, then we should only 
urge him, entirely metaphorically, to break a leg.
 