
The demise of such a famous name as Bradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-rugby-league-liquidation-rfl-championship>
 may have come as a surprise to some sports fans who do not follow rugby league 
closely, but those in the know have seen their slide towards oblivion catch 
pace for years.

While it’s less than 11 years since Bradford won the World Club Challenge for 
the third time, it is eight since they finished as high as fifth inSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>. The speed of the decline is 
nowhere near as shocking as some other clubs in our game. Halifax melted at the 
end of 2003, just five years after being the third best team in the land; 
Crusaders reached the play-offs in 2010 and were gone a year later; 18 months 
after lifting the Challenge Cup Sheffield Eagles were swallowed up by 
Huddersfield and relaunched as a new club in the Steel City; Gateshead Thunder 
reached the play-offs in their first season. There wasn’t a second one.

Such declines are not unique to rugby league, of course. Nottingham Forest, 
Leeds United and Manchester City all found themselves in the third tier not 
long after being European powers; in rugby union, London Welsh hit the wall 
this season; and Durham are now on life-support having won cricket’s County
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> in 
2008, 2009 and 2013.

RFL supremo Nigel Wood said “our sport would be bigger if Bradford were in 
better shape” but his claim that it is “a viable and valuable sports franchise” 
proved untrue. With debts of £1m, another operating loss of a million expected 
this year and an inevitable points deduction meaning the prospect of spending 
at least the next few seasons outside of Super League, any buyer would need to 
be comfortable with writing off a few million quid just to tread water. Funnily 
enough, no one that rich and wanton could be found.

Rugby league is not alone in struggling to make professional second-tier 
competitions sustainable. The Championship is now packed with football clubs 
that are spending vastly more than their income, most propped up by extremely 
wealthy benefactors willing to plug the gaps for a few years in the hope they 
recoup their fortune with promotion to the Premier League. Player wages are 
massive and losses enormous. Most of the problems in union’sChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> are the same as rugby 
league’s: a mixture of professional players and staff, semi-pro players and 
coaches, amateur administrators; a play-off system that means the majority of 
the season is almost irrelevant to the top teams; and a class divide that 
leaves the same few clubs bouncing between the top of the second tier and the 
bottom of the top flight.

While the funding for clubs in the RFL’s Championship varies enormously 
depending on their finishing position the previous season, union’s Championship 
clubs receive £530,000 each in central funding and yet all are encouraged to 
have a full-time squad.That figure hardly covers a basic wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/17/championship-wild-west-professional-rugby-union-dangers>
 for anyone with kids and/or living in the south-east of England.

When Richmond, who get a couple of thousand to attractive games at their 
ground which used to host league’s Varsity match, went up, they opted to remain 
part-time and now look likely to go straight back down again, unless local 
rivals London Welsh beat them to it. Workington and Whitehaven showed it is 
tough to compete in rugby league’s Championship training three times a week, 
although Sheffield (in 2015) and Batley last year proved that part-time clubs 
can challenge near the top of the Championship.

Bradford Bulls’ fate was down to years of mismanagement of a trailblazing club 
| Aaron Bower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-rugby-league-liquidation-rfl-championship>
Like Bradford, the meltdown of London Welsh this winter may not be an isolated 
one. Their wage bill of £1.7m has been unsustainable, with losses of £10m. 
London Irish are reported to be spending £4.5m in a desperate bid to bounce 
straight back into the Premiership, Nottingham just £800,000. In league, Hull 
KR have told their fans they will spend £1.2m on players alone this season and 
keep £600,000 back for an expected promotion push in late summer. Part-timers 
such as Swinton and Dewsbury will hope to compete again on a slither of that. 
Thanks to benefactor David Hughes, London Broncos have remained full-time 
despite average crowds of just 830 last season. Sheffield, with no home ground 
and a major backer withdrawing, found full-time rugby way beyond their means 
and are back to part-time. Toulouse will train every day but most of their 
players still have other jobs or study.

Only French rugby union seems to have the wherewithal to finance two divisions 
of full-time professional rugby. Nigel Wood has suggested that would be an 
ideal situation, but if rugby union cannot afford to do it, and nor canBradford 
Bulls <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls>, then rugby league as a 
whole surely can’t.

Clubcall: Wakefield Trinity

Christmas was the midway point in pre-season and several Super League clubs 
marked it with a Festive friendly.Wakefield Trinity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wakefieldtrinity> began a new era without 
the tacky Wildcats moniker by surprisingly stuffing Leeds Rhinos 30-6 at 
Headingley, suggesting they could be top-eight contenders again. There were 
some new names on show, recruited from the Championship: Trinity prop Keegan 
Hirst made his first appearance for a Super League club, at the age of 28, 
while Leeds gave debuts to half-back Cory Aston, the 21-year-old recruited from 
Sheffield, and former Featherstone forward Jack Ormondroyd.

There were new faces galore as Castleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> hammered second string Hull FC 
42-10 at the Jungle. Samoa international Jesse Sene-Lefao – signed from NRL 
champions Cronulla – and Tuoyo Egodo from London Broncos Under-19s may have 
arrived from different ends of the rugby league spectrum but both impressed 
many of the 5,000 watching on. Intriguingly, Egodo was not the only London 
product in their squad: Daniel Igbinedion, a 22-year-old second row, signed for 
Cas after a strong first senior season with third division Oxford.

Foreign quota

While the French federation have sufficient financial woes to withdraw their 
teams from the Student and Women’s World Cups, on the pitch there was a 
distinct split in Elite 1 at the festive break. The top five look far superior 
to the rest, who, aside from winless Toulouse Broncos at the bottom of the 
pile, seem much of a muchness.

Lezignan, with Super League veterans Cyril Stacul and Jamal Fakir in their 
ranks, look well poised to take the title. They went into the New Year top of 
the league, thanks to the try-scoring form of Windy Buche (a French winger, not 
a flatulence condition). Buche grabbed a 10-minute hat-trick in the thrashing 
of promoted St Gaudens and then his late try helped see off Jerome Guisset’s St 
Esteve-XIII Catalan in the final game before Christmas.

Catalans, with former Whitehaven halfback Louis Jouffret swapping the bracing 
coast of Cumbria for Perpignan, are second, with reigning champions Limoux 
third. The Grizzlies are making more use of import players this year: Kiwi Matt 
Robinson (ex Manly and Gold Coast) has been among their recent try-scorers. 
Fifth-placed Avignon have benefitted from the tries of centre Paul Jacob and 
are enjoying a better season than last year and are probably the only other 
play-off contender.

Albi, St Gaudens and Palau have all won three or four of their first 10 games. 
St Gaudens, who pulled off a shock win at Catalans in early December, are 
finding their feet in the elite, as Palau and Albi have done after promotion in 
the last two seasons, while Dragons legend and former France captain Olivier 
Elima has arrived to add a glut of experience at Catalan village club Palau, 
who continue to do better than they should.

Goal-line drop-out

It should be no surprise that a player wanted by one of the world’s most 
famous clubs has been voted the best performer of one of the Four Nations 
teams. But there were times in a troubled 2016 that Adam Walker would have been 
the last name fitting that bill. Yet Walker has been named Scotland’sPlayer of 
the Year 
<http://www.loverugbyleague.com/news_24523-walker-named-as-top-scot-for-2016.html>
 for a trio of terrific performances in the Four Nations, as he rode the abuse 
of Hull KR fans to challenge Australia, took it to the Burgess boys when the 
Bravehearts rattled England, and was again tremendous in the draw with the 
Kiwis. No wonder St Helens snapped him up when the Robins were relegated.

Walker was the runaway leader of the Dave Valentine Award – first choice of 
five of the six management team who voted – with runner-up Lachlan Coote also 
picking up votes from five of them. The other eight available votes went to 
eight other players, showing what a remarkable team showing it was by the 
Bravehearts.

Fifth and last

Entering the final weeks of a three-month rugby league drought, it’s only four 
weeks until Super League is back on our screens. Those without Sky Sports 
subscriptions will have to rely on highlights on the BBC again and wait until 
the Challenge Cup in April for the first free live action, nearly six months 
after the Four Nations final. As the Blow Monkeys’ (honorary) Doctor Robert 
crooned,it doesn’t have to be this way 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aqNasjUIN6c>.

Paul Cooke interview: leaving Hull FC, joining Hull KR and coaching Leigh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/dec/23/paul-cooke-interview-hull-fc-hull-kr-leigh-coaching>
Other sports have found ways around taking pay-TV’s big bucks and getting 
their product on as many screens as possible. This festive break I’ve enjoyed 
Twenty20 cricket from Australia’s Big Bash League every Sunday morning on 
Channel Five and Pro 12 rugby union between Edinburgh and Glasgow at a 
surprisingly busy Murrayfield on BBC2 Scotland, then Glasgow’s trip to 
wonderful Treviso on BBC Alba. There were Pro 12 games featuring the Welsh 
regions on Welsh TV, too.

So without subscribing to Sky or BT, who own the main rights, cricket and 
rugby union fans can watch a game a week live on terrestrial TV. Evenlive 
football returns to terrestrial with the FA Cup this weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/football-quiz-fa-cup-third-round>
. There are live NRL games on free-to-air TV every week, some live, some 
delayed, while Sky Italia have done a deal to show major games (delayed) late 
in the evening on MTV. Yes, Sting’s old muckers, Music Television. The Italians 
have realised they need to reach younger, potential future Sky Italia 
subscribers. A similar deal to show a repeat of a Thursday or Friday night 
Super League game late on BBC Four or the red button - or even on a Sky-owned 
freeview channels Challenge or Pick, seems a no-brainer to me.

It will be interesting to see if Sky put more Super League on their free Sky 
Sports Mix channel this season. With viewing figures falling, they need to show 
more folk what they are missing.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>

 