
Sir Bradley Wiggins has acquired new management at the M&C Saatchi Merlin 
agency as he attempts to reconfigure his image following thecontroversy last 
September over therapeutic use exemptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues>
 and with a UK Anti-Doping inquiry still to report on thedelivery of a medical 
package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/mystery-package-fluimucil-dave-brailsford-cycling>
 to Team Sky at the 2011 Critérium du Dauphiné.

Wiggins’s low-key confirmation on 28 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/28/bradley-wiggins-announces-retirement-from-cycling>
 that his racing days were finally over would appear to be linked to the move, 
so too his recentdecision to participate in the skiing reality TV show The Jump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradley-wiggins-the-jump-channel-4-robbie-fowler-louis-smith>
, going full circle on his previous assertions that he was determined to eschew 
celebrity sporting culture after hanging up his wheels.

Saatchi Merlin worked with sporting personalities such as Andrew Flintoff and 
Jamie Redknapp after their playing careers ended, and have the Olympic 
champions Greg Rutherford and Sir Mo Farah on their books. “Having now retired, 
the reach into broadcasting and developing my own brand will be very 
important,” Wiggins said in a statement from the agency.

Bradley Wiggins in The Jump? Let’s cut him a bit of celebrity slack | Tim Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/07/bradley-wiggins-channel-4-the-jump>
Wiggins moved to Simon Fuller’s XIX agency in the wake of his stellar 2012 
season when he won the Tour de France and thegold medal in the time trial at 
the London Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/01/bradley-wiggins-gold-medal-olympian>
. The Guardian understands that XIX will continue to work with him on joint 
ventures such as his range of children’s bikes available through Halfords, and 
his eponymous team, which is reported to have gained a new title sponsor in 
Skoda for 2017 as part of a multimillion-pound deal which will see Wiggins 
figuring in adverts for the car company.

The change of direction comes in the wake of the revelation last September 
through hacked computer data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
 that Wiggins had been permitted to have three injections of the corticosteroid 
triamcinolone to combat pollen allergies before three major Tours, including his
successful attempt at the 2012 Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-cavendish>
.

No rules were broken but the TUEs have drawn criticism from figures as senior 
as the three-time Tour de France winner Chris Froome, Wiggins’s former 
team-mate atTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky>, who last 
Friday repeated his assertion that questions about the case remain unanswered.

Wiggins is also involved in the Jiffy‑bag imbroglio, with the departing Ukad 
head David Kenworthy expressing his dissatisfaction with the information 
provided about its contents, stated by the Team Sky head Sir Dave Brailsford to 
be the mucolytic Fluimucil.

Team Sky have denied wrongdoing in the affair, as has Wiggins, but Kenworthy 
said his agency would “dig and delve” until the bag’s contents have been 
determined beyond doubt, while the head of the House of Commons culture media 
and sport committee, Damian Collins MP, called upon Sky to give full details of 
their use of Fluimucil.
 