
A new uprising has broken out at a prison in north-eastern Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> where 26 inmates were killed by a 
rival gang faction over the weekend, authorities said on Monday.


 “A Swat team is there at this exact moment. Our men are entering the prison 
now to get control of the situation,” said Eduardo Franco, head of 
communications for police in the state of Rio Grande do Norte, where the prison 
is located.

At least 30 inmates killed in Brazil prison riot as gang war death toll rises
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/brazil-prison-riot-alcacuz-drug-gang>
 It was not immediately clear what sparked the latest uprising at the Alcaçuz 
prison, located about 15 and a half miles south of the state capital, Natal.

 It was in the same prison that members of Brazil’s most powerful drug gang, 
the First Capital Command (PCC), killed 26 inmates in a riot that began late on 
Saturday and was not controlled until Sunday.

 As in a series of other prison uprisings in recent weeks, many of those 
killed had their heads cut off and were badly mutilated or burned. At least 140 
inmates have died in Brazil’s prisons in just over two weeks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbrazil-prison-riot-alcacuz-drug-gangs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22256d04518460831ab2b0bc0ad382b117f31148%2F0_265_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil%20sees%20renewed%20violence%20at%20prison%20where%2026%20were%20killed%20over%20the%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbrazil-prison-riot-alcacuz-drug-gangs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%20sees%20renewed%20violence%20at%20prison%20where%2026%20were%20killed%20over%20the%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbrazil-prison-riot-alcacuz-drug-gangs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22256d04518460831ab2b0bc0ad382b117f31148%2F0_265_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Inmates prison roof during the Alcaçuz uprising on 16 January. Photograph: 
Andressa Anholete/AFP/Getty Images 
 The intense violence is the result of a split between the PCC and Brazil’s 
second-most powerful gang, the Red Command. For more than two decades the two 
gangs maintained an uneasy working relationship, ensuring that a steady flow of 
drugs and arms easily made its way over Brazil’s porous borders with the 
world’s biggest cocaine-producing nations.

 But about six months ago, security officials and experts say, the PCC moved 
to fully take over trafficking routes and tried to push the Red Command aside.

 The Red Command responded by forming alliances with smaller regional gangs, 
primarily in Brazil’s Amazon region and in the north east, in an attempt to 
block the PCC from taking over those drug routes and gaining new turf.

 A New Year’s Day prison massacre at the Anisio Jobim prison complex in the 
state of Amazonas, in which 56 died, ignited the recent violence. Most of those 
killed were members of the PCC, butchered by members of the North Family gang, 
which is allied with the Red Command.

 It was Brazil’s deadliest prison uprising since a 1992 rebellion at the 
Carandiru penitentiary in Sao Paulo state that saw police storm the building 
and kill 111 prisoners.

On 6 January, members of the PCC murdered 33 inmates at the Monte Cristo 
prison in the Amazonian state of Roraima. Videos taken by inmates showed the 
slaughter, with those hacking away at bodies saying they were doing so in 
revenge for their “brothers” killed the week before.

 Brazil’s prisons, mostly under control of states and not the federal 
government, have for decades been in a state of chaos, with extreme 
overcrowding, escapes and violence the norm.

 The prisons are also largely run by prison gangs and the state, experts and 
authorities acknowledge, has little control over the institutions. Drugs, guns 
and all manner of contraband seemingly enter the jails at will.

 Also Monday, a separate prison rebellion lasted for about two hours in a 
different prison in the same state that saw the violence this weekend.
 