
The good news is that there are some great female characters coming up in the 
cinema in 2017. The bad news, if you’re looking for inspirational feminist role 
models, is that you won’t always find them in the movies. Lurking behind such 
obvious audience-pleasing instances of fine upstanding womanhood as Taraji P 
Henson plotting a course through the cosmos inHidden Figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/hidden-figures-review-john-glenn-taraji-henson-black-nasa-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>
, or Rachel Weisz takingantisemitism to court in Denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/15/david-irving-youtube-inspiring-holocaust-deniers>
, lies a monstrous army of deeply flawed femmes – perverse, prickly, deluded, 
depressed, obsessive, venal, scary. Well, I say hurrah for that.

First up, though, is the unfeasibly perfect Natalie Portman in Pablo Larraín’s 
Jackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/01/jackie-pablo-larrain-first-ladies-in-films>
, not so much a biopic of Jacqueline Kennedy as a tone poem evoking its 
subject’s transformation from trophy wife via weeping widow into American icon, 
a makeover forged by grief. In recreating a historical event made to seem ever 
more removed from reality by more than half a century ofZapruder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/14/abraham-zapruder-film-kennedy-killing-parkland>
,Warhol <http://collection.whitney.org/object/16292> and conspiracy theorising, 
the film-maker and his leading lady transport us back to basics: the barely 
imaginable horror of witnessing your husband’s brains being blown out. Portman 
knocks it out of the park, giving a masterclass in suffering beautifully.

And I mean beautifully. Whereas the likes of Claire Danes and Laura Dern 
convey excoriating emotional pain by snivelling like you and me, cry-faces 
scrunched up and shoulders heaving, Portman weeps like a lady, trying to blink 
back her tears, elegant eyebrows rearing up like rival caterpillars to greet 
each other across her lightly furrowed brow. “She cries cute,” a fan comments 
beneath one of the supercuts of Portman’s comely blubbing in everything fromLéon
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/22/natalie-portman-five-best-moments>
 to V for Vendetta to the Star Wars prequels toBlack Swan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/20/black-swan-review>. And Larraín’s 
camera loves her, whether she’s crying in the shower or chaperoning her 
husband’s coffin on Air Force One.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e73c3ea4c5c010fae85fc144d964cb4cc5b0811%2F0_0_1494_1866%2F1494.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20bad%3A%20Hollywood%20wakes%20up%20to%20the%20power%20of%20dark%2C%20dangerous%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20bad%3A%20Hollywood%20wakes%20up%20to%20the%20power%20of%20dark%2C%20dangerous%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e73c3ea4c5c010fae85fc144d964cb4cc5b0811%2F0_0_1494_1866%2F1494.jpg>
 Tippi Hedren in Hitchcock’s The Birds. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Universal 
There is something exquisitely cinematic in the suffering of women, and 
depicting their torment in big closeup has long been a favourite pursuit of 
male auteurs. How often do their cameras linger on women’s pleasure? Try to 
think of great actressy moments in the cinema and the memory veers towards 
heartbreak more than happiness or fulfilment. Greta Garbo may have laughed in 
Ninotchka, but this was already so atypical that the publicity department 
bragged about it on the poster.

No wonder there have been so many films about Joan of Arc - all that 
in-your-face spiritual agony, with the religious element providing a righteous 
front for the voyeuristic revelling in pain. In The Passion of Joan of Arc, 
Carl Dreyer dwells on Falconetti’s sublime anguish so relentlessly his camera 
is practically lapping up her tears. One thinks of the “women’s pictures” of 
Douglas Sirk or Max Ophüls, or Rainer Werner Fassbinder (Margit Carstensen in 
The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant), or Meryl Streep tortured by Sophie’s 
Choice, or, more recently, Nicole Kidman in Birth, or Marion Cotillard howling 
the roof down in La Vie en Rose or Rust and Bone.

Alfred Hitchcock pretty much dedicated his career to putting his leading 
ladies through the wringer, and duly subjected Joan Fontaine, Ingrid Bergman 
and Kim Novak to the sort of carefully calibrated mistreatment guaranteed to 
make them look more alluring than ever. This tendency reached its apex in The 
Birds, where Tippi Hedren starts off as the epitome of cool blonde chic 
(impeccable coiffure, spotless suit and pearls) and ends up decoiffed, streaked 
with blood, her nylons laddered –a traumatised victim of assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/06/alfred-alfred-hitchcock-sexual-harassment-claims-tippi-hedren-the-birds>
. Hitchcock is clearly getting off on it. Male directors, few of them 
attractive physical specimens themselves, like nothing better than to knock 
perfect leading actresses off their pedestals.

The most Hitchcockian heroine of 2016 was Amy Adams in Tom Ford’s Nocturnal 
Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/03/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-amy-adams-jake-gyllenhaal>
. Adams plays Susan, a super-soignée Los Angeles art gallery owner who lives in 
a concrete and glass Bel Air mansion and sports impeccable maquillage, 
preternaturally straight hair, high-tone couture (as you’d expect in a film 
from the former creative director of Gucci), statement jewellery so pronounced 
you half expect it to start talking and a fabulously good-looking husband who 
keeps her in the style to which she is accustomed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34983e3ec0a24ba6d3fb5413c3138ba2e816371c%2F0_93_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20bad%3A%20Hollywood%20wakes%20up%20to%20the%20power%20of%20dark%2C%20dangerous%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20bad%3A%20Hollywood%20wakes%20up%20to%20the%20power%20of%20dark%2C%20dangerous%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34983e3ec0a24ba6d3fb5413c3138ba2e816371c%2F0_93_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Perfectly flawed … Amy Adams as Susan Morrow in Nocturnal Animals. Photograph: 
Merrick Morton/Universal 
But, this being a revenge thriller (albeit not necessarily the sort that 
you’re expecting) the delivery of the manuscript of a novel by her first 
husband throws a spanner into the perfection. Unlike Hitchcock, Ford is a prime 
physical specimen, and one can safely assume his interest in her downfall isn’t 
so much sexual as conjuring classic Hollywood by expressing emotion via screen 
style. But many filmgoers have felt alienated by Susan not being sympathetic, 
and condemnations of the film as misogynistic are not hard to find. “A love 
letter to sexist movies” (Bitch Flicks); “epitomises salacious, exploitative 
misogyny” (Ruthfully Yours); “an ugly, mean-spirited story from start to 
finish, with a deep misogyny at its core” (Bouquets & Brickbats).

I suppose if you like your films to be purveyors of Old Testament-style 
justice, in which anything unpleasant that may happen to, say, a career woman 
must be de facto punishment for sins she has committed, then Ford’s treatment 
of her is as cruel as that of her ex-husband. But Nocturnal Animals is a 
cautionary tale, not a moral one. I prefer to think of Susan as a tragically 
flawed human being, wrestling with life’s complexities and suffering the 
consequences of her own misguided decisions, yet in control of her own destiny, 
just like all the best male movie characters. I’m not interested in watching 
the hackneyed rise and fall and rise again of a one-dimensional paragon who 
learns from her mistakes, triumphs over sexist opposition and emerges in the 
third act as a shining feminist role model. I want compelling drama and dark 
nights of the feminine soul. I want Shakespearean, and if that means a 
character suffering, so be it.

And it looks as if 2017 might be stepping up to bat. Brace yourself for a 
coven of female characters who are no more sympathetic than Susan. Prepare to 
see them make awful decisions and do bad things, with results that are 
sometimes tragic, sometimes comic, sometimes both simultaneously. In Christine, 
Rebecca Hall gives a fearlessly unlikable performance as an ambitious Florida 
newscaster whose refusal to play the game leads her into some very dark places. 
In Miss Sloane,Jessica Chastain is bracingly uningratiating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/11/miss-sloane-review-jessica-chastain-washington-lobbyist-film>
 as a ruthless Washington DC lobbyist. In Elle, Isabelle Huppert plays a chilly 
businesswoman who reacts to being raped by refusing to embrace the traditional 
movie roles of victim, survivor or avenger, instead striking out into 
unexpected and distinctly uncomfortable territory.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Felle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elle%20trailer%3A%20Isabelle%20Huppert%20stars%20in%20Paul%20Verhoeven's%20noir%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Felle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elle%20trailer%3A%20Isabelle%20Huppert%20stars%20in%20Paul%20Verhoeven%27s%20noir%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Felle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video&media=>
Elle trailer: Isabelle Huppert stars in Paul Verhoeven’s noir thriller – 
exclusive video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/16/elle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video>
All these are hints that the next few months could be one of the most 
promising seasons for choice female roles in years, and what is especially 
exciting is that female film-makers’ visions are at last entering the picture. 
In the three chapters ofCertain Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/25/certain-women-review-kelly-reichardt-returns-melancholy-yet-triumphant>
, Kelly Reichardt presents the non-glamorous lives of Laura Dern, Michelle 
Williams and Lily Gladstone in a precisely observed manner that is the opposite 
of melodramatic, though one of the segments will still break your heart. Maren 
Ade’sToni Erdmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/13/toni-erdmann-review-long-german-comedy-is-slight-biting-little-miracle>
 may be named after the grotesque alter ego of its leading male character, but 
it’s chiefly about the strained relationship with his daughter (Sandra Hüller), 
a workaholic businesswoman leading a bleak life in Bucharest. Like Reichardt, 
Ade isn’t in a hurry and prefers slice of life to glamour, but the film packs 
at least two audience-pleasing highlights to rank with any by commercial 
Hollywood.

But you don’t have to settle for realism, because the more we see movies by 
female film-makers, the more it’s evident that the female point of view, like 
the male one, is not some homogeneous, touchy feely Mama Mia!-type hoedown.
Alice Lowe stars in her own directing debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/19/prevenge-first-trailer-alice-lowe-pregnancy-horror-comedy-video>
, the deliciously mean-spirited Prevenge, as a pregnant woman whose foetus 
urges her to kill, and kill again. Lowe’s Arnold Bennett-ish ear for 
one-liners, insight into hormonal chaos, and gleeful splatter combine to 
present a female POV you’ve never seen before. From the other side of the 
Atlantic, Anna Biller pays visual homage to the colourful style of 1970s occult 
thrillers in The Love Witch, the tale of a Californian femme fatale (Samantha 
Robinson) whose love spells have bloody consequences, but gives the story a 
modern feminist twist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e0ecc162233b5a4cd5cde8bf871b419c56a1872%2F0_7_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20bad%3A%20Hollywood%20wakes%20up%20to%20the%20power%20of%20dark%2C%20dangerous%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20bad%3A%20Hollywood%20wakes%20up%20to%20the%20power%20of%20dark%2C%20dangerous%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbreaking-bad-hollywoods-wakes-up-to-power-of-dark-dangerous-women-rebecca-hall-jessica-chastain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e0ecc162233b5a4cd5cde8bf871b419c56a1872%2F0_7_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Alice Lowe as a woman whose foetus urges her to kill in horror flick Prevenge. 
Photograph: Western Edge Pictures 
And keep your eyes peeled for Julia Ducournau’s Raw, the best and bloodiest 
slice of body horror since David Cronenberg in his prime. It’s about a naive 
French veterinary student (Garance Marillier) whose hair-raising rite of 
passage includes brutal hazing, eating raw liver, cannibalism and the funniest, 
most gruesome bikini waxing ever filmed.

There’s more than enough room for all these films. Some you may love, others 
you might loathe, but there is no longer any excuse to pin feminist hopes and 
dreams on to a single film or female character. We contain multitudes.
 