
No celebration associated with Donald Trump’s inauguration was ever going to 
be able to secure the services ofBruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/13/bruce-springsteen-this-is-the-only-thing-im-qualified-to-do-it-matters-how-i-do-it>
 to provide the entertainment. But a Springsteen covers band? More doable. And 
so the Garden State Presidential Inaugural Gala – New Jersey State Society’s 
bash for a new president, held in Washington DC at every inauguration – booked 
the B-Street Band, exactly as it had done for the Obama inaugurations in 2009 
and 2013. This time, though, given Springsteen’s owndenouncement of the 
incoming president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/24/bruce-springsteen-calls-donald-trump-a-moron>
, the response to the booking was swift and condemnatory.

Even E Street Band bassist Garry Tallent was angered, 
<https://twitter.com/gwtallent/status/819607893087547392> tweeting: “Please 
tell me this is more fake news. Or at least a joke.”

The B Street Band themselves have been shocked by the response. “I’ve been 
beaten down. I haven’t slept. I’ve been up all night,” founder member and 
keyboard playerWill Forte told Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/features/bruce-springsteen-cover-band-defends-trump-inauguration-party-w460813>
. He has also pointed out the event is a non-political New Jersey event and not 
associated with Trump,telling Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/rock/7655004/springsteen-cover-band-controversy-trump-inauguration-not-associated>
: “We’re just working stiffs, working musicians … who got invited to play a 
ball for guys like us, regular jerks, and it’s non-political and just a 
celebration of the changing-over of power.”

Bruce Springsteen: ‘This is the only thing I’m qualified to do. It matters how 
I do it’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/13/bruce-springsteen-this-is-the-only-thing-im-qualified-to-do-it-matters-how-i-do-it>
In fact, the B Street Band were asked to play the 20 January New Jersey ball 
not only before Trump won the election, but long before he was even a 
candidate. Forte told Rolling Stone the band had been booked for the event just 
a week after performing at the 2013 inauguration.

In a statement to fans, he said: “In 2009, The B Street Band was honoured to 
be contracted by the NJ inaugural ball to perform at their gala celebrating
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>’s election. The 
NJ State Society was so impressed, they immediately hired the band for their 
gala four years later in 2013. At that time we performed for President Obama’s 
successful re-election. The gala again enjoyed our NJ Shore-flavoured style and 
signed us a third time for the 2017 gala.”

Nancy Fatemi of the New Jersey State Society, which organises the gala, told 
Rolling Stone: “We consider them the official band of the New Jersey State 
Society and would not consider any other group. We have been holding this event 
consistently since the 1950s. Our ball is always non-partisan, like our 
organisation, and a celebration of democracy and the peaceful transfer of 
power. Springsteen music is magic to the ears of our New Jersey members and 
guests, regardless of party.”

Forte told both Billboard and Rolling Stone that the band wouldn’t be pulling 
out of the event, because they had signed a contract. “I’ve been in enough 
litigation in my life. I have four kids. I’m 63 years old,” Forte said. “I 
can’t make stands like other people can. I’m not in that position. Whatever the 
politics may be, [the band] understands that I’m just trying to do what’s 
right.”
 