
It is vitally important for investors to understand the risks that climate 
change may pose to the businesses they have invested in – and the opportunities 
in transitioning to a low-carbon economy. It’s not an easy task.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> may be one of the 
world’s best-modeled processes in physics, but in finance, the information is 
scarce. The projections are opaque. There is no consensus on which data matters 
or how to interpret it.

Why is corporate America picking wind power over solar?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/21/solar-wind-energy-renewables-google-microsoft-amazon>
While the US has rules requiring public companies to disclose their climate 
risks, the government has beenlax in enforcing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/24/business/energy-environment/sec-is-criticized-for-lax-enforcement-of-climate-risk-disclosure.html>
 these rules. A compelling example of that comes from a New York state
government investigation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/24/business/energy-environment/sec-is-criticized-for-lax-enforcement-of-climate-risk-disclosure.html>
 revealing that the Missouri-based Peabody Energy, the world’s largest coal 
producer that filed for bankruptcy in April this year, had withheld its own 
projection that climate change would lower the demand for coal.

The arrival of the Trump administration is causing concerns that the US will 
fall further behind in addressing climate change. When our government isn’t 
willing to step up, we have to take matters into our own hands. For companies 
that understand the value of identifying and analyzing their climate risks, new 
help has arrived.

Earlier this month, an international task force led by former New York City 
Mayor Michael Bloomberg issued a sweeping set of 11 recommendations 
<https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/publications/recommendations-report/> that give 
specific instructions on how companies in every industry should disclose 
information about climate risk and governance, strategy, risk management, 
metrics and targets.

Just as crucially, the task force’s report takes into account the goal of the 
Paris climate agreement to keep the world’s rising temperatures atno more than 
2C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
 above pre-industrial levels. The report advises businesses to use the 2C 
warming scenario as a model for analyzing climate risks and the progress they 
are making.

These guidelines are voluntary, that’s true. But this is a market-led effort 
that will have an outsized impact. The task force developed the recommendations 
with the help of heavyweights in business and finance, including investment 
firm BlackRock, French insurance company Axa and Unilever.

I hope that the two global organizations that set corporate reporting 
standards, the International Accounting Standards Board and the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board, will adopt these recommendations. The mandate of 
the two groups is to protect investors.

But shareholders don’t have to wait. This report gives a framework – and more 
firepower – to demand disclosure. Measuring the impacts of climate change will 
help us identify companies that we don’t want to put money into and identify 
new investment opportunities. Having an agreed upon framework means we can get 
working towards that economic opportunity.

What businesses want Trump to know about climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/23/trump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21>
We have already seen evidence of how climate change is shaping lives. Research 
shows that global warming has worsened thedrought that has gripped California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/20/california-drought-blame-global-warming>
 since 2012. The drought has turned acres of arable land to dust and has led to 
billions of dollars in financial losses.

We have also seen major investment opportunities that have emerged because of 
climate change: there aremore solar energy jobs 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-05-25/clean-energy-jobs-surpass-oil-drilling-for-first-time-in-u-s>
 than in oil, natural gas and coal in the US.

An analysis by the California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> 
Public Employees Retirement Systems (Calpers), which manages $300bn in assets, 
showed that more than 50% of the emissions from the public company stocks it 
holds comes from just 100 of over 10,000 companies it is invested in. During 
the next five years, I and others at Calpers will work with global investor 
coalitions to demand disclosure of emissions and plans for reducing the 
emissions from these firms.

For too long the market has been in the dark about how exposed it is to risks 
and the opportunities that we all know are out there. Now we have the tools to 
manage these risks and make the most of new opportunities. We’re going to use 
them.
 