
More than 600 businesses and investors signed and released a letter on Tuesday 
urging president-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> to fight climate change – a 
move that coincides with the start of the Senate hearings to confirm his 
cabinet nominees, who are poised to gut existing climate policies.

The letter <http://www.lowcarbonusa.org/> contains signatures from roughly 200 
more companies and investors than when it was initially submitted after the 
election in November, including Campbell Soup, Johnson & Johnson and the New 
York State Retirement Fund. The previous plea wassigned by companies like 
Monsanto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/23/trump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21>
, eBay, Levi Strauss and Staples.

What businesses want Trump to know about climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/23/trump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21>
“We want the US economy to be energy efficient and powered by low-carbon 
energy ... Failure to build a low-carbon economy puts American prosperity at 
risk,” says the letter.

The letter urges Trump to continue policies that combat global warming, such 
as the Clean Power Plan created by the Obama administration to cut emissions 
from coal power plants. The letter also petitions Trump to invest in low-carbon 
energy at home and abroad and remain committed to the Paris agreement.

“As a utility, we are a critical infrastructure, so we make big investments in 
our system,” says Melissa Lavinson, chief sustainability officer for PG&E Corp, 
the parent of Pacific Gas and Electric Co in California that signed the letter. 
“Climate change can impact our ability to safely, affordably and reliably serve 
our customers. For example, more heat waves mean more cooling days, and sea 
level rise can affect coastal infrastructure. So for us taking action on 
climate change is very important.”

The letter reflects the hope that Trump, as a businessman, will heed the 
declaration of so many American companies that climate change is real and could 
pose a threat to their financial health.

Whether the petition will make any impression on the president-elect, who has 
claimed in the past that climate change is a hoax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>
 and wishes to disregard the Paris agreement, is unclear.

Since the letter was first released nearly three months ago, Trump has picked 
advisors and cabinet members who are largely hostile toward environmental 
regulations and have close ties to the fossil fuel industry.

For example, Trump nominated climate change denier Scott Pruitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
, a former Oklahoma attorney general and a driving force behind the lawsuit 
against the Clean Power Plan, to head the Environmental Protection Agency.

The nominee for energy secretary, Rick Perry, was governor of Texas, the oil 
and wind energy capital of America. While he supported the expansion of the 
state’s wind energy development, he made climate change skepticism part of his 
platform during a failed bit for presidency in 2011. Perry also once said he
wanted to eliminate 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/06/rick-perry-climate-change-skeptic-oops>
 the very department he’s now expected to lead.

Trump wants the outgoing ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson as secretary of state, a 
decision that’s led some environmentalists to dub it “an epic mistake” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/rex-tillerson-environmental-record-exxonmobil>
.

Representatives from Trump’s team did not respond to the Guardian’s requests 
for comment.

While environmental groups are gearing up for an intense fight with the new 
government, evidence continues to emerge that points to the substantial 
business risks posed by rising global temperatures, such as dwindling supplies 
of raw materials and water.

Extreme heat, for example, is bad for the economy 
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603158/hotter-days-will-drive-global-inequality/>
, causing crop failure and reduced worker productivity, according to a new 
study from Stanford University and the University of California at Berkeley.

Businesses no longer have an excuse not to disclose their climate risks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/29/business-climate-risk-disclosure-bloomberg>
The Sustainability Accounting Standards Board, a nonprofit group that sets 
standards for corporate sustainability disclosures to investors and is chaired 
by former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, estimates thatsignificant climate 
risks <https://library.sasb.org/climate-risk-technical-bulletin/> – such as 
severe weather events – exist for most of the companies it tracks, which 
represent $27.5tn, or 93%, of US stocks as measured by market value.

There is also evidence that companies that embrace sustainability actually 
perform better financially than those that do not. A2014 study by the nonprofit 
CDP 
<https://www.starwoodhotels.com/Media/PDF/Corporate/CDP-SP500-climate-report-2014.pdf>
, which provides environmental data and climate risk analysis, found that 
corporations that actively manage and plan for climate change achieved an 18% 
higher return on investment than companies that weren’t planning for climate 
change, and 67% higher than companies that refused to disclose their emissions.

Investors are increasingly seeing opportunities to address climate change. 
Nearly two dozen of the world’s most successful business leaders, entrepreneurs 
and venture capitalists such as Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, Virgin’s Richard Branson 
and Alibaba founder Jack Ma, plan to invest as much as $1bn in a fund 
<https://qz.com/859860/bill-gates-is-leading-a-new-1-billion-fund-focused-on-combatting-climate-change-through-innovation/>
 called Breakthrough Energy Ventures, led by Bill Gates, that aims to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by financing clean energy technology.
 