
Dylan Thomas had one. So did Roald Dahl, Arthur Miller and Norman MacCaig. 
Virginia Woolf wrote her last words in one and Gabriel Oak had one in Hardy’s
Far From the Madding Crowd.

Fishermen and shepherds have long recognised their value and between the wars 
they were promoted as boltholes, a means for the working classes to escape 
toxic cities for the good of their health. InScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, the hut, whether a mountain bothy or 
forest retreat, has long been part of both the scenery and the cultural 
landscape, immortalised in the “but an’ ben” of the Broons cartoon strip – a 
tiny two-room, one-storey holiday cottage.

But a toughening up of land access rights and a change in attitudes by 
landowners led to the tradition of the rustic getaway almost disappearing, 
leaving just sheds for those with gardens, and holiday lets for those who could 
afford them.

Now a ‘hutting’ revival is predicted after the Scottish government signalled 
that later this month it will change legislation to exempt huts from building 
regulations, allowing people to put up these most simple of second homes in the 
countryside wherever they can rent or buy a plot of suitable land, subject to 
planning permission.

It is the end of a long campaign by enthusiasts and conservationists, who have 
been battling for years to re-establish the hutting tradition in Scotland. 
Karen Grant, from environmental charityReforesting Scotland 
<http://www.reforestingscotland.org/>, has been working to promote the group’s 
Campaign for a Thousand Huts <http://www.thousandhuts.org/> which has attracted 
interest from people all over Scotland and beyond. The group is working on good 
practice guidelines for the burgeoning trend. New groups of enthusiasts are 
springing up and architects specialising in small eco-buildings are reporting 
high levels of interest.

“Some people will just want to quietly build their own hut using whatever they 
can reclaim in wood and materials,” said Grant, “while others will want to have 
something designed and built. I know one chap who built his for £200 while 
others will come in at £15,000 – it’s a sliding scale in terms of cost. And so 
is the kind of hutting people want – part of a community, maybe, or else out on 
their own. The important thing is that it’s a simple human dream, to have a 
place of tranquillity, close to nature, and it’s absurd that it has been 
outlawed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fhow-scotland-back-in-love-with-hutting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F615fc95b0ae468f2ac00a5f544aba0a0fe908aca%2F0_66_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cabin%20fever%3A%20how%20Scotland%20is%20back%20in%20love%20with%20the%20joys%20of%20%E2%80%98hutting%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fhow-scotland-back-in-love-with-hutting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cabin%20fever%3A%20how%20Scotland%20is%20back%20in%20love%20with%20the%20joys%20of%20%E2%80%98hutting%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fhow-scotland-back-in-love-with-hutting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F615fc95b0ae468f2ac00a5f544aba0a0fe908aca%2F0_66_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Richard Lochhead MSP, left, at the launch of Reforesting Scotland’s planning 
guidance for new hut developments, with Richard Heggie and Karen Grant of the 
Thousand Huts campaign. Photograph: Michelle Lowe 
“We’ve got a great level of interest from people who have just been waiting 
for this move so they can go ahead and establish their hut. Building 
regulations are likely to be relaxed for huts designed for recreational use 
that are of 30 sq metres or less, and using low-impact materials, generally 
off-grid.

“If you’re going to want a flushing toilet you’ll still be looking to apply 
for the right permissions, but we’re hoping most people will be thinking of 
compost toilets or similar low impact ideas, in keeping with the ethos of 
hutting.

“We will have to be careful and make sure this freedom isn’t abused: but our 
primary goal is improving people’s relationship with the forest and the 
environment while improving mental health and wellbeing.”

Already a pilot project with the Forestry Commission has started in Fife, on 
Scotland’s east coast, while acommunity of hutters in Carbeth 
<http://www.carbethhutters.co.uk/>, which has been established since 1918, has 
successfully bought the land it occupies to be held in community ownership.

Richard Lochhead, the Scottish National party MSP for Moray, was the cabinet 
secretary for rural affairs, food and environment until last year and played a 
key role in pressing the Scottish government to act on easing regulations after 
meeting with diehard hutters and seeing the impact on their lives.

“A renewed hutting culture in Scotland would be hugely beneficial because it 
would encourage people, particularly in our towns and cities, to connect with 
the countryside and our spectacular natural environment. This can only help the 
nation’s health and wellbeing,” he said.

“There are clearly different models of hutting and we can learn from other 
parts of the world, such as Scandinavia, where having access to a hut or 
smaller countryside property is very common. In Scotland, there is potential 
for both private developers and community groups to play a role in establishing 
hutting communities, which would also help ensure their sensible use.”

And for those south of the border with a lust for a basic rustic retreat, 
there is no obligation to live in the country of your hut – “although we would 
hope their hut would be something people would use regularly, to build a deeper 
understanding of place, and so you’d maybe not want to live too far away,” said 
Grant. “It’s a lovely thing that many people dream of: we’ll just have to hope 
enough sympathetic landowners think so too.”

RAMSHACKLE SHELL TO GREEN GETAWAY

Chris Cunningham runs a guitar shop in Edinburgh during the week. At the 
weekend he is a hutter. He bought his getaway in a small off-grid colony of 23 
huts on farmland near Peebles in 2011 when it was a ramshackle shell.

“It was a cold January day when my girlfriend and I went to look at it, it was 
falling to bits and had birds living in it. She turned to me as we were leaving 
and said, ‘you’d have to be mental to buy that’, but I was already sold. It’s 
given me something I never thought I’d have, I have a greenhouse and a little 
allotment there, and you have to constantly think outside the box about how to 
manage things off-grid. I’ve just devised a solar-powered watering system for 
the greenhouse.

“There is an ideology, the hutter growing veg and reading by candlelight, but 
also some who do use their huts as a bolthole for drinking and leaving rubbish 
about so I do worry there is a risk of how manageable sites will be if hutting 
is opened up to the masses. We’ll have to see how it pans out”

 * This article was amended on 18 January 2018 to make it clear that while 
building regulations are to be relaxed for huts, planning permission is still 
required.
 