
To the Editor of the Manchester Guardian,
Sir, – You have been kind enough on more than one occasion to give publicity 
to letters from me relating to the inducements extended by the Dominion and 
Provincial Governments ofCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> to 
persons who from one cause or another are contemplating emigration from the 
United Kingdom.

I venture to think that in no part of the world can settlers obtain greater 
advantages than in the Dominion of Canada. In Manitoba, the North-west 
Territories, and parts of Ontario free grants of 160 acres of land are to be 
had. In Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, Ontario, and 
British Columbia, as well as in Manitoba and the North-west Territories, public 
lands can be purchased on nominal terms. And in every part of the country 
improved farms may be acquired at reasonable prices by those who are possessed 
of a little means.

Canada's immigration website crashes as Trump's election lead grows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/canadas-immigration-website-crashes-as-donald-trumps-us-election-lead-grows>
The agricultural industry is in a flourishing condition. There is a large 
market, locally for the produce that is raised, while the exports of the 
Dominion, particularly to Great Britain, of cattle, meats, grains of all kind, 
flour, butter, cheese, eggs, and fruit are increasing with great rapidity. It 
is not only in agriculture, however, that opportunities await the new settler. 
Canada has abundant wealth in her forests, mines, and fisheries, all of which 
can be more rapidly developed than at present with the advent of capital and 
more people; and the same remarks apply to the important manufacturing industry 
which is expanding so satisfactorily.

Both in agriculture and in the other directions mentioned there are excellent 
openings for men with money and for labour of the classes in demand. It may be 
added that taxation is light, that the cost of living is relatively cheaper 
than in the United Kingdom, that the climate is healthy and attractive, and 
that a man with a family has unusual facilities for the education and starting 
in life of his children.

Canada has room for many millions more than her present population. The 
occupation of the immense areas of fertile land now awaiting cultivation means 
increased markets for British productions, which now receive a tariff 
preference of 33 1-3 per cent over similar merchandise from other countries. At 
the same time it would provide additional sources of supply of the many food 
and other products which Canada can furnish in abundance, and which the United 
Kingdom is likely to continue to import in large quantities. It can readily be 
understood, therefore, that the question of immigration is regarded in the 
Dominion, and in the colonies generally, as of Imperial as well as of local 
importance.

The Canadian Government have appointed agents in different parts of the United 
Kingdom, from whom, as well as from my own Department, full particulars about 
Canada may be obtained, either personally or by letter; and my principal object 
in once more drawing attention to the matter is to emphasise the importance, to 
those contemplating emigration, of procuring in advance the fullest and most 
reliable information available. – I am, &c.,STRATHCONA 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Smith,_1st_Baron_Strathcona_and_Mount_Royal>
.
Offices of the High Commissioner for Canada, 17, Victoria-street, London, 
S.W.; January 16, 1901.
 