
The Northampton and England flanker Calum Clark is to leave the club at the 
end of this season. The versatile forward, who is equally comfortable on the 
blindside or openside and has filled in at lock and No8 in the past, is likely 
to join thePremiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> and 
European champions Saracens, according to reports.

Clark, who was Northampton’s 2014-15 player of the season, won a solitary 
international cap in a warm-up match against France before the 2015 World Cup 
but was a regular member of Stuart Lancaster’s training squads and has long 
been tipped as a promising back-row option for England; he was a particular 
favourite of Lancaster having worked with the deposed England coach in the 
junior ranks at Leeds. This season, however, his opportunities have been 
limited and he missed the whole of the last campaign with a serious shoulder 
injury.

RFU’s Ian Ritchie ‘happy’ with George North concussion review protocols
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/concussion-rfu-ian-ritchie-george-north>
This season the 27-year-old has found it hard to nail down a place for his 
club even as Northampton have struggled badly in pursuit of their traditional 
dominance up front. Tom Wood, the club captain and a direct rival in Clark’s 
position, has been in outstanding form and Eddie Jones, the England coach, 
appears to once againfavour the Saints’ Teimana Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/teimana-harrison-england-eddie-jones-south-africa>
 ahead of the forthcoming Six Nations. Jamie Gibson and Ben Nutley have also 
provided stiff competition for places on the flanks, while Louis Picamoles has 
been the player of the season so far at No8.

Clark did not help himself when he picked up a three-week ban for elbowing 
Worcester’s Donncha O’Callaghan in November. This followed the 32-week 
suspension he was given in 2012 forhyperextending the arm of the Leicester 
hooker Rob Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/mar/29/calum-clark-suspended-rfu>. 
However, Clark’s disciplinary record and form between the two incidents were 
outstanding and he was most recently called up by England in 2015, shortly 
before his shoulder surgery.
 