
Some of the NRL’s biggest names including Cameron Smith, Jason Taumalolo and 
Sam Burgess have been overlooked for the World All Stars because of their 
packed scheduled over the next 12 months.

World All Stars coach Mal Meninga refused to pick many involved in the recent 
Four Nations tour because of fear of player burn out.

Andrew Fifita given NRL breach notice over public support for convicted killer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/andrew-fifita-given-nrl-breach-notice-over-public-support-for-convicted-killer>
Cooper Cronk, Shaun Johnson and Jesse Bromwich were names also not brought up 
at the selection table for the 10 February clash with a packed domestic 
schedule and the 2017 World Cup on the horizon.

“They’ve played a lot of footy so we made sure that anyone who was involved in 
the Four Nations – for Australia, England, New Zealand or Scotland – we 
wouldn’t be making them play. They needed a spell,” Meninga said.

Meninga did pick Jake Trbojevic and Jake Friend, who were a part of the 
Kangaroos squad but were given the all clear because they were given limited 
game time.

The Indigenous All Stars have named several Kangaroos representatives 
including Greg Inglis, Johnathan Thurston and Sam Thaiday.

Sydney Roosters rake Jake Friend will wear the No9 for the World All Stars in 
Smith’s absence, giving him a rare shot at a representative team having toiled 
behind Smith for years.


Meninga said Semi Radradra was not considered because he is awaiting a court 
hearing to answer domestic violence charges. The Parramatta winger was not 
considered for the Four Nations because his charges were still before the court.

Controversial prop Andrew Fifita was named in the Indigenous All Stars side 
despite having the threat of a ban hanging over his head. The Cronulla star 
made Laurie Daley’s 20-man squad a day after receiving a breach notice from the
NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl>.

Meninga hinted he would have left out Fifita, after the 27-year-old was asked 
to show cause over his relationship with convicted one-punch killer Kieran 
Loveridge.

Fifita could be rubbed out for the start of the season but is reportedly 
likely to receive a $20,000 fine after writing “FKL” – a message of support for 
childhood friend Loveridge, who is serving a 10-year jail sentence for the 
killing of Thomas Kelly in Kings Cross in 2012.

Meninga refused to pick Fifita for the recent Four Nations tour because of the 
integrity unit’s investigations and because he was not considered a fit and 
proper character.


While Meninga said he had no problem with Fifita lining up for the exhibition 
game in Newcastle, he said the character of the player should be considered.


“I would suggest to you that is a good point – the character of the person on 
and off the field really matters when you select representative footy sides,” 
Meninga said.


Daley said Fifita’s involvement in the game was dependent upon him not being 
banned. “The selection criteria was he was available so the fans have picked 
him so he’s been included,” Daley said.

“I’ve coached him before and certainly had no issues with him. He’s always 
proud and he loves playing in this game. It will depend on what the breach 
notice says and whether it’s a fine or whether he’s looking at missing games. 
He has been selected subject to him being cleared.”

Indigenous All Stars: Jack Wighton, Blake Ferguson, Greg Inglis, Will 
Chambers, Dane Gagai, Johnathan Thurston, Ash Taylor, Ryan James, Nathan Peats, 
Andrew Fifita, Joel Thompson, Wade Graham, Sam Thaiday. Interchange: Tyrone 
Peachey, Jack Bird, Leilani Latu, Latrell Mitchell, Aidan Sezer, Kyle Turner, 
Adam Elliott.


World All Stars: Jarryd Hayne, David Mead, Joseph Leilua, Konrad Hurrell, Nene 
Macdonald, Mitchell Moses, Adam Reynolds, Nate Myles, Jake Friend, Jordan 
McLean, Gavin Cooper, Bryce Cartwright, Jake Trbojevic. Interchange: Reagan 
Campbell-Gillard, Sosaia Feki, Sione Mata’utia, Sam Lisone, Moses Mbye, Tepai 
Moeroa, Jordan Turner.
 