
People are being urged to support calls by a major pan-European group to halve 
‘farm to fork’food waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/10/uk-throwing-away-13bn-of-food-each-year-latest-figures-show>
 in Europe by 2030, on the eve of a landmark vote later this month.

The European parliament’s environment committee will vote on new regulations 
on 24 January, which are set to shape the next 15 years of EU food waste policy 
and have the potential to be the most ambitious, legally binding target on food 
waste in the world.

A new campaign <https://www.change.org/p/let-s-cut-europe-s-food-waste-in-half>
 urges MEPs to halve the amount of food waste generated in the EU by 2030, and 
for this target to be legally binding at member state level. A movement of 42 
organisations from across 15 countries has backed calls for the EU’s circular 
economy package to support a 50% reduction of food waste by 2030. Separately, 
47,000 people have to date signed the public petition (28,000 from Change.org 
and 19,000 from Global Citizen) backing the move.

If the target is passed, it would become British law before the UK leaves the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, making it difficult for 
the government to backtrack.

Martin Bowman, Campaigner for This is Rubbish 
<http://www.thisisrubbish.org.uk/>, who started the UK public petition 
<http://www.change.org/p/let-s-cut-europe-s-food-waste-in-half>, said: “The 
circular economy package has potential to be the most ambitious food waste 
agreement in the world, and that’s urgently needed – both for the environment 
and the millions suffering from food poverty in Europe.”

An estimated 88m tonnes of food is wasted in EU countries every year, which 
This is Rubbish estimates could feed the 55 million people living in food 
poverty inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> more than nine 
times over.

Kierra Box, campaigner for Friends of the Earth England, Wales and Northern 
Ireland added: “If approved, this ambitious target to halve food waste across 
Europe should enter into UK law before we leave the European Union, meaning 
that it will influence our approach to food waste even after Brexit. If our 
government tries to wriggle out of this commitment when we leave Europe, it 
will have a fight on its hands.”


Some EU countries, including France and Italy already have national schemes in 
place to combat their food waste. Meanwhile, the UK’s major supermarkets will 
be questioned on Wednesday about food waste throughout the entire supply chain 
and why there is little comparable data between retailers on food waste data.

In the third evidence session of its inquiry 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environment-food-and-rural-affairs-committee/news-parliament-2015/food-waste-ev3-16-17/>
 into food waste in England, MPs will want to know why the UK’s levels of 
redistribution, where out-of-date but edible food is redistributed to the 
hungry and the needy via charities and food banks, is at less than 2% – much 
lower than in other European countries.

Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Morrisons and Waitrose will all give evidence, along with 
theFood <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Drink Federation, 
which represents the UK food and drink industry. They will be asked to explain 
their policies on selling ‘wonky’ or imperfect fruit and vegetables, and 
whether current best by/use by labelling is contributing to food waste by 
creating consumer confusion.

Labour MP Jim Fitzpatrick of the environment, food and rural affairs 
committee, said: “Despite the progress made reducing food waste along the 
supply chain, the amount of reusable, recyclable food that we throw away in the 
UK is still staggeringly high. Of the estimated 7m tonnes we discard from our 
homes each year, nearly half is edible.

“We will be asking the supermarkets what more can be done to reduce food waste 
and this needless expense to our households. We know there is a lot of good 
practice out there – from Tesco’s work with the Fareshare charity to a£1m food 
waste trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/29/uk-families-blow-twice-as-much-money-on-food-waste-as-they-think-research-shows>
 by Sainsbury’s – and we want to find out more about it.”
 