
Trump’s promise to make America great again

The steel mills have sat dormant for 20 years in Northampton County, 
Pennsylvania – a county that had voted twice for Barack Obama before flipping 
and voting forDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> in 
2016. In a new series, the Guardian has been spending time in Northampton 
County, speaking to voters who have embraced Trump’s promise to make America 
great again, and those who doubt it. We will continue to do so as the Trump 
presidency progresses, to find out how Trump has risen or fallen in the 
estimation of voters who confounded the pollsters and shocked the political 
classes by making him president. Bruce Haines, the managing owner of the 
Historic Hotel Bethlehem and a lifelong Republican, told Tom McCarthy: “Now 
it’s like, it’s almost like I left the country for eight years, and now it’s 
back. Like the country that I grew up in is now returning. Now, whether all 
that will happen or not, who knows.”

Can Trump really make America great again? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/donald-trump-america-great-again-northampton-county-pennsylvania>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fdonald-trump-divided-america-pennsylvania-steel-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20has%20divided%20America.%20Can%20he%20really%20make%20it%20great%20again%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fdonald-trump-divided-america-pennsylvania-steel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20has%20divided%20America.%20Can%20he%20really%20make%20it%20great%20again%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fdonald-trump-divided-america-pennsylvania-steel-video&media=>
Trump has divided America. Can he really make it great again? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/17/donald-trump-divided-america-pennsylvania-steel-video>
Manning’s prison sentence commuted

Chelsea Manning, the US army soldier who became one of the most prominent 
whistleblowers of modern times when she exposed the nature of warfare in Iraq 
and Afghanistan, and who then went on to pay the price with a 35-year military 
prison sentence, is to be freed in May after Obama commuted her sentence just 
three days before he leaves the White House. Manning, a transgender woman, will 
walk from a male military prison in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, on 17 May, almost 
seven years to the day since she was arrested at a base outside Baghdad for 
offenses relating to the leaking of a vast hoard of US state secrets to the 
website WikiLeaks. Melinda Taylor, who serves on the legal team for Julian 
Assange, said that the WikiLeaks founder was “standing by” after pledging to 
agree to US extradition if Manning was granted clemency. Meanwhile NSA 
whistleblower Edward Snowden’s leave to remain in Russia has been extended for 
three years,his lawyer has said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/18/edward-snowden-allowed-to-stay-in-russia-for-a-couple-of-years>
.

Chelsea Manning’s prison sentence commuted by Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-sentence-commuted-barack-obama>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Senate confirmation hearings

It’s week two of confirmation hearings for Trump’s cabinet picks. On Tuesday, 
his nominee for secretary of education, Betsy DeVos, faced questioning from the 
Senate, as didRyan Zinke, his choice to lead the department of the interior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/trump-interior-secretary-pick-ryan-zinke-climate-change>
. In her remarks, DeVos refused on Tuesdayto state whether she would uphold the 
Obama administration’s guidance on how to handle campus sexual assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/betsy-devos-hearing-prompts-fears-for-campus-sexual-assault-protections>
. On the roster for today: Wilbur Ross, the nominee for commerce secretary, Tom 
Price for health secretary, Scott Pruitt, the nominee to lead the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and Nikki Haley, the nominee for UN ambassador. Price, a 
congressman from Georgia, has recently come under fire from senators for buying 
and selling health-related stocks while he was an influential voice on 
healthcare policy in the House of Representatives. Pruitt, who has served as 
attorney general of Oklahoma since 2011, is a climate change skeptic who has 
sued the agency he has been chosen to lead.

Scott Pruitt confirmation hearing for Environmental Protection Agency: the key 
points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/18/scott-pruitt-confirmation-hearing-epa-key-points>

Xi Jinping signals China will champion free trade

Joe Biden spoke on day two of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland 
this morning inhis final speech as US vice-president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/18/middle-classes-imf-christine-lagarde-davos-2017-joe-biden>
, in which he criticized Russia and called on the richest 1% to pull their 
weight. On Tuesday, China’s president, Xi Jinping,delivered a strong defense of 
globalization 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/china-xi-jinping-china-free-trade-trump-globalisation-wef-davos>
 and criticized Trump’s protectionist policies. Followour live coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/18/davos-2017-global-elite-angry-middle-classes-climate-change-joe-biden-day-2-live>
 of the event.

Xi Jinping signals China will champion free trade if Trump builds barriers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/china-xi-jinping-china-free-trade-trump-globalisation-wef-davos>

The legacy of Obama in seven drawings

The Guardian’s data editor, Mona Chalabi, illustrates seven numbers that 
illustrate what Obama did during his eight years in the White House – including 
number of jobs created, number of vacation days and number of drone strikes 
ordered.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-economy-jobs-healthcare-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20legacy%20of%20Barack%20Obama%2C%20in%20seven%20drawings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-economy-jobs-healthcare-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20legacy%20of%20Barack%20Obama%2C%20in%20seven%20drawings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-economy-jobs-healthcare-video&media=>
The legacy of Barack Obama, in seven drawings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/18/barack-obama-legacy-economy-jobs-healthcare-video>
Diary of a Latino teen in age of Trump

After Donald Trump won the election, the Guardian asked 17-year-old Angelina 
Alvarez – who, along with others, had worn a Dump Trump T-shirt in response to 
anti-immigrant, anti-Mexican, pro-Trump graffiti at school – to keep a diary of 
her feelings in this new era. “I don’t even know what to think. I’m just 
scared, I want to be with my grandma right now and just hug her,” she wrote on 
election day.

‘Don’t tell me it’s going to be OK’: diary of a Latino teenager in the age of 
Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/18/teenage-diary-latino-donald-trump-california>

NFL on alleged Lady Gaga politics ban

Rumors that Lady Gaga would be blocked from speaking out about politics or 
Donald Trump during her upcoming Super Bowl half-time show have been denied by 
the National Football League. “This is unsourced nonsense from people trying to 
stir up controversy where there is none. The Super Bowl is a time when people 
really come together,” the NFL’s Natalie Ravitz told CNN. “Lady Gaga is focused 
on putting together an amazing show for fans and we love working with her on 
it; we aren’t going to be distracted by this.” The Super Bowl will be on 5 
February.

NFL denies Lady Gaga is banned from mentioning Donald Trump at Super Bowl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/18/nfl-denies-lady-gaga-banned-from-mentioning-donald-trump-at-super-bowl>

And finally … fatbiking grows in popularity


Fatbikes – named for their comically thick tires – look like monster trucks of 
the biking world, Merope Mills writes. They’re designed for riding on surfaces 
like sand and snow and are booming in popularity.

Fatbiking in California: could the cycling trend be as big as snowboarding? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2017/jan/18/fatbiking-california-cycling-trend-bigger-than-snowboarding>
 