
Among the 3,000 politicians, business leaders, economists and celebrities 
attending this year’s World Economic Forum inDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> will be a 64-year-old with 
receding hair and rimless glasses.

The academic demeanour of Larry Fink belies his role running BlackRock, an 
outfit he founded 30 years ago and which has become the biggest fund manager on 
the planet, overseeing $5.1tn (£4.2tn) of investments for pensioners and savers.

The sheer size of the operation – the UK economy is worth £1.8tn 
<http://visual.ons.gov.uk/tag/gdp/> – puts Fink at the helm of an international 
powerhouse, with tentacles across markets for stocks and bonds around the globe.

Davos 2017 begins, as Brexit fears hit the pound – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/16/pound-falls-to-lowest-level-since-flash-crash-on-brexit-worries-business-live>
In the UK alone, BlackRock is usually found among the top three shareholders 
in FTSE 100 blue-chip companies. Last weekit pipped the UK government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/08/blackrock-biggest-lloyds-banking-group-shareholder>
 to become the biggest investor in Lloyds Banking Group.

While Fink makes regular appearances at major events such as Davos – this year 
he is to opine on the global economy – BlackRock is not known for its public 
pronouncements. It does not provide specific detail on its shareholdings in 
each company or offer opinions on individual investments.

However, there are signs that it may be about to become more vocal in public 
after its UK arm fired offa letter to the boards of the biggest 350 companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/15/blackrock-demands-cuts-to-executive-pay-and-bonuses>
 listed in London to urge them to rein in executive pay.

Signed by Amra Balic, its head of investment stewardship in Europe, the letter 
says: “We consider misalignment of pay with performance as an indication of 
insufficient board oversight, which calls into question the quality of the 
board. We believe that shareholders should hold directors to a high standard in 
this regard.”

The accompanying document puts board members on notice that they could face 
protest votes at annual general meetings.

Balic had signalled the letter was being prepared last month when she appeared 
before MPs on the Commons business, energy and industrial strategy select 
committee, which is examining corporate governance at a time when Theresa May 
has put executive excess back on politicians’ agenda.

BlackRock should carry clout, not only because of its size but also because 
90% of its investments in listed companies are through tracker funds – 
positions it cannot sell even if it does not like the management.

In the 12 months to the end of June, it voted against 7% of pay-related 
resolutions,including Sir Martin Sorrell’s £70m pay deal at WPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/sir-martin-sorrell-pay-deal-faces-investor-revolt-at-wpp-agm>
 and companies where pay deals were voted down such atengineering company Weir 
Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/shareholder-rebellions-shire-pay-agm-ceo-investor-anger>
 and themedical equipment group Smith & Nephew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
.

This expertise in index-tracking – known as passive investment – helped it win 
business in 2016, when it attracted $202bn of new funds.

BlackRock was launched in 1988 when Fink and seven others set about creating a 
fund management house that specialised in investing in bonds, with the support 
of the Blackstone private equity firm.

It was part of the US financial firm PNC by 1995 after Fink parted ways with 
Blackstone’s Steve Schwarzman. BlackRock floated in New York four years later 
and, apart from taking a dive during the 2008 financial crisis, its share price 
has been on an upward trajectory ever since.

A series of deals followed, notably including with Merrill Lynch over its fund 
management arm in 2006, and later the acquisition of Barclays’ fund management 
arm in the depths of the financial crisis. Thetakeover of Barclays Global 
Investors in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jun/12/blackrock-buys-barclays-fund-unit>
 brought with it iShares, a business that specialises in exchange traded funds 
(ETFs) that track markets. There have been concerns that funds such as these 
could create systemic risks by accentuating market moves during times of stress.

BlackRock is also known for a risk-management system known as Aladdin, used to 
monitor risks posed by changes to interest rates and other factors that can 
affect the value of investments.

 Last year, it came under fire for failing to clamp down on boardroom excess. 
Steve Silberstein, the founder of computer company Innovate Interfaces, took 
issue with BlackRock’s voting record in the US and started a petition to urge 
the company to take a more aggressive approach. His resolution at BlackRock’s 
annual meeting last year got the support of just 4% of shareholders.

In the UK, BlackRock’s rivals wonder whether the $26m paid to Fink last year 
will stand in the way of its calls on leading companies to rein in excess. 
Insiders rubbish the idea – and point out that measuring impact by voting 
records does not take account of the behind-the-scenes talks with companies to 
avert showdowns at annual meetings.
 