
Most people are happy if their medical test results come back negative – but 
for at least 5% of us such news brings no relief. If you have health anxiety, 
there is no test on earth to reassure you. You may pore over the internet 
picking the most serious diagnosis for your symptoms. And last week brought 
evidence that health anxiety can make you physically ill.A study of more than 
7,000 Norwegians 
<http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/6/11/e012914.short?g=w_open_current_tab> found 
that people with such anxiety had a 73% greater chance of developing heart 
disease over 10 years, compared with those who weren’t anxious.

The solution

Health anxiety may increase risk of heart disease, research finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/03/worried-well-more-risk-heart-disease-research-finds>
Health anxiety is the persistent preoccupation with having a serious illness. 
It involves monitoring your body closely, misinterpreting symptoms and often 
seeking medical advice. Prof Peter Tyrer, professor of community psychiatry and 
an expert on health anxiety, says it is the level of anxiety that sets it apart 
fromhypochondriasis <http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/194/6/481>. If you have 
health anxiety, <http://www.bmj.com/content/353/bmj.i2250> you want to stop 
worrying about being ill rather than have your physical symptoms relieved. 
However, this latest study will ramp up any existing anxiety by linking it to 
heart disease.Anxiety is already associated with increased thickness in artery 
walls <http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/6/11/e012914.short?g=w_open_current_tab> 
and activation of hormone systems involved in stress – both increasing the risk 
of heart disease. This new study took into account lifestyle factors that 
promote heart disease, but it was impossible to exclude actual illness being 
the cause of some of the health anxiety.

Health anxiety is not a joke – it can ruin lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/27/health-anxiety-on-the-increase>
Tyrer asks people with symptoms and suspected health anxiety three questions: 
have you been worrying a lot about this (problem)? Do you tend to worry about 
your health in general? And have you ever felt that the problem is more serious 
than the doctors have found? If there’s a yes to any of them, he gently 
suggests help. Simple reassurance is useless –Tyrer’s research shows cognitive 
behavioural therapy is needed 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(13)61905-4/abstract?rss=yes>
 to reinterpret their obsessive thoughts about their health. It helps to keep a 
diary to link symptoms with daily activities.

“The symptoms themselves are often due to anxiety, such as chest pain,” says 
Tyrer. “We get people to make the connection themselves. For example, if they 
get chest pain at work but not when digging the garden then it’s unlikely to be 
physical, cardiac pain.” Tyrer says that health anxiety usually starts young: 
the death of a grandparent can be a trigger. About five to 10 therapy sessions 
seems to work –as does mindfulness 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22708977> – and the benefits seem 
long-lasting. So, if you overmonitor your health and can’t be reassured enough 
(by tests if needed), suspect that your real condition is health anxiety and 
ask your GP for help.
 