
Can’t get to sleep? Try online therapy. While a glowing screen is a 
counter-intuitive cure for insomnia, there is evidence that online cognitive 
behavourial therapy (CBT) can restore normal sleep patterns. In astudy 
<http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapsychiatry/fullarticle/2589161> published 
in this month’s Jama Psychiatry, an online CBT programme cured 57% of those who 
used it, compared with 27% who had standard education about insomnia.

Insomnia affects up to half of all people 
<https://duckduckgo.com/?q=should+internet+cognitive+beahvioural+therapy+for+insomnia+be+the+primayr+treatment+option+for+insomnia&t=osx&ia=web>
 – with up to 20% having a serious problem with getting off to sleep (or 
falling asleep again if they wake up). Chronic insomnia can last for years – 
making people feel sleepy during the day and anxious at night. Standardadvice 
<http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/healthadvice/problemsdisorders/sleepingwell.aspx> 
includes promoting “sleep hygiene”: a cool, dark bedroom; going to bed and 
getting up at the same time every day; and not napping. After that, it’s 
face-to-face cognitive behavioural therapy – but there aren’t enough therapists 
to go round. This may be why people are still prescribed sleeping tablets that 
make them feelpleasantly dissociated and are very addictive 
<http://www.webmd.com/sleep-disorders/guidnderstanding-the-side-effects-of-sleeping-pills#1>
.

In an editorial 
<http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapsychiatry/fullarticle/2589158> 
accompanying this latest research, Andrew D Krystal from the department of 
psychiatry at the University of California says it is inevitable that internet 
CBT will become the first line of treatment for insomnia.

So should you be asking for it already?

The solution

There is evidence <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3353040/> from 
other randomised, controlled trials of the benefit of online CBT. There aremany 
apps 
<http://www.healthline.com/health/healthy-sleep/top-insomnia-iphone-android-apps#1>
 offering insomnia cures, but most have not been tested in proper trials. The 
Jama Psychiatry study looked at the Sleep Healthy Using the Internet (SHUTi 
<http://www.myshuti.com/>) programme, which asks users to keep a sleep diary 
and then produces an algorithm that identifies their “sweet window” (the period 
of time the person should be asleep).

The study’s lead author, Lee M Ritterband from the University of Virginia 
School of Medicine, says that the first and hardest step is sleep restriction. 
“It sounds paradoxical but we are looking for sleep efficiency,” says 
Ritterband. “People will tell you they are in bed for 10 hours but sleep for 
six – which is 60% efficient. We are looking for more than 85% efficiency. So 
if someone only usually sleeps between 2am and 6am, they shouldn’t get into bed 
before midnight.” Time spent in bed then gets extended as the person sleeps 
more.

Hit snooze! How a better night's sleep could save the UK £40bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/nov/30/how-falling-asleep-on-job-could-save-uk-40bn>
Sleepio <https://www.sleepio.com/> is another digital CBT tool that has been 
evaluated in trials and, like SHUTi, can be bought online. Sleepio has an 
animated virtual therapist and also covers sleep restriction, managing 
intrusive thoughts and suggesting relaxation techniques. Both Sleepio and SHUTi 
coach you to break the connection between being awake and being in bed. (Bed is 
for sleeping and sex, not mobile devices.) Both programmes are shown instudies 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22654196/> to have outcomes as good as 
face-to-face CBT.

Online CBT for insomnia is already available 
<https://www.sleepio.com/blog/2015/01/29/sleeping-way-better-mental-health/> in 
some parts of the UK. But if you want to ask your GP for it, or buy it for 
yourself, make sure you use one backed by research – and remember it will only 
stand a chance if you are motivated enough to stick to it.
 