
There is no one who has suffered more under the US government’s crackdown on 
leakers and whistleblowers than Chelsea Manning. But now, afterPresident Obama 
commuted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-sentence-commuted-barack-obama>
her unjust 35-year jail sentence on Tuesday, she will, amazingly, soon be able 
to walk free.

Manning, who provided journalists a historic treasure trove of documents and 
the public an unparalleled window into world diplomacy, will no longer have to 
spend the rest of her life behind bars. She will be released from prison on 17 
May instead of the unconscionable 2045. It’s a cause for celebration, but also 
a time for reflection – not just about what she has gone through but what her 
case represents.

At the time of her revelations, she was the most important whistleblower since 
Daniel Ellsberg. Upon hearing the news today, Ellsberg said this: “Once in a 
while, someone does what they ought to do. Some go to prison for it, for seven 
years; some accept exile for life. But sometimes even a president does it. And 
today, it was Obama.”

Many publications have tried to list the many stories her revelations have 
contributed to over the years, but almost all have fallen short. The State and 
Defense documents that were leaked by Manning – originally to Wikileaks and 
published by the Guardian, New York Times and others – are to this day cited 
regularly in the nation’s largest newspapers. They provided historians and the 
public a view inside the US government’s machinations that we’ve never seen 
before. They even helpedend the Iraq war 
<https://www.salon.com/2011/10/23/wikileaks_cables_and_the_iraq_war/>.

Chelsea Manning: majority of prison sentence commuted by Barack Obama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-sentence-commuted-barack-obama>
In response, the government quite literally tried to destroy her. Although the 
government admitted that no one was harmed because of her disclosures, Chelsea 
suffered beyond what is imaginable for most people.

She was held incommunicado during pre-trial confinement, so that the American 
people could not hear her voice and the explanation for what she did. She was 
then,according 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/12/bradley-manning-cruel-inhuman-treatment-un>
 to the UN special rapporteur on torture, treated in a “cruel, inhumane and 
degrading way” before her trial by the US military.

After that, she was given a heartbreakingly long 35-year sentence, longer than 
most actual spies, and, for that matter, rapists and murderers. She faced the 
prospect of spending the rest of her life behind bars, where she was 
continually and harshly punished for trivial violations. Recently, she had been
put in solitary confinement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/chelsea-manning-solitary-confinement-suicide-attempt-military>
 – a macabre punishment forattempting suicide. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/chelsea-manning-second-suicide-attempt-attorneys-prison-sentence>

No matter your political leanings or views on the role of leaks in our 
democracy, the treatment Chelsea has suffered over the last 10 years is 
shameful. With a stroke of his pen, President Obama not only did the right 
thing, but quite literally may have saved Chelsea’s life.

That said, the commutation of Chelsea Manning’s sentence cannot be looked at 
in a vacuum. President Obama, while commendably showing her mercy, also oversaw 
a justice department that prosecuted more whistleblowers than all other 
administrations combined, while casting an unmistakable chill over 
investigative reporting and press freedom.

In the coming days many will ask why President Obama chose to commute 
Chelsea’s sentence. Was he looking to the history books, knowing he would go 
down as the president who went after whistleblowers?

If President Obama doesn't commute her sentence, Chelsea Manning won't survive 
| Evan Greer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/chelsea-manning-prison-obama-commute-sentence>
Was he secretly appalled by the treatment Manning received in both pre-trial 
confinement and then later, after she was convicted? (He did, after all, 
condemn solitary confinement in theWashington Post last year 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/barack-obama-why-we-must-rethink-solitary-confinement/2016/01/25/29a361f2-c384-11e5-8965-0607e0e265ce_story.html>
.) Was he worried about what type of retribution the Trump administration would 
take once in office? Or did he just realize that Manning’s sentence was orders 
of magnitude higher than any other leaker in history and fundamentally unjust?

Only the president knows why. But we do know this: he made the right decision, 
one that he didn’t have to. It won’t erase his tragic legacy of cracking down 
on leakers and journalists’ sources, but he should be commended for it. So: 
thanks, Obama. Seriously.
 