
Chelsea Manning <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning>, the US 
army soldier who became one of the most prominent whistleblowers of modern 
times when she exposed the nature of warfare in Iraq and Afghanistan, and who 
then went on to pay the price with a 35-year military prison sentence, is to be 
freed in May as a gift of Barack Obama in his final days as president.

In the most audacious – and contentious – commutation decision to come from 
Obama yet, the sitting president used his constitutional power just three days 
before he leaves the White House to give Manning her freedom.

Manning, a transgender woman, will walk from a male military prison in Fort 
Leavenworth, Kansas, on 17 May, almost seven years to the day since she was 
arrested at a base outside Baghdad for offences relating to the leaking of a 
vast treasure trove of US state secrets to the website WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>.

When will the US government stop persecuting whistleblowers? | Chelsea Manning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/government-persecuting-whistleblowers-insider-threat-chelsea-manning>
Nancy Hollander, Manning’s lawyer, spoke to the Guardian before she had even 
had the chance to pass on to the soldier the news of her release. “Oh my God!” 
was Hollander’s instant response to the news which she had just heard from the 
White House counsel. “I cannot believe it – in 120 days she will be free and it 
will all be over. It’s incredible.”


Manning, 29, is a former intelligence analyst in Iraq who was sentenced in 2013
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/bradley-manning-35-years-prison-wikileaks-sentence>
 after a military court convicted her of passing more than 700,000 documents, 
videos, diplomatic cables and battlefield accounts to WikiLeaks. It was the 
biggest breach of classified material in US history.

In 2010, WikiLeaks worked with media organisations including the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2010/dec/06/wikileaks-us-embassy-cables-live-updates>
 to publish material that offered unprecedented insight into the workings of US 
diplomacy. Among the files Manning leaked was a gunsight video of a US Apache 
helicopter firing on suspected Iraqi insurgents in 2007, killing a dozen people 
including two Reuters journalists.

On a call with reporters, a White House official said repeatedly that the 
president believed Manning’s crimes were “serious” and “harmful to national 
security” but refused to label her a “traitor”.

Human rights groups welcomed Tuesday’s decision. Margaret Huang, executive 
director of Amnesty International USA, said: “Chelsea Manning exposed serious 
abuses, and as a result her own human rights have been violated by the US 
government for years.

Manning exposed serious abuses, and as a result her own human rights have been 
violated by the US government for years
Margaret Huang, Amnesty International USA 
“President Obama was right to commute her sentence, but it is long overdue. It 
is unconscionable that she languished in prison for years while those allegedly 
implicated by the information she revealed still haven’t been brought to 
justice.”

But the commutation was condemned by leading Republicans. Senator John McCain, 
chairman of the Senate armed services committee, described it as a “grave 
mistake” that he fears “will encourage further acts of espionage and undermine 
military discipline. It also devalues the courage of real whistleblowers who 
have used proper channels to hold our government accountable.”

McCain added: “It is a sad, yet perhaps fitting commentary on President 
Obama’s failed national security policies that he would commute the sentence of 
an individual that endangered the lives of American troops, diplomats, and 
intelligence sources by leaking hundreds of thousands of sensitive government 
documents to WikiLeaks, a virulently anti-American organisation that was a tool 
of Russia’s recent interference in our elections.”

WikiLeaks last year published emails hacked from the accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/clinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump>
 of the Democratic National Committee and John Podesta, chairman of Hillary 
Clinton’s election campaign. US intelligence agenciesconcluded that the hacking 
was authorised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 by senior figures in the Russian government and intended to sow chaos and harm 
Clinton’s chances against Donald Trump. Assange has denied receiving the 
material from Russia.

How Chelsea Manning lifted lid on harsh facts of US wars and military justice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-whistleblower-us-military-justice>
Paul Ryan, the House speaker, said: “This is just outrageous. Chelsea 
Manning’s treachery put American lives at risk and exposed some of our nation’s 
most sensitive secrets. President Obama now leaves in place a dangerous 
precedent that those who compromise our national security won’t be held 
accountable for their crimes.”

Tom Cotton, a senator for Arkansas and a military veteran, said: “When I was 
leading soldiers in Afghanistan, Private Manning was undermining us by leaking 
hundreds of thousands of classified documents to WikiLeaks. I don’t understand 
why the president would feel special compassion for someone who endangered the 
lives of our troops, diplomats, intelligence officers, and allies. We ought not 
treat a traitor like a martyr.”

Responding to Cotton, a White House official said it was worth considering 
that the Republican supported the presidency of “someone who publicly praised 
WikiLeaks” and who “encouraged a foreign government to hack his opponent”, in 
reference to Trump.

Obama’s surprise move also raises questions over the future of WikiLeaks 
founderJulian Assange, holed up at the Ecuadorian embassy in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/04/wikileaks-founder-julian-assange-embassy-what-it-means-what-happens-next>
 after claiming asylum. Two women in Sweden have accused him of rape and other 
sexual offences, which he denies.


In a tweet soon after Tuesday’s announcement, Assange thanked “everyone who 
campaigned for Chelsea Manning’s clemency. Your courage & determination made 
the impossible possible.”

He did not mention his earlier pledge 
<https://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/819630102787059713> that he would agree 
to US extradition if Obama granted clemency to Manning. But, Melinda Taylor, 
who serves on Assange’s legal team, said he would not be going back on his 
word. “Everything that he has said he’s standing by,” she told the Associated 
Press.

WikiLeaks (@wikileaks) 
If Obama grants Manning clemency Assange will agree to US extradition despite 
clear unconstitutionality of DoJ casehttps://t.co/MZU30SlfGK 
<https://t.co/MZU30SlfGK>
 <https://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/819630102787059713> January 12, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/819630102787059713> 
The White House insisted on Tuesday that Assange’s offer to submit to 
extradition if Obama “grants Manning clemency” did not influence the 
president’s action.

“The president’s decision to offer commutation was not influenced by public 
comments by Mr Assange or the WikiLeaks organisation,” the White House official 
said on the call. “I have no insight into Mr Assange’s travel plans. I can’t 
speak to any charges or potential charges he may be facing from the justice 
department.”


Manning, who is a columnist for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chelsea-e-manning>, was the symbol of one 
of the harsher aspects of the Obama administration, as an official leaker who 
suffered a longer custodial sentence than any other whistleblower of modern 
times. She was one of several leakers who were prosecuted under the 1917 
Espionage Act – with more individuals falling foul of that anti-spying law than 
under all previous US presidents combined.

The soldier has experienced some very hard times while in military prison. In 
2010 she was transferred from Iraq and Kuwait to the military brig at Quantico, 
Virginia, where she wasput through prolonged solitary confinement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/11/stripped-naked-bradley-manning-prison>
.

Manning, formerly known as US army private first class Bradley Manning, 
revealed after being convicted of espionage that she identifies as a woman. She 
has said she wasconfronting gender dysphoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/17/chelsea-manning-gender-treatment-military-custody>
 at the time of the leaks while deployed in Iraq.

She has endured recent challenges with her morale and mental health, having 
attempted suicide on at least one occasion last year. The US military responded 
to that attempt by punishing her withfurther solitary confinement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/chelsea-manning-solitary-confinement-suicide-attempt-military>
. She was not due to be released until 2045.

Jay Brown, communications director of the Human Rights Campaign, America’s 
biggest LGBT civil rights organisation, said: “President Obama has a strong 
record regarding the humane treatment of prisoners and a long commitment to 
LGBTQ equality. The decision to commute Private Chelsea Manning’s remaining 
sentence – after she served nearly seven years for her crimes – reflects that 
record. We hope Private Manning soon can access the care and treatment that 
she, and every transgender person, deserves.”

Obama has commuted the sentences of 1,385 individuals, more than any other US 
president. The White House official said more commutations are expected “most 
likely on Thursday”.

The official said the president believed six years in prison was sufficient 
relative to sentences given to others who committed similar crimes.

“Manning is somebody who accepted responsibility for the crimes she 
committed,” the official said. “She has expressed remorse for those crimes.”

Earlier on Tuesday, the White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, was asked 
if theNSA whistleblower Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/star-treks-zachary-quinto-calls-for-return-of-edward-snowden>
, currently living in Russia, could also be in line for a pardon. But Earnest 
argued that there are key differences between the two cases. “Chelsea Manning 
is somebody who went through the military criminal justice process, was exposed 
to due process, was found guilty, was sentenced for her crimes, and she 
acknowledged wrongdoing,” he said.


“Mr Snowden fled into the arms of an adversary and has sought refuge in a 
country that most recently made a concerted effort to undermine confidence in 
our democracy.”

Although the documents Manning provided to WikiLeaks were “damaging to 
national security”, Earnest said, those leaked by Snowden were “far more 
serious and far more dangerous”.

Snowden tweeted in response to the Manning decision: “In five more months, you 
will be free. Thank you for what you did for everyone, Chelsea. Stay strong a 
while longer! … Let it be said here in earnest, with good heart: Thanks, Obama 
… To all who campaigned for clemency on Manning’s behalf these last hard years, 
thank you. You made this happen.”
 