
The push to increase adoption <https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> 
in England is punishing low-income women, who are increasingly losing their 
children due to poverty, according to research byLegal Action for Women 
<http://legalactionforwomen.net/>.

A report to be presented at the House of Commons on Wednesday contains new 
research from the legal service and campaign group, which suggests the policy 
of increasing adoption has not reduced the number of children in care – as it 
was intended to – but has increased the number of those separated from their 
parents.

Dr Andy Bilson <https://bilson.org.uk/>, emeritus professor of social work at 
the University of Lancashire, has been analysing the data gathered between 31 
March 2001 and 2016. He found the number of children from care living with 
adopted parents or special guardians, has increased from 87,090 to 143,440 – a 
rise of 65%.

His research found adoptions have risen by 40% over the past five years, 
compared with the five previous years, but over the same period the number of 
children in care rose by 7.5% to 70,440.

British Association of Social Workers launches inquiry into adoption ethics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/10/british-association-of-social-workers-adoption-inquiry>
 “This is very unlikely to be due to an increase in abuse,” said Bilson. “The 
vast majority of this is about neglect or emotional abuse, often through 
witnessing domestic violence.

“Both of these can be better dealt with through family support and responses 
to poverty and deprivation. We are more willing to spend money on someone else 
looking after these children than in making sure the parents make a good job of 
it.”

Bilson’s research is part of the dossier of evidence collected by Legal Action 
for Women to be presented at the House of Commons on Wednesday. The report, 
Suffer the LittleChildren <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children>, 
examines what the group calls “the unjust separation of children from their 
mothers.”

 It finds the number of looked-after children in England is the highest it has 
been since 1985; one in five children under five are referred to childrens’ 
services, one in 19 are investigated and adoptions are higher than in any other 
European country, and now stand at the highest level since data was first 
collected. More than 90% of adoptions are done without the consent of the 
family, the report states.

The report examined the cases of 56 women, all of whom came for help to fight 
for their children. Between them the women had 101 children; 71% of the women 
had suffered rape and/or domestic violence, 47% did not have a lawyer and 39% 
had mental health problems.

Anne Neale, one of the report’s authors, said: “Charges of neglect are used to 
punish, especially single-mother families, for their unbearably low incomes.

 “The fundamental relationship between mother and child is dismissed as 
irrelevant to a child’s wellbeing and development, and the trauma of 
separation, and its lifelong consequences, are ignored.

“Mothers who are victims of domestic violence are refused help, blamed for 
‘failing to protect’ their children, and punished with their removal.”

The report highlights the secrecy of family courts, where adoption decisions 
are made in private hearings, in which mothers are prevented by law from 
talking about the loss of their children.

Donna Clarke, whose granddaughter was taken from her teenage mother and handed 
to adoptive parents, will speak on Wednesday at the launch. She said families 
were being punished for living in poverty. “It is a form of social cleansing,” 
she said. “Vulnerable people are having their children taken away. It is all 
about them judging the risk of significant harm but if they spent the money on 
putting in the support that was needed many of these families would be able to 
keep their children.”

Adoption numbers drop steeply as government's flagship policy falters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/29/adoption-numbers-drop-steeply-as-governments-flagship-policy-falters>
Clarke’s granddaughter was adopted when she was 13-months-old after spending 
the first five months with her biological mother, a teenager with learning 
difficulties. The baby was sent to a foster parent at five months while 
adoption proceedings got underway. The baby’s grandparents asked to be 
considered but none were deemed suitable and the child was given to new 
adoptive parents.


Clarke is able to write and receive two letters a year from the adoptive 
parents to keep in touch with her granddaughter. Her son – the baby’s father – 
and the baby’s mother, have gone on to have other children whom they are 
successfully caring for.

The drive to increase adoptions began under Tony Blair’s government in an 
attempt to reduce the numbers of children in long-term care. It was continued 
under David Cameron, who said that the children and social work bill –currently 
in parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/social-workers-fierce-row-childrens-bill>
 – was designed to “tip the balance in favour of permanent adoption where that 
is the right thing for the child - even when that means overriding family ties.”

In a 2013 high court ruling, Sir James Munby, the president of the high court 
family division, said the political drive to hasten and increase adoption 
should not override due process and break up families unnecessarily.
 