
Women who go to see a Lucy Kirkwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/21/lucy-kirkwood-nsfw-pornography-play-interview>
 play may find themselves unknowingly serving as production consultants. The 
dramatist spends a lot of time in the ladies’, not from nerves but because she 
has found that “you hear really honest responses if you just sit in a cubicle 
and listen”. At a preview of Chimerica, her epic drama about US-Asia relations, 
she overheard an Almeida theatregoer say, “Oh God, it’s three hours long. I was 
hoping to be home for Grand Designs!” It made the writer panic, but the 
production transferred to the West End and won four best play awards.

 Whatever the lavatorial feedback on The Children, about to open at the Royal 
Court in London, Kirkwood has been unusually thoughtful to her audience with 
the choice of title. Few were sure how to pronounceChimerica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/22/chimerica-transfer-billington-harold-pinter>
 (the first syllable, she says, should rhyme with whine not him), while no one 
could remember the name ofIt Felt Empty When the Heart Went at First But It Is 
Alright Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/20/it-felt-empty-when-review>, her 
breakthrough play about sex trafficking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flucy-kirkwood-the-children-royal-court-theatre-chimerica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45164e230ba7868b7db74690ca5763585d39494b%2F0_757_7471_4891%2F7471.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chimerica%20playwright%20Lucy%20Kirkwood%3A%20'The%20whole%20of%20democracy%20looks%20fragile%20and%20farcical'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flucy-kirkwood-the-children-royal-court-theatre-chimerica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chimerica%20playwright%20Lucy%20Kirkwood%3A%20%27The%20whole%20of%20democracy%20looks%20fragile%20and%20farcical%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flucy-kirkwood-the-children-royal-court-theatre-chimerica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45164e230ba7868b7db74690ca5763585d39494b%2F0_757_7471_4891%2F7471.jpg>
 Fallout … Francesca Annis, Ron Cook and Deborah Findlay in The Children. 
Photograph: Johan Persson 
 So is The Children a deliberately simple baptism? “Yes. The Royal Court box 
office rang me up in tears and pleaded with me,” she jokes. “No. But the first 
line of the play is, ‘How are the children?’ And so, when it came to the title, 
I did think, ‘Why not make it easier for the poor bloody people who have to put 
the play on?’”

 Arriving at the Court with long hair blown by the first winds of winter and 
carrying a big bunch of wild flowers, Kirkwood, 33, looks as if she has come to 
rehearse for Ophelia’s big scene in Hamlet. The flowers, a gift for her 
grandmother, were picked at home in Norfolk before she travelled to London for 
a few days to watch rehearsals for The Children and attend a read-through of 
another new play, Mosquitoes, which opens in July at the National.

 After a success as big as Chimerica, writers often become frozen or panicky 
about works in progress. “There wasn’t ever a conscious panic about following 
it,” Kirkwood says. “I’m very grateful that it happened to me relatively late – 
not that I’m ancient, but it didn’t happen out of the gate. If it happens with 
a first play, I can understand that causing a panic. But I did notice that I 
have become quite slow in wanting to finish these two new plays and hand them 
over.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flucy-kirkwood-the-children-royal-court-theatre-chimerica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7427a490df70407922360f59029cab278c90016a%2F0_106_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chimerica%20playwright%20Lucy%20Kirkwood%3A%20'The%20whole%20of%20democracy%20looks%20fragile%20and%20farcical'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flucy-kirkwood-the-children-royal-court-theatre-chimerica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chimerica%20playwright%20Lucy%20Kirkwood%3A%20%27The%20whole%20of%20democracy%20looks%20fragile%20and%20farcical%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flucy-kirkwood-the-children-royal-court-theatre-chimerica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7427a490df70407922360f59029cab278c90016a%2F0_106_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 ‘I came to realise that it is really a thriller’ … Chimerica. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 There was a time when playwrights with a big success – such as Tom Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/17/tom-stoppard-the-hard-problem-national-theatre-london>
 andJohn Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/24/john-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre>
 – moved to a mansion in the country, but Kirkwood says Chimerica did more for 
her profile than her purse: “It was a very expensive production. If it had run 
longer, I might be able to take you out to lunch. So no mansion. But I have a 
Victorian labourer’s cottage that I’m happy with.”

 The fluent rhythm and wit of Kirkwood’s conversation make clear where her 
characters get their spiky, imagistic dialogue from. Of the first dramas she 
wrote as a student at Edinburgh University, she says: “I would hesitate to call 
them plays, but they were definitely dialogue-based lifeforms.” Getting stuck 
during the composition of a play resembles “trying to put on a wet swimming 
costume: it won’t go with you”. Seeing actors working on scripts in rehearsal 
is “like opening your fridge and finding a parmesan rind, and then someone 
makes you a risotto out of it”.

One theme is people choosing not have children because of fears about the 
world they would inhabit

 Key ingredients of both her new plays are female scientists. Mosquitoes 
features two sisters involved with theLarge Hadron Collider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/large-hadron-collider> experiments in 
particle physics. In The Children, three nuclear scientists reunite at a 
teetering seaside cottage after a disaster at a power station. One theme of the 
latter is parental instinct – choosing to be childless, or having children you 
can’t love or who don’t love you. This seems to reflect a social phenomenon of 
the cold war: people choosing not to have children because of fears about the 
world they would inhabit.

 “Yes,” says Kirkwood. “My dad wasn’t going to have children originally for 
that reason.” Did he tell you? “No, my nana told me. But I did talk to him 
about it. Along with: would you rather have had a boy? Because there’s just me 
and my sister. I think those are really interesting questions in families.” She 
stresses, though, that the sibling relationship in Mosquitoes “definitely isn’t 
about me and my sister. Although my family always think it’s about them even 
when it isn’t.”

 She grew up on the borders of Essex and London, her father an investment 
analyst and her mother a signer for deaf students. Her parents’ keen 
theatregoing seeded her vocation: “The very first time I was interviewed, I 
said the first play I had ever seen was Alan Bennett’s adaptation ofThe Wind in 
the Willows at the National <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pVcH9-_6pXw>. But 
it got printed as myfavourite play, which was pretty devastating for a radical 
young dramatist. It was brilliant, though. I remember going to school the next 
day and trying to make a revolving stage.”

'Her work haunts me': Caryl Churchill by those who have worked with her
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/29/her-work-haunts-me-caryl-by-those-that-have-worked-with-her>
 Having given up maths and physics at school as soon as she could, Kirkwood is 
slightly surprised at the current scientific direction of her writing, but she 
consciously approaches the material as a non-expert. Noting the online 
speculation that switching on the Large Hadron Collider might cause the end of 
the world, she wanted Mosquitoes to deal with “the fear of science and how lay 
people react to science”.

 But in the post-apocalyptic scenario of The Children, such concerns seem to 
have been justified. “Yes. That’s true. Although the play for me was never 
meant to be an examination of the ins and outs of nuclear power and whether 
that’s the right way forward.” She sees the older nuclear power stations – 
built with science and requirements that prove inadequate today – as a wider 
metaphor for the problems of dealing with social and political inheritances.

 Across her first decade as a playwright, Kirkwood’s work displays trademarks 
of strong narrative – “I came to realise that Chimerica is really a thriller” – 
and, in common with the work of her theatrical heroineCaryl Churchill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/29/her-work-haunts-me-caryl-by-those-that-have-worked-with-her>
, an intense attempt to approximate on stage the way people really speak. 
Kirkwood’s characters get speeches containing sudden gaps, stammering repeats 
or switchbacks that give a delayed answer to an earlier question.

Chimerica – review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/29/chimerica-review> 
 She points out that the versions of her answers that appear in this piece 
will have been purged of the mistakes, false trails and hesitations, with the 
result that her theory of dialogue now reads: “Very few people in life speak 
aloud in spontaneous perfectly formed certainties – and I’m suspicious of those 
who do – and so to me dialogue without hesitations, overlaps, repetitions, 
loops and mistakes draws attention to its ‘written-ness’. It’s a bit like how 
in a good costume department they don’t just give an actor a coat, they age and 
weather and scuff up and dirty the coat until it feels like the character has 
actually worn it. Because a new coat on stage jumps out a mile.”

 Her first five performed plays – from 2008’s Tinderbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/apr/29/theatre4>, a 21st-century 
dystopia, toChimerica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/29/chimerica-review> – are 
published this month in an anthology, and the playwright found it agonising to 
revisit the scripts: “It’s like reading a teenage diary. You’re mortified by 
what you were like. Anything of mine I read from the past I find excruciating. 
I was itching to rewrite, but I had to be very strict with myself. You have to 
be honest about the writer you were at the time.”

 Between the opening of The Children and rehearsals for Mosquitoes, she hopes 
to complete a four-part drama, potentially for Channel 4, that extends 
Chimerica’s investigation of contemporary politics; it’s set during the year of 
the Brexit and Trump victories. “The whole of democracy looks fragile and 
farcical. After writing about communist China in Chimerica, you suddenly look 
at western democracy and think: is this necessarily better? Maybe this is the 
endgame.”

• The Children is at the Royal Court, London 
<https://royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/the-children/>, from 17 November until 
14 January. Mosquitoes opens at the National Theatre in July.
 