
China is cementing its global dominance of renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/china-to-generate-a-quarter-of-electricity-from-wind-power-by-2030>
 and supporting technologies, aggressively investing in them both at home and 
around the globe, leaving countries including the US, UK and Australia at risk 
of missing the growing market.

A report by the Institute for Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Economics and Financial 
Analysis (Ieefa) found China’s dominance in renewables is rapidly spreading 
overseas, with the country accelerating its foreign investment in renewable 
energy and supporting technologies.


Analysing Chinese foreign investments over US$1bn, Ieefa found 13 in 2016, 
worth a combined $32bn. That represented a 60% jump over similar investments in 
2015.

China to generate a quarter of electricity from wind power by 2030
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/china-to-generate-a-quarter-of-electricity-from-wind-power-by-2030>
China was already widely recognised as the largest investor in domestic 
renewable energy, investing $102bn in 2015, according to Bloomberg New Energy 
Finance – more than twice that invested domestically by the USand about five 
times that of the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/renewables-investment-uk-fall-95-percent-three-years-study-subsidy-cuts-emissions-targets>
.

The big foreign investments in 2016 included two in Australia, two in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and two in Brazil, as well as deals 
in Chile, Indonesia, Egypt, Pakistan and Vietnam.

 * In Australia, China Light & Power struck a $1.1bn deal, buying power from 
wind and solar farms. 
 * In Chile, Tianqi Lithium spent $2.5bn acquiring a 25% stake of a lithium 
miner and processor. (Lithium is essential for lithium batteries used in 
electric vehicles and home battery storage.) 
 * In Germany, Beijing Enterprises Holdings Ltd spend $1.6bn on a Waste to 
Energy development. 
The report noted the global expansion cements China’s total domination of 
renewable energy growth globally.China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>
 now owned:

 * Five of the world’s six largest solar-module manufacturing firms

 * The largest wind-turbine manufacturer 
 * The world’s largest lithium ion manufacturer 
 * The world’s largest electricity utility 
Renewables investment in UK will fall 95% over next three years – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/renewables-investment-uk-fall-95-percent-three-years-study-subsidy-cuts-emissions-targets>
Tim Buckley, director of Ieefa and author of the report, said the election of 
Donald Trump in the US and lack of supportive policy in Australia left those 
countries at risk of missing a huge opportunity.

“At the moment China is leaving everyone behind and has a real first-mover and 
scale advantage, which will be exacerbated if countries such as the US, UK and 
Australia continue to apply the brakes to clean energy,” he said.

“The US is already slipping well behind China in the race to secure a larger 
share of the booming clean energy market. With the incoming administration 
talking up coal and gas, prospective domestic policy changes don’t bode well,” 
Buckley said.

But because of the magnitude of opportunities in investment, technology and 
jobs opportunity expected in the future, he said there was still time for other 
countries to catch up.

“We are still in a relatively early stage of the transition, so the next 
couple of years will be defining in terms of which countries gain the major 
slices of the market,” Buckley said.
 