
China’s football association has announced a series of measures in response to 
“irrational” spending by clubs on transfer fees and player salaries, amid 
concerns that foreign stars are crowding out local talent and harming the 
country’s goal of becoming a global force in world football.

The changes include confirmation that the number of foreign club players who 
can appear at any given time will be reduced from four to three and that each 
team’s starting list must include at least two Chinese players under the age of 
23.

Diego Costa dropped by Chelsea after row over huge offer from China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>
The Chinese Football Association said in a statement on Monday that the steps 
would target the “operations and management” of teams in the top-tier China 
Super League and the China Premier League one step below it.

The new measures will address “recent irrational investments by clubs, 
high-figure transfer fees and salaries paid to domestic and international 
athletes and other issues,” the CFA said in a news release. TheChelsea striker 
Diego Costa is the latest potential big-name signing to have been linked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>
 with a move to China.

High spending by Chinese clubs on players such as Argentina’s Carlos Tevez has 
drawn global attention, raising fears among some that foreign stars are 
depriving local players of opportunities to grow. That could stifle the 
government’s attempts to produce talent capable of achieving its stated goal of 
winning the World Cup by 2050, part of the Chinese President Xi Jinping’s push 
to make football success a national priority.

Even in that endeavour, China is relying heavily on foreign talent, having 
hired the veteran Italian coach Marcello Lippi to helm the men’s national team.

Despite misgivings, Chinese clubs have continued to spend heavily over the 
past year to attract mainly South American stars. Apart from Tevez, whom 
Shanghai Shenhua said it paid an $11m transfer fee to the Argentinian club Boca 
Juniors to acquire, they include Oscar, purchased from Chelsea, Brazilians 
Hulk, Ramires, Alex Teixeira and Paulinho, the Colombian striker Jackson 
Martínez and the Argentinian forward Ezequiel Lavezzi.

Altogether, Chinese Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chinese-super-league> clubs paid to $300m 
in the winter transfer window on big names.
 