
Many of us have been there: hopelessly unprepared for an exam, wishing we had 
studied more and certain of a failing mark. Now for students at one school in
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, success is guaranteed, but it 
comes at a price.


A high school in eastern China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has 
set up a “grade bank”, where students who would normally fail a test can borrow 
points to push them over the line into a passing mark.

Is China’s gaokao the world’s toughest school exam? | Alec Ash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/gaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world>
But nothing in life is free, and students must repay their borrowed grades 
with even higher scores on a future exam. Students can also do extra work in 
the form of lab experiments or public presentations to repay the bank.

China’s education system is heavily dependent on just a few major exams, with 
entry into college almost entirely determined byone test in the final year of 
school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/gaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world>
. Students are under so much pressure to perform, many attempt increasingly
hi-tech methods of cheating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/china-university-exam-cheats-may-face-seven-years-in-jail>
. Spy cameras and radio devices have been found hidden in jewellery, 
spectacles, wallets, pens, rulers and underwear.

“The purpose of exams are for students to evaluate, correct and improve their 
studies, not to make things difficult, punish, destroy student’s enthusiasm,” 
Huang Kan, a director at the school, told the Yangtse Evening News.

Huang also lamented the culture in China where “one test determines your life” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/22/china-education-exams-parents-rebel>
.

The “grade bank” at Nanjing No. 1 High School is currently only in the pilot 
phase, and so far only available for advanced students in the international 
department.

One student, identified only as Gui, recently used the bank to borrow seven 
points in order to receive a passing grade of 60 on a physics test, the 
newspaper reported, but most students usually need only one or two points.


“The difference in learning between a score of 59 points and 60 points is not 
large, but the psychological impact on students is huge,” said Mei Hong, a 
physics teacher at the school.

So far about a quarter of the students in the pilot program have borrowed from 
the bank.

Like a real bank, borrowing marks will incur interest, and students can repay 
their debt in installments. Any students still in debt at the end of the 
semester will get a “red mark” on their record.
 