
On the surface, things were looking up. The LA Clippers held the league’s 
longest active win streak 
<http://losangeles.cbslocal.com/2017/01/16/clippers-trounce-thunder-extend-win-streak-to-7/>
, notching their seventh straight win with Monday’s 120-98 victory over the 
Oklahoma City Thunder. Yes, there were concerns when point guard Chris Paul 
injured his hand – it’s never a good sign when your franchise player kicks a 
chair in frustration after being hurt – but x-rays taken after the game proved 
to be negative. For a time, it seemed the biggest news to come out of the 
Clippers camp the next day was that forward Blake Griffin, currently biding 
time until his no-doubt triumphant return from knee surgery, was participating 
in a remake ofWhite Men Can’t Jump. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/17/white-men-cant-jump-remake-kenya-barris-blake-griffin-ryan-kalil>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6qCmoQ2_avc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6qCmoQ2_avc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6qCmoQ2_avc&media=>
It turned out that when Paul kicked that chair, he had a very good idea about 
just how seriously he was injured. The good news that came from the x-rays 
ended up being the set-up for the latest cosmic punchline coming at the expense 
of the Clippers. A MRI taken the next day revealed a torn ligament in Paul’s 
left thumb. He’s scheduled to have surgery Wednesday and is expected to missthe 
next six to eight weeks 
<http://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/18497579/chris-paul-los-angeles-clippers-thumb-surgery-6-8-weeks>
.

Warriors show they hold the edge over Cleveland in the NBA's fiercest rivalry 
| Arielle Retting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/17/nba-rivalry-golden-state-warriors-cleveland-cavaliers>
If this sounds familiar, it’s because it’s the second time Paul has had this 
injury: he had surgery to repair a torn ligament in his right thumb back in 
2012. He also broke his hand in the first round of the playoffs against the 
Portland Trail Blazers last year, an injury that effectively ended the Clippers 
postseason campaign before it began. The year before that, a hamstring injury 
prevented him from playing in the first two games of a second-round playoff 
series against the Houston Rockets. The Rockets eventually won in seven games, 
preventing both Paul and the Clippers organization from reaching their first 
Conference finals.

With this is mind, the positive spin one could take from Paul’s latest injury 
is that, historically speaking, the timing not only could be worse, it has, in 
fact, been worse. Assuming everything goes right, never the safest of 
assumptions when it comes to sports injuries, a healthy Paul should be back in 
plenty of time for the playoffs. It’s also unlikely that the 29-14 Clippers, 
right now the fourth seed in the Western Conference, will fall out of the 
playoff picture, not one which currently features the 17-23 Denver Nuggets in 
eighth place.

Beyond this exercise in glass-half-fullism, though, it’s hard to imagine any 
fan being optimistic about their team’s championship chances after a serious 
injury to their key player. It’s doubly difficult to imagine when one’s team 
has spent most of its existence acting as an extended metaphor for hopeless 
failure.

The more concrete obstacles in the Clippers’ way begin with the schedule. 
Paul’s absencewill encompass 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/chris-paul-to-miss-6-8-weeks-with-torn-ligament-in-left-thumb-003751978.html>
 two five-game road trips along with home games against the likes of the Golden 
State Warriors, San Antonio Spurs and Houston Rockets.

Then there’s the fact that Griffin is still recovering from knee surgery. 
Since 2013-14, the Clippers have gone 18-17 in the 35 games they’ve played 
without Paul, but as the Ringer’s Chris Almeidapoints out 
<https://theringer.com/chris-paul-injury-clippers-blake-return-6d4bf098cc5b#.ab8biet25>
, they’ve gone 15-10 in those games where Griffin were available, and suggests 
that Paul’s absence will force the team to rush him back quicker than they 
would otherwise. Factoring in both Griffin’s own lengthy injury history and his 
all-out style of play, you can see the potential “worst-case scenario” looming 
a mile away.

Even if Griffin stays healthy and the Clippers manage to remain competitive, 
they simply are not as good a team without Paul as they are with him. Paul has 
been a perennial dark-horse MVP candidate with the Clippers, and has been as 
good as ever this season, averaging 17.5 points, 9.7 assists and 5.3 rebounds 
per game. His 2.25 steals rate puts him astops in the league 
<http://www.nba.com/article/2017/01/17/los-angeles-clippers-hit-hard-chris-paul-injury>
 for that particular category. While Raymond Felton and Austin Rivers have been 
playing better than their statuses as league-wide running gags would indicate, 
they still represent a comical downgrade from Paul at the point guard position.

In other words, a fully healthy Paul could find himself playing for a sixth- 
or seventh-placed team when the playoffs begin, facing the likes of the Spurs 
or Rockets in the first round, without the cushion of home advantage. Even if 
fate smiles upon them from here on out, the Clippers’ path towards their first 
Conference finals will be as perilous as it ever was.

Looking at how enjoyable, albeit not exactly likable 
<http://hoopshabit.com/2015/03/12/teams-still-hate-los-angeles-clippers/>, the 
Paul-Griffin Clippers have been when at full strength, it feels unfair that 
they have never really had the opportunity to prove themselves championship 
contenders. It’s almost cruel that the Clippers season began with them owning 
the best record in the NBA. They were beating teams by an average of 16.6 
points per game and their once-woeful bench suddenly looked likethe best in the 
league 
<https://theringer.com/the-clippers-are-contenders-because-of-their-bench-3d101bd21641#.hrj9cke8u>
. Maybe, just maybe, the Clippers had managed to re-open that championship 
window that seemed to have shut permanently after ill-timed injuries helped end 
yet another playoff run.

After the Clippers’ 11-1 streak to start the season, I was writing a piece 
arguing that this might be the year, but was forced to abandon it after Phil 
Jackson decided it would be a brilliant idea to call LeBron James’s long-time 
business associatesa “posse” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/16/phil-jackson-lebron-james-posse-comment-new-york-knicks>
. It was a tough argument to put aside because, even when everything was going 
right for the team, it felt like the last opportunity to write something 
positive and hopeful about this incarnation of the Clippers.

Maybe Paul’s latest injury won’t hurt the Clippers’ hope as much it appears it 
will. The timing very much could be worst, it bears repeating, and if all goes 
to plan they could still enter the postseason as a legitimate threat. 
Unfortunately, the history of the Clippers organization provides very little 
reason to believe that things will ever go according to the plan.
 