
Friends, it is my honour and my duty to report that the proposed fight between 
Soulja Boy and Chris Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/06/floyd-mayweather-train-soulja-boy-fight-chris-brown>
 – theRicky Gervais and Grant Bovey 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1417456/Rocky-Gervais-has-a-knockout-paunch.html>
 of the Facebook generation – is growing ever more absurd by the day. By the 
way this one is moving – telegrammed in blurry low-res Instagram videos where 
Brown calls Soulja Boy a “bitch” – this could be all change twice over by press 
day. But the latest revelations are as follows: “Iron” Mike “Everything I’ve 
Touched With My Huge Rough Hands Has Turned to Fire and Hell in the Last 
Decade, Maybe More” Tyson has signed up to coach Brown andreleased a diss track 
to prove it <https://www.instagram.com/p/BPD7R1shoZE/?taken-by=miketyson>, and 
the whole thing might have to happen in Dubai or somewhere where neither 
fighter has to take a drug test before the bout. If you don’t already gleefully 
have the vague fight date of “March” blocked off in your calendar for this one, 
then you are not my people.

And so the vague recap: Soulja Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/soulja-boy>, a man who looks incredibly easy 
to pick up against his will, is an Atlanta rapper who you will of course 
remember from 2007’s seminalCrank Dat (Soulja Boy) <https://vimeo.com/59920661>
. A few days into the year, Mr Boy favourited one of modelKarrueche Tran 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karrueche_Tran>’s photos on Instagram, which 
somehow served to enrage Brown – he and the actress had a tumultuous on-off 
relationship between 2011 and 2015, which isn’t an explanation but it will have 
to do. At this point in the timeline, it was announced that the two had beef.

Beef 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Beef&utm_source=search-action> 
is a curious celebrity pastime, one far removed from the good old days of 
Biggie and Tupac going at each other until they died; it is an agitation acted 
out in loaded subtweets that end in ellipses, and with Snapchat callouts, and 
Instagram comments that are leapt on and decoded by fans. Beef, it has to be 
said, is a very modern way at getting so mad at Soulja Boy that someone offers 
you $1m to fight him in a ring.

So how this all snowballed into Tyson – stiff-legged and just slightly off the 
beat – standing alone in a recording studio spitting out “If you show up / it’s 
going down / I’m gonna teach him how to knock your ass out” into the mic is 
anyone’s guess. A lot has gone on in the interim. Soulja Boy took to 
the streets to prove his don’t-mess-with-me credentials in a short-lived live 
broadcast, andsomehow managed to get in a set-to with a stranger 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mg2CPB3UrAg> during that. Former champion 
Floyd Mayweather signed up as both fight promoter and Soulja Boy’s trainer, a 
frankly headache-inducing conflict of interests that makes me think the 
International Boxing Federation isn’t going to endorse this one. Tran, the 
unwitting progenitor of the beef, released a statement essentially saying, 
“Well, this is dumb”. Brown, who, when he hasn’t been training, has as best I 
can tell been smoking a load of cigarettes in someone else’s bedroom and 
occasionally using a 10-year-old camera phoneto release diss videos 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BO_X_7vFUXX/>, hit back that “NOONE ASKED FOR THIS 
OPINION!!!” It’s all getting very messy.

Is this fight going to happen? My heart tells me no, my head tells me yes. At 
this point, too much trash has been talked, too much money has been 
hypothesised about, and too many gigantic male egos have been put on the line: 
there is no way Soulja Boy, Brown, Tyson and Mayweather will let this slip away 
into the night, and that was before 50 Cent got involved. But then I’ve seen 
the clip Soulja Boy put up of himpractising his swings 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W6o9TKnE7aY> and I do worry that if he tries 
to do that against another human being, then he will die. It sort of looked 
like a wet and fragile puppy trying to struggle out of a small string bag, 
and failing.

Picture it. March. Dubai. The scorching heat of the desert sun. The sky 
darkens over slowly cooling sands. A billion-dollar skyscraper has been built 
especially for the fight.

What we are basically going for here is “Apollo Creed’s entrance from Rocky IV 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NapMLrSmf8I>, but twice over”. Iron Mike 
performs his 30-second diss track, glitter cannons exploding behind him. 
Assembled rap royalty watches from behind Gucci shades.

Brown, the Ivan Drago of this analogy, spends 30 minutes entering the ring 
from below, pausing for a full dance performance of Loyal somewhere around the 
15-minute mark. Soulja Boy, our brave Apollo, descends from the roof among 
go-go dancers and fireworks, wearing something inexplicable made out of the US 
flag and a load of silver leather. He is somehow allowed to grab the 
announcer’s microphone one last time to call Brown a “bitch”. And then, 
ding-ding, Round 1. AndSoulja Boy <https://www.theguardian.com/music/soulja-boy>
 is killed instantly by the first punch.

I’m sorry: that’s the only way I see this one going. But let’s at least enjoy 
the next two months of hype.
 