
I dispute claims made by Italian journalist Emiliano Fittipaldi in a new book 
as reported in your article (‘Pope has done almost nothing to halt sex abuse’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/catholic-church-not-done-enough-to-tackle-abuse-claims-new-book>
, 16 January). As a member of the pontifical commission for the protection of 
minors since its formation in 2014, I have personally attended eight plenary 
meetings of the commission, in addition to numerous working group meetings. 
Members have had more than 50 educational engagements in five continents during 
the last 12 months, ranging from a couple of hours to three-day dedicated 
workshops for church leaders, staff and volunteers.

The intensity of the global educational and policy work under way is quite 
different to Fittipaldi’s dismissive suggestion that the commission has only 
met on three or four occasions. Pope Francis has endorsed our recommendations, 
which will require significant culture change and time to be implemented in 
practice.Pope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> has a 
relationship with all members of the church, but would not normally interfere 
with the role of the local hierarchy. He is a pastor, not the governor of the 
local church.

Diocesan bishops are responsible for the local church, and religious superiors 
for their communities, and they are expected to “get on with it”. If they are 
having difficulties fulfilling their responsibilities, there are advisory 
structures in place to assist them. Readers can find more details of the 
commission’s work at www.protectionofminors.va 
<http://www.protectionofminors.va/content/tuteladeiminori/en.html>
Sheila Hollins
Labour, House of Lords

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 