
George Washington, the first president, was trembling as he gave his inaugural 
address, and his immediate successors John Adams and Thomas Jefferson were 
respectively terrified of having a mid-speech panic attack and criticised as 
“near-inaudible”. Two hundred years later, in the alternative political reality 
ofThe West Wing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing>, 
President Bartlet fretted up to the last moment about what to put in and leave 
out of his second address, despite (with third terms ruled out) having no 
further need to seek public approval. Such are the strains derived from a 
paradoxical American tradition: a display of the ancient art of oratory is the 
first task required of new or re-elected heads of a nation that, from 
Washington onwards – his first inauguration in April 1789 preceded by only 75 
days the start of the French Revolution that took its lead from America’s - has 
prided itself on spearheading the world into the future. Donald Trump will 
become the latest exponent of this esoteric literary form when he delivers the 
58th inaugural address next Friday.

What may have frightened the Founding Fathers was the prospect of failing to 
meet the standards of Cicero and other classical orators, and their own more 
silver-tongued contemporaries; whereas for recent presidents includingBarack 
Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> the bar has been set 
by the addresses generally agreed to be the finest. These are Abraham Lincoln’s 
(in 1861 and 1865, just before and in the final months of the civil war), two 
of FD Roosevelt’s (mid-Depression in 1933 and rededicating himself to take his 
still-stricken people to a “happy valley” in 1937), and John F Kennedy’ssole 
address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/20/jfk-inauguration-speech-guardian-archive>
 in 1961, weeks away from the centenary of Lincoln’s first.

As well as in book collections, these and all the other addresses can now be 
quickly found on the websitesbartleby.com <http://bartleby.com/> and 
avalon.law.yale.edu/subject_menus/inaug.asp 
<http://avalon.law.yale.edu/subject_menus/inaug.asp>, an easy accessibility 
that can be a curse as well as a boon: last week Ghana’s new president Nana 
Akufo-Addo (whose inauguration speech echoed those by Bush and Bill Clinton) 
joined the roll call of politicians accused of plagiarising them.

Inaugural oratory has distinctive features – not least the cruel custom that 
it has to be delivered in the open air in January, making chattering teeth a 
danger but providing a suitable context for gritty commitments to battling foes 
and evils. (Obama, channelling Richard III, drew on this in speaking of the 
“winter of our hardship” on inheriting several messes from George Bush in 2009; 
the death of William Harrison after a month in office in 1841 is often blamed 
on his having given an interminable speech widely regarded as the worst ever in 
cold weather). It has to be lofty in tone, offer a panorama of domestic and 
foreign aspirations, and (unlike campaign speeches) be free of partisan 
negativity. Above all, if the president accepts the challenge of living up to 
the tradition, it must be eloquent, informed by the language of Lincoln and the 
Bible plus personal influences – Bunyan for Roosevelt, Churchill for Kennedy, 
Martin Luther King forObama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/21/barack-obama-2013-inaugural-address>
. It is no accident that the top-rated addresses produced phrases that live on 
today, such as Lincoln’s “the better angels of our nature”, Roosevelt’s “the 
only thing we have to fear is fear itself” and Kennedy’s “ask not what your 
country can do for you – ask what you can do for your country”. (Overall, 
Obama’s two speeches matched their stirring prose, but were marked down by 
commentators for lacking similar “signature phrases”.)

In contrast, the nearest British equivalent – prime ministers’ speeches on 
arrival in Downing Street – tend to be brisk, unshowy and practical, firmly 
eschewing tricksy oratorical devices and nods to God, such as Kennedy’s call to 
heed “the command of Isaiah” to “let the oppressed go free”.

As for Trump, he may look up the addresses given by his hero Ronald Reagan but 
it will be a surprise if he seeks to match his illustrious predecessors for 
verbal verve or memorability: hisspeechwriter Stephen Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/16/donald-trump-adviser-stephen-miller-duke-newpaper-column>
 was responsible for the address at the Republican convention which was little 
more than a series of bullet points, used “I” 68 times and offered slogans – “I 
am your voice” and “we will make America great again” – instead of prose poetry.

There is a point to this anti-oratory approach, which isn’t simply an avoiding 
of a challenge: lawyer-like verbal finickiness, polished arguments and the 
skilful marshalling of words are tied to what Trump views as the malaise of the 
Obama era. His convention speech referred to the Democrats’ “corporate spin, 
carefully crafted lies and media myths” and an America “led by a group of 
censors, critics and cynics”. Blunt refusal to be rhetorical, though, is itself 
a time-honoured rhetorical ploy.
 