
Manchester City were the third team to lose 4-0 in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-rules-out-title-race>
 this weekend but the result was particularly embarrassing for Claudio Bravo. 
While Swansea City goalkeeper Lukasz Fabianski made four saves and was 
unfortunate to be beaten bytwo deflected goals against Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/swansea-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 and Ben Foster made a commendable eight saves at White Hart Lane againstan 
utterly dominant Tottenham team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/tottenham-hotspur-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
, Bravo failed to produce a single stop against Everton. He faced four shots on 
target and conceded four goals. It was yet another afternoon to forget for a 
goalkeeper who has had enough time to adjust to the Premier League but has 
simply failed to do so.

The City defence should shoulder a large amount of the blame – and they have 
done so, no more so than John Stones – but Bravo has not instilled any 
confidence in his team-mates and Pep Guardiola’s attempts to switch to a 
ball-playing goalkeeper have not worked.

Before comparing individual performances, it’s worst noting that the save 
success rate in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> this season (goals 
conceded/shots on target faced) is at its lowest since we obtained Opta stats 
for the 2009-10 season. Goalkeepers have faced 1,800 shots on target and made 
1,190 saves, meaning the save success rate has dropped below two thirds (66.1%) 
for the first time in those eight seasons. The percentage has fallen year on 
year in the last four campaigns, and from 70% in 2009-10, but who have been the 
guiltiest culprits for this season’s decline?

Pep Guardiola to target new Manchester City goalkeeper in summer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/pep-guardiola-target-new-manchester-city-goalkeeper>
It may be a surprise to learn that Bravo isn’t at the bottom of the pile, 
though his meagre save success of 55.4% is way below the league average. He’s 
produced just 31 saves from the 56 shots on target he has faced, with his 
success rate way down on predecessor Joe Hart’s figure both this season with 
Torino (67.5%) and in six seasons atManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> (71.8%).

Bravo’s save success rate is the fourth worst of any Premier League goalkeeper 
to make at least 10 appearances in a season since 2009-10, though it’s still 
not the lowest in the current campaign. That unwanted statistic belongs to 
Fraser Forster, who has faced significantly less criticism this season despite 
failing to live up to his heroics of the previous campaign.

The England international achieved the third highest save success rate of the 
regular keepers in the league last season (73.9%) – with Petr Cech leading the 
way – but that number has dropped substantially to just 54.8% this time around. 
That’s not only the lowest in the league this season but also the worst since 
Chris Kirkland in 2009-10 (54.6%). Despite starting every league game this 
season, Forster has made just 34 saves from a modest 62 shots on target, owing 
much to a strong defence in front of him.
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Indicative of the slipping standards in goalkeepers, of the 10 worst save 
success rates in the last eight seasons, half are from the current campaign. 
Joining Bravo and Forster as the guiltiest culprits this season are Heurelho 
Gomes at Watford (56%), Wayne Hennessey at Crystal Palace and Maarten 
Stekelenburg at Everton (both 57.6%).


Transfer window: five players who should interest Premier League clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2017/jan/03/transfer-window-five-players-who-should-interest-premier-league-clubs>
At the opposite end of the spectrum this season is Ben Foster, who tops the 
pile with 75.7%, though that too is the lowest rate of any keeper to lead the 
way in any of the last eight campaigns. Tom Heaton (75.6%), Lee Grant (71.6%) 
and Jordan Pickford (71.6%) help compile a top six consisting of four 
Englishman.

Guardiola has stood by his No1 this season but Bravo’s struggles have clearly 
left City at a disadvantage. The other keepers in the top six clubs all boast 
above average save success rates, with Cech top of the elite this season with 
74%. Bravo is not City’s only problem but if they had a keeper of Cech’s 
quality – whose save success has only dropped below 72% once in the last eight 
seasons – the current 10-point gap between City and Chelsea would be 
significantly smaller. Conceding four goals without making a save was 
humiliating but at least Bravo can take comfort from the fact that his issues 
are systematic of a league-wide dip in save success.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Primeira Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 