
At a Hollywood roast for the Star Wars mogul George Lucas, Carrie Fisher gave 
a speech <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lZ97s396kb0> in which she remembered 
how, in the years of her incarnation as the intergalactic Princess Leia, space 
was haunted by “a small merry band of stalkers”. I met her only a couple of 
times, but heard enough to know that she could talk like that for ever.

Compounding the gloom of her demise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-obituary-star-wars-actor-writer>
 was thather mother, Debbie Reynolds, went, too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/28/debbie-reynolds-hospital-carrie-fisher-mother>
. So, along with all the footage of Carrie fighting the Imperial stormtroopers 
and frowning with glacial heat at Han Solo, the screen was suddenly playing 
host to a zillion clips ofDebbie dancing with Gene Kelly and Donald O’Connor 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nCSUsF_YEe0>. One of the reasons I could never 
go fully ape for the daughter, despite her brilliance, was that I had long ago 
gone fully ape for her mother.

Back in the day of its first glorious release, I had seen Singin’ In The Rain 
three times on the trot, thrilled by every number in it, but by no number more 
thanGood Mornin’, Good Mornin’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yu6--WBPBHo>, 
in which the barely post-teen Debbie keeps up with every step of those two 
dazzling male dancers. At the time, there was no vast mass of online commentary 
to tell me that Debbie had been taught to dance just for the movie.

Clive James: ‘Even the most trite Netflix drama is too slick to be ignored’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/31/clive-james-netflix-drama-too-slickly-done-switched-off>
Debbie was too sunny of aspect ever to add much darkness to her onscreen 
persona, but Carrie, a generation later, could give her inborn merriment a 
tragic aspect. Even inShampoo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rJllau4-qd0>, 
Warren Beatty’s most convincing stint as a psychologically troubled man of 
outstanding handsomeness, he is mainly a bouffant hairstyle in tight pants, but 
Carrie as the ravenous teenage sexpot is something more complex. She had 
tragedy in her nature: the element that always sharpened her comedy, and made 
her a touchstone for other writers. Tina Fey wrotea whole episode of 30 Rock 
around Carrie <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosemary's_Baby_(30_Rock)> just to 
celebrate what her witty example had meant to the generation that came next.

But no comedian gets far who just relies on being influenced. Somewhere inside 
must be the capacity to see what might be funny if you tilt your head this way 
instead of that. In the Beeb’s magnificent pantoPeter Pan Goes Wrong 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b087kcrn>, the cast had no big names to lean 
on except David Suchet. He was on magisterial form, but there were youngsters 
who showed every sign of capturing the comic future, stretching ahead like 
a long corridor with flying wires that get tangled without quite killing you 
and trick panels that fold under your feet. There were times, when the cast 
were crashing into each other in mid-air, when I got so sick with laughter, I 
clean forgot that I was sick anyway.
 