
The competition watchdog has raised concerns that a takeover of a payments 
system by Mastercard could have an impact on the Link cash machine network.

 The Competition and Markets Authority has given Mastercard a week 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/competition-concerns-over-mastercardvocalink-merger>
 to tackle its concerns that its takeover of Vocalink will restrict the number 
of companies able to provide systems to Link, which operates more than 70,000 
automatic teller machines (ATMs) around the UK.

Andrea Coscelli, acting chief executive of the CMA, said: “The Link ATM 
network provides an essential service for millions of customers. It’s important 
that Link has a good choice of providers when it comes to supplying the 
necessary infrastructure so it can take advantage of the opening up of payment 
systems to competition.


UK credit binge approaching levels not seen since 2008 crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>
“These concerns warrant a closer investigation in the event that Mastercard 
cannot address them at this stage.”

It was announced in July that the US card provider Mastercard would buy 
Vocalink, owned by a consortium of high street banks, for about £700m. At the 
time, Philip Hammond heralded the deal as showing international companies had 
confidence in the UK after Brexit.

Vocalink and Mastercard are two of three possible providers of services to 
Link, the CMA said.

The competition body did not find any concerns about the impact of the 
transaction on Bacs, the automated clearing service, or faster payments (FPS), 
which allows real-time payments between banks. It said there were many credible 
alternatives to Vocalink and Mastercard in these two areas.

Mastercard said: “We’re pleased to have the opportunity to address their one 
concern, regarding the Link ATM scheme, in the timeframe provided. This 
acquisition promises to bring greater choice and innovation to the payment 
ecosystem, enabling people, governments and businesses to pay the way they want 
to pay.”

The CMA said a number of industry participants had raised concerns with the 
transaction and it had investigated a number of theories of harm including loss 
of competition in payment infrastructure services to Bacs, FPS and Link.

The government has been trying to encourage competition in the mechanisms by 
which money is moved around the financial system, and has set up the Payments 
Systems Regulator to oversee the market.
 