
The government has decided it will not implement compulsory sex and 
relationships education despite recommendations from the women and equalities 
select committee (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/29/government-not-doing-enough-to-combat-sexual-harassment-in-schools>
, 29 November). Yet, according to a poll we recently commissioned, compulsory 
sex and relationships education is favoured by eight out of 10 Britons.

Our 2016 report on girls’ rights concluded that the UK is failing girls. 
Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> should be safe 
environments free from violence, abuse and discrimination. However, in reality 
they can be part of the problem. Girls in particular report that they don’t 
feel safe at school due to unwanted sexual contact such as groping. Earlier 
this year, we revealed that one in five schoolgirls have experienced this, in 
or around school. If anything the picture is potentially getting worse, with 
reports of sexual offences in and around school more than doubling in the past 
four years.

A problem of this scale and severity needs urgent action from the government. 
Evidence shows that quality sex and relationships education can help to tackle 
sexual harassment in schools, by educating young people about what healthy 
relationships are and what consent is. The government is right in calling for a 
holistic approach – but without a clear foundation in legislation for mandatory 
and up-to-date sex and relationships education this serious problem will not be 
addressed.
Kerry Smith
Head of girls’ rights and youth, Plan International UK

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 