
My musings last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/mar/04/1> about 
crossword conventions that should be considered past their sell-by date (such 
as 'actor' indicating TREE, because Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree was a leading 
actor and theatre manager until he was sadly gathered in 1917 at the age of 64) 
produced a lively email bag. There was a pretty general view that CHE is still 
acceptable, because of his continuing popularity on T-shirts and because of 
recent films, such as the 2004 Motorcycle Diaries. And so is "chairman" for 
MAO, because the results of his great achievements and his monumental mistakes 
continue to affect China and the rest of the world. More surprisingly, perhaps, 
was the considerable support for a view that crossword conventions with 
long-forgotten origins should be preserved, because it was a good thing for 
younger solvers to become aware of them and enjoy them as part of a slightly 
arcane world they were entering.

To be honest, I don't feel entirely comfortable with this view and so will 
maintain the ban on TREE but be more flexible about CHE and MAO. Also 
unaffected for the time being is the convention that phrases in clues, such as 
"on board ship", indicate that the solution has an "S" at the beginning and an 
"S" at the end. This is because "SS" in front of a vessel's name meant that it 
was a steamship, though none of these has been seen on the high seas for some 
time. The most delightful comment came from Catherine H, a lady in her late 70s 
who admitted that she got a bit lost with modern music references in clues but 
argued strongly in favour of TREE preservation. However, she concluded, in 
crosswords as in other things it is not possible to "please the young and 
appease the old". (I shall add this neat phrase to my stock of replies for use 
with disgruntled correspondents.)

When the French group Hachette took over the venerable Scottish publisher 
Chambers Harrup and shut its Edinburgh offices, moving the various parts of the 
operation to London and Paris in 2009, there was concern that this might be the 
beginning of the end for Chambers' traditional interest in crosswords. It is 
now clear that this was quite unjustified, for in the last four years there has 
been a steady stream of new and updated publications aimed at crossword 
fanatics. A third edition of the Chambers Crossword Dictionary (first published 
in 2000) appeared in hardback in 2011 and in paperback in 2012. Lots of 
Chambers mobile apps, useful to crossword solvers, are now on the market. Don 
Manley is working on a fifth edition of his Chambers Crossword Manual, 
scheduled for the second half of next year. And a new publication, the Chambers 
Complete Crossword Companion (hardback, Â£39.99), has just been published. It is 
a handsome and substantial volume in the same large format as the main Chambers 
Dictionary. It includes some of the material in the Crossword Manual, an 
interesting history of the development of the cryptic crossword and an enhanced 
version of the useful material and lists in the Crossword Dictionary. It is 
described as "a Rolls-Royce option for serious crossword fans" and the claim is 
justified.

The March Genius (No 129 by Puck) produced 30 correct entries on the first day 
and 273 in total by the deadline. Following a now regular pattern, Dave H was 
first in, followed by Tony of Demon. The first in from overseas was MJS from 
New Zealand. Congratulations to Sheila Green from Powys, Wales, who is the 
winner of the March Genius puzzle.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords please contactcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 