
In the relatively short time that she has been the tenant of Number 10, 
Theresa May has been likened to a lengthy list of other people. There have been 
the inevitable and mostly misleading comparisons with Margaret Thatcher, the 
only other woman among her predecessors. It was also predictable that she would 
be twinned with Angela Merkel, because both are the daughters of clergymen. 
Some opponents have categorised Mrs May asHenry VIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/theresa-may-henry-viii-leadership-style-compared>
, the tyrant king of the 16th century, a comparison also favoured by those of 
her colleagues who complain that she treats them with the same brutality that 
Henry meted out to spouses who aroused his displeasure. She would like us to 
bracket her with a Tudor monarch who is regarded more fondly in the popular 
imagination. She has self-identified with Elizabeth I on the grounds that she 
was “a woman who knew her own mind but achieved in a male environment”. That 
was a very self-serving pick. The reign of the Virgin Queen is mythologised as 
a golden era when plucky English sailors defeated the rapacious ambitions of a 
continental European power.

This scrabbling around for a historical template into which Mrs May can be 
slotted has not been much help in really understanding her. It has come about 
because she was so little known when she became prime minister. During her long 
stretch as the home secretary, she rarely ventured beyond her zones of 
departmental responsibility. She was one of the few noncombatants in the civil 
wars over Europe that convulsed her party for decades. Her tactical 
invisibility when it suited led David Cameron’s aides to call her “submarine 
May”.

The truncation of the Tory leadership contest last summer meant that she was 
not subject to the scrutiny she might have received had it gone the full 
course. To many people, including most of her colleagues, Mrs May arrived at 
Number 10 as a sturdy-looking frame around a largely blank canvas. A colleague 
who sat in cabinet with her for six years once told me: “In all that time, I 
never worked out what really makes Theresa tick.” This inscrutability was 
initially an advantage. People projected on to her their own preferred 
qualities, values and fantasies.

Theresa May’s honeymoon is masking her many vulnerabilities | Andrew Rawnsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/04/theresa-may-political-honeymoon-soon-over>
Mrs May has sought to maintain the mystique of the sphinx. She is parsimonious 
about how often she speaks to the media. Those close to her say this is a 
deliberate shift away from the 24/7 style of communication pioneered by Tony 
Blair and copied by David Cameron, both of whom believed that modern leaders 
could only stay in control of the news agenda by giving constant, rolling 
commentary on issues and events. She believes this hyperactivity devalued the 
currency of prime ministerial pronouncements. Her media shyness may also have 
something to do with the fact that she is not as comfortable in front of a 
camera as those two fluent performers.

She does not give away much about herself. There is probably not that much to 
give away. The raciest thing she appears to have done at university was to take 
part in a debate at the Oxford Union on the motion “That sex is good… but 
success is better”. She spoke against. She has confided that she hates the 
shape of her nose, fears snakes and likes to relax with a Jane Austen novel.

When she is subject to interrogation about her policy agenda, she responds 
with an imitation of the doggedly defensive batting that characterised the 
career of Geoffrey Boycott, her cricketing hero. Just before parliament took 
its Christmas break, there was tortuous encounter with a committee of senior 
MPs whose desire to tease out more about her intentions ran into a brick wall 
of stubborn refusal to engage with their questions.

She may be a vicar’s daughter, but she doesn’t believe in Jesus’s injunction 
to turn the other cheek in politics

Some things about her, already evident to those who studied her pre-prime 
ministerial career, have become clearer to a wider audience. She hates 
conceited and condescending men who think they are terribly clever, a category 
that includes rather a lot of her Tory colleagues. This helps to explain the 
humiliating manner in which she dispatched many of the Cameroons from the 
government. Where her predecessor often flew by the seat of his pants, she 
sweats the paperwork and seeks achievement through attention to process and 
detail. Asked what single thing would most improve the quality of her life, she 
replied: “An extra eight hours in the day.”

She can’t abide idleness, indiscipline and disobedience. Woe betide colleagues 
who commit any of these sins because they will feel the lash of Downing 
Street’s vindictive streak. She may be a vicar’s daughter, but she doesn’t 
believe that Jesus’s injunction to turn the other cheek applies in politics. 
When Nicky Morgan made some mildly mocking remarks about the prime minister’s 
taste for expensive leather trousers, theformer minister was promptly 
disinvited from a meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/morgan-cut-from-meeting-with-may-after-criticising-pms-leather-trousers>
. “Don’t bring that woman to Number 10 again,” rasped a text to another 
attendee from Fiona Hill, one of the prime minister’s chiefs of staff.

Her aides do not like the control-freak narrative about Mrs May. They 
especially do not like it because the two most senior of those aides, Ms Hill 
and Nick Timothy, are commonly portrayed asthe prime minister’s enforcers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/fiona-hill-theresa-may-adviser-chief-staff>
, terrorising ministers and putting the frighteners on civil servants who stray 
out of line. Some allies concede that the prime minister is ferociously tight 
with the reins of power and will even acknowledge that it is gumming up 
decision-making. But they contend that you would be a control freak too if you 
faced a challenge as horrendous as Brexit and presided over a cabinet that 
contains some volatile and vaulting egos. Yes, they probably mean you, Boris. 
And you, Liam.

The “control freak” account of Mrs May is now developing into a more damaging 
portrayal of her government as chaotic. Six months ago, theEconomist welcomed 
her to Number 10 with praise for “a no-nonsense conservative” with “real 
qualities: Merkelian calm, well suited to counter the chaos of the moment and a 
track record of competence”. It has since concluded that the steely mien was a 
mask for chronic indecisiveness. The latest edition has her picture on the 
cover with a wounding caption branding her “Theresa Maybe”.

This reflects a wider evolution of perceptions of her regime. It has been 
partly triggered by recent events, notably the departure of Sir Ivan Rogers, 
our former man in Brussels, who abruptly and angrily left his post with a 
parting blast about “muddled thinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
” at the heart of government about Brexit and complained of a reluctance among 
ministers to face up to the truth about how hard it will be to make any sort of 
success of it.

Time is catching up with the prime minister. She will soon have been at Number 
10 for six months, a period that invites a comparative audit of her words and 
her actions. Some of the rhetoric has been bold, not conventionally Tory and 
has sought to address the discontents of voters. She has talked about spreading 
the fruits of prosperity more fairly, reforming corporate behaviour, improving 
life chances for the less advantaged and addressing “burning” inequalities. 
These speeches have sketched out a potential architecture for what might come 
to be called Mayism. They have encouraged expectations of dramatic action, 
expectations that have then been disappointed by the lack of substantial 
progress in delivery.

Her time at Number 10 has been more distinguished by policies dropped than 
pledges implemented. Tomorrow, the prime minister will give what is being 
billed in advance as a significant speech on what she will call “the shared 
society”. If that tagline for her ambitions is not to attract the ridicule that 
murdered her predecessor’s “big society”, her promises to “deliver real social 
reform” to tackle “everyday injustices” will have to be accompanied by some 
actual results.

Mrs May is not going to change her character, but she might help herself by 
being more candid about the circumstances in which she finds herself. She has 
an extremely slim Commons majority and no majority at all in the Lords, which 
demands considerable care in framing legislation and consensus building to get 
change through parliament. It is easy for restless radical Tories to urge her 
to imitate the tiger, but she doesn’t have the numbers in parliament to follow 
their advice. Brexit presents her with the most complex and daunting 
negotiation to face any British prime minister in more than 50 years. She is 
due to make a big speech about that before the end of the month. Rather than 
repeat her panglossian cliches about a “red, white and blue Brexit” and a 
“Brexit that works for everyone”, it would be wise to be more frank about just 
how difficult it is going to be. And if she is honest about herself, she would 
say that she isn’t Margaret Thatcher and she isn’t Elizabeth I. She is herself, 
a cautious, tenacious, pragmatic and guileful politician, which aren’t bad 
qualities given the scale of the challenges that face her.

Number 10 loathes it when Mrs May is portrayed as a control freak. They will 
look back on that description with wistful nostalgia if she becomes redefined 
as the Queen of Misrule.
 