
James Waters, the leader of Forest Heath district council, said on Monday that 
the Jockey Club should consider the urgent need for new housing in the area 
when it finalises its plans for a new all-weather racecourse on the outskirts 
of Newmarket.

A housing development alongside the new course could help to secure council 
approval for the project, but it would also lay the Jockey Club open to 
accusations of hypocrisy, as it is a leading opponent of Lord Derby’s 
controversial plan to build 400 houses in the home of Flat racing.

Champion trainer Paul Nicholls speaks out against Kempton development
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/champion-trainer-paul-nicholls-speaks-out-on-kempton-development>
The Jockey Club revealed last week that it will seek to sell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/kempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans>
 Kempton Park, in south-west London, for housing,despite fierce opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/kempton-park-jockey-club-development-plan>
 both from Spelthorne Borough Council and local residents. The Club hopes to 
raise at least £100m from the sale, and use the proceeds to fund a new 
all-weather course in Newmarket and significant improvements at Sandown Park, 
in Esher.

Waters, whose support could be invaluable if the scheme is to proceed 
smoothly, said on Monday that he had first heard of the Club’s plans for a 
major new facility in Newmarket “last week, the same as everyone else”. It 
would, he said, have a significant impact on the area, and occupy land which 
could also be used to address the desperate shortage of housing in the area.

“As much as we would welcome any additional industry, racing or otherwise, 
into Newmarket, where are people going to be housed? There needs to be a 
balance,” Waters said. “If you’re going to have a new racecourse, you’ll need 
infrastructure to deliver that. We also have the Cambridge phenomenon on our 
doorstep, where Cambridge is overheating and people are looking to move out. It 
needs to be planned properly. It’s early stages and we’re going to have to sit 
down and have some conversations around that.

“It’s like the 400 houses at Hatchfield. Would it really have had a massive 
impact on racing? Personally, I don’t think so, and it is much-needed. There 
are an awful lot of residents in Newmarket that aren’t linked to racing.”

Forest Heath council approved Lord Derby’s plan for 400 houses, a reduction 
from an initial proposal of 1,200 new homes, on his Hatchfield Farm site in 
2014. After a fierce campaign against the plan backed by many local trainers as 
well as the Jockey Club, the scheme was blocked by the communities and local 
government secretary Sajid Javid in September 2016, a decision which is subject 
to a high‑court challenge.

There was widespread surprise and concern in racing last week when the Jockey 
Club insisted that the sale ofKempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> was essential to fund what it 
described as “a half a billion pounds investment in racing over the next 10 
years”.

The track, which opened in 1878, stages the King George VI Chase on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/brilliant-thistlecrack-smooth-winner-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-horse-racing>
, one of the most historic and prestigious events in the National Hunt 
calendar. If Kempton closes, the Jockey Club plans to move the race to Sandown 
Park.
 