
Every new year at the council brings with it a fresh cycle of angst and fear, 
because the battle to keep jobs begins all over again.

But this year, I no longer care about losing my job – in fact, the prospect of 
facing redundancy fills me with relief. Relief that I no longer have to face a 
relentless cost-cutting cycle.

Things changed for me last spring, when I was diagnosed with a serious 
illness. By the time June hit – which tends to be when the annual battle for 
existence kicks off – I was not at work to spend hours collating the 
service-saving information I have put together every year since the cuts began.

I manage a service that works with vulnerable families; we’re cheap and we 
don’t cause referrals to other services.


After several operations I returned to work to be told that my team and I were 
at risk. The formal consultation of our posts is widely accepted as tokenistic 
and my only priority now is to get the best exit from the council that I can.

The cycle of cuts I will be leaving behind normally goes something like this: 

June kicks off with a catchy new phrase, adopted to avoid the word “cuts”. It 
could be “the transformation programme” or the “change agenda”.


Then there’s a reshuffle at the top of the council or highly paid consultants 
are bought in as a fresh pair of eyes. By July, rumours abound and I start to 
get anxious. Random demands for data hit my inbox from names I do not know.


I worked in local government – show me a robot that could do my job better
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/29/local-government-robot-job-automation>
By August it is clear I will have a job on my hands to save the service I work 
for. So I spend the month poring through our databases and submitting long 
documents showing how much money our service has saved the council.

More requests for data hit my inbox and I start to lose sleep, worrying that I 
won’t have a job by the following April. I don’t tell the members of my team 
about any of this. Why put them through this every year?

September heralds a peak in my anxiety, and my insomnia. All staff are 
summoned to workshops where a vision of the future is laid before them. I hear 
phrases like “everything must change” and “no job is safe”. I have to divert 
our meagre resources to paying staff to attend these events, while reassuring 
them that their jobs are safe because of all the money we save the council.

By October, across children’s services there is a general loss of focus. 
Morale plummets and people start leaving. Some because they think they will be 
made redundant. Some because they can’t stomach any more change. The cracks in 
the system widen further than ever before.


November is always when I am promised some concrete news. But the haste with 
which decisions about cuts are made means there are too many legalities to iron 
out and the November deadline expires.

December and the truth is out there. The people who belong to services that 
are safe try and make the most of January to May before it all starts again. 
The constant nausea disappears and I start to sleep soundly again.

Lies about the public sector go unchallenged – this is my polite rebuttal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/21/lies-public-sector-council-rebuttal-pay>
I am exhausted by this annual cycle, by the insecurity about whether I will be 
able to pay the mortgage and put food on the table.


I have recovered from my illness. My future is bright. My future is not in the 
local council, even though I am still driven to want to help the most 
vulnerable in our society. I don’t know what the future holds but I know I 
won’t miss the misery of the constant uncertainty of working for a council.

When my surgeon gave me the good news I shook his hand vigorously and 
gratefully. As I drove back to work it occurred to me that lots of the families 
I have worked with have shaken my hand in the same way. But no-one in the 
council has ever shaken my hand and I don’t expect that to change as I hold my 
head high and work my way towards my redundancy date.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contactkirstie.brewer@theguardian.com <mailto:%20kirstie.brewer@theguardian.com>


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 