
Name: Courgettes.

AKA: Zucchini, summer squash, baby marrow.

Stock: Dwindling.

I beg your pardon? The UK is in the midst of a dark and unprecedented 
courgette shortage.

That doesn’t sound likely. Oh, really? Did you know it is currently impossible 
to buy courgettes in three major cities in the UK?

Really? What’s your source? A bloke on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/iantendo/status/819258146975875077>.

What a pickle: UK gripped by courgette shortage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/17/uk-supermarket-courgette-shortage-italy-spain-cold>
And they wonder why people don’t trust journalists any more. But it is based 
in truth. A spate of poor weather in southern Spain – where most of the UK’s 
courgettes come from – has led to failed crops anda blip in the courgette 
supply chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/17/uk-supermarket-courgette-shortage-italy-spain-cold>
.

It could be worse. At least we still have spinach and aubergines. I have some 
bad news for you. Spain’s output of those vegetables has been similarly 
compromised.

This is a disaster. I was planning to make courgetti with skinny bolognese for 
dinner tonight.Oh, you’re one of those.

One of what? One of those bloody clean-eating, carb-free weirdos. You never 
used to eat courgettes, did you, until some posh ninny with a cookbook 
convinced you to buy a spiraliser. Two years ago you wouldn’t have even noticed 
this courgette famine, and now it’s a disaster.

Well, how do you eat courgettes? Chopped up and boiled and put on a plate next 
to a sausage, like an adult.

Just tell me this famine is temporary. Well, temporary is a relative term, 
isn’t it?

What do you mean? Since there aren’t many courgettes around, the few that did 
make it are going for much more money at auction. Suppliers are thought to be 
making an extra euro for every kilo of courgettes they sell.

And? And when this price increase trickles down to the consumer, it is likely 
to put courgettes out of the reach of some shoppers. Think of it as a warm-up.

For what? For Brexit, when we all have to pay so much more for imported 
vegetables that we’ll all live on a diet of crisps and dirt, and die at the age 
of 36.

That’s all well and good, but can you recommend any useful courgetti 
alternatives?Try using pasta, you nimrod.

Do say: “There has never been a better time to start growing your own 
vegetables.”

Don’t say: “Can you spiralise linguine?”
 