
Wildlife officers were called to remove a saltwater crocodile near a 
children’s playground in far northQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> on Tuesday, amid 
warnings that heavy rains were seeing the dangerous reptiles turning up in 
“unexpected places”.

The 1.5 metre crocodile was spotted by residents in a grass area opposite a 
caravan park playground in Bramston Beach, nearCairns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cairns>.

It was successfully removed by wildlife officers and taken to a holding 
facility where it will be sent on to either a crocodile farm or a zoo.

George Tsaksirris, who lives near the park, said his wife spotted it while she 
was out for a walk with a friend.

Welcome to crocodile country: the remarkable comeback of Australia's Jaws of 
the north
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/27/welcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north>
“They thought it was a palm frond on the ground so they went and had a look, 
but it wasn’t a palm frond it was a crocodile,” Tsaksirris told Guardian 
Australia. “We’ve been living here most of my life, and this is the first time 
we’ve seen a crocodile near the camping ground and the residents’ houses.”

Tsaksirris also saw the crocodile and said it was heading towards a creek 
behind the houses. As far as he knew there had never been a crocodile spotted 
in the creek before.

“We weren’t real keen on having it there that’s why we notified the rangers. 
There are a lot of children holidaying and living around there,” he said.

The ranger arrived quickly, living just around the corner, but those tasked 
with trapping the animal had to travel about 70km from Cairns.

“People don’t really swim in [the creek] but a lot of children do go fishing 
and catching mud cod,” he said. “My grandchildren were learning to fish there 
[recently].”

He said the appearance was concerning, and that he’d like to see the 
Queensland authorities take similar action to theirNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> counterparts 
who harvest eggs and trap hundreds of crocs annually under control measures.

Guardian Australia reported last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/27/welcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north>
 the number of saltwater crocodiles in Australia’s north are growing, and 
causing widespread concern among the human populations who share the habitat.

The NT News and the Cairns Post have in recent days competed over whether the 
NT or Queensland had the biggest crocodiles, trading barbs in the paper and on 
Twitter. At under two metres the Bramston Beach invader is unlikely to win any 
points againstan alleged eight metre monster spotted in the Roper River 
<http://www.ntnews.com.au/lifestyle/photo-of-legend-crocodile-resurfaces-as-does-whispers-of-its-existence-along-roper-river/news-story/af1ba1a7efb2afb61649e967e9c329f9>
, over the border.

A photo taken by Richard Sallis, a Katherine-based fisherman, shows the 
enormous reptile on the muddy banks of the river. He told the NT News other 
fishermen used their dragnets to estimate the crocodile’s size at about eight 
metres, although experts later expressed some scepticism it was that big.
The NT News (@TheNTNews) 
HEY @couriermail <https://twitter.com/couriermail> AND @MaduraMcCormack 
<https://twitter.com/MaduraMcCormack>, WE SPOKE TO BRUTUS AND IT'S OFFICIAL - 
NT CROCS ARE BIGGER THAN QLD LIZARDShttps://t.co/1wSgnq4u7F 
<https://t.co/1wSgnq4u7F> pic.twitter.com/duhUfIzaMb <https://t.co/duhUfIzaMb>
 <https://twitter.com/TheNTNews/status/816078295292751872> January 3, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/TheNTNews/status/816078295292751872> The NT News 
(@TheNTNews) 
.@TheCairnsPost <https://twitter.com/TheCairnsPost> CASSIUS WAS CAUGHT IN THE 
NT'S FINNISS RIVER BY GRAHAME WEBB IN 1985. WE GAVE HIM TO YOU#SHAMEJOB 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SHAMEJOB?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/TheNTNews/status/816112777852895233> January 3, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/TheNTNews/status/816112777852895233> 
The Queensland Department of Environment and Heritage Protection said heavy 
rains in parts of far north Queensland were influencing crocodile movements.

“Crocodiles prefer calmer waters and they may be on the move as they search 
out a quiet place where they can wait for the floodwaters to recede,” it said.

The department urged people to remain “crocwise”, including obeying all 
crocodile signage, not provoking any animals they see in the wild, and keeping 
children and pets away from water where crocodiles may be.
 