
The Guardian setter Boatman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/05/crosswords-meet-the-setter-boatman>
 has broken free from the shackles of newsprint and pixels, and produced a book.
Boatman: The First 50 
<http://www.boatmancryptics.co.uk/index_files/First50.html> collects (and 
re-typesets) 51 (you read that right) of his puzzles, with the story of how 
each came together and what goes through a setter’s mind when devising these 
challenges.

It also describes the setter’s relationship with a puzzle editor – in this 
case, this paper’sHugh Stephenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/crossword-editor-update>, who 
has incidentally today publisheda roundup of festive puzzle books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/nov/13/puzzles-for-christmas>
. I had some questions ...

The setter Arachne told me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/mar/07/the-great-us-crossword-plagiarism-mystery>
 that “some setters ... can’t remember the clues they wrote last week, ahem”. 
In Boatman: The First 50, you guide us through the perspiration as well as the 
inspiration going back to 2008. Good memory, or good note-maker?


A bit of both, each helping the other. I still have the notebook I’ve used for 
15 years to keep track of clue ideas, and for every puzzle, I have a 
word-processor document that starts with the key clues and any word lists I’d 
made while developing the theme.

In most cases, I could see which were the first clues that I’d written, and 
that worked like Proust’s madeleine to remind me of my state of mind. It was a 
fascinating experience: all these puzzles were important in my life for three 
or four weeks, and it was good to be able to enjoy them again. I could see my 
style and my way of working developing. I had a few “why on earth did I think 
that was a good idea?” moments, but not too many – thanks, really, to Hugh’s 
editing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fcrossword-blog-boatman-the-first-50%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a392493dc7b3afaa9073306eddde43b3ad351b6%2F0_0_815_1276%2F815.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossword%20blog%3A%20Boatman%20-%20The%20First%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fcrossword-blog-boatman-the-first-50%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossword%20blog%3A%20Boatman%20-%20The%20First%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fcrossword-blog-boatman-the-first-50%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a392493dc7b3afaa9073306eddde43b3ad351b6%2F0_0_815_1276%2F815.png>
 Boatman: The First 50 
Your commentaries include “the ideas that never made it”. Which is your 
favourite of the ones that got away?


 The most significant was a potential nina, which would have filled the top 
three rows of the grid with A GHOST THEME’S TINY TIM DISMAYS EBENEZER SCROOGE.

I did something else in the end because I couldn’t see how to clue TINY TIM 
and EBENEZER SCROOGE without referring to A Christmas Carol and thereby 
negating the purpose of the nina – which of course is to be a surprise. The 
final version was full of references to ghosts and mediums, with a 
substantially tangential trip into a different meaning of “medium”, which I’ll 
leave for anyone who hasn’t yet solved the puzzle to discover.

Of course, there’s another kind of near miss. I still find it frustrating that 
DALMATIAN is not spelled with an O – if a DALMATION were a real thing, it would 
be a “funny dot animal”.

Crossword blog: practising, paying and playing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/oct/03/crossword-blog-practising-paying-and-playing>
A pity. When you were asked to join the Guardian team, Hugh’s brief was for 
“steady right-arm medium stuff from the pavilion end with as much wit as can be 
worked in”. How should those of us who enjoy the sounds of cricket but don’t 
understand the actual words interpret that?

No outlandish gimmicks, no complicated references from one clue to another, 
reasonably current vocabulary in the solutions – nothing that would suggest 
that the puzzle was there primarily to prove that I was fantastically clever or 
erudite.


I do wonder whether what I’ve produced since has exactly met the brief – my 
clues can be pretty tricky, but there’s always an underlying logic. On the face 
of it, a steady right-arm delivery, perhaps, but with a deceptive spin. And 
occasionally the ball explodes. Or turns into a blackbird.


Some solvers have a kneejerk negative response to themed puzzles – your 
stock-in-trade. Can your book persuade them to re-think?

That would be a good outcome. I think the solvers you’re talking about assume 
that they’re going to need specialist knowledge, or that half the solutions 
will be members of a class (all types of cheese, or some such) – which strikes 
them, understandably, as limiting.

If they try a few of my puzzles, though, they’ll soon find that my theme clues 
are at least as likely to be pure red herrings which lead in a completely 
different direction.

As for the clues that do lead to a theme solution, it’s very rare that you 
need any special knowledge. Try the football-themed puzzle 10, and I guarantee 
you’ll be able to finish without knowing anything about any team or (almost) 
any player – which is pretty much my level of knowledge of the game.

My favourite of your puzzles is No 18 in the book, with its entirely fair red 
herrings and its gentle cohesion to a surprising whole. Of course, I had no 
idea of its backstory: a dismantling of half the grid which you gamely describe 
as “carnage”. The puzzle survived, but I suppose that sometimes, you pick at a 
thread and the whole thing irrevocably unravels?

Not as often as you’d expect. One grid had ARCHAEOPTERYXES running down the 
middle of it, and that’s the only time Hugh has asked me to rework an entire 
puzzle. It was impossible because that one word affected everything.

What’s wrong with archaeopteryxes? Mainly, that they have little comedic 
potential on their own, and they had no connection with the theme. I’ve been 
careful since then not to use the grids with isolated long solutions, 
especially if they run down the middle of the grid.


Of course, I have favourite grids, as well as a couple that I don’t 
particularly like but which keep imposing themselves on me because they happen 
to contain useful combinations of word lengths ... but that’s another story.


You run crossword classes. In three sentences, and without giving away the 
whole curriculum, what are the most important things that aspiring setters 
should consider?

I have plenty of sentences – far too many for a one-day class, really – but 
here are three:


 * Learn to be competent before you try to be inspired: once you know that you 
can write reliably watertight clues, you can start to experiment more.

 * Be patient: most clues can be improved by slow polishing, and your first 
attempt at fitting solutions into a grid will not necessarily be the best.

 * Learn to see your work as your solvers do: this is the hardest one to put 
into practice, but if you can manage it, the rest will fall into place.

Many thanks to Boatman. More details about the classes are here 
<http://www.boatmancryptics.co.uk/index_files/CrosswordMasterclasses.html> and 
more details about The First 50 arehere 
<http://www.boatmancryptics.co.uk/index_files/First50.html>.
 