
Hello again. Our helpful series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners>
 recently looked at the stickers indicatingwhich cars come from which countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/feb/01/crosswords-for-beginners-foreign-affairs>
 and how remembering them can make for a smoother solve. And it’s the same for
another set of one- and two-letter abbreviations <http://www.ptable.com/>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDYW50F42ss8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDYW50F42ss8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDYW50F42ss8&media=>
 Tom Lehrer, anticipating nihonium and the others that have since been 
‘discarvard’. 
Yes, the solver needs to be as much chemist as geographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/feb/01/crosswords-for-beginners-foreign-affairs>
,cricketer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/nov/16/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-howzat>
 ordrug fiend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/dec/14/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-drugs>
. Which is to say, not very much. A hazy memory of pre-GCSE science classes 
will most likely get you through.

In the example clues that follow, remember that cryptics generally give you 
two routes to the answer: a definition of what it actually means (indicated in
bold type), before or after a little recipe for the letters which spell it out 
(initalics).

Some examples

There are elements that, when you see their names, scream out “I am 
unambiguously a member of the periodic table! Try to remember my abbreviation!”

So it is with Brummie’s picture of pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26772#25-across> ...


25 Cobalt in stream is cause of affliction (7)

... where the solver puts a CO for “cobalt” inside (“in”) another word for 
“stream” (SURGE) for the answer SCOURGE. And here’ssomething jollier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quiptic/579#8-down> from Moley in one 
of thequiptic puzzles, which the Guardian offers as a stepping-stone for the 
curious but cautious <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quiptic>: 

8d/13ac Good news for good boy with titanium rings (4,7)

Here, you take an abbreviation for “good” (G), a synonym for “boy” (LAD), the 
symbol for “titanium” (TI) and another word for “rings” (in fact, DINGS) and 
place them one after another for GLAD TIDINGS. Good news!

It’s not always that simple

Not all elements immediately make you think of the chemistry lab. Here’s 
Arachne <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26814#24-across>:

24ac Iron Lady contrarily embracing little in the women’s movement (8)

Here, you mentally separate “iron” (FE) from “lady” (‘Ms’, but spelled 
backwards as indicated by “contrarily”, so SM). Then you ask those four letters 
to “embrace” a synonym for “little”. So FESM takes in MINI for the answer 
FEMINISM.

Lead can take longer to spot, since it can look like a verb or an adjective. 
Even when it’s clearly a noun, it might not look like the metal. Here’s a 
corker from the introduction to theChambers Crossword Dictionary 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/chambers-crossword-dictionary.html>:

 Saw dog wearing lead  (7)

The “dog” is ROVER, who is “wearing” (inside) PB for “lead”, at which point 
the solver sees that “saw” is another misleading word, and one which can mean 
PROVERB.

Occasionally, the hint might be more general. When Puck says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/26561#23-across> ...

23ac Spots gas bill first (4)

... he is hoping that you will eventually, and probably through the letters 
that come from the intersecting answers, see that the “gas” might be neon (NE), 
and if an abbreviation for “bill” (AC for “account”) comes “first”, you’re 
adding AC to NE for ACNE.

Over to you

Beginners, any questions? And seasoned solvers, any favourites? (I haven’t, 
for example, gone near the fun to be had with helium’s being He.) For practice, 
newcomers might enjoythis themed puzzle by Brendan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/24415>; stalwarts could approach 
an old Genius puzzle by Araucaria (grid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/print/0,,-25170,00.html>; clues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/page/0,,2301045,00.html>) with something 
of a head start.

Finally, here’s a clue from Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25494#18-down> ...

18d Oxygen and another gas, oxygen and another gas, energy individually matched
 (3-2-3)

... that I like very much, because while it may be daunting at first glance, 
adding O, NEON, O, N and E is, it turns out, elementary.
 