
The energy company Cuadrilla has started work on a controversial shale gas 
site in Lancashire that will later this year become the first well to be 
fracked in the UK since 2011.

The site at Preston New Road in the Fylde is one of two rejected by Lancashire 
county council, but its decisionwas overturned last year by the communities 
secretary, Sajid Javid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
.

Cuadrilla said work was initially focused on building an access road. Over the 
next three months, it will establish a well pad and site in what is currently a 
field, the size of a rugby pitch, in the Lancashire countryside. Drilling is 
expected to begin in the spring, with fracking in the third quarter of the year.
Fracking explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=4d42b98e-1b9d-4f95-b256-e12acfd39f21>
The chief executive of Cuadrilla, Francis Egan, said he hoped it would become 
clear within a yearwhether it was economically viable to extract shale gas from 
the site.

“It’s a resumption of operations,” he said. “It’s been a long break. So for us 
it’s good to be able to commence work on the ground. We know there’s a lot of 
gas in the ground and we hope to demonstrate that it can be made to flow out in 
commercially viable quantities.”

Although Cuadrilla has planning permission for four wells at the site, it will 
concentrate on drilling a pilot well 3,500 metres deep this year and two 
horizontal wells. The contract for the construction is worth £1.5m and Egan 
said the work would involve dozens of people.

Claire Stephenson, of the local residents group Preston New Road Action Group, 
said the first they had heard of construction starting was via media reports.

“If this is Cuadrilla’s delivery of their ‘community engagement’ standards, 
they have failed in the first instance. Local residents were not even informed 
of their plans. It’s discourteous and reaffirms the continued lack of social 
licence that this company has in Lancashire and beyond,” she told the Guardian.

Rose Dickinson, a campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: “This is brashness 
and arrogance from Cuadrilla, especially so while legal challenges from people 
in the local community are pending. What this action does is further erode any 
chance of trust in this company.”
Fracking map - Lancashire 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/frackmap-zip/giv-3902vC29IkfpT6pB>
Environmental activists last year vowed to fight fracking at the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/07/hundreds-expected-protest-lancashire-fracking-site-cuadrilla>
, promising direct action and “rolling blockades” to delay construction and 
drilling.

On the prospect of protests, Egan said: “I understand that there are people 
opposed to it [fracking] for a variety of reasons and will want to make that 
opposition known. Frankly, I don’t have a problem with that.

“We have the consent; we are following government policy. We and, more 
importantly, our workers have a right to go out about their business, so I hope 
that right will be respected, just as we will respect the right for people to 
make their feelings known.”

Cuadrilla and Friends of the Earth have clashed before, and this week the 
green group informally agreed with the advertising watchdognot to repeat claims 
it had made in an anti-fracking leaflet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/friends-of-earth-ticked-off-claims-anti-fracking-leaflet>
 about the effects of fracking on the health of local populations, drinking 
water or property prices.

On Thursday, the chief of the Advertising Standards Authority said it was not 
true that, as Friends of the Earth had claimed, it had dropped the case.

“That’s not an accurate reflection of what’s happened,” said Guy Parker, the 
ASA’s chief executive. “We thoroughly investigated the complaints we received 
and closed the case on receipt of the above assurance. Because of that, we 
decided against publishing a formal ruling, but plainly that’s not the same 
thing as ‘dropping the case’.”
 