
A report by the National Audit Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/14/ministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says>
 has said schools face cuts of 8% in real terms by 2019-20. While the 
government said school funding would be ringfenced, headteachers are facing a 
mountain of increased costs: higher contributions to national insurance and 
teachers’ pensions, the introduction of the “national living wage”, pay rises 
and theapprenticeship levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/06/schools-breaking-point-apprenticeship-levy>
. There’s no extra money for these, nor is funding per pupil rising in line 
with inflation. The NAO warned that cuts could put students’ “educational 
outcomes at risk”. To make matters worse, the education services grant, worth 
£600m,is also being cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/30/tory-councils-600m-black-hole-demise-education-bill-grant-england>
, which means there will be less money for local authorities or academies to 
provide services such as school improvement.

Meanwhile, headteachers are nervously keeping an eye on proposals for a new 
funding formula for schools in 2018-19, expected to redistribute money from 
inner-city schools to rural areas. But even schools that are likely to gain 
under this model say any extra cash will be eaten up by increased costs.

Schools ‘running on empty’ hit by deprivation funding changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/05/school-deprivation-funding-changes-education-budget>
‘We’ve cut our counsellor’s hours despite suicide attempts’

Everything has been cut. We used to spend lots of money on speech therapy, 
especially in primary, but the number of hours has been cut. Our gangs worker 
has gone, our drugs worker has gone. These were important people in our area, 
where students need this support.

Our counsellor has had her hours cut. I have a number of students on suicide 
risk assessments because they have attempted suicide, either at home or at 
school. For those children, part of their risk assessment is that they see the 
therapist. Apart from one, who has become a school phobic, they’re all in and 
attending and mostly succeeding. I think you can attribute that to the therapy. 
My concern is that there’s a fairly big waiting list of kids who haven’t tried 
to kill themselves and I can’t get them into therapy, because we haven’t got 
enough capacity. There’s absolutely no help outside of school.

The only thing we haven’t cut is the classroom teachers, but staffing has 
become leaner. We’ve lost teaching assistants, admin staff, senior leaders and 
this has included redundancies. If a teaching assistant leaves, we replace them 
with someone cheaper – fewer hours or less responsibility. In the past three 
years we’ve lost 25 people.

At Christmas time, we used to get theatre companies in to do pantomimes, 
because a lot of our children’s families just don’t do that sort of thing. It 
would cost £350 and normally we’d ask for contributions from parents - we’d get 
£100 in and then we’d top it up. We can’t top it up any more. This year it 
didn’t happen.

The gap between my kids and some of the other schools in the area is widening 
at a frightening rate. Parents elsewhere are stepping up and paying for things. 
But in my school I’ve got more than one family per year group where this 
Christmas the kids didn’t get any presents and they sat in their bedrooms 
eating sandwiches. I can’t fix that, but I can try to make coming to school as 
much fun as possible.Headteacher, west of England



 David Waugh, headteacher, Cheshire: ‘I can’t afford my own special needs 
coordinator, so I share. I’m a school of 1,500 and the other school has 1,100 
students’ 
‘I’m running nine-year-old computers’


I’ve got my training budget for staff down to £10,000 – I have 178 staff and 
the guidance says it should be around £70,000-£80,000. At a time when the 
government has changed every course, every exam curriculum, I’m struggling to 
cope with training my staff and I can’t afford to resource these courses.

I have 32 A-levels for my sixth formers at the moment, and I’m putting them 
into three categories: A-levels I’ll deliver myself, A-levels I’m going to have 
to find a different way of delivering, and A-levels I will never offer again. 
Some A-levels, such as music and languages, I may have to run jointly with 
other schools. I can’t afford my own special needs coordinator [who makes sure 
pupils with disabilities or special needs get the right support], so I share 
one with another school. I’m a school of 1,500 and the other school has 1,100 
students. I’ve restructured everything. Over the last few years I’ve taken 13.2 
full-time equivalent teaching staff out of the system through redundancy and 
non-replacement of staff. This includes two members of the senior leadership 
team. I don’t put any money into computers, I’m running nine-year-old computers.

There’s not a morose feeling in my school because it’s a bloody good school 
and people want to stay. But if I were in a different school, with a different 
demographic, it would be catastrophic.

As a local authority area, we are the sixth worst-funded schools in the 
country. A lot of us have been holding out for the national funding formula to 
save us. But Cheshire East will become officially the 150th in the list of 150 
local authorities under the new funding formula. We’ll go from sixth worst to 
the worst. I can’t cut back any more.David Waugh, Poynton High School, Poynton, 
Cheshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcuts-headteachers-schools-funding-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b124fec4ed1453540f8a01ed730d1f3c2e43f1%2F307_401_779_778%2F779.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cuts%2C%20cuts%2C%20cuts.%20Headteachers%20tell%20of%20school%20system%20%E2%80%98that%20could%20implode%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcuts-headteachers-schools-funding-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cuts%2C%20cuts%2C%20cuts.%20Headteachers%20tell%20of%20school%20system%20%E2%80%98that%20could%20implode%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcuts-headteachers-schools-funding-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b124fec4ed1453540f8a01ed730d1f3c2e43f1%2F307_401_779_778%2F779.jpg>
 Sean Maher, headteacher, Greater London: ‘If we do not sort out the problem, 
within two to three years the system could implode.’ 
‘We can’t offer computer science as we can’t afford a teacher’

Over the last three years we’ve adopted a policy of not replacing staff where 
we don’t have to, and last year we ended up making four people redundant. It 
was the most brutal thing I’ve ever had to do, it was just horrible.

If you’re in education and you’re working with children you want staff who are 
happy and pulling together – try doing that and also saying “some of you are 
losing your jobs”. It has a massive effect on the children. We rely so much on 
our teachers; we’re an outstanding school and do loads and loads of wider 
curricular activities. Staff do that without charge, through goodwill. They’re 
not going to keep doing things like that if morale isn’t high.

We’ve had to look at our curriculum offer and say “well we can’t offer 
computer science to this year group because we can’t replace that member of 
staff”.

With these new courses coming out across A-levels and GCSE, staff are coming 
to me and saying “I want £2,500 to buy a new set of textbooks”. I say “no, I 
can’t afford them, find another way to do it”. With everything, you’re just 
trying to find ways of penny pinching. If something in the building breaks we 
won’t fix it unless we have to.

We’ve been told there’s no more money in the pot. One of the things I find 
galling is that when the prime minister decides she has a policy she wants to 
announce, like let’s have more grammar schools, they suddenly find millions to 
set up new grammar schools.

Education is at a tipping point – I really do think if we do not sort out the 
funding problem and the recruitment crisis, then within two to three years the 
whole system could implode. Fantastic, dedicated classroom practitioners will 
just turn around and say: I’m not going to carry on doing this job any more, 
not for this money, not for this workload, not with this amount of stress.Sean 
Maher, Richard Challoner school, New Malden, Greater London

Cash-strapped schools consider introducing four-day week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/03/cash-strapped-schools-consider-introducing-four-day-week>
‘No wonder teachers are leaving, they’ve had enough’

We are running on a skeleton staff. We have some classes of 34; we went up to 
35 at one point because we couldn’t afford to open a new class.

We have a boy in a wheelchair who needs one-to-one support but he’s not funded 
for one-to-one, so I’m pulling staff from other classes who should be 
supporting other children. We haven’t got enough staff.

You end up with a teacher with 34 children in a class, with many with special 
needs and medical problems, and you don’t get medical support [which used to 
pay for a member of staff to be specially trained] any more. We have a child 
with diabetes who keeps passing out; we don’t get any medical funding to 
support her. No wonder teachers are leaving; they’ve had enough.

Over the last two to three years I’ve been really prudent with the budget, but 
next year we’ll start going into deficit.

We don’t use teachers for supply any more; we use higher level teaching 
assistants. We used to have a capital budget [which pays for improvements to 
the school premises] that was quite large; now it’s £6,000. I’ve had to apply 
to the local authority to have my roof replaced and I’ve got to provide the 
first £15,000. I’ve got to find the money somehow. That means next year I won’t 
be able to spend anything on my curriculum budgets – literacy resources, 
numeracy resources, IT spending and so on.

Some schools have a dedicated family liaison person, but none of the schools 
in Cambridgeshire does because we just can’t afford it. I’m sitting here 
counselling the same parents week on week, having massive arguments with them 
about attendance, because I’m going to be judged on attendance. I’m constantly 
referring cases to social services – who say it doesn’t meet the threshold.
Primary head, Cambridgeshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcuts-headteachers-schools-funding-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7420fac2473f53d7d58a3faa1856195685ba12e%2F748_644_1558_1558%2F1558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cuts%2C%20cuts%2C%20cuts.%20Headteachers%20tell%20of%20school%20system%20%E2%80%98that%20could%20implode%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcuts-headteachers-schools-funding-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cuts%2C%20cuts%2C%20cuts.%20Headteachers%20tell%20of%20school%20system%20%E2%80%98that%20could%20implode%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcuts-headteachers-schools-funding-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7420fac2473f53d7d58a3faa1856195685ba12e%2F748_644_1558_1558%2F1558.jpg>
 Helen Longton Howorth, headteacher, Brighton: ‘You’re having a conversation 
with teachers about whether to buy a set of Pritt Sticks. It’s ridiculous.’ 
‘I worry about asking parents for money’

In Brighton we’ve got a peculiar situation where in the city centre, schools – 
the more middle-class schools – are full, but on the outskirts our funding 
problem is that we’re not full. I’ve got 100 or so places that I can’t fill. 
You get £3,000 per child, so you’re looking at £300,000 I’m already down on my 
budget before you’re even thinking about funding cuts.

We’re only not in deficit because I have a good business manager and we’re 
spending absolutely no money. We don’t hire supply teachers, we have one person 
who is in-house supply. If anybody is off sick we tend to split classes or use 
learning mentors to cover because we can’t afford supply teachers. Heaven 
forbid if anybody goes long-term sick leave because that would tip the budget 
into the red. It’s a massive worry.

I’m spending a lot of time thinking creatively about how to make money. We are 
having to make ourselves into marketable commodities – we’re thinking all the 
time about how to creatively raise funds, divert funds or not spend funds. Our 
PTA and fundraising events are funding our equipment. All the computers are 
funded through the PTA.

At Christmas, the children all made decorations in class and sold them to 
parents. We filmed the school play ourselves, spent the weekend burning many, 
many DVDs, sold them cheaply to parents, and we made £600 from things like 
that. That went to pay for resources to use in lessons. You worry about the 
fact that, for example, we charge parents £1 a ticket to come and watch the 
children’s play.

It’s come to the point that you’re having a conversation with teachers about 
whether they can afford to buy a set of Pritt Sticks before the end of the 
financial year – that’s quite ridiculous.Helen Longton Howorth, Carden primary, 
Brighton



 