
For most of his career, Dan Evans has been either proving people wrong or 
pleasing himself, but self-doubt has rarely haunted the bustling Birmingham 
court artist, at his best a free-hitting threat to anyone in the game.

On the first day of the 2017 Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, Evans brought all his 
swagger and some of his sweary belligerence to tranquil Court 14 and imposed 
his will on Facundo Bagnis, a player he had neither watched nor met.

Andy Murray makes hard work of Illya Marchenko in Australian Open first round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/andy-murray-makes-hard-work-of-illya-marchenko-in-australian-open-first-round>
Away from the excitement unfolding elsewhere on a warm, cloying day at 
Melbourne Park, Evans won 7-6 (10-8), 6-3, 6-1 in just under two hours to reach 
the second round of the tournament for the first time. He saved three set 
points in the tie-break before taking the first with a withering forehand, then 
steadily outmanoeuvred the Argentinian left-hander with his beguiling mix of 
touch and power, hitting a peak of dominance at the end of the match.

Evans, who reached his first ATP Tour final in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/dan-evans-atp-final-sydney-tennis>
 on Saturday and appreciated Tennis Australia flying him to Melbourne by 
private jet then allocating him a late-afternoon start, looks very much at home 
in his surroundings. This was Evans at his most adventurous, hitting just a few 
more winners, 39, than unforced errors, 33, with 14 aces and three double 
faults. His second serve was particularly impressive, varying it to the point 
where Bagnis was nonplussed as to where the ball might go.

Evans next plays the former US Open champion Marin Cilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/09/marin-cilic-kei-nishikori-us-open-final-2014>
, who survived an early scare before beating the big-serving Jerzy Janowicz 
4-6, 4-6, 6-2, 6-2, 6-3.

“It’s going to be tough, isn’t it?” Evans said in his matter-of-fact way. “The 
likelihood is he’s probably going to win, but we’ll see what happens. He 
obviously had a tough one today, so hopefully his body is pretty sore. And he 
lost in Chennai to a guy ranked not great [the world No110 Jozef Kovalik]. 
Hopefully I’ll get into the match, keep it close and take a chance. I should 
get a chance somewhere along the line. If I neutralise his serve, I’ll be happy 
with to be playing the points with him.”

He reckons Cilic will have taken notice of his excellent performance to 
stretch the ultimate champion, Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/dan-evans-stan-wawrinka-us-open-tennis-match-report>
, at the US Open last year, and concedes: “He’ll probably be more prepared for 
me.”

Evans does not go under the radar much any more. He almost defeated Wawrinka, 
who had to fight hard to beat the world No34 Martin Klizan 4-6, 6-4, 7-5, 4-6, 
6-4 here, and his performance in Sydney also has alerted rivals to the threat 
his tennis poses, sometimes from the most unexpected situations, such as his 
fight back in the tie-break on Monday, when he looked beaten.

Nor does he crave attention away from the court. “Not really,” he said when 
asked if he might become a “terrace idol”.

He added: “I’m just happy to get the win. I’d be fine to not be noticed and 
just go along and hopefully keep winning. I don’t really like that sort of 
thing.”

He does not much like being called Daniel either, as the Australians insist on 
addressing him, in person and on the scoreboard. As Evans points out, his 
mother is the only person who does, and that usually is when he has been in 
trouble. “I’ve been called that a few times,” he admitted.

If he defeats Cilic on Wednesday, though, he probably would not care what 
people called him.
 