
Weltenburg Abbey stands on a bend of the upper Danube, deep in a wooded gorge 
where the river cuts through the white limestone cliffs of the Fränkische Alb 
mountains, about 25 miles west of Regensburg in Bavaria. The abbey church, a 
spectacular concoction of late-baroque flamboyance, is worth the journey, but 
the main draw for most visitors is alcoholic rather than spiritual. The abbey 
houses the oldest monastic brewery in the world, which first started brewing in 
1050 and produces a number of beers, the most popular being a dark, almost 
black, beer known as Kloster Barock Dunkel. It’s a lovely thing to sip in the 
beer garden in the abbey courtyard, accompanied by roastschweinshaxe (pork 
knuckle) and Bavarian dumplings, and is also available in bottles to take away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdark-beer-bavaria-oldest-monastic-brewery-in-world-weltenburg-abbey-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2060e354b0c19eddef57ca80d70d6e6df1763b21%2F0_1160_3527_3526%2F3527.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dark%20beer%20and%20dumplings%20in%20Bavaria%3A%20a%20visit%20to%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20oldest%20monastic%20brewery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdark-beer-bavaria-oldest-monastic-brewery-in-world-weltenburg-abbey-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dark%20beer%20and%20dumplings%20in%20Bavaria%3A%20a%20visit%20to%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20oldest%20monastic%20brewery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdark-beer-bavaria-oldest-monastic-brewery-in-world-weltenburg-abbey-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2060e354b0c19eddef57ca80d70d6e6df1763b21%2F0_1160_3527_3526%2F3527.jpg>
 Kloster Barock Dunkel on draught. Photograph: Getty Images 
The abbey was founded in AD620, but the current buildings date from the early 
18th century. The highlight is the interior of St George church, designed by 
late-baroque architects Cosmas and Egid Asam, with a combination of frescoes, 
stucco and sculpture. Outside the monastery there are great walks through the 
deep wooded gorge and into the surrounding hills.

As there is no road through the gorge, visitors arriving by car must park in 
nearby Weltenburg village and walk along the riverside track. Much better, 
however, is to park on the quayside in Kelheim, three miles downstream, and 
catch one of the frequent boats that follow the winding gorge to the monastery 
landing stage. And if you end up overdoing the Kloster Barock Dunkel, there’s 
aways the option of overnighting in the monastery guesthouse (from €54 a night 
B&B).
• kloster-weltenburg.de <http://kloster-weltenburg.de/>
Mike Wells is author of The Danube Cycleway 
<http://www.cicerone.co.uk/product/detail.cfm/book/722/title/the-danube-cycleway-volume-1#.WFAxCDaLSrM>
, Cicerone Press, £14.95
 