
Early on a July morning in 2012 a small figure in black cycling kit left the 
village of Vielha, on the Spanish side of the Pyrenees, and set off along the 
quiet two‑lane road towards the Col du Portillon, a winding tree-lined climb 
leading to the French border.

The kit was that of Team Sky, but beneath the helmet and the sunglasses it was 
impossible to identify the rider, only to envy him the imminent experience of a 
picturesque climb. Just under five miles long, with gradients averaging 6.8%, 
the 4,200ft Portillon has occasionally featured in the Tour de France. Clearly 
the rider in the Sky kit was on his way from Vielha, where the team were one of 
several bivouacking overnight in the village’s hotels, to Bagnères-de-Luchon 
and the start ofstage 17 of the 2012 Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/24/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france>.

Ukad chair adds to pressure on Sir Dave Brailsford over mystery package proof
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/ukad-pressure-dave-brailsford-team-sky-david-kenworthy>
An hour or so later, beside the barriers put out along the main street, the 
rider brought his bike to a halt, removed his glasses, and said a cheery hello. 
It wasDave Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford>, a 
team principal staying close to his roots. This was still recognisably a man 
who had gone to France after leaving school to try to forge a career as a 
professional racer before accepting reality and looking for a different way of 
channelling his enthusiasm.

It was hard to reconcile the memory of that morning, and of a man so relaxed 
and full of optimism, with the strange figure giving an interview to BBC TV 
during Team Sky’s pre-season media day in Majorca this week. There was little 
surprise, perhaps, in hearing him ignore the nub of Andy Swiss’s questions 
about the continuing investigation into Bradley Wiggins’s use of therapeutic 
use exemption certificates. What appeared weird was the way Brailsford 
accompanied his management-speak with an extraordinary lexicon of very precise 
physical gestures devised to accompany each phrase, his hands forming a 
succession of gates, cups, sliding doors and other shapes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdave-brailsford-team-sky-cycling-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faba76c1cd94773da977b9d0c51deb3d8415b3bea%2F0_153_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dave%20Brailsford%20appears%20to%20be%20losing%20his%20grip%20as%20hands%20spin%20out%20of%20control%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdave-brailsford-team-sky-cycling-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dave%20Brailsford%20appears%20to%20be%20losing%20his%20grip%20as%20hands%20spin%20out%20of%20control%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdave-brailsford-team-sky-cycling-control%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faba76c1cd94773da977b9d0c51deb3d8415b3bea%2F0_153_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Dave Brailsford looked far from the calm figure he was at the Tour de France 
in 2012 when he spoke to media in Majorca this week. Photograph: Enrique 
Calvo/Reuters 
He had done something similar, to a rather less emphatic degree, while facing 
the House of Commons select committee before Christmas, when he declared – with 
what seemed like a rather studied casualness – thatthe Jiffy bag delivered to 
Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/team-sky-drugs-in-sport-fluimucil-jiffy-bag-dave-brailsford>
 on the final day of the 2011 Critérium du Dauphiné contained only a 
proprietary brand of nasal decongestant.

These textbook gestures are perhaps intended to convey an air of authority, to 
suggest that business is being taken care of. They are possibly supposed to 
emphasise competence and to distract from substance. On this occasion, however, 
they seemed to have gone out of control, as if some unseen hand had 
surreptitiously turned the relevant dial way past the optimum setting. It was 
like watching and hearing a slightly malfunctioning robot. You could only 
wonder what had happened to the man who freewheeled up to the barrier in 
Bagnères, looking forward to seeing Wiggins carrying the yellow jersey into 
Paris four days later as the first British rider to win the Tour de France.

The answer is an awful lot. Back then Brailsford was already riding a wave of 
success that would soon turn into a tsunami. Thanks in large part to his work 
withBritish Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> and 
Team Sky, the sport became a new national obsession. The medal factory that had 
made celebrities of Wiggins, Chris Hoy and Victoria Pendleton would propel 
Laura Trott, Jason Kenny and others on to breakfast TV sofas and honours lists. 
And it became big business. To take just one example, this week a company 
called Science in Sport, which produces energy drinks and is an official 
sponsor of British Cycling’s Olympic programme, announced higher than expected 
profits.

It was as if some unseen hand had surreptitiously turned the relevant dial way 
past the optimum setting

If there was an early warning of trouble in store, it came a year or so after 
the launch ofTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky>, when 
Brailsford was running both that and the Olympic programme, and questions were 
asked about the relationship between a publicly funded organisation and a 
purely commercial professional racing team. Some of the thousands of ordinary 
members of British Cycling felt uneasy that a competitive platform created 
through the use of their subscriptions – to declare an interest, mine is £70 a 
year – and significant lottery funding aimed specifically at Olympic success 
was now being exploited for commercial gain.

The response from British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> 
and UK Sport was to commission the accountancy and management consultant firm 
Deloitte to produce a report into possible conflicts of interest in matters 
such as rider contracts, the sharing of medical and coaching resources, and so 
on. The resulting document, which was never fully made public, suggested some 
areas of possible concern and minor adjustments were said to have been made. It 
would be three more years before Brailsford left his role as British Cycling’s 
performance director to concentrate wholly on Team Sky.

Chris Froome refuses to back Sir Dave Brailsford over drugs questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/chris-froome-sir-dave-brailsford-team-sky-drugs-questions-jiffy-bag>
Now there are calls for him to resign that post, too, which might seem 
astonishing, given the level of success he helped bring to a sport in which 
Britain had long struggled to make a mark. But a handful of poor decisions, 
large and small, have come back to bite him. A big one was the failure seven 
years ago to launch a women’s professional team alongside the men’s squad; that 
might have headed off the resentments expressed in different but equally 
damaging ways by Nicole Cooke and Jess Varnish. A smaller one, falling into a 
trap that ensnared Clive Woodward a decade ago, was his willingness to be 
impressed by spin doctors from the world of politics, and specifically from the 
long-discredited Blair camp. Their approach to pulling veils over the truth 
could be seen in Sky’s cack-handed recent attempts to limit reputational damage.

Brailsford, Wiggins and the rest of Team Sky appear to have done nothing 
outside the rules, but the sense of disillusionment is considerable and 
widespread among those clinging to a belief that cycling, for all its difficult 
history, was being led down a straighter path. You can only feel sorry for 
someone like Geraint Thomas, talking to a newspaper this week but seeing his 
hopes for the season taking second place to his views on the team’s probity.

The figure at the centre of it all is being punished, perhaps, for being too 
clever for his own good, which the British never like. But Brailsford’s 
gestures during that TV interview were those of a man who appears to have lost 
touch with the real essence of the sport and pastime he appeared to embody on 
the morning he pedalled, in anonymous solitude, towards the hairpins and ramps 
of the Col du Portillon. As every cyclist knows, while the climb may be harder, 
the real dangers lie in the descent.
 