
Two debt charities are preparing for what they say will be one of their 
busiest months ever as cash-strapped consumers are forced to face up to 
pre-Christmas overspending, and more deep-seated financial problems.

Citizens Advice expects more than 370,000 people to seek help on a range of 
financial issues including post-Christmas debts over the next two months.

National Debtline, which took an average of 715 calls a day in December and 
helped more than 40,000 people online last month, said it expected January to 
be its busiest month in several years.

The charity, which particularly helps consumers with debt problems, said its 
latest research suggested 10% of Britons (5.5 million people) would fall behind 
with their finances in the next few weeks.

Citizens Advice, which has 2,900 offices nationwide dispensing free advice, 
expected someone to be viewing its online advice pages every three seconds in 
January.

Based on last year’s figures, Citizens Advice said demand for financial advice 
was likely to peak on 12 January.

Consumers who have overspent in the run-up to Christmas often struggle from 
mid-January onwards as already stretched overdrafts reach breaking point, and 
credit card bills start arriving.

This year’s financial hangover is set against a backdrop of steadily rising 
personal debt, and recently rising household bills. Credit card debt hit a 
record high of £66.2bn in October and overall unsecured lending has jumped 
10.5% in the past year, to a rate not seen since 2005.

Seven simple ways to cut your spending in 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/17/seven-simple-ways-cut-spending-make-savings-2017>
Comparethemarket said on Monday that household bills rose by almost £200 in 
2016. Analysis of costs across energy, motor and home insurance found that, 
after a £180 drop in 2015, bills rose by 9.7% from £2,032 in 2015 to £2,223 
during last year.

Joanna Elson, chief executive of the Money Advice Trust, which runs National 
Debtline, said only 12% of the 2,000 adults surveyed recently by the charity 
had a plan as to how they would repay their debts. 


“January can be a difficult month for household budgets – and it is easy to 
see how many people fall behind when the bills for Christmas spending begin to 
land,” said Elson. “I would urge anyone who is struggling to cope to seek free 
advice as early as possible – as the earlier you seek advice, the quicker and 
easier the problem will be to solve.”

Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said: “Although debt worries 
can be more acute in January, people are also taking stock of their finances 
and thinking about the future. It doesn’t matter what your earn – whether you 
are on minimum wage or have a comfortable salary – everyone can benefit from 
reviewing their finances.”
 