
Is this the year we finally get to grips with all our stuff? If so, it has 
been a long time coming. Forecasters and commentators say we have entered a new 
era where people prefer to share rather than own, and prize experiences over 
possessions. Retailers worry about the implications for them of a public sated 
on“peak stuff” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/31/consumerism-reached-peak-stuff-search-for-happiness>
. Official figures suggest that Britons are consuming ever fewer resources. And 
witness the worldwide success of the rationalisation bible,Marie Kondo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/27/top-tips-to-joyfully-declutter-your-home-from-marie-kondo>
’s The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up: The Japanese Art of Decluttering and 
Organising.

If having more no longer satisfies us, perhaps we’ve reached ‘peak stuff’ | 
Will Hutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/31/consumerism-reached-peak-stuff-search-for-happiness>
It’s an encouraging thesis with which to start a new year. If only it were 
true. The talk is of the sharing economy, but the reality is that very little 
is being done on a large-scale level to reduce our high-consumption lifestyles. 
While it might feel virtuous to Marie Kondo your wardrobe, we urgently need to 
address the vast amount of often unseen resources that support our modern way 
of life.

To be fair, there are some signs of hope. The first repair café 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/17/joys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea>
 opened in Amsterdam in 2009. Since then, a thousand of these places have 
sprung up across Europe and North America, giving people a chance to share 
tools, materials and knowledge.

The bulk of the so-called sharing economy, however, follows a different model. 
On New Year’s Eve more than half a million people on the planet stayed in a 
home rented viaAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/03/tax-not-tech-gives-airbnb-advantages-in-uk>
. Much of this is not about sharing but about renting and profit. It increases 
the demand for resources, rather than reducing it. Hotels earn less, but hosts 
earn more – which they spend on additional holidays. Lodgers save on cheaper 
accommodation and take more mini-breaks to Florence and Barcelona. Meanwhile, 
the total number of people owning second homes (and a second set of domestic 
appliances) steadily rises.

Car clubs have become a common sight. But let’s put it in perspective. In the 
UK,Zipcar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/zipcar-city-dwellers-driving-seat>
 has 1,500 cars. At the same time, Britons bought more than 2.7m new cars last 
year, more than ever before. Yes, perhaps, young people are less car-oriented 
today, but it might also just be a lag – housing costs and university fees have 
gone up and mean that cars are bought at 30, not at 20.

Sharing is not some new paradigm. Modern societies have done it for a long 
time – from the cooperatives to municipal baths and playgrounds. While growing 
in some commercial sectors, we are seeing it being chopped down in others, such 
as public libraries.

The story of “from stuff to fluff” is a similar mix of hopeful thinking and 
bad history. Visits to film and music festivals have sky-rocketed in the last 
decade. But let’s remember that more than 12,000 people flocked to the 
rehearsal of Handel’s Fireworks in 1749 in Vauxhall Gardens, causing a 
three-hour-long traffic jam on London Bridge. Experiences have been an 
essential ingredient in the rise of consumption over the last 500 years, from 
pleasure gardens to football stadiums. Nor is it wise to think of possessions 
and experiences as separate: since the 17th century, shopping for pleasure has 
been about making purchase a sensation.

Commentators have been complaining of people accumulating too many possessions 
since the sumptuary laws of the 15th and 16th centuries. In ancient Rome, 
Seneca warned the young were being corrupted by the pursuit of things and 
leisure, and before him so did Plato.

Today, services make up a bigger share of the world economy than ever – more 
than 40% in value-added terms, compared with 30% in 2008. But this does not 
mean the volume of goods and merchandise has fallen. It has grown in total, 
just a bit less fast than services. Since 1998, merchandise trade has more than 
doubled. More than four times as many containers travelled back and forth 
between Europe and Asia in 2013 as in 1995.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fsharing-economy-selfish-consumption-fundamental-rethink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39c15f76837d56db4e0ae15b8818a119c21537f1%2F0_2_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Declutter%20your%20cupboard%20if%20you%20want%2C%20but%20it%20won't%20save%20the%20planet%20%7C%20Frank%20Trentmann&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fsharing-economy-selfish-consumption-fundamental-rethink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Declutter%20your%20cupboard%20if%20you%20want%2C%20but%20it%20won%27t%20save%20the%20planet%20%7C%20Frank%20Trentmann&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fsharing-economy-selfish-consumption-fundamental-rethink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39c15f76837d56db4e0ae15b8818a119c21537f1%2F0_2_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 A hybrid Toyota Prius might save petrol, but it eats up valuable rare-earth 
elements. Photograph: Karen Bleier/AFP/Getty Images 
And a lot of leisure and other “experiential” services depend on material and 
resources. Zip-wiring in a jungle might feel more virtuous than buying a 
designer handbag, but you do not get there by teletransportation. In 2007, the 
French travelled 42bn kilometres to pursue their hobbies and another 12bn to 
eat out. That takes a lot of fuel.

Our love of digital services often leads to the idea that these somehow must 
be ethereal. But behind virtual communication there lurks a lot of physical 
matter: power stations, data centres, cables, batteries and cooling systems. 
Our mobile phones and headphones would not work without lanthanides. A hybrid 
Toyota Prius might save petrol but it also needs 9kg (20lb) of rare-earth 
elements, and that’s just for its battery. Information and communications 
technology already account for 15% of the service sector’s electricity 
consumption in France.

Adam Smith, the great moral philosopher and economist, noted in his 1759 
Theory of Moral Sentiments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/audio/2011/oct/06/big-ideas-podcast-adam-smith-audio>
 that people spent more and more on “trinkets” and “little conveniences” and 
then designed new pockets in order to carry a greater number. Today, you can 
buy magic jackets with a dozen, even 20 pockets, to accommodate a tablet, phone 
and other digital devices.

If you believe we are in the midst of “dematerialisation”, open your wardrobe, 
cupboard and attic and do a count. One third of all the clothes in British 
wardrobes are not worn once in a year. Recall how few electronic products you 
had in the 1970s: according to the Energy Saving Trust, all gains in energy 
efficiency between 1972 and 2002 were wiped out by the doubling in electricity 
use that came with the greater number and frequent use of domestic appliances.

We are not dealing here with a peculiarly Anglo-Saxon phenomenon. Contrary to 
popular image, Scandinavians are not that austere either. In Stockholm, for 
example, the number of electronic appliances tripled between 1995 and 2014.

The idea of peak stuff rests in part on distorted and inadequate numbers. At 
the Office of National Statistics’ latest count (2016), the average Briton 
consumed 10 tonnes of raw materials and products in 2013, down from 15 tonnes 
in 2001. That looks heart-warming, but is a bit of an optical illusion. For it 
only counts the materials used in the UK. We are considered to have used more
fossil fuel and minerals <https://www.carboncommentary.com/> if we make a car 
in Luton with British coal and iron and steel than if we import a car made in 
Brazil or Poland. We really need to know about all the materials used. In 
effect, since the 1980s, Britain has off-shored the environmental consequences 
of its own consumption.

What’s needed is a level of thinking and a scale of action commensurate to the 
problem. By all means, buy fewer gifts next Christmas, but don’t fool yourself 
that this will accomplish much. Shopping is part of it, but our entire 
lifestyle is using up resources at unsustainable levels. Consumers carry a big, 
heavy“ecological rucksack” <https://www.gdrc.org/uem/footprints/rucksacks.html> 
on their shoulders full of all the materials needed to service their lifestyle. 
It amounts to between 45 and 85 tonnes a year per person, depending on where 
you are in the rich world. This includes leisure, travel and comfy homes with 
central heating.

Changing that lifestyle must be the fundamental focus. This is not impossible; 
modern history is one rich story of successive lifestyle changes. But these 
have rarely been the result of individual choices. States and social movements 
played critical roles, harnessing the power and moral authority of collective 
opinion. If we are to bridge the gap between aspiration and achievement, this 
must be their task again.
 