
In the last six years, some 140 million people have been forced to move 
because of climate-related disasters (Mongolian herders fly steppe blighted by 
climate extremes and social change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/mongolian-herders-moving-to-city-climate-change>
, 5 January). Climate change is driving long-term environmental damage and 
sudden catastrophes, presenting a global long-term threat to human security. 
According to the UN, by mid-century, one in 30 people could be displaced, many 
as a result of climate change. Existing global inequalities are exacerbated by 
the injustice of climate change which severely affects the poorest and most 
vulnerable, those who have contributed least to the climate crisis. Although 
climate change and enforced migration are increasingly linked, those displaced 
have no legal standing under existing international refugee and asylum law.

Record-breaking increases in global temperature mask the unequal impact of 
planetary warming. Temperature increases inMongolia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mongolia> have risen by more than double the 
global average over the past century. Elsewhere, in Somalia, Darfur, Syria and 
across sub-Saharan Africa, the chronic effects of drought, water scarcity and 
agricultural crises in rural areas no longer able to sustain their peoples have 
driven hundreds of thousands of migrants into cities and across borders. Safe 
haven is provided overwhelmingly by other poor countries, whilst richer 
countries respond by building walls and fences and a political debate that is 
toxic and often racist.

In response, our respective organisations, with wide support across civil 
society and trade unions, are organisingEurope’s first national conference on 
climate refugees in London on 11 February 
<http://www.campaigncc.org/nationalconference>. Our conference will discuss the 
need for urgent international protection for climate refugees and migrants, and 
for far stronger public awareness and government leadership to tackle this 
fundamental issue.
Suzanne Jeffrey Chair, Campaign Against Climate Change Trade Union Group 
Asad Rehman Senior campaigner, international climate, Friends of the Earth 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 