
Diego Costa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-costa> has taken his 
first step towards reintegration into the Chelsea squad following his spat with 
Antonio Conte by resuming training with the team, with the striker hoping to 
play his part in the title pursuit before departing in the summer.

Costa had been working on his own since complaining of pain in his lower back 
a week ago, prompting a row with a member of Chelsea’s fitness staff who had 
doubted the validity of the injury. Conte, who supported his coach, made Costa 
train alone and omitted him from the squad whobeat Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/leicester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday. Chelsea were convincedthe player’s attitude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/diego-costa-chelsea-antonio-conte>
 was born less of an injury and more ofinterest from the Chinese Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>
 club, Tianjin Quanjian.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
The forward declared himself fit and, having been assessed by medical staff, 
was permitted to participate. Conte had never intended to speak to Costa to 
clear the air after the events of last week, preferring to seek out an 
improvement in attitude on the training pitch.

It will be down to the player to convince his manager he should be involved in 
Sunday’s visit of Hull City at the expense of either Willian or Pedro, both 
outstanding at the King Power Stadium in partnership with Eden Hazard.

Although Chelsea always envisaged Costa returning to the fold, there is an 
acceptance his stay is unlikely to extend beyond the summer. The owner of 
Tianjin Quanjian, Shu Yuhui, has admitted attempts were made to secure Costa 
with a £30m-a-year offer proposed to the player’s agent, Jorge Mendes, only for
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> to make clear their 
14-goal top scorer would not be sold in the January window. That stance has 
never shifted.

The situation is likely to be revisited in the summer when other Chinese Super 
League clubs, as well as the player’s former club Atlético Madrid, are expected 
to rekindle their interest. Chelsea, resigned to the reality they will not be 
able to tie the striker down to a new contract with his deal due to expire in 
2019, will be more open to negotiating the 28-year-old’s exit at that point.

The money raised through Costa’s sale will offer Conte more leeway in the 
market to secure a high-calibre replacement, with interest maintained in the 
Real Madrid’s former Juventus striker Álvaro Morata. The Spaniard, signed for 
the Italian club by Conte, came close to moving to Chelsea last summer only for 
Real to refuse to sanction the sale after exercising a buy-back clause with 
Juventus.

Diego Costa will not return to Chelsea team unless his attitude improves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/diego-costa-chelsea-antonio-conte>
Morata has only started six Primera Liga games since – he has scored five 
times –– and remains a long-term target for Chelsea. Players such as Romelu 
Lukaku at Everton and Crystal Palace’s Christian Benteke will also come under 
serious consideration.

Tianjian’s transfer policy has had to shift in the wake of the Chinese FA 
reducing the number of foreign players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/chinese-super-league-reduces-number-foreign-players-allowed-to-play>
 who can appear at any one time from four to three as it seeks to curb 
“irrational” spending. “I made an appointment with Mendes and he came to my 
hometown to visit me,” Shu told Tianjian TV. “At that time, we were interested 
in signing Costa. Paris Saint-Germain told us Edinson Cavani would only be 
allowed to leave in June, even though the player himself was willing to join 
us. The same can be said for Costa because Chelsea would only let him leave in 
June. However, the new season of the Chinese Super League will almost reach the 
halfway stage in June, we can’t wait so long.

“But this situation [with the rule change] has brought a change to our signing 
plans. We continue to wait and suffer, but at the end of the day we’ll get 
someone. We have targeted a lot of strikers, and made an offer for [Karim] 
Benzema, but with this policy change, we are very helpless.”
 