
Diego Costa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-costa> has been 
dropped from the Chelsea squad for Saturday’s Premier League match at Leicester 
City over a row that involves a massive offer made to him from a club in the 
Chinese Super League.

The volatile striker has also clashed with one of the Chelsea fitness coaches 
over an injury he feels he has been carrying and he did not travel to Leicester 
with his team-mates on Friday. Costa has not trained fully this week andAntonio 
Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> has become involved 
in the argument.
Transfer interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/atoms/2016/12/transfer-window/transfers/embed/index.html?limit=6&league=all&currency=pounds>
It is the situation involving the Chinese club that has led to the greater 
consternation at Stamford Bridge. Costa, in common with an increasing number of 
leading Premier League players, has been the subject of a £30m per year offer 
from China and there is the fear atChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> that his advisers could be using 
it to lever him away. Costa’s agent, Jorge Mendes, is reportedly in China.

Costa has recovered his best form this season and his goals have been 
instrumental in Chelsea’s surge to the top of the table. The hierarchy have 
taken a dim view of the situation regarding China and, amid fears the 
28-year-old’s head might have been turned, they have pledged to hold him to his 
contract, which expires in 2019.

Despite being left out of the trip to Leicester, Costa posted a message of 
support for Conte’s side on Friday night on social media, writing “Come on 
Chelsea!!!!” to his 1.7 million followers on Instagram.

Conte said at his press conference on Friday afternoon he had at least one 
decision to take in terms of his selection for the Leicester game. “I have to 
check a couple of situations and then decide,” the manager said. “I don’t want 
to say exactly what and give an advantage to our opponent.”

He was also asked, in relation to Dimitri Payet going on strike at West Ham 
United, whether he had experienced any problems about players refusing to play. 
“It’s very difficult to talk and above all for me, it’s very difficult for me 
to talk about another player,” Conte replied. “For my club, for my players, we 
solve our problem if there are problems. This is important.”

Chelsea’s Antonio Conte: Chinese Super League is a danger to all teams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/antonio-conte-chinese-super-league-danger-oscar-move-chelsea>
Conte has just won the Premier League’s manager of the month award for a third 
successive time – a record – on the back of his team’s 13-match winning streak 
but aftertheir 2-0 defeat at Tottenham Hotspur  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
on 4 January, he has been consumed with bouncing back. He could have done 
without this headache involving Costa.
 