
This week, there was no shortage of matters to discuss at our morning news 
conference. Staff in the Guardian’s London office assemble daily at 10am to 
reflect on the stories we published the previous day, talk about those we are 
about to publish, and participate in topical conversations. Monday started on a 
positive note, with news that the Guardian’s charity appeal this year raised
more than £1.75m for child refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/guardian-observer-2016-charity-appeal-child-refugees>
, before the conversation turned to the news that had dominated the weekend.


We discussed the Israeli diplomat who had been caught on camera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/07/israeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps>
 by al-Jazeera plotting to “take down” MPs regarded as hostile, and moved onto 
Theresa May’s appearance on Sky News’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday. One journalist 
was of the opinion that Maylacked a direct message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-great-deceit-share-cuts>
 which led to a colleague observing that the nickname Theresa Maybe might just 
stick.

There were some comparisons to Gordon Brown, and the difficulties of 
transporting a controlling approach to governance from the Treasury or the Home 
Office to Downing Street. A big mistake by May, it was noted, was to think that 
the special relationship with America is with the country as a whole rather 
than the actual administration in charge. Blair’s big mistake was to not 
realise that you shouldn’t deal with George W Bush the way you deal with a 
leader like Bill Clinton.

But no matter how badly May might be doing, the general consensus at 
conference was that she was not likely to run into trouble, due to a lack of 
credible opposition, with Labour consistently trailing in the polls. This topic 
continued to be debated throughout the week, as it transpired the party was 
trying to launch a version ofJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> that was more radical, 
populist and anti-establishment.

His first move was to call for a maximum wage for workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-calls-for-maximum-wage-law>
 during an appearance on the Radio 4 Today programme. Later he announcedplans 
for a proposed 20:1 pay ratio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
 in any company that is awarded a government contract. He also deployed a 
series of ideas aimed at tackling inequality, such as kite marks for companies 
with pay ratios, executive pay signed off by committees on which workers have a 
majority, and a higher rate of income tax for the very rich.

But other positions were mixed and slightly confused. In conference, many 
journalists wondered what Corbyn’s position was on the principle of free 
movement of labour between the UK and the rest of the EU, and whether the new 
pledges came from Corbyn himself or from the Labour party. One person compared 
Corbyn to Bernie Sanders, who, they said, made similar points in a much more 
powerful and visceral way.

Midweek brought with it a dramatic turn of events, as BuzzFeed published a 
dossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 alleging secret contacts between Donald Trump’s campaign and Moscow, and that 
Russian intelligence had personally compromising material on Trump.

The dossier was drawn up by a former western counter-intelligence official, 
and several of its claims have beencirculating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-report-opposition-research-john-mccain?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 for some time within newsrooms, including the Guardian’s. We discussed the 
ethics of publishing the documents, and whether the Guardian should have 
reported the allegations they contained without being able to independently 
verify them.

Should we publish material that even intelligence services cannot verify? In 
times where allegations of fake news are so ripe, one editor said, does a 
decision to publish play into the hands of anyone who wants to dismiss all 
negative news as lies? After the publication of the dossier by other outlets, 
the Guardian report focused on the fact that Senator John McCain had passed the 
documents to the director of the FBI.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdiplomats-wage-caps-and-dossiers-this-week-at-guardian-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d0b9fc1c235515ab0d7dbd21b85addcc6983bd1%2F0_46_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diplomats%2C%20wage%20caps%20and%20dossiers%3A%20this%20week%20at%20Guardian%20conference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdiplomats-wage-caps-and-dossiers-this-week-at-guardian-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diplomats%2C%20wage%20caps%20and%20dossiers%3A%20this%20week%20at%20Guardian%20conference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdiplomats-wage-caps-and-dossiers-this-week-at-guardian-conference%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d0b9fc1c235515ab0d7dbd21b85addcc6983bd1%2F0_46_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn at a public event last week. Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
The Trump/Russia story remained central as the week progressed. We were joined 
in London by a reporter from the Guardian in the US, who has been covering the 
US election. She expressed doubt that the revelations would make any difference 
to those who voted for Trump, and recalled an incident during the election 
campaign where she was berated by a group of Trump supporters for being part of 
what they saw as the corrupt media. “They trust whatever he’s doing and 
completely distrust the media,” she said.

The Republican party is also having to come to terms with how they contributed 
to this atmosphere of distrust in order to get votes, she added. They touted 
conspiracy theories to delegitimise the Obama presidency, so by the time they 
tried to stop Trump they had discredited most news organisations.

For reporters attempting to cover inaccessible and authoritarian figures like 
Trump, one of the biggest challenges is to ensure that significant stories 
don’t fall through the cracks of the breaking news cycle, which is so often 
concerned with the president-elect’s outrageous Twitter remarks. There is also 
the question of how publications might support each other when faced with a 
leader who is so shamelessly dismissive of the media.

How do we strike the balance between maintaining a healthy inter-media 
rivalry, gaining access to crucial briefings, and refusing to operate on any 
terms save our own?

It’ll take a few more conferences to figure that one out.
 