
Disability <https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> rights campaigners 
have hailed a ruling by the supreme court that bus drivers must try to persuade 
other passengers to make room for wheelchair users.

Drivers may stop the bus “with a view to pressurising or shaming recalcitrant 
non-wheelchair users to move” if they believe a refusal is unreasonable, the 
judgment declared.

The case, brought by a wheelchair user who was unable to board a bus in 
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>, highlights the need 
for legislative changes, the supreme court judgment suggested. A bus services 
bill is currently going through parliament.


Doug Paulley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/30/doug-paulley-not-my-benefit-tackling-injustice>
 attempted to get on a First Group bus from Wetherby to Leeds in February 2012 
but the wheelchair space was being used by a mother with a pushchair and a 
sleeping child.

The woman rejected the driver’s request to move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/11/disabled-man-forced-off-bus-refusal-move-pram-sparks-equality-test-case>
 or fold the pushchair and so the driver told Paulley he could not board the 
vehicle. As a result, he missed his train connection at Leeds and was unable to 
meet his parents for lunch that day.


Disability activist Doug Paulley: ‘I’m tackling injustice’ | Saba Salman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/30/doug-paulley-not-my-benefit-tackling-injustice>
In its ruling on Wednesday, the court allowed Paulley’s appeal to the extent 
that the driver should have taken further steps to pressurise the 
non-wheelchair user into making space.

“Where the driver concludes that non-wheelchair users’ refusal is 
unreasonable,” Lord Nuebeger, the president of the supreme court said, “it 
seems to me that it would be unjustifiable for a bus-operating company to have 
a policy which does not require some further step of the bus driver ...

“Where there is some other place on the bus to which a non-wheelchair user 
could move, I cannot see why a driver should not be expected to rephrase any 
polite request as a requirement.”

If that did not work and the bus was ahead of schedule, Neuberger added, the 
bus could be halted for a few minutes to apply pressure to the unreasonable and 
unmoved passenger.


Paulley took his claim for discrimination to the supreme court after the court 
of appeal in 2014 decided transport firms were not required to force one 
traveller to make way for another.

By a majority of four to three justices, however, the court decided not to 
award damages to Paulley.

Welcoming the decision, Paulley said: “I’m absolutely delighted. It represents 
a significant cultural change. It’s been a long fight of five years by a lot of 
people. I’m incredibly grateful that so many people put so much time, effort 
and passion into it. I know it was done for the cause.

“We have achieved something here that will make a difference not just for 
wheelchair users but for other disabled people.”

Chris Fry, of the law firm Unity Law, who represented Paulley, told disability 
campaigners who attended the hearing: “It’s a win for Doug and all of you, so 
that you will have an expectation that you have a right to travel.

“Three of the supreme court justices would have gone as far as saying that the 
policy should go as far as removing people from the bus who do not comply [with 
a request to make room].”

The judgment, Fry said, replaced the old “request and retreat” policy for 
drivers with a more forceful “request and require” policy.

“It’s the ‘Paulley principle’. We now have priority and right of access. We 
know that parliament is interested in this case. There’s a lot more to do.”


Try life in a wheelchair and then tell me disabled people have equal rights | 
Jackie Ashley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/23/life-wheelchair-disabled-people-equal-rights>
Robin Allen QC, who represented Paulley, said: “All the judges say that 
legislative change is needed. The bus services bill is now before parliament.

“The transport select committee have said they will have to consider their 
position after the Paulley judgment.


“The majority of the justices said that to have a notice that said you would 
be evicted [if you do not make room] would be going too far. First come first 
served is not reasonable.”

The transport select committee has suggested that an EU regulation that will 
make disability training for bus drivers compulsory should be incorporated into 
domestic legislation.


Giles Fearnley, managing director of First Bus, said the ruling did not 
require bus drivers to remove customers from vehicles. “This provides welcome 
clarity for bus operators, our drivers and our customers,” he said.

 “This was clearly a difficult case for the supreme court with six different 
judgments ... we will implement any necessary changes.

 “We recognise how important it is that bus services are accessible for all 
customers, and we lead the industry in improving bus travel for customers with 
all disabilities. We are therefore also pleased that the supreme court found 
that we did not discriminate against Mr Paulley.”

Richard Lane, head of communications at disability charity Scope, said: “This 
is an important milestone. It’s a victory for common sense, and disabled 
customers will now want to see action from travel companies.

“Wheelchair spaces on buses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/23/life-wheelchair-disabled-people-equal-rights>
 exist because of a sustained campaign by disabled people. But today many 
wheelchair users still face difficulties accessing the spaces on buses, often 
causing a great deal of distress.

“Most people don’t realise just how difficult it is for disabled people to get 
around, to get to the shops, or to visit friends. These spaces are often a 
lifeline into work and the local community.

“This ruling sends a clear message to transport providers right across the 
country that they have a responsibility to make travel easier and more 
comfortable for all of their customers.”

Paulley’s test case was supported by the the Equality and Human Rights 
Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/15/bus-companies-must-give-wheelchair-users-priority-human-rights-group-says>
, which has called on bus operators to ensure that people using wheelchairs can 
travel more easily.

The EHRC’s chairman, David Isaac, said: “Public transport is essential for 
disabled people to live independently, yet bus companies have not made it easy 
for this to happen.


“This is a victory for disabled people’s rights. The success of this case 
means bus companies will have to end ‘first come, first served’ policies, 
increasing peace of mind for disabled people.
“For years, wheelchair users have been deterred from using vital public 
transport links because they could not be sure they will be able to get on. 
Today’s judgment will make that easier.”
 