
Putting weekend papers into the recycling bin, an advert caught my eye. Among 
a tumble of sections of The Guardian and another, rival, publication, was a 
motoring section. Its back page was given over to an ad for gardening gadgets; 
strimmers, leaf-blowers and mowers, all beefed-up and top-of-the-range, 
presumably selected to catch the eye of the Top Gear set.

How different my last few months would have been if I’d had that “firepower” 
to hand. Our garden isn’t big, but we have lots of hedge. Actually, nearly all 
the boundary of our long, skinny property is hedge. That means one of the big 
jobs of the gardening year is hedge-taming. Until recently that involved two or 
three days of sustained slog with power trimmer, shredder and, here and there, 
a chainsaw. This year, though, it has taken a little longer. I started in 
September - and am still at it.

Of course, I’ve had plenty of other things to do (make a living, raise 
children, have a life etc). But over a couple of months I’ve found time for an 
hour or two to work on those hedges three or four days each week. Slow, but 
steady. The change of pace has come about because I decided at the end of 
autumn 2015 to become a fossil fuel-free gardener - or at least work towards 
it. No bothering with extension cables, no fiddling with my chainsaw’s 
petrol-oil mix, just muscle-power.

I’d like to say that my conversion was the result of a high-minded engagement 
with theSlow Movement <http://www.carlhonore.com/>, but that was only part of 
it. It was more to do with a growing irritation with just how much it takes to 
keep power tools happy. My hedge trimmer has rechargeable batteries, which 
seemed to be a good buy. In reality, the batteries rarely had more than half an 
hour of useful life in them, then needed to six hours on charge.

The shredder is fine in principle. Usually though, I spent more time stripping 
it down to unclog the blade than I did shredding. But my real bugbear was the 
chainsaw. I’d bought it on a whim after getting involved in a pub conversation 
and discovering that everyone else seemed to own one; I’m a little ashamed to 
say it, but off I went to buy one for myself. I went for a leading brand, but 
it turned out to be absurdly temperamental. It refused to start without a fight 
and, when it finally get going, coughed and spluttered unhappily. It didn’t 
take long for it to occur to me that using a bow saw was the real labour-saving 
option. It is also greener, and far cheaper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fditching-power-tools-made-me-a-happier-gardener%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe393d25f135c222a1f8162ec04de4ead4a0336aa%2F0_122_4608_2763%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ditching%20power%20tools%20made%20me%20a%20happier%20gardener&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fditching-power-tools-made-me-a-happier-gardener%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ditching%20power%20tools%20made%20me%20a%20happier%20gardener&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fditching-power-tools-made-me-a-happier-gardener%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe393d25f135c222a1f8162ec04de4ead4a0336aa%2F0_122_4608_2763%2F4608.jpg>
 Hand tools such as the bow saw and this billhook are fossil fuel-free 
replacements for a chainsaw. Photograph: Julian Rollins 
So, the chainsaw went to the back of the shed and stayed there. That was last 
autumn. The other power tools soon joined the chainsaw, and I’ve been mostly 
doing without ever since. A little over a year on and my go-slow is still a 
work in progress. I have had to cheat here and there. For example, my old Flymo 
has been used one or twice, because I haven’t totally mastered unplugged lawn 
care. I struggle to keep a cutting edge on the second-hand scythe I found last 
summer. And, as I say, this year’s hedge makeover has taken forever.

I can’t suggest that hour after hour spent snipping and chopping is an 
efficient use of my time, but I would recommend it. Last year was the year that 
(like just about everybody else) I was going to becomemindful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/23/is-mindfulness-making-us-ill>
. I really gave it a go, but struggled to ever reach the sort of stillness 
required. When I should have been clearing my mind, I was usually putting 
together to-do lists for the minute I could get back to my day. But I have 
benefited from mindful moments – up a ladder, on bright, dry afternoons, 
shaping beech twig by twig. Marvellous.

 * Julian Rollins <http://www.julianrollins.co.uk/> is an author and 
journalist who specialises in the environment, conservation and rural affairs.  