
There are two competing narratives about MP Tristram Hunt’s resignation from 
his seat in Stoke-on-Trent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
, to take over the Victoria and Albert Museum. The first, distilled in the
portentous tweeting of David Miliband 
<https://twitter.com/DMiliband/status/819949989438885888>, is that he is a good 
man, a brave man driven from the party he loves by the rabid left in a move 
that is “happy for him, sad for [the] party”.

The second is that he was a vacuous, entitled, money-grabbing New Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> poster boy who reveals the full 
extent of his self-interest in his willingness to ditch the party just when it 
can least afford to lose a seat.

Both arguments are pretty well meritless. Hunt was a half-hearted MP of 
shallow beliefs, makinglimp statements about low wages 
<http://www.stokesentinel.co.uk/tristram-hunt-minimum-wage-longer-living-wage/story-20921653-detail/story.html>
 one minute, blogging for the Huffington Post aboutright-to-buy handing cheap 
homes to immigrants 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/tristram-hunt/housing-crisis_b_8447382.html?1446423146&>
 the next. He was, by the most meaningful measure – the proportion of 
constituents whovoted for him 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/07/letter-stoke-how-transform-city-decline>
 – the least popular MP in Britain.

Tristram Hunt to quit as MP to become V&A director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
Even to a leader with whom he was ideologically aligned (whatever Hunt’s ideas 
are), he would have been a liability; to Jeremy Corbyn, he was blank anathema. 
So claims that he was damaging the party don’t make sense either: he was not, 
and never pretended to be, an ally – and they neither had, nor affected, any 
illusions that he was. If they had the confidence they claim – that a more 
radical, less antiseptic candidate could reignite the passion for the party 
that once earned the area the euphemistic “heartlands” tag – they should be 
pleased to see the back of him.

Had Hunt resigned on principle, it would have been no more remarkable or 
deplorable than ill-health or personal disgrace, the other two classic reasons 
for leaving the House of Commons between elections. There was a brief period in 
the 1980s whentwo MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/oct/13/biography.politicalbooks> left 
to go andmake daytime TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/sep/23/robert-kilroy-silk-returns-interview>
, which you can file under ill-health or disgrace, as you see fit.

Five years ago Louise Mensch left for “family reasons” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/aug/29/louise-mensch-commons-career-ritual>
, and could be seen as a “career MP” if by “career” you mean “relentless quest 
for attention”. David Cameron stood down as leader because he didn’t see why he 
should have to do “all the hard shit 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/25/why-should-i-do-the-hard------david-cameron-told-aides-he-would/>
” over Brexit, a callow-sounding sentiment at the time, from the man who had 
caused all the hard shit, but one with which we cannot now do anything but 
sympathise.

MPs leave to join other parties or to seek other elected office, usually to 
become mayors. But it is more or less unheard of for an MP to leave because 
they’ve been offered a better job. Hunt isn’t even the first –Jamie Reed 
resigned his Copeland seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
 just before Christmas to take a job at Sellafield.According to the 
PoliticsHome website 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/political-parties/labour-party/jeremy-corbyn/news/82326/excl-labour-whips-braced-more>
, one unnamed MP put it baldly: “There are scores of us who would quit if we 
had another job to go to because we know that the party has no chance at the 
next election.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmps-tristram-hunt-quit-better-job-careerism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52d00e4a134cc04cfa7499cdd34d8fdf746f9a44%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20we%20want%20MPs%20like%20Tristram%20Hunt%2C%20who%20quit%20when%20a%20better%20job%20comes%20up%3F%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmps-tristram-hunt-quit-better-job-careerism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20we%20want%20MPs%20like%20Tristram%20Hunt%2C%20who%20quit%20when%20a%20better%20job%20comes%20up%3F%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmps-tristram-hunt-quit-better-job-careerism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52d00e4a134cc04cfa7499cdd34d8fdf746f9a44%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Again, to see that hopelessness as a reality and resign on principle would 
be one thing – arguably a good thing, since the personal, political and 
national cost entailed by a party limping into an election represented by 
people who neither expect nor want it to win will be some whole new brand of 
unaffordable. But to wait until you have a better job offer is odd – and when I 
say “odd”, I mean as close as we get, without having a constitution, to being 
unconstitutional. This effectively takes membership of parliament as just 
another job, dispensable upon receipt of a better offer, a contract no deeper 
than its terms and conditions, a waypoint on a career to which it will 
hopefully prove beneficial.

We use the term “career politician” as a pejorative, but usually to indicate 
someone a bit too slickly dressed, who puts their own advancement before their 
promises. We rarely mean it so literally.

Technically, you’re not allowed to resign from parliament, and a legal fiction 
had to be invented to enable it – departing MPs are appointed to an office of 
profit under the crown (Stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds or the Manor of 
Northstead), which disqualifies their membership of parliament, effectively 
dissolving the bond of duty to constituents, with a superseding, made-up duty 
to the Queen. Of course it’s archaic, but it also contains and describes a 
fundamental truth about representative democracy: that MPs are the servants of 
the voters; they begged that service, and won it. Only the voters, not party 
grandees, can release them from it.

Why Tristram Hunt concluded he had a brighter future in a museum | Andrew 
Rawnsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/15/tristram-hunt-better-future-in-museum-jeremy-corbyn-labour>
It’s understood that voters are reasonable people, and will release anyone who 
feels they can no longer perform the duty. But any MP who thinks the bond 
itself is archaic should consider its alternative. Try running a campaign with 
the top line, “I will fight for my constituents while there’s breath in my 
body, or until I get some number with better pay and less hassle, whichever is 
the sooner.” Not even the clubbable pseudo-authenticity of Boris Johnson or 
Nigel Farage could make this fly.

There is an argument that the Palace of Westminster could use a little more 
professionalism: that if we were to reframe our expectations, see this as a job 
rather than an act of public service, it would entail some proper training. 
Education and environment secretaries might be required to listen to the 
experts in the field, rather than dismiss them as “blobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2013/oct/02/michael-gove-referring-to-the-blob>
” and “green blobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2014/jul/21/paterson-green-blog-right-climate-change>
”. A well-informed health secretary might know something about social policy. 
Housing ministers might have to use the word “affordable” correctly. The 
argument upon which Conservative rhetoric hangs – that all problems in the 
public sector are caused by its recalcitrant employees – would collapse under 
the shame of knowing its falsehood.

With humility on both sides, we could incorporate careerist structures without 
relinquishing the expectation of civic duty. Instead, we have the worst of both 
worlds: a carnival of amateurishness in which the only discernible 
professionalism is in the exit strategy.
 