
A thud echoed through the house, as if something with purpose had landed in my 
porch. It had. The postie had delivered my score of Ligeti’s Le Grand Macabre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/27/le-grand-macabre-gyorgy-ligeti>. 
Let’s be clear about this: we’re not talking a thin, limp excuse for a score; 
we’re talking a chunky presence, an I-mean-business score that you have to make 
space for in your house, its bright yellow cover constantly demanding 
attention. Like an evil personal trainer, this score was going to take control 
of my life for weeks to come.

Ligeti's riot through history | Tom Service
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/27/le-grand-macabre-gyorgy-ligeti> 
I have some experience with music that those of us in the business often 
naughtily refer to as “squeaky gate”. By that I mean music that doesn’t conform 
to the confines of harmony and tonality, like the classical music you hear when 
on hold to your favourite insurance company. I once attempted the feat of 
memorising an hour ofKurtág <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Tksayf09-c>, a 
fine composer of this type of music, and the process nearly broke me. I 
surgically attached myself to a piano, lived off tea and biscuits for several 
days and spent three hours working on just one bar. Given the piece wassettings 
of Kafka texts <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n_Ug0UmwHcE>, perhaps this was 
all part of the intention. By the time I got to the last song – which was about 
10 times longer than any other, had no time signature, was full of quarter 
tones and required a GCHQ code-breaker to read the rhythms – I was,to quote 
Spock, emotionally compromised <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k9vHopyEtzs>. 
But I survived and lived to learn another score.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Felizabeth-watts-ligeti-le-grand-macabre-barbican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1507c5964fe751aadd27c1cd1ed788b265c0d91%2F0_57_675_675%2F675.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20Panic%3A%20learning%20to%20love%20Ligeti's%20Le%20Grand%20Macabre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Felizabeth-watts-ligeti-le-grand-macabre-barbican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20Panic%3A%20learning%20to%20love%20Ligeti%27s%20Le%20Grand%20Macabre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Felizabeth-watts-ligeti-le-grand-macabre-barbican%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1507c5964fe751aadd27c1cd1ed788b265c0d91%2F0_57_675_675%2F675.jpg>
 ‘I was, to quote Spock, emotionally compromised. But I lived to learn another 
score.’ Elizabeth Watts Photograph: PR 
I opened the Ligeti and looked through the opera. I thought of The 
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/07/hitchhikers-guide-galaxy-book-changed-me-vogons-economics>
. Not only because of the surreal world the work conjures up which cleverly 
cocks a snook at our own (but with more sex and swearing than Douglas Adams’s), 
but also because I thought it might be appropriate to writeDON’T PANIC 
<https://alexhaigh.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/tumblr_lcmc931hfn1qd7wqno1_500.jpg?w=1091>
 on the cover.

Set in a absurdist land of despots, debauchery and drunkenness, Le Grand 
Macabre premiered in 1978. Its score is a riot of quotations and pastiche and a 
huge percussion section that includes “a duck-quacker”, a wind machine, a 
saucepan and a “large alarm clock”.Ligeti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/27/gyorgy-ligeti-contemporary-music-guide>
 wasn’t sure his work could even be classed as an opera, and despising the 
then-trendy term anti-opera, Le Grand Macabre thus became the first – and 
possibly the last – anti-anti-opera.


On an initial assessment Ligeti’s work didn’t seem to promise total mental 
meltdown, but there were tricky patches. A patch of semiquavers may not seem 
too difficult fora woman who has conquered music written for Farinelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/24/alessandro-scarlatti-opera-classical-music-soprano-elizabeth-watts>
, but when you’re also looking at a tempo marking of 120 crotchets per minute 
things start to get interesting. I used an old trick of singing the notes 
staccato (very short) and then, with the help of a metronome, getting faster 
and faster until I was at the right speed. Only I never was. All that happened 
was that I ended up sounding like a crazed chimpanzee (and I should know, 
having recorded the vocalisations of the great apes in a former anthropological 
life). The only solution: more practice. And then, more practice. Repeat, 
repeat, repeat. You have to cut out the emotion because the frustration of not 
being able to get it right is self-defeating.

Our characters were originally named Clitoria and Spermando. So, yes, sex is 
definitely the order of the day

Then occasionally there was a longed-for eureka moment. There is one page 
where I sing the syllable “per” ofperish several times in different rhythms 
mostly in tones and semitones. The thrill of finally being able to do this was 
actually quite addictive. My husband put on earphones during the process.

Alongside all of this technical note-learning is the matter of 
characterisation: thinking about my function in the piece and imagining 
different ways of perceiving the part. I don’t know what directorPeter Sellars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/20/peter-sellars-john-adams-the-gospel-according-to-the-other-mary>
 and conductor Sir Simon Rattle may end up wanting, but one starting point is 
my character’s name. Amanda is what’s written in the score, and my lover Amando 
(a mezzo) and I sing much of the music together, it being rather sensual in 
places. Then I learn that our characterswere originally named Clitoria and 
Spermando <http://www.gramophone.co.uk/review/ligeti-le-grand-macabre>. So, 
yes, sex is definitely the order of the day.

Among the detailed dynamics, articulations and complicated rhythms I try to 
add a layer of irresistible legato and lustful colour in my voice. For me, 
that’s the thing about “modern” music: trying to get down to the music; to 
communicate the meaning in a truthful, honest way, getting beyond the often 
terrifying dots on the page. I am no musicologist, and I leave the analysis of 
such great works as Le Grand Macabre in the hands ofsuch experts as Tom Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/27/le-grand-macabre-gyorgy-ligeti>, 
but to me, as well as the irreverent thrill of 12 car horns in the opening 
prelude, the use of an unconventional musical language helps to transport us 
into another world. Once transported it allows us to look back in on ourselves 
through a parallel universe. Ligeti’s absurd panoply of foul-mouthed tenors, 
dominatrix mezzos, hell-raising basses and weak countertenor politicians casts 
a light on our own absurdities.

Ligeti’s opera is an inexorable gallop towards the destruction of Breughelland 
(its setting), and it may be that the only thing that halts armageddon is a 
large amount of alcohol. Now there’s something we can all relate to.

So think of me, as I sip my medicinal glass of wine after a long day smashing 
notes out, not with pity for someone working hard to learn seemingly impossible 
music, but as someone with a mission to pick up a musical hitchhiker and 
transport them to another musical planet.

 * Elizabeth Watts sings the role of Amanda in Peter Sellars and Simon 
Rattle’s semi-staging of Le Grand Macabre with the London Symphony Orchestra at
the Barbican, London on 14 and 15 January 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=19270>.
 