Drowning claims 372,000 lives every year. But which types of drowning are not 
included in that figure?  Floods and tsunamis  Ferry accidents and migrant boat 
capsizes  Suicide and homicide  All of the above According to the World Health 
Organisation's 2014 global report on drowning, many deaths go unreported Half 
as many people die from drowning as from …  Cholera  Malaria Drowning deaths 
are also equivalent to two-thirds of those from malnutrition  Diarrhoea  
MalnutritionDrowning is also equivalent to more than half of malaria deaths In 
terms of death from unintentional injury, where does drowning rank globally?  
1st  3rd  7th  14th In children aged 0-14, where does drowning rank in terms of 
death from unintentional injury?  1st There were 140,219 drowning deaths in 
this age group in 2012 (second were deaths from road traffic injuries, at 
134,795), according to the WHO Global Health Estimate 2014  2nd  7th  11th 
Which region has the highest drowning rate?  South-east Asia  Western Pacific  
Eastern Mediterranean  Africa The second highest is south-east Asia, followed 
by the western Pacific Which of these countries ranks in the top 20 worldwide 
with the highest drowning rates?  Thailand  Lithuania  Philippines  Belarus 
Belarus has the 18th highest drowning rate worldwide, according to the 
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation's Global Burden of Disease Study. 
It is believed death is caused from bathing while intoxicated What percentage 
of drowning deaths happen in low- and middle-income countries?  91  52  41  29  
Where is drowning most common?  More than 10 metres out to sea  Closer than 10 
metres to the shore  Inland In one rural community in Vellore, India, nearly 
90% of drowning deaths involved water in a pot, well or pond  At the beach How 
many times is drowning mentioned in the UN sustainable development goals?  0 
Yet tackling drowning is key to meeting childhood mortality, climate adaptation 
and resilience targets  1  6  12 Drowning injuries are the second leading cause 
of death for children aged 1-14 in which country?  Australia  Bangladesh  China 
 USDrowning is the leading cause of death for children aged 1-14 in China; the 
leading cause of death for children aged 1-3 in Australia and accounts for 43% 
of deaths in children aged 1-3 in Bangladesh  You got…  Challenge your friends 
Submit answers  