
Where to begin with Dutch literature? Any reasonably outward-looking British 
reader can reel off a list of French, Spanish, Italian and Scandinavian 
writers, classic and contemporary. German, too, though they’re more likely to 
be from the last century than this one. But Dutch? It is a strange gap in our 
cultural knowledge of Europe.

The lack is surprising when you consider how similar the Dutch and British 
national types are. Granted, Herman Koch’s The Dinner was a big international 
hit in 2009, with its public evisceration of a supposedly happy family, and
Gerbrand Bakker won the International IMPAC Dublin literary award in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/17/gerbrand-bakker-impac-prize> 
with his debut, The Twin. And then there’sCees Nooteboom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/mar/25/featuresreviews.guardianreview11>
, now in his 80s, who has entered the rarefied upper atmosphere of “being 
mentioned as a Nobel candidate”. But those were the Dutch authors I could name 
… until the appearance ofThe Penguin Book of Dutch Short Stories 
<https://minorliteratures.com/2016/11/18/the-penguin-book-of-dutch-short-stories-edited-by-joost-zwagerman-jonathan-gibbs/>
.

Herman Koch: ‘I’m curious about going back into oblivion’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/28/herman-koch-dear-mr-m-interview-the-dinner>
This hugely welcome anthology does us the double favour of introducing us to 
36 writers, living and dead, that we probably haven’t heard of and goes some 
way to explaining why we haven’t. This is thanks to an excellent introduction 
by its editor Joost Zwagerman. He, I was saddened to discover on reading his 
own biographical entry at the front of the book, killed himself before it 
reached publication.

The reason we don’t know Dutch literature over here, according to Zwagerman, 
is because they barely know it themselves. The Dutch language has been in such 
constant flux over the past few centuries, he writes, that “many great works of 
17th- and 18th- and 19th-century Dutch literature have to be translated into 
modern Dutch to make them accessible to the average reader”. Laurence Sterne? 
Jane Austen? Charlotte Brontë ? Imagine them all lost to us!

It’s no surprise, then, that Zwagerman starts his selection barely more than a 
century ago, in 1918. Young Titans, by the pseudonymous Nescio, finally found 
its way into English in 2012. Zwagerman lauds Nescio’s story – about a group of 
idealistic young men acclimatising more and less well to the world of work – 
for its lyricism, and for its reversal of the general view of the Dutch as 
level-headed and hardworking – and not much more.

It is also inescapably melancholic. I’d be lying if I said this collection 
presents Dutch writing as a laugh riot. Where there is humour, it is of the wry 
and dark variety, as in Nicolaas Matsier’s The Minnema Variations, a story 
about a minor literary journal editor who is plagued by endless submissions 
from a doomed – and, frankly, terrible – poet. It’s funny like Herman 
Melville’s Bartleby, the Scrivener is funny: endlessly, until you realise how 
unpleasantly close to home it feels.

There is much weirdness to be found in the Dutch national literature; among my 
favourites are tales of a man challenged to eat fresh dog excrement in order to 
win himself the keys to a canalside house, and a journalist spending a day out 
in the field with a ruminative muskrat catcher. In the end, though, what’s so 
rewarding is how it presents us the Dutch and British characters as essentially 
similar. So too are the two languages, linguistically speaking, when you factor 
out thevery prickly matter of pronunciation. Like us, this is a nation governed 
by rationality, with a vision of classlessness at its heart. Like us, they see 
themselves as a sensible compromise between Latin fervour and German dourness. 
No doubt in part thanks to excellent translations, many Dutch stories and books 
feel close, sometimes uncannily so. Most of them could quite easily be set in 
the UK – in fact, Marcel Möring’sEast Bergholt <http://www.eastbergholt.org.uk/>
 actually is, and Gerbrand Bakker’s The Detour is set in Snowdonia. The 
characters have a familiar strangeness about them. For that, we should be 
grateful – and should not rest until we have more Dutch writing heading our way.

 * Dutch writers, including Herman Koch, Esther Gerritsen and Joost De Vries 
will be appearingat the Tabernacle in London on 17 January 
<http://www.tabernaclew11.com/whats-on/events/17-jan-17-high-impact-an-all-star-gala-of-music--literature-from-the-low-countries-the-tabernacle/>
.
 