
‘This was once one of the dirtiest areas in East Germany,” says Sören, my tour 
guide fromIBA Tours <http://www.iba-tours.de/>, as our bikes swoosh through the 
Lusatian Lake District. “When I was growing up here, before the Wall fell, we 
never hung our laundry outside, and we never wore white socks, because we knew 
they wouldn’t be white after a few minutes. The coal dust was everywhere, all 
the time.”

It’s difficult to connect this information with the pristine landscape around 
us, all soaring pine forests, glistening lakes and immaculate asphalt cycle 
paths. The only other major signs of life have been a smattering of fellow 
cyclists and a sedge of cranes in a field. We haven’t heard, let alone seen, a 
motorised vehicle – and there’s certainly no coal dust in the air now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a6734ef248a2608c0b7ffb98a13b723f8ffbeb5%2F0_168_5050_3030%2F5050.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20old%20mines%20transformed%20into%20new%20lake%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20old%20mines%20transformed%20into%20new%20lake%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a6734ef248a2608c0b7ffb98a13b723f8ffbeb5%2F0_168_5050_3030%2F5050.jpg>
 Aerial view of the Lusatian Lakeland. Photograph: Alamy 
The development of this region is one of the former GDR’s biggest success 
stories, transforming what was once one of its primary lignite-producing areas 
into the largest artificial lakeland inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, stretching 50 miles across the 
states of Saxony and Brandenburg. The popular Spreewald area is just to the 
north, the Polish and Czech borders are around 55 miles away – as is the 
handsome city of Dresden – and Berlin can be reached by train in an hour and a 
half. It’s intriguing to think that each of the 26 lakes that make up this 
region was once an opencast mine. The mining continued throughout the 20th 
century, reaching peak production under the GDR regime, which was highly 
dependant on lignite as a natural energy resource, especially following the 
1970s oil crisis.

The idea of turning mines into recreational lakes actually began in the GDR, 
when one of the mines near Senftenberg was flooded in 1973, on the 
recommendation of landscape planner Otto Rindt. Lake Senftenberg – nicknamed 
“Dresden’s Bathtub” – subsequently became the blueprint for the current 
development. Following reunification, the remaining mines were either taken 
over and cleaned up by Swedish company Vattenfall, or handed over to the 
federally owned LMBV (founded in 1994) for transformation into recreational 
areas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23be3e23259e73c5c9f4754149b456e09be6a3d%2F0_171_5121_3073%2F5121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20old%20mines%20transformed%20into%20new%20lake%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20old%20mines%20transformed%20into%20new%20lake%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23be3e23259e73c5c9f4754149b456e09be6a3d%2F0_171_5121_3073%2F5121.jpg>
 Upper Lusatian heath and pond area in Saxony. Photograph: Alamy 
Around 13 lakes are already accessible, with the rest a year or two away from 
completion, at a total cost so far of around €2.2bn. There are cycling paths 
encircling each lake, many of which criss-cross to create a 300-mile network. 
The central group either have been, or soon will be, connected by waterways, 
and associated infrastructures are being individually developed in an attempt 
to create a variety of experiences.

Some lakes have been left relatively undeveloped, while others, like the more 
eastern Spreetaler See, has been earmarked for boisterous watersports. The most 
developed lakes – Senftenberger and Geierswalder, connected by a €50m canal – 
are mostly geared towards families. Here you can find beaches, cafes and 
restaurants, and activities ranging from fishing and horse riding to 
quad-biking and diving. Accommodation ranges from campsites to floating rental 
apartments and the four-starSeeschlösschen Ayurveda Spa & Hotel 
<https://www.ayurveda-seeschloesschen.de/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe85b5492a12db5d98146f665b2e9551bee834aa9%2F0_451_4783_2870%2F4783.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20old%20mines%20transformed%20into%20new%20lake%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20old%20mines%20transformed%20into%20new%20lake%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe85b5492a12db5d98146f665b2e9551bee834aa9%2F0_451_4783_2870%2F4783.jpg>
 Volleyball on Senftenberger lake beach. Photograph: Alamy 
According to Kathrin Winkler, manager of Lusatian Lakeland Tourism, visits to 
the area have been increasing 10% annually. In 2015, there were around 300,000 
overnight stays on Lake Senftenberg alone, with another 200,000 spread around 
the rest of the lakes. Most of the tourists hail from Saxony, Brandenburg and 
the Czech Republic, illustrating how the region has managed to remain something 
of a local secret.

The lakeland also carries huge symbolic value in terms of the country’s 
Energiewende <http://energytransition.de/>, part of Angela Merkel’s renewable 
energy act, under which all nuclear power stations are to be closed by 2022 in 
an ambitious push towards clean energy. However, with lignite (together with 
stone coal) still providing 41.9% of national power, several mines are still in 
operation around the country, including three in the Lake District.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce7b08fd2aed6a2e780aac20b975f65e6ef91585%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20old%20mines%20transformed%20into%20new%20lake%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20old%20mines%20transformed%20into%20new%20lake%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Flusatian-lake-district-project-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce7b08fd2aed6a2e780aac20b975f65e6ef91585%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Cyclists at Großräschener lake. 
After completing our 11-mile ride around Geierswalder lake, Sören brings me to 
a not-quite-finished one at Grossrächener, where his offices occupy the former 
buildings of the IBA-See – a federal and EU-funded project that, between 2000 
and 2010, gave a huge boost to the area with around 30 creative projects. Some, 
like afloating discovery centre 
<http://www.iba-see2010.de/en/projekte/projekt30.html>, are still awaiting 
completion, but finished sites such as the visitor centres in former mines and 
power stations, awater sports centre in Sedlitz  
<http://www.iba-see2010.de/en/projekte/projekt28.html>and the ‘Rusty Nail’ 
<http://www.iba-see2010.de/en/projekte/projekt10>– a rust-coloured 
architectural tower with stellar views over the area – are now connected via the
Lusatian Route of Industrial Heritage 
<http://www.germany.travel/en/leisure-and-recreation/scenic-routes/energy-route-of-lusatian-industrial-heritage.html>
.

The former IBA offices, now known as the IBA-Terrassen, include a fairly slick 
cafe-restaurant that’s fronted by an attractive vineyard sloping down towards 
the lake. The adjacent marina is still in progress but the adjacentSeehotel 
Großräschen 
<http://www.seehotel-grossraeschen.de/Seehotel/Herzlich_Willkommen_im_Seehotel.html>
 is already up and running. Originally built in the 1920s for Polish mine 
workers, it’s now a swish four-star with an intriguing museum of counterfeit 
artwork made by the Russian Posin brothers.

As we pass replicas of paintings, including a Mona Lisa, Sören remarks: “They 
are perfect for the area, aren’t they?” I look at him, nonplussed. “They’re 
artificial, too,” he smiles.

• The trip was provided by Brandenburg Tourism 
<http://www.brandenburg-tourism.com/> and Germany Travel 
<http://www.germany.travel/en/index.html>. Accommodation was provided by 
Seehotel Großräschen (seehotel-grossraeschen.de 
<http://seehotel-grossraeschen.de/Seehotel/Herzlich_Willkommen_im_Seehotel.html>
), doubles from €109 B&B. For further information on the area, visit
lausitzerseenland.de <http://www.lausitzerseenland.de/de.html>
 