
Members of one of Latin America’s most well-known environmental organisations, 
Acción Ecológica <http://www.accionecologica.org/editoriales/sosaccionecologica>
, are fighting for their survival against a controversial attempt by Ecuador’s 
government to shut them down.

The move by the government came six days after violence between soldiers, 
police and indigenous Shuar people opposed to a Chinese-run copper development, 
Panantza-San Carlos, in the Cordillera del Condor region, and just two days 
after Acción Ecológica had called for a Truth Commission to be set up to 
investigate events there. The attempt to close the organisation has sparked 
severe criticism fromUN human rights experts 
<http://www.ohchr.org/SP/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21065&LangID=S>
 and outrage from numerous civil society organisations in Latin America and 
elsewhere.

On 20 December the Vice-Minister for Internal Security, Diego Torres Saldaña, 
requested the Minister of Environment, Walter Garcia Cedeño, to begin the 
process to “immediately dissolve” the Quito-based organisation. According to 
Torres Saldaña, Acción Ecológica has been using social media to express support 
for violence by Shuar against soldiers and police, to claim that extractive 
operations will negatively affect the environment, and to allege “supposed 
human rights violations”, including “unjustified militarisation”, against the 
Shuars. Such behaviour has been “repeated”, Torres Saldaña wrote, and also 
included mobilising the public and organising demonstrations, making it clear 
that the NGO “rejects any kind of natural resource exploitation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fecuadors-leading-environmental-group-fights-forced-closure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa386854bd81ab4ebca1cb0a53958154d161be23c%2F62_43_1155_693%2F1155.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ecuador%E2%80%99s%20leading%20environmental%20group%20fights%20to%20stop%20forced%20closure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fecuadors-leading-environmental-group-fights-forced-closure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ecuador%E2%80%99s%20leading%20environmental%20group%20fights%20to%20stop%20forced%20closure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fecuadors-leading-environmental-group-fights-forced-closure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa386854bd81ab4ebca1cb0a53958154d161be23c%2F62_43_1155_693%2F1155.jpg>
 Acción Ecológica representatives and supporters walk through Quito yesterday 
to the Ministry of Environment. Photograph: Zitouna Auryn 
Torres Saldaña’s conclusion was that, by allegedly promoting and committing 
violence, Acción Ecológica has strayed from its legally-constituted objectives 
and poses a threat to national security.

The Ministry of Environment heeded Torres Saldaña’s request and gave Acción 
Ecológica 24 hours to respond initially and then 10 days to respond in full. In 
its initial response the NGO denied it has ever supported any kind of violence 
and described claims that it represents a serious threat to Ecuadorian society 
as “disproportionate.” It accepted it has denounced extractive operations on 
environmental and human rights grounds, as is permitted under its statutes, and 
carried out “different types of social mobilisations”, as in accordance with 
the right to freedom of expression, freedom of association, and Ecuador’s 
Constitution defending nature. It also accepted it has made allegations of 
human rights violations in Shuar territory, pointing out that other Ecuadorian 
and international organisations have done likewise.

Acción Ecológica’s initial response to the Ministry of Environment copied in 
various UN offices, an EU delegation, and the Inter-American Commission on 
Human Rights. “We’re confident that what the Ministry of the Interior has 
stated is an error of interpretation or based on erroneous information obtained 
out of context,” wrote Acción Ecológica legal representative Natalia Bonilla.

On 3 January a 27-page document authored by Torres Saldaña and three other 
functionaries from the Ministry of the Interior was sent to the Ministry of 
Environment elaborating on their allegations, providing 11 pieces of evidence 
for why Acción Ecológica should be shut down. These included three of the NGO’s 
Facebook links, four of its website links, and two police reports.

Acción Ecológica’s newly-elected president Alexandra Almeida dismisses Torres 
Saldaña’s allegations. “We looked over the documents that they sent and, 
really, it is “evidence” that has no substance,” she told the Guardian. “All 
this we’re including in the document that we’re going to submit on Friday 6 
January.”

That document was submitted to the Ministry of Environment yesterday following 
a public presentation in Quito by several Acción Ecológica representatives. 
Gloria Chicaiza said the claim they were promoting violence was “false”, and 
the fact they have been making statements about human rights violations and the 
negative impacts of extractive operations means they are “fully complying” with 
their objectives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fecuadors-leading-environmental-group-fights-forced-closure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8016ecb5d8cce1a07c816afba7f6494b98fa6bf%2F86_0_1108_665%2F1108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ecuador%E2%80%99s%20leading%20environmental%20group%20fights%20to%20stop%20forced%20closure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fecuadors-leading-environmental-group-fights-forced-closure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ecuador%E2%80%99s%20leading%20environmental%20group%20fights%20to%20stop%20forced%20closure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fecuadors-leading-environmental-group-fights-forced-closure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8016ecb5d8cce1a07c816afba7f6494b98fa6bf%2F86_0_1108_665%2F1108.jpg>
 Acción Ecológica representatives speak in Quito yesterday before formally 
submitting their responses to the government’s accusations. Photograph: Zitouna 
Auryn 
Acción Ecológica’s Natalia Bonilla and Esperanza Martinez also spoke. Bonilla 
said the attempt to dissolve the organisation was far from an isolated attack, 
but the latest in a long “chain” of “different types of aggression” dating back 
10 years, most allegedly originating from the government. In a particularly 
impassioned speech, Martinez told the audience the government’s accusations 
were “outrageous” and politically motivated, and compared its attempt to close 
them to trying to stop a jaguar from roaring:

You can’t prohibit a civil society organisation from expressing and organising 
itself, from holding protests, from filing legal complaints, if those are its 
objectives. . . The possibility that they may close us pains us greatly. But 
this isn’t just our problem, because it’s not only against us. It’s a problem 
that really involves everyone. . . We’ve been on this road for 30 years and 
we’re going to continue. If they decide to close us, no doubt about it, we will 
be reborn, stronger, in greater numbers. This isn’t just about defending nature 
or land, but the right to participate, the right to work together, the right to 
protest, the right to speak.

There were also contributions from constitutional lawyer Ramiro Ávila, from 
the Universidad Andina Simon Bolívar, and Ximena Reyes, from the International 
Federation of Human Rights (FIDH). Ávila argued the government has “no 
evidence” to close Acción Ecológica and it should abandon the process to do so, 
saying that the NGO has suffered from “systematic persecution” and those 
responsible should be investigated instead. Reyes described the move to silence 
the NGO as part of “a regional and global phenomenon.”

Five UN human rights experts are also calling on Ecuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> to backtrack closing Acción 
Ecológica and to reform its legislation, noting that two other organizations, 
Pachamama and Union Nacional de Educadores, have been shut down in recent 
years. The experts include the UN special rapporteurs on human rights 
defenders, the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and the right to 
freedom of peaceful assembly and association.

“It seems Ecuador’s government is systematically dissolving organisations when 
they become too vocal or challenge official orthodoxy,” the UN experts claim. 
“This strategy to asphyxiate civil society has been implemented through two 
decrees - 16 and 739 - that give the authorities power to unilaterally dissolve 
any kind of organisation.”

Ecuador’s Foreign Ministry responded to the UN claims by accusing the experts 
of “flagrantly violating” norms and a UN Code of Conduct, and effectively 
deceiving the Ecuadorian government. It argues that the UN statement is 
impartial, lacks objectivity, and makes “tendentious statements that 
misrepresent” events in Shuar territory. It also categorically disputed the 
assertion it is “systematically dissolving” organisations and “asphyxiating” 
civil society, and that current legislation is “restrictive.” It stated:

It’s important to highlight that there are more than 70,000 social 
organisations in our country which are testimony to an active, participative 
and organised citizenry. The Ecuadorian state fully complies with its human 
rights commitments.

Support for Acción Ecológica has poured in from around the world. US NGO 
Amazon Watch calls it a “pioneering” organisation “largely responsible” for 
Ecuador’s modern environmental movement, having worked on issues such as 
extractives, climate change, deforestation, trade and GMOs.

“Many of the [current president] Correa administration’s landmark 
environmental initiatives actually originated with Acción Ecológica, like the
2007 Yasuni-ITT Initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/19/ecuador-oil-china-yasuni>, 
which sought to keep close to a billion barrels of crude in the ground 
underneath Yasuni National Park,” Amazon Watch states. “And the groundbreaking 
inclusion of the Rights of Nature in the country’s 2008 Constitution would not 
have happened without the organisation’s work.”

Ecuador’s government, under Correa, made an earlier attempt to close Acción 
Ecológica in 2009, but failed to do so. “Then 1,000s of people in Ecuador and 
around the world spoke out against that injustice,” reads a 20 December 
statement from the NGO saying it is “strictly” complying with Ecuadorian law. 
“This time we’re receiving new demonstrations of support. We know that, with 
this type of protest, we’ll be able to reverse the arbitrary and illegitimate 
closure of Acción Ecológica.”

To the south of Panantza-San Carlos is another copper project, Mirador, also 
in Shuar territory. Both are run by companies reportedly controlled by two 
Chinese state-owned firms: the China Railway Construction Corporation and the 
Tongling Nonferrous Metals Group Holding Company.

Both projects have been marked by conflict. The violence in December left at 
least 2 soldiers injured, 5 policemen injured and one policeman dead, according 
to Torres Saldaña, and was followed by a government decision to militarise the 
region and send in tanks. In August soldiers and police forcibly evicted Shuar 
families, and houses and other community buildings have been destroyed. In 2014 
José Tendetza Antún, a Shuar leader and leading critic of Mirador, was killed 
and secretly buried just days before he was due to denounce the project to the 
International Tribunal for the Rights of Nature held in Lima.

The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/06/ecuador-indigenous-leader-found-dead-lima-climate-talks>
 reported that the results of an initial autopsy on Tendetza Antún were 
“unclear”, and that activists linked his death to his opposition to Mirador.

Torres Saldaña did not respond to questions from the Guardian sent via email. 
The Ministry of Environment could not be reached for comment.
 