
England will be without their two leading loosehead props for at least the 
first two rounds of the Six Nations withJoe Marler ruled out of action for up 
to five weeks after fracturing his left leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/george-kruis-england-six-nations>
 and Mako Vunipola not expected to return from a knee injury until the end of 
next month.

Joe Marler’s broken leg adds to England’s Six Nations worries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/george-kruis-england-six-nations>
The pair have been in England’s match-day 23 in nine of the 13 Tests under 
Eddie Jones. Marler pulled out of the Australia tour last summer when Matt 
Mullan backed up Vunipola from the bench, while Mullan started theTwickenham 
friendly against Wales in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/england-wales-international-match-report>
 with Ellis Genge, who was left out of the current squad, among the 
replacements.

Saracens have not put a date on Vunipola’s return and said the prop will see a 
specialist this week for an examination onthe knee he injured against Sale last 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/mako-vunipola-england-six-nations-saracens-suspected-ligament-injury>
, but the club did not expect him to be back in action until the end of 
February at the earliest.

Marler was originally thought to have suffered a calf strain after pulling out 
of Harlequins’ match against Sale on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-joe-marler-england-injury-six-nations>
 before the kick-off but a scan revealed a fracture. The club said his 
rehabilitation would take between four and five weeks, ruling him out of 
England’s opening two fixtures in defence of their Six Nations title, at home 
to France and away to Wales.

Mullan and Bath’s Nathan Catt are the two fit looseheads in the squad, with 
Genge, who reacted to being dropped with outstanding displays for Leicester in 
their narrow defeats against Saracens and Wasps, expected to be recalled.

Eddie Jones: ‘Six Nations can be the greatest tournament in the world’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/eddie-jones-england-six-nations-bonus-points>
Jones has a number of concerns at forward, with the second-row George Kruis 
unlikely to recover from a fractured cheekbone to play for Saracens against 
Toulon on Saturday week, while the flanker James Haskell, whosefirst appearance 
of the season last Sunday following a toe operation ended after 35 seconds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/england-james-haskell-head-injury-wasps-comeback>
 when he was knocked out making a tackle, has been ruled out of Wasps’ European 
Champions Cup match against Toulouse on Saturday.

Haskell is expected to play against Zebre the following weekend but will not 
be match-hardened by the start of the Six Nations. Jones already has to replace 
two of his first-choice back row, withChris Robshaw and Billy Vunipola out for 
the whole tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/england-chris-robshaw-12-weeks-six-nations>
 with injuries.

In addition, the England captain, Dylan Hartley, who has made seven starts 
this season for his club, Northampton, and his country and spent less than 
seven hours on the pitch,returns from suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/dyland-hartley-banned-six-weeks-available-six-nations-rugby-union>
 after the end of the Champions Cup group stage. Unless he were released to the 
Saints for the Anglo-Welsh Cup match against Leicester on 28 January, he would 
go into the Twickenham opener against France with six minutes’ game-time in two 
months.

Better news for Jones is that the second-row Joe Launchbury is in line to 
return from a calf strain for Wasps on Saturday, while the club’s centre Elliot 
Daly, who suffered a head injury against Leicester last Sunday, is also set to 
be available for selection.

One back rower Jones has not been able to consider because of the rule 
governing players who are based outside England is Sam Underhill, who has spent 
the past two seasons at Ospreys. That will change in the summer as the Welsh 
region has agreed a transfer with Bath for the 20-year old, who had one season 
remaining on his contract.

The Leicester outside-half Owen Williams is joining Gloucester next season. 
The 24-year old has spent four years at Welford Road after joining from the 
Scarlets, but the Tigers have been heavily linked with Bath’s unsettled England 
fly-half, George Ford.
 