
Schools in education secretary Justine Greening’s constituency will be among 
thousands across England suffering steep budget cuts despitethe government’s 
new “fair funding” formula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/progress-schools-tories-maths-london-england-justine-greening>
, according to analysis released by six unions.


Tory backlash grows over school funding plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/06/tory-backlash-grows-over-school-funding-plans>
The unions – including the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT) and 
the National Union of Teachers – say the study shows an “extremely bleak” 
picture of how the new formula will leave schools across England struggling.

The analysis – published online via a campaigning website, schoolcuts.org.uk 
<http://schoolcuts.org.uk/> – suggests that 98% of schools face a real-terms 
reduction in funding by 2019, with an average loss for each primary pupil of 
£339 and £477 for every secondary pupil.


In Greening’s constituency of Putney, the analysis of Department for Education 
data found an average loss of £655 for every pupil by 2019-20, with the 
worst-hit school seeing a loss of £834 for every pupil in real terms.

Russell Hobby, general secretary of the NAHT, said the new funding formula 
introduced by Greening late last year – which redistributed funds between 
mainly urban schools and those in more rural areas – has dashed hopes of 
solving the crisis in school budgets. “Already heads are being forced to cut 
staff, cut the curriculum and cut specialist support. A new funding formula is 
the right thing to do but it cannot be truly fair unless there is enough money 
to go round in the first place,” Hobby said.

Dave Prentis, general secretary of Unison, which represents many non-teaching 
staff working in schools, said: “The funding crisis means overcrowded 
classrooms, support staff not being replaced and parents having to pay towards 
the cost of lessons.Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children>, 
parents and staff deserve so much better.”

The worst hit schools are those in the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> constituency of Bermondsey and Old 
Southwark, which are forecast to lose an average of just over £1,000 per pupil.

Even prime minister Theresa May’s constituency of Maidenhead can expect a 
real-term cut of £377 for every pupil. All except one school in the 
constituency represented by the chancellor, Philip Hammond – Runnymede and 
Weybridge – is likely to see funding reductions, with an average real-terms 
fall of £285 per pupil.

The analysis is published as a number of Conservative MPs have expressed their 
dismay at the results arising from the fair funding formula, after years of 
complaining that rural and shire districts were underfunded compared with inner 
city boroughs in London.

Hugo Swire, the Conservative MP for East Devon, has labelled the proposed 
formula “entirely unacceptable”if schools in his area see their budgets cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/06/tory-backlash-grows-over-school-funding-plans>
. The new analysis shows the constituency would effectively see a fall of more 
than £400 per pupil.

Greening’s announcement of the new formula in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/england-school-funding-formula-justine-greening-education-secretary>
 included a pledge that no school will lose more than 3% of funding overall, 
with a maximum cut capped at 1.5% per year under the new formula. That still 
left around 9,000 schools losing out directly.


But school leaders and unions point out that with school spending frozen, the 
effective cuts are magnified by the impact of inflation and rising staff costs, 
including mandated increases in pay, pension and national insurance 
contributions.

The new formula is undergoing a public consultation, which finishes in March, 
before a final decision is taken by the government.

 