
Today, eight people have the same wealth as the poorest half of the world’s 
population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/16/worlds-eight-richest-people-have-same-wealth-as-poorest-50>
. Stop and think about this. It is a mind-boggling concept.

Last year we said we would have needed a double-decker bus to transport the 62 
people we thought owned the same as the poorest 3.6 billion on the planet. In 
2017, thanks to more accurate data, we find that in factthis group would fit in 
a single golf buggy 
<http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/an-economy-for-the-99-its-time-to-build-a-human-economy-that-benefits-everyone-620170>
.

Today nearly 800 million people – one in nine – across the world will go to 
bed hungry 
<http://www.worldhunger.org/2015-world-hunger-and-poverty-facts-and-statistics/>
 or undernourished. The adults will wake up uncertain when they will next eat, 
whether they will have work, fearful for their health and the costs that 
illness in the family might bring. The eight men – yes, they’re all men – and 
their fellow billionaires will wake up having slept rather better, and their 
wealth, invested across the world, will have increased by countless millions 
even as they slept.

World's eight richest people have same wealth as poorest 50%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/16/worlds-eight-richest-people-have-same-wealth-as-poorest-50>
It would be easy to vilify the eight, to make each individual a poster boy of 
the growing chasm between the richest and the rest. But painting these 
individuals as the villains would be unfair. The eight include some of the 
world’s largest philanthropists and those, such asWarren Buffett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/warrenbuffett> and Bill Gates, who have 
spoken out against the shocking scale of inequality in the world. These eight 
men are not themselves the cause of the poverty so many still live in. But they 
are the most powerful representatives and beneficiaries of an economic system 
in which wealth accrues more wealth; where wealth means power and influence, 
which in turn leads to laws and practices that help the rich get richer.

So this is not an exposé of eight people, but of a broken economics. Narrowing 
the gap between the richest and the rest requires us to take on a more 
challenging task than asking eight men to change their behaviour. It requires 
us to create a more human economy; one that does not result in 1% of the 
world’s populationowning the same wealth as the other 99% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/13/half-world-wealth-in-hands-population-inequality-report>
. One that encourages and rewards enterprise and innovation, yes, but one that 
also offers everyone, regardless of background, a fair chance in life and 
ensures when individuals and businesses succeed, they do so for the benefit, 
rather than at the expense, of others.

Too often today, our economy rewards rather than discourages bad behaviour. 
Tax avoidance costs poor countries more than $100bn annually 
<http://www.taxjustice.net/2015/03/26/unctad-multinational-tax-avoidance-costs-developing-countries-100-billion/>
 that could be used to provide clean water, lifesaving medicines or education. 
Rich countries, including the UK, lose countless billions more. Yet 
governments, anxious to defend their own corporate sectors and perceived 
national interests, have failed to adequately respond to companies’ use of tax 
loopholes, corporate power and new technology to avoid paying their fair share. 
Small, taxpaying businesses are forced to operate at a competitive disadvantage 
against multinationals, encouraging them to find their own dodges in a 
desperate effort to level the playing field.

Nowhere is the old proverb “money begets money” more apparent than in how 
companies seem determined to stuff the pay packets of their top executives, 
whatever the economic weather. Here in the UK, a FTSE 100 director can expect 
to pocket about £5.5m a year. A leadingUK CEO now earns almost 130 times the 
wage of their average employee 
<http://highpaycentre.org/blog/fat-cat-wednesday-2017>, up from just 10 or 20 
times as recently as the 1980s.

Meanwhile, those without economic power feel the pain: the producer in a 
developing country, the low-paid UK worker, the woman juggling work and 
childcare, are squeezed until their pips squeak, all in the name of returning 
as much money as possible to predominantly wealthy shareholders. Last autumn, 
the Institute for Fiscal Studies warned that their fellow Britons were in the 
midst ofdecade of lost wage growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/24/ministers-defend-obr-after-pro-brexit-tories-accuse-it-of-scaremongering-politics-live>
, the worst for 70 years. Justifying such a growing divide in terms of merit 
will be hard. A recent study by CFA, the global association of investment 
professionals, foundthe link between the pay and performance of 350 top 
executives to be negligible <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-38449264>.

In a survey of 700 experts 
<http://reports.weforum.org/outlook-global-agenda-2015/top-10-trends-of-2015/1-deepening-income-inequality/>
, published ahead of its annual gathering in Davos this week, the World 
Economic Forum pinpointed inequality as the number one threat to the global 
economy during the year ahead. It also cited it as a key factor in continuing 
extreme poverty, political instability, violence and the polarisation of 
societies. Yet there appears little hope of substantive change being proposed 
by leaders at WEF. In the short-term at least, GDP growth will remain their 
answer to all ills.

We have made huge progress in reducing global poverty, and wealth creation has 
played a major part. But the real incomes of the world’s very poorest have gone 
up by just $3 a year over the last 25 years. We need to recognise that economic 
growth and wealth creation are not in themselves enough to ensure decency and 
dignity for all.

Equality looks further away than ever in a Brexit, Donald Trump world | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/brexit-trump-despair-equality-further-than-ever>
A properly functioning economy requires our companies to see themselves as 
vital contributors to society, rather than a means of extracting wealth from 
it. It demands that governments set the rules in a way that reward, rather than 
penalise, them for good behaviour. It requires us to better balance the 
important incentives for people to save, invest and create jobs with an 
approach to sharing the benefits that will allow countries to run the public 
services that all citizens need, the poor far more than the rich; that allows 
people to earn a real living; and that supports the most vulnerable.

Moving towards a more human economy also means looking seriously at different 
approaches to corporate ownership – such as cooperatives and other forms of 
wider involvement – and how they can help in giving a greater number of people 
a greater stake in both the national and global economies. There are 
individuals and companies that are already trying to do it right but they are 
the exception not the norm.

Responsible and responsive leadership – the theme of this year’s Davos 
conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/14/davos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit>
 – requires governments and companies to really step up if we are to eradicate 
extreme poverty as the world committed to so bravely in thesustainable 
development goals <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300> just 16 
months ago.
 