
Sluggish wage growth means the average employee is £3,500 a year worse off 
since the Conservatives came to power, according toLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> analysis of Treasury figures 
before chancellor Philip Hammond’s first autumn statement next week.

Compared with the average wage growth under Labour, full-time employees are 
£67 a week or £292 a month worse off, the party’s report found. The analysis 
compared the average annual percentage change in wages in the six years of the 
Conservative and coalition governments, which is 1.3%.

In contrast, the average growth under the last Labour government was 3.2%, 
though growth fell significantly post-2008. Labour will use slow wage growth as 
a key argument against plans to cut universal credit, which Hammond is being 
urged to reverse in his autumn statement on 23 November.

Damian Green, the work and pensions secretary, has said the government will 
not make any more immediate welfare cuts after the UK’s vote to leave the EU in 
order to focus on economic recovery, but said cuts already announced would go 
ahead as planned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Femployees-3500-a-year-worse-off-under-tories-says-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff670e39f5d4372c7c5db1cfef30a20f93ade2b01%2F54_0_4566_2739%2F4566.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Employees%20%C2%A33%2C500%20a%20year%20worse%20off%20under%20Tories%2C%20says%20Labour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Femployees-3500-a-year-worse-off-under-tories-says-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Employees%20%C2%A33%2C500%20a%20year%20worse%20off%20under%20Tories%2C%20says%20Labour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Femployees-3500-a-year-worse-off-under-tories-says-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff670e39f5d4372c7c5db1cfef30a20f93ade2b01%2F54_0_4566_2739%2F4566.jpg>
 Shadow work and pensions secretary Debbie Abrahams. Photograph: David 
Gadd/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, the 
shadow chancellor, said: “We have known for a long time that the government has 
failed to make good on its promises to ‘make work pay’; we have had sluggish 
wage growth and a failure to return wages to their 2008 peak. That’s why Labour 
is calling on the chancellor, in the upcoming autumn statement, to reverse the 
damaging cuts to universal credit still planned for the remainder of this 
parliament.”

Labour will also focus on the self-employed in the party’s response to the 
autumn statement, with the shadow work and pensions secretary, Debbie Abrahams, 
highlighting the gaps in the national insurance framework for freelancers or 
small business owners, who make up 15% of the workforce.

In a speech on Monday, Abrahams will call for changes to the current system in 
which self-employed workers are not able to gain access to important elements 
of the social security system, including sick pay and paternity pay, and for 
the government to tackle the potential pensions black hole because of lower 
personal pension savings among the self-employed.

“In so many ways, self-employment is characteristic of both the opportunities 
and the challenges faced by our society,” she will say. “It brings to the 
individual a combination of great freedom with great risk, an ability to build 
one’s own enterprise or to work flexibly around other priorities; it can offer 
great prosperity for some, but poverty pay for others.”
 