
The Rugby Football League has cancelled England’s planned warm-weather 
training camp following widespread opposition within the game.

England’s head coach, Wayne Bennett, was set to take 17 leading Super League 
players for a fortnight-long training camp in Dubai in early January. But 
Warrington’s Tony Smith, who was in charge of England from 2008-09, was among a 
host ofSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> club 
coaches to criticise the move.

Many of the coaches claimed it would disrupt their preparations for the start 
of the 2017 Super League season – which begins on 9 February – for little 
reward, and theRFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> appears to have 
backed down.

St Helens’ Keiron Cunningham fumes about England training camp in Dubai
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/st-helens-keiron-cunningham-england-rugby-league-training-camp-dubai-wayne-bennett>
“I totally disagree with the rationale behind it,” Smith told the Warrington 
Guardian. “I don’t understand it whatsoever.”

Smith said he expressed his concerns to Bennett, who was thought to be 
intending to attend only part of the camp since it clashes with the 
preparations of his club Brisbane for the new National Rugby League season.

An RFL spokesman said: “Following further discussions with Super League clubs, 
the England coaching staff and RFL have reflected on all views and concluded 
that the plans that are now in place would not deliver what was initially 
expected.”

Last month the St Helens coach Keiron Cunningham was another to condemn the 
plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/st-helens-keiron-cunningham-england-rugby-league-training-camp-dubai-wayne-bennett>
, saying: “The whole system is absolutely abysmal, both what has been put 
forward and what has been accepted by the powers that be.

“We all want a successful World Cup but I can guarantee you 12 days anywhere 
in the world in January isn’t going to make you win a World Cup in October or 
November. That’s not going to happen. ‘These 12 days in Dubai are going to 
change our competition, I believe.’ Those were Wayne Bennett’s words, all 
because they’re taking players away for two weeks in the middle of January.”

The RFL spokesman insisted Bennett will remain in charge and that the England 
team are now focused on the mid-season Test in May but the reversal will be 
seen as major embarrassment to the RFL, which was were keen to support Bennett.

Super League clubs were already unhappy at having to arrange a second set of 
back-to-back fixtures to accommodate an early start to the season and several 
will also be without key players when England play their proposed international 
against Samoa in Sydney on the weekend of 7 May.
 