
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> should expand a ban on 
bee-harming pesticides in light of a new report warning of widespread risks to 
agriculture and the environment, Greenpeace has said.


The report by biologists at the University of Sussex and commissioned by 
Greenpeace, concluded that the threat posedto bees by neonicotinoid pesticides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/strong-consensus-that-neonicotinoids-harm-bees-analysis-shows>
 was greater than perceived in 2013 when theEuropean Union adopted a partial ban
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bee-harming-pesticides-banned-europe>
.

“New research strengthens arguments for the imposition of a moratorium” on the 
use of three neonicotinoids – clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam, the 
analysis concluded.

“It has become evident that they pose significant risks to many ... organisms, 
not just bees.”

A global review last November said about 1.4bn jobs and three-quarters of all 
crops depend on pollinators, mainly bees.

There are some 20,000 species of bees responsible for fertilising more than 
90% of the world’s 107 major crops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/26/decline-of-bees-poses-potential-risks-to-major-crops-says-un>
.

Last year, the United Nations said 40% of invertebrate pollinators - 
particularly bees and butterflies - risk global extinction.

Bee populations have been hit in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/19/nearly-one-in-ten-of-europes-wild-bee-species-face-extinction-says-study>
,North America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/11/first-us-rusty-patched-bumble-bee-species-listed-endangered-numbers-plummet>
 and elsewhere by a mysterious phenomenon called “colony collapse disorder”.

The blight has been blamed on mites, a virus or fungus, pesticides, or a 
combination of factors.

“These essential insects are in serious trouble,” Greenpeace wrote in a 
foreword to the report published on Thursday, which its authors said involved 
analysing hundreds of scientific studies published since 2013.

“The case that neonicotinoids are contributing to wild bee declines and 
exacerbating honeybee health issues is stronger than it was when the partial EU 
ban as adopted,” said co-author Dave Goulson.

Neonicotinoids appeared also to be linked to declines of butterflies, birds 
and aquatic insects, he said in a statement.

“Given evidence for such widespread environmental harm it would seem prudent 
to extend the scope of the current European restriction.”

“The European Union takes the protection of bees very seriously,” European 
commission spokesman Enrico Brivio told AFP in response.

“It is exactly because their protection is a priority that (neonicotinoid) 
restrictions are, and will remain, in place until an evaluation is finalised.”

Neonicotinoids are lab-synthesised pesticides based on the chemical structure 
of nicotine.

They were introduced in the mid-1990s as a less harmful substitute to older 
pesticide types. They are now widely used to treat flowering crops, and are 
designed to be absorbed by the growing plant and attack the nervous system of 
insect pests.

But studies have blamed neonicotinoids for harming bee reproduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/20/pesticides-neonicotinoids-linked-bee-decline-first-time-large-scale-field-study>
 and foraging by diminishing sperm quality and scrambling memory and navigation 
functions.

It has also been linked to lower disease resistance.

One study suggested that – similar to nicotine for humans – neonicotinoid may 
hold an addictive attraction for bees, which sought out pesticide-laced food in 
lab tests.

The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) declared in 2013 that neonicotinoid 
pesticides posed an “unacceptable risk” to bees, followed by a temporary 
European moratorium.

The partial ban excluded neonicotinoid use on barley and wheat as well as 
gardens and public spaces.

An EFSA neonicotinoid review is due to be finalised in the second half of this 
year.

Officials this week placed the patched bumblebee on the endangered species list
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/11/first-us-rusty-patched-bumble-bee-species-listed-endangered-numbers-plummet>
 – the first ever continental American bee in that category.
 