
While there is no magic diet that will cure or prevent cancer, intervention in 
a patient’s diet will help them maintain an acceptable quality of life – as 
long as that intervention comes from a medically qualified professional with no 
vested interests. Which brings us to the case of Australian bloggerBelle Gibson 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/cancer-conwoman-belle-gibson-faces-1m-fines-over-fundraising-scam-20160428-goh3r2.html>
, who is facing legal action for “unconscionable conduct” after promoting a book
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/belle-gibson-fails-to-appear-in-court-over-allegations-she-made-up-cancer-claims>
 in which she talked of curing herself of multiple cancers by eating the right 
things. The publisher, Penguin,paid more than A$264,000 (£160,000) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/belle-gibson-fails-to-appear-in-court-over-allegations-she-made-up-cancer-claims>
 for the book and Gibson alsomade more than A$420,000 from app sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/belle-gibson-video-submitted-to-court-sparks-condemnation-over-cancer-claims>
 before it emerged thatshe had never had cancer 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/life-and-style/people/the-curious-case-of-belle-gibson-1.2147035>
. Her claims to have donated over A$300,000 to charities also turned out to be 
false.

In contrast, a recipe book for cancer patients experiencing weight loss 
<https://www.ucc.ie/en/fns/clinicalnutrition/nutritionandcancerrecovery/> from 
University College, Cork, and one forpatients with swallowing difficulties 
<https://www.breakthroughcancerresearch.ie/shop/eating-well-with-swallowing/> 
from Breakthrough Cancer Research have been developed by dieticians and are 
available free of charge.

What is an oncology dietician?

Oncology dieticians provide expert, evidence-based advice to cancer patients 
to help maintain their strength, wellbeing and quality of life. They can, for 
example, develop plans using fluids or tube feeding to help maintain weight and 
muscle mass. They also address side effects of treatment that affect a 
patient’s ability to eat. Qualifying as an oncology dietician involves a 
four-year undergraduate degree in human nutrition and dietetics, with a 
hospital placement. Alternatively, people with a related science degree can 
obtain a postgraduate qualification in dietetics, followed by at least three 
years of post-qualification hospital work.

Ruth Kilcawley and Fiona Roulston are oncology dieticians. Frustratingly, says 
Kilcawley, much of the misinformation about diet and cancer her patients 
receive comes from well-intentioned loved ones, while Roulston’s patients often 
get information online. “If you enter ‘nutrition and cancer’ into Google, you 
get over 123m results. With so much conflicting information, it makes it so 
confusing and overwhelming for cancer patients at an already stressful time.”

What about a vegan diet?

There isn’t currently any strong evidence 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20663065> that eating too much red meat 
causes cancer.Some studies have shown a weak possibility 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20663065> that red meat may be associated 
with colorectal cancer in men. But an association is not a cause. There is some 
evidencethat vegan diets may aid weight loss 
<https://authoritynutrition.com/vegan-diet-studies/> in certain people (though 
this may partly relate to vegans simply being more aware of what, and therefore 
how much, they eat). However, a healthy diet hinges on avoiding overindulgence 
and ensuring that we get enough nutrients to meet our essential needs. The few 
scientific studies on veganism and vegetarianism refer to alack of data 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26707634> on vegan diets, but some vegan 
diets have been shown to result in calcium levels that are below minimum 
dietary regulations <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24667136>. In a small 
study of men with early-stage prostate cancer, a vegan diet resulted in vitamin 
D deficiency <http://www.andjrnl.org/article/S0002-8223(05)01154-5/abstract>.

“Unnecessary diet restrictions of food groups are not recommended during 
cancer treatment,” says Roulston. Kilcawley adds: “The negative consequences 
include accelerating muscle loss. This leads to reduced ability to tolerate 
treatment, inadequate micronutrient intake (particularly calcium, which may 
compound bone mineral density issues with some types of chemotherapy), lack of 
energy, low mood and fatigue.”

But surely we all know that sugar is carcinogenic


Eating too much fatty and sugary food is not good for anyone. But the idea that
cancer has a sweet tooth 
<http://junkfoodscience.blogspot.co.uk/2008/03/do-you-fear-sugar-might-cause-cancer.html>
 and that a patient can “starve” their cancer by cutting all sugars and 
carbohydrates is a gross oversimplification for a complex disease that behaves 
differently from patient to patient. It simply isn’t the case that cake feeds 
cancer while eggs feed healthy cells, and cutting carbs completely puts 
patients at increased risk of malnutrition. A study of more than 1,000 patients 
across three Irish hospitals foundalarming levels of malnutrition 
<http://www.thejournal.ie/diets-malnutrition-cancer-3108255-Nov2016/?utm_source=shortlink>
 amongst cancer patients.

The case study of a 65-year-old woman  
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2874558/>who recovered from a 
brain tumour has been used to promote the idea that a low-carb, high-fat “
ketogenic diet” 
<https://www.sciencebasedmedicine.org/ketogenic-diets-for-cancer-hype-versus-science/>
 is a cure for cancer. However, this patient had also received standard 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Disturbingly, a proponent of this diet, Dr 
Thomas Seyfried of Boston College, has said it“can replace chemotherapy and 
radiation for almost all cancers”. 
<http://www.australiannationalreview.com/ketogenic-diet-effective-chemo/>

Nutrition is complex. Patients should seek advice on their individual needs 
from a qualified professional. No competent professional will ever tell a 
patient to forgo evidence-based medicine in favour of a diet.

What about supplements and superfoods?

Anything that alters how your body works is a drug, even if it’s “natural”. 
Supplements not recommended by a dietician can interact with other drugs, 
including anti-cancer therapies, and make them less effective. TheMemorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Centre 
<https://www.mskcc.org/cancer-care/treatments/symptom-management/integrative-medicine/herbs>
 urges patients to stop taking any herbal supplements before starting treatment 
and lists some of the dangerous effects 
<https://www.mskcc.org/cancer-care/patient-education/herbal-remedies-and-treatment>
 such “natural remedies” can have. The term“superfoods” 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/superfoods/Pages/what-are-superfoods.aspx> is 
simply part of a marketing strategy, not based on science.

“There is huge manipulation of people’s emotions going on when someone tries a 
fad diet, hoping against hope it will cure them, and then subsequently fails 
because it is restrictive, unpalatable, or the patient is simply too ill,” says 
Kilcawley. “They risk blaming their own failure in keeping to the diet on any 
progression of disease, which is excessively cruel of those promoting diets 
without sufficient evidence that the diet if kept to would be effective. I see 
this a lot.”

Further information: Cancer Research UK <http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/>, 
Macmillan <> and the Irish Cancer Society <https://www.cancer.ie> are all 
reliable sources for advice and support.
 