
Manor Racing have gone into administration, leaving the Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> future of the Banbury-based 
marque in doubt.

Future of F1 British Grand Prix at Silverstone in doubt over hosting costs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/future-f1-british-grand-prix-silverstone-in-doubt-hosting-costs>
The team failed to secure fresh investment for the 2017 season, which begins 
with the Australian Grand Prix on 26 March, putting hundreds of jobs and their 
future in the sport at risk.

Geoff Rowley, joint administrator at FRP Advisory, acknowledged the team need 
significant continuing investment if they are to continue competing in F1.

He said: “The team have made significant progress under their new ownership 
since the start of 2015, the highlight of which included securing a 
constructors’ championship point in the preceding F1 season, but the position 
remains that operating an F1 team requires significant ongoing investment.

“During recent months, the senior management team have worked tirelessly to 
bring new investment to the team to secure its long-term future, but 
regrettably have been unable to do so within the time available.”

The team, backed by the energy company owner Stephen Fitzpatrick, employs 212 
staff and administrator FRP Advisory said while no redundancies have been made, 
the future of the staff position is “dependent on whether new investment can be 
secured”.

The team’s participation in March’s season opener in Australia will “depend on 
the outcome of the administration process and any related negotiations with 
interested parties in what is a very limited window of opportunity”, FRP said.

Manor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manor> Grand Prix Racing Ltd – the 
sister company of Manor’s parent company, Just Racing Services Limited, which 
holds the rights to compete in F1 – is not in administration.

In the final 2016 constructors’ standings, Manor finished in last place with 
one point. The German driver Pascal Wehrlein scored that solitary point at the 
Austrian Grand Prix. Manor were overtaken by Sauber with one race to go, when 
Felipe Nasr came ninth in Brazil.
 