
The French Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> Grand 
Prix will return in 2018 after a 10-year absence, with the race scheduled to 
take place at the Circuit Paul Ricard in southern France, said a local 
politician, Christian Estrosi, on Monday.

“We and those who are with me are very proud … it’s a great victory,” said 
Estrosi.

France hosted the first ever recognised Grand Prix near Le Mans in 1906, but 
the country lost its slot in 2008.

Young guns and old hands in frame to replace Nico Rosberg at Mercedes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/replace-nico-rosberg-mercedes> 
McLaren have no fears about losing Fernando Alonso to Mercedes after the 
Formula One world championNico Rosberg’s sudden retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-shock-retirement-f1-formula-one>
, the team’s new executive director Zak Brown said on Monday.

“We have a contract with Fernando and he’s very happy,” the American told Sky 
Sports. “Obviously, he wants to be winning races, as do we, but I am not 
worried about that scenario [him leaving]. We are very comfortable where we are 
at.”

McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> have not won a race since 
2012 and have under-performed since the start of their new partnership with 
Honda in 2015, finishing sixth overall this year and ninth out of 10 teams in 
2015.

Alonso, a double world champion with Renault, joined McLaren from Ferrari at 
the end of 2014 and has been disappointed by their lack of success. He is due 
to partner Belgian rookie Stoffel Vandoorne next year.

Formula One’s commercial supremo Bernie Ecclestone said last week that Alonso, 
a team-mate of the triple world champion Lewis Hamilton at McLaren in 2007, 
would be his ideal replacement for Rosberg at Mercedes alongside Britain’s 
Lewis Hamilton.

Rosberg announced his retirement on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-remained-modest-and-unaffected-through-11-year-f1-career>
, five days after winning the world title in Abu Dhabi.

Mercedes began their search for a new driver on Monday with the non-executive 
chairman Niki Lauda saying at the weekend that he hoped the most-prized seat on 
the starting grid could be filled by the end of the year.

Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, another driver mentioned in media speculation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/replace-nico-rosberg-mercedes> 
and a four-times world champion, ruled himself out of the reckoning on Sunday.
 