
Sunday morning, and the crowds are thronging the myriad churches on the ragged 
western edge of Kinshasa. Congregations file into the barn-like halls to hear 
priests and preachers. Down on the terrace of Chez Tintin, one of Kinshasa’s 
best known restaurants and nightspots, only fishermen and two tourists from the 
central town of Kisangani brave the warm, driving rain.


Beyond the plastic tables and chairs, a low brick wall, and the pilgrims, is 
the Congo. Though 4,500km from its furthest source, the great river is less 
than 1,000 metres wide at this point, and surges through the narrow bottleneck 
with tremendous power. The resulting rush of foaming brown water is the reason 
for the existence, the proximity and the enmity of arguably the world’s two 
closest capital cities: Kinshasa, of the Democratic Republic of Congo, and 
Brazzaville, of the confusingly similarly named Republic of Congo.

Upstream, the river broadens and is navigable deep into the interior. But 
below the rapids, all the way to the Atlantic Ocean 450km away, the Congo is 
impassable.

This geography was of crucial significance in the late 19th century when 
France and Belgium established rival colonies on the Congo’s banks. Ivory, 
rubber and other commodities could be brought as far as the rapids, but no 
further. To bypass them, each built a railway to the Atlantic Ocean. The 
Belgians built theirs on the southern bank in the 1890s; the French followed 30 
years later on the northern. The tracks began at the last possible point where 
goods could be carried by ships: the current sites of Kinshasa, and 
Brazzaville, named in honour ofPierre de Brazza 
<https://www.britannica.com/biography/Pierre-de-Brazza>, the young French 
explorer who pioneered Paris’ acquisition of the territory.

The birthright of the cities is thus suspicion and rivalry. For nearly 150 
years the two have been divided by their shared origins and the famous river 
which runs between them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f2d1066d4029eecef1dcff96c93b01c8852db86%2F0_0_3188_1913%2F3188.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Face-off%20over%20the%20Congo%3A%20the%20long%20rivalry%20between%20Kinshasa%20and%20Brazzaville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Face-off%20over%20the%20Congo%3A%20the%20long%20rivalry%20between%20Kinshasa%20and%20Brazzaville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f2d1066d4029eecef1dcff96c93b01c8852db86%2F0_0_3188_1913%2F3188.jpg>
 The DRC capital, Kinshasa, was known as Leopoldville under Belgian rule. 
Photograph: Thomas Mukoya/Reuters 
When Joseph Kabila, the 45-year-old president of what has been the DRC since 
2001, looks out of his heavily guarded home on the river’s banks in the centre 
of Kinshasa, he will see, directly opposite, the span of a vast new bridge, 
illuminated at night with sprays of pink and yellow light.

This is the Route de la Corniche, a prestige project which spans a valley over 
a minor tributary on the river’s northern bank separating two wealthy 
neighbourhoods of Brazzaville, where his counterpart Denis Sassou Nguesso, 73, 
has been ruling since 1979 (with a five year break during civil war). It is, 
says one western diplomat, “a bridge to nowhere” and is an adequate 
representation of the relations of the two countries.

Brazzaville and Kinshasa have never seen the Congo as a wall … it was the 
colonial powers which created this divide
Kambayi Bwatshia 
There is a flight twice a week between the two ridiculously close capitals – 
“Welcome aboard, our flight time today is five minutes” – but the Congo is the 
main link, and that means the heavy, rusting ferries and the faster but 
terrifyingly flimsy speed boats which bounce over the waves.

Professor Kambayi Bwatshia lives in a small villa in central Kinshasa where he 
has watched regimes on both sides come and go. He has also watched the two 
cities – Kinshasa with a population of 12 million, the other three million – 
steadily grow. Bwatshia teaches in universities in the two cities, taking the 
ferry across to lecture students on international relations and culture.

“Going in either direction is a homecoming,” Bwatshia says. “The populations 
of Brazzaville and Kinshasa have never seen the river Congo as a wall, a 
closure … but as a passage, a route for coming and going to see a friend, a 
brother, a partner. The two peoples are one and the same, sharing politics, 
economics, commerce, spirituality and faiths.”

Bwatshia believes the divisions between the twin cities are a legacy of 
European imperialism. “It was the colonial powers which created this divide, a 
divide which entered into the spirit of people, as it has done elsewhere across
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>,” he says.

King Leopold II was forced to hand the DRC over to the Belgian government in 
1908 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-13286306>. The colony, after 
decades of horrific mismanagement and exploitation, did not gain independence 
until June 1960. Brazzaville, which had played a key role for the French during 
the second world, followed two months later as a free nation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F893d5d193a39bb72f5d2b4606503dbe2585eab0f%2F0_273_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Face-off%20over%20the%20Congo%3A%20the%20long%20rivalry%20between%20Kinshasa%20and%20Brazzaville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Face-off%20over%20the%20Congo%3A%20the%20long%20rivalry%20between%20Kinshasa%20and%20Brazzaville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F893d5d193a39bb72f5d2b4606503dbe2585eab0f%2F0_273_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Thousands cross the Congo river every day. Photograph: Federico 
Scoppa/AFP/Getty Images 
“Each colonial power exploited its colonies according to it own objectives, 
mentality and values. That has been a major influence on the two cities and 
their relationship. The two peoples became almost enemies, and remained so 
until today … The river, once a bridge, became a wall,” said Bwatshia.

One key factor was the cold war. In 1965, Joseph Mobutu (who later renamed 
himself Mobutu Sese Seko) a former soldier and journalist, took power of the 
Belgian Congo. On the other side of the river, three years later, it was Marien 
Ngouabi, a leftist former paratrooper who took control and declared a 
Marxist–Leninist state. Mobutu, despite his brutality and venality, was 
supported by the west as a bulwark against Communist expansion. The Republic of 
the Congo, or Congo-Brazzaville as it is often known,broke diplomatic relations 
with the US <https://history.state.gov/countries/congo-republic>, leaning 
towards the Soviet camp though it was wooed by its former colonial masters, or 
at least French businesses.

Both are scarred by the architecture of the time. Kinshasa is still full of 
crumbling monuments to Mobutu’s 32-year rule – such as his 200m Tower of Limite 
from 1971, a monument to Congolese independence leader Patrice Émery Lumumba – 
while Brazzaville is dominated by the 108m Nabemba Tower, an office block built 
with funds borrowed from French oil companies in the early 1980s.

The two capitals have been intertwined in more recent events too. As the 
author Michela Wrong drily writes in her account of the last years of Mobutu, 
In the Footsteps of Mr Kurtz, the fact that the two capitals are “within easy 
shelling distance of each other” has been “of more than merely abstract 
interest”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c55cc43bd5eeda4dc4861550ea6891e0833b361%2F77_379_3368_2021%2F3368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Face-off%20over%20the%20Congo%3A%20the%20long%20rivalry%20between%20Kinshasa%20and%20Brazzaville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Face-off%20over%20the%20Congo%3A%20the%20long%20rivalry%20between%20Kinshasa%20and%20Brazzaville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c55cc43bd5eeda4dc4861550ea6891e0833b361%2F77_379_3368_2021%2F3368.jpg>
 An empty avenue in Kinshasa with the Limete tower in the background. 
Photograph: Eduardo Soteras/AFP/Getty Images 
Wrong wrote: “From Brazzaville to Kinshasa, from Kinshasa to Brazzaville, 
residents ping-pong irrepressibly from one to another … depending on which 
capital is judged more dangerous at any given moment.”

The ebb and flow of violence has since led more people across the river, in 
both directions.

Forty years on from the Rumble in the Jungle, Kinshasa is a city of chaos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/15/-sp-forty-years-rumble-in-the-jungle-kinshasa-muhammad-ali-george-foreman>
In 2001, Laurent Kabila 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/feb/11/theobserver>, Joseph Kabila’s 
father and the rebel leader who took over from Mobutu, was shot by a teenage 
soldier in his palace. At least three of those involved in the plot, including 
the unnamed killer himself, reportedly fled Kinshasa, crossed the river and may 
have gone into hiding in Brazzaville. A supposed attempt in 2011 on Joseph 
Kabila’s life blamed on the northern neighbours led to major breakdown in 
diplomatic relations, which is yet to be patched up.

Tens, possibly hundreds of thousands of DRC citizens who have found work in 
Brazzaville face periodic expulsions. Many were already displaced within DRC 
and now live in desperately poor camps around Kinshasa.

But the sheer disparity in size between the two nations – the DRC with a 
population of 80 million,Congo-Brazzaville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo-brazzaville> with less than five – and 
the two cities, is a factor that restrains any outright hostility.

In recent months, as the DRC has slid into a bloody political crisis, anxious 
looks have been cast in both directions across the fast-moving waters between 
the two capitals.


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9af164322a24374fc0b67cee08e0614e8a1cd451%2F0_2_2729_1638%2F2729.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Face-off%20over%20the%20Congo%3A%20the%20long%20rivalry%20between%20Kinshasa%20and%20Brazzaville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Face-off%20over%20the%20Congo%3A%20the%20long%20rivalry%20between%20Kinshasa%20and%20Brazzaville&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fcongo-rivalry-kinshasa-brazzaville-river-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9af164322a24374fc0b67cee08e0614e8a1cd451%2F0_2_2729_1638%2F2729.jpg>
 Cyclists in the 11th Africa Games ride through Brazzaville in 2015. 
Photograph: Monirul Bhuiyan/AFP/Getty Images 
Kabila failed in a bid to change the constitution to allow himself to stand 
for a third term and his electoral mandate expired in December, prompting 
widespread violence in which more than 40 people are thought to have died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/weve-had-enough-kinshasa-holds-its-breath-amid-talks-to-end-violence>
.

In 2015, Sassou held a referendum to change Congo-Brazzaville’s constitution 
to allow him to stand for a third presidential term.He went on to win elections 
held last year. 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/03/congo-president-denis-sassou-nguesso-wins-election-160324040212900.html>

Both rulers are accused of nepotism and corruption – which they deny.


***

With less than 24 hours before Kabila’s mandate officially ended, the ferries 
between the two capitals were busier than usual. Through the rusting gates, 
beyond the money changers with their stacks of eroded Congolese francs and the 
photocopiers where vital documents could be duplicated or triplicated, scores 
queued for tickets in the sweltering heat. Porters lugged suitcases, plastic 
bags wrapped in twine, multicoloured sacks and children. Armed police cradled 
Kalashnikovs and watched the chaos.

“It isn’t the English channel,” said Nzuzi Sitalina, the principal 
administrator of the port.

For some, the purpose of the trip was relatively mundane: to stay with 
relatives over Christmas, to retrieve some property, and trade sugar for cheap 
clothes. For others, the trip was more urgent.

Kinshasa's traffic robots: 'I thought it was some kind of joke' - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/mar/13/kinshasa-traffic-robots-robocops-in-pictures>
A luxury 4x4 drew up metres from the ramps leading to the ferries. A tall slim 
woman emerged, flanked by a heavy-set man carrying a radio. Six porters were 
rapidly hired, and five giant suitcases plus an Italian-manufactured baby seat 
distributed. Four surly teenagers wearing baseball caps and skinny jeans 
followed. They were on their way out, one said, to escape the violence 
predicted for the following week.

Despite the political tensions between the two capitals, and the legacy of two 
very different nations’ imperialism, and even the limits to commercial, social 
and intellectual exchange imposed by the unbridged river, the 15 million on 
both banks are drawn inexorably together.

Feasibility studies are reportedly being carried out for a 4km, $1.65bn road 
and rail bridge linking the hearts of Brazzaville and Kinshasa. These are not 
the first such efforts. Half a dozen studies have been undertaken. It is 
unlikely that anyone is going to put up the kind of sums required in the near, 
or even distant, future for such an epic project.

In the meantime, the ferries ply back and forth, the students, teachers, 
traders and politician’s fugitive families still flow between the cities, and 
the rapids continue to entertain the diners at Chez Tintin.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
read more articles in our Border cities series here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/border-cities>
 