
Ordinarily, everyday life is grist to the narrative mill. Yet on a 
sufficiently eclipsing scale, reality is the enemy of fiction. When the truth 
grows outlandish, invention appears superfluous. Much like 9/11, America’s 
astonishing electoral upset, landing an ill-informed, volatile neophyte in the 
White House, makes novelists like me worry that nothing we contrive can 
compete. The products of mere imagination seem tinny and lame.

Besides, reality cheats. Drafting my most recent novel, The Mandibles  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/08/the-mandibles-lionel-shriver-review-biting-near-future-satire>
(2016), I carefully devised a fiscal collapse for the United States of 2029 not 
too over the top, reading up for months to ensure that the plot would ring true 
for economists. But fiction must clear a higher bar. Reality doesn’t have to be 
plausible. Reality can be as preposterous as it pleases.

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> wouldn’t work 
on paper. Obnoxious, crass, boastful and vulgar, with garish tastes and a 
Stepford wife, as a fictional character he’d seem too crudely drawn. Even in a 
trashy airport thriller, readers wouldn’t buy such a boor as president. 
Reviewers would slam the author for artless overkill. (I take that back. This 
book wouldn’t get reviewed at all.) As a notional construct, Trump wouldn’t fly 
in satire, either. Parody-proof, he’s too broad to be funny.

Were I designing a double-talking demagogue whose election imperils American 
democracy, the politician would be slick, seductive. Slyly disguising 
unpalatable sentiments that appeal to his countrymen’s baser instincts, he’d 
not resort to overt bigotry, but might tout nostalgic return to “traditional 
values”. Like Reagan, he’d parlay a disarming sense of humour, quite a 
different matter from claiming retroactively that a particularly horrifying 
assertion on the campaign trail was just “a joke”.

My slime-ball charlatan would speak with a silver tongue. He’d never use the 
same bland black-and-white adjectives, nasty and terrible, or wonderful and 
terrific, multiple times in a sentence. He’d promote dodgy positions with an 
eloquence that flatters the underexamined opinions of his constituents. He 
wouldn’t lie outright; he’d leave things out. Insincerely, of course, like 
Frank Underwood inHouse of Cards, my huckster would style himself as humble.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffaced-with-current-reality-how-can-fiction-compete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5e3a487eb0f210ac27a575190a8822193aec701%2F0_142_2448_1468%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Faced%20with%20current%20reality%2C%20how%20can%20fiction%20compete%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffaced-with-current-reality-how-can-fiction-compete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Faced%20with%20current%20reality%2C%20how%20can%20fiction%20compete%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffaced-with-current-reality-how-can-fiction-compete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5e3a487eb0f210ac27a575190a8822193aec701%2F0_142_2448_1468%2F2448.jpg>
 Stephen King’s novel The Dead Zone, about an unstable presidential candidate, 
was made into a film starring Christopher Walken. Photograph: Courtesy Everett 
Collection/REX 
Multiple commentators have cited fictional premonitions of Trump. Sinclair 
Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/oct/09/it-cant-happen-here-1935-novel-sinclair-lewis-predicted-rise-donald-trump>
 modelled Buzz Windrip inIt Can’t Happen Here (1935) on the rabble-rousing 
Louisiana governor Huey Long, whose presidential bid the author hoped to 
squelch (the pen was less mighty than the sword; Long was assassinated). Like 
Trump promising to bring back bygone manufacturing jobs, Windrip vows to give 
every American $5,000, before getting into office, declaring martial law, 
jailing the opposition and crushing the press.

Philip Roth nodded to Sinclair Lewis in The Plot Against America (2004), in 
which FDR is instead defeated by Charles Lindbergh – dashing, heroic, closer to 
the seductive autocrat I would create, though also, in both life and the novel, 
an admirer of Hitler. While Roth’s story of a pro-fascist president makes no 
allusions to the modern day, hisNew York Times reviewer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2004/10/03/books/review/the-plot-against-america.html?_r=0>
 Paul Berman wrote with unwitting prescience that it was “as if a second novel, 
something from our own time, had been locked inside and was banging furiously 
on the walls, trying to get out.” Stephen King’sThe Dead Zone (1979) presents a 
dilemma that feels ominously contemporary: a young man with precognitive powers 
foresees that an emotionally unstable politician will rise to the presidency 
and instigate nuclear war. Is he duty bound to assassinate the candidate before 
the worst comes to pass?

More disconcertingly, numerous readers hail The Mandibles as prophetic. 
Written before Trump’s campaign, the novel does contain eerie coincidences. A 
wall goes up between the US and Mexico and Mexico pays for it – because the 
wall is erected to keep unemployed American riffraff out. But the larger plot 
is not predictive. In the novel, America isn’t politically broken – it’s broke. 
My first Latino president is neither a reactionary nor a loose cannon. In the 
book, the dollar becomes almost worthless; on today’s currency exchange, its 
value has soared. So perhaps the readers’ sense of recognition is atmospheric: 
my near-future USA, as one character understates, is “something of a 
disappointment”.

This impulse to identify visionary novelists is itself signal. Perhaps oracles 
who saw Trump coming help to fit the present into a coherent pattern that makes 
his election seem preordained. An inexorable slouching toward Bethlehem – 
toward either the dark destiny of America or the natural bleak endpoint of 
democracy – is more satisfying than random historical caprice. The same 
yearning for order helps to explain the conspiracy theories surrounding 9/11: 
we prefer an evil order to no order.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffaced-with-current-reality-how-can-fiction-compete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26b53242d87b626a5ea599f459ef8ecd8f1bd7e6%2F0_124_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Faced%20with%20current%20reality%2C%20how%20can%20fiction%20compete%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffaced-with-current-reality-how-can-fiction-compete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Faced%20with%20current%20reality%2C%20how%20can%20fiction%20compete%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffaced-with-current-reality-how-can-fiction-compete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26b53242d87b626a5ea599f459ef8ecd8f1bd7e6%2F0_124_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Donald Trump may seem a natural endpoint of democracy. Photograph: Robyn 
Beck/AFP/Getty Images 
It’s a rough time for fiction readers, too. Though I rarely read long-form 
nonfiction for fun, I devoured several apocalyptic nonfiction books over the 
holidays, because reality bests the feeble fabrications of my occupation hands 
down. The young protagonist ofThe Mandibles urges his great aunt, a novelist, 
to relinquish copies of her books to burn for cooking fuel. “Now isn’t a time 
for novels,” he chides. “We’re in a novel.”

While they are in a novel, this is a sensation that many Americans now seem to 
share. Reality has gone make-believe. A Trump presidency feels as if we’ve 
crawled between the covers of a really crummy book. So the temptation is to 
take real life less seriously, to kick back and enjoy the farce in DC as cheesy 
entertainment.

I can’t be alone among fiction writers in regarding the world, so much weirder 
than anything we could make up, as beating us at our own game or in racking my 
brains over what could possibly constitute a contribution when novels pale 
before the newspaper. Much as some Hillary supporters may retreat into private 
absorptions, many of my colleagues are apt to go small, to burrow into the 
personal, maybe exploring the sorrows of the very “left behind” voters who 
landed us in Oz. As driving spirits in fiction, Democrats’ dominant 
post-election emotions – contempt, indignation, outrage – tend to backfire. 
Artistically, soul searching and compassion are more transformative.

Logistically, too, it seems risky to set fiction in the present. After such an 
upheaval, what other momentous events lie in wait? Writing and releasing a book 
usually takes two to three years. No one wants to toil away on a project only 
for it to become utterly beside the point overnight. More authors are likely to 
set plots safely in the past. We may also see fewer high-concept speculative 
novels of the sort I recently published, in which a great aspirational country 
falls into decline, in the process betraying the fine principles on which the 
nation was founded. If you’re going to set a book in the future, you don’t 
write about what’s already happened.
 