
Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, appeared in court to 
testify on behalf of the social media giant’s virtual reality company Oculus 
Rift on Tuesday, as it was accused of stealing trade secrets from Id Software, 
maker of the Doom and Quake games.

“I’m here because I believe they’re false,” Zuckerberg said of the charges, 
“and it’s important to testify to that.” He characterized the plaintiffs as 
opportunists: “It’s pretty common when you announce a big deal that people just 
come out of the woodwork and claim they own some part of the deal.”

Will 2017 be the year virtual reality gets real?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/27/will-2017-be-the-year-virtual-reality-gets-real>
“We’re disappointed that another company is using wasteful litigation to 
attempt to take credit for technology that it did not have the vision, 
expertise or patience to build,” anOculus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/oculus> spokesperson told the Guardian. 
Representatives from Zenimax media, owner of Id and chief plaintiff, did not 
immediately respond to a request for comment.


Zenimax alleges that Oculus founder Palmer Luckey and Id co-founder John 
Carmack – now chief technical officer at Oculus – tweaked the software that 
operates the Oculus while Carmack was still under contract at Id and then 
destroyed evidence of the collaboration. Luckey is also accused ofusing Zenimax 
games to promote the Rift during its Kickstarter campaign 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1523379957/oculus-rift-step-into-the-game>
 without permission. Oculus was acquired by Facebook in 2014 at a cost of $2bn.

Attorneys grilled Zuckerberg about whether or not his company had done the 
necessary due diligence before the sale. The court heard that Amin Zoufonoun, 
Facebook’s head of corporate development, warned Zuckerberg that Oculus Rift’s 
team had toldFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> things 
that were “simply not true”.

Demos of the headset impressed enough reporters and tech executives that 
Oculus’s 2012 Kickstarter campaign raised $2.4m, after which Zenimax demanded 
compensation from Oculus, including an equity stake. The subsequent discussions 
ended in stalemate: Oculus refusing to give Zenimax equity without payment, 
Zenimax refusing to pay cash. Several Zenimax employees left the company for 
Oculus, including Carmack.


Carmack’s gifts are central to the suit: in one exhibit, the company has 
included a tweet from the venerable developer reading, “When you are in a 
hurry, and you know you wrote the exact needed code (well!) at a previous job, 
reimplementation grates.”
John Carmack (@ID_AA_Carmack) 
When you are in a hurry, and you know you wrote the exact needed code (well!) 
at a previous job, reimplementation grates.
 <https://twitter.com/ID_AA_Carmack/status/457599632252485633> April 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ID_AA_Carmack/status/457599632252485633> 
Carmack was associated with the Rift from the headset’s earliest days; during 
the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in 2013, the company held private briefings 
for press and other interested parties in a suite at the Venetian Hotel in Las 
Vegas, whereLuckey demonstrated 
<http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/we-have-seen-future-and-its-3-d-mobile-and-waterproof-146510>
 what was not much more than a Galaxy Note 2 duct-taped to a plastic headset 
with what he called “some hacky driver fixes in [Microsoft rendering software] 
DirectX” at the time. Zuckerberg said in court that there was “no shared code 
[from Carmack’s contract work with Zenimax] in what we do”.

Reuters contributed to this report
 