
Back in the 1970s and 80s, Star Wars fans desperate to fill their time with 
Jedi-related adventures on mystical far-flung planets in the company of wise, 
syntactically challenged aliens of the green, hairy-eared variety were forced 
to turn to comics or novels from the Expanded Universe – or worse still, the 
execrable Star Wars Holiday Special – while waiting three years for a new film 
to come out. These days we have thrillingly unnecessary episodes, such as Rogue 
One: A Star Wars Story, a Death Star-sized slice of fan fiction masquerading as 
a movie, to keep appetites whetted. In fact, a newStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> movie of a sort is promised every 
year from here on in, with Alden Ehrenreich’s young Han Solo the next to get 
his own gap-filling spinoff, in 2018.


Disney's dilemma: digitally resurrect Carrie Fisher or write her out of Star 
Wars?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2017/jan/06/carrie-fisher-star-wars-princess-leia-episodes-viii-ix-disney>
But now that most fans have seen Rogue One and marveled at its miraculous 
ability to pump up dozens of minor characters we never knew we cared about into 
major players on a par with Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Princess Leia et al, we 
are surely ready to move on to the corners of a galaxy, far, far away that 
really matter. Star Wars: Episode VIII director Rian Johnson certainly seems to 
think so, and has been helping to fuel the hype machine with carefully 
considered hints about part two of the main Star Wars trilogy that began with 
2015’s The Force Awakensin a new interview with USA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/movies/2017/01/09/star-wars-episode-viii-rian-johnson-mark-hamill/96351428/>
.

Solid details are predictably few and far between, but it sounds like Rey’s 
relationship with Luke Skywalker will form a huge part of the new movie, with 
Johnson describing their encounter as a deeply affecting “dawning of this new 
chapter” in the young life of the Jakku-based scavenger. There are also hints 
that Star Wars’ fondness for inter-generational themes will continue, with the 
Brick and Looper director revealing familial connections will play “a huge 
part” in Rey’s story. So far, so tantalizing, but JJ Abrams’ The Force Awakens 
left so many story threads unfinished that there is still plenty more to dig 
through. Here are some of the questions fans won’t forgive Johnson for failing 
to answer by the time the credits roll onStar Wars: Episode VIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars--episode-viii>.

Who is Rey and why is she so powerful?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d5317732a6ef011b8e33e1b9c093398d7f080ec%2F0_568_2336_1402%2F2336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can't%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can%27t%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d5317732a6ef011b8e33e1b9c093398d7f080ec%2F0_568_2336_1402%2F2336.jpg>
 Photograph: Allstar/Disnay/Lucasfilm 
Very few of the enduring fan theories about Daisy Ridley’s staff-wielding 
proto-Jedi are entirely satisfactory. If she is Luke Skywalker’s daughter, why 
did he abandon his Jedi vows to enter into the relationship that led to her 
birth? And why does she talk about Anakin Skywalker’s son in excitable, awed 
terms when he is first mentioned in The Force Awakens, when the natural 
reaction to someone raising the ongoing absence of your secret dad would surely 
be pursed lips and sheepish efforts to avoid looking anyone in the eye? For 
similar reasons, it seems unlikely that Rey is a Kenobi, unless old Ben got 
really, really bored with hermit-life during his self-imposed 30-year exile on 
Tatooine and began to engage in unwise forays to Mos Eisley in search of female 
companionship. Not that he would have had much luck in the sausage fest 
environment of the local cantina.

Trawl the internet for a parsec or two (yes, I know 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/movies/2017/01/09/star-wars-episode-viii-rian-johnson-mark-hamill/96351428/>
) and you’ll find theories that Rey is the reincarnation of Anakin 
Skywalker/Darth Vader – a new chosen one – or that she is Snoke or Palpatine’s 
literal or metaphorical daughter. The Vader theory would help at least partly 
to explain the essential quandary surrounding our young hero, that she is 
somehow stronger with the Force than Adam Driver’s Kylo Ren (who has presumably 
been honing his darkling emo powers for decades) despite having had no training 
whatsoever beyond a few years in Luke’s Jedi academy as a very young child. 
Moreover, why do Rey’s powers emerge so rapidly, and with such raging 
intensity, when Skywalker’s had to be developed and honed over many years? Only 
if she is somehow a more powerful Jedi than anything we have seen in Star Wars 
since the birth of Anakin can any of The Force Awakens’ gaping plot holes be 
satisfactory filled.

Where has Luke been and what has he been up to?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb6068ce314d2a2db94ed61633e3e0393efa9799%2F13_0_973_584%2F973.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can't%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can%27t%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb6068ce314d2a2db94ed61633e3e0393efa9799%2F13_0_973_584%2F973.jpg>
 Photograph: Lucasfilm 
The Force Awakens revealed that Skywalker went in search of the first Jedi 
temple, and that he ended up on the barren, windswept oceanic planet of 
Ahch-To, where Rey found him in the movie’s final scenes. We also know that 
Luke failed to stop the young Ben Solo turning to the Dark Side and becoming 
Kylo Ren, a development which would surely be enough to send even the strongest 
of minds catapulting into doubt and despair. But there must be more backstory 
to discover here.

Force of argument: why Jediism should be recognised as a religion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/21/why-jediism-should-be-recognised-as-a-religion-charity-commission-decision>
Might Luke have gone into exile to meditate over why his plans to retrain a 
new generation of Jedi ultimately failed? Is this why he sought out the temple, 
to wade through ancient repositories of knowledge about the establishment of 
the original order and work out what went wrong with his own teaching methods? 
Might the original apex of Jedi knowledge be the only place in the galaxy where 
it is now possible to communicate with the Force ghosts of past masters? Yoda, 
Kenobi and even Anakin were seemingly capable of popping up whenever and 
wherever they pleased in the original trilogy, but Rey was only able to 
experience fractured, fleeting, half-heard missives from Kenobi at Maz Kanata’s 
castle, and only when she came within range of Luke Skywalker’s lightsaber.

Has there been some kind of disturbance in the communication network between 
living and dead Jedi? This would all make a lot of sense, given therumours that 
Frank Oz has been seen on the set of Episode VIII at Pinewood Studios 
<http://screenrant.com/star-wars-8-yoda-frank-oz-audio/>. It would certainly be 
no surprise to discover in the opening frames of Johnson’s movie that Yoda’s 
Force Ghost has been keeping Luke company on Ahch-To, and now stands ready to 
help train a new apprentice.

Is Finn as much of a blank canvas as he seems?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b7b5601f946a3f0aa9db3b1cc492479ec471191%2F619_0_1429_858%2F1429.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can't%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can%27t%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b7b5601f946a3f0aa9db3b1cc492479ec471191%2F619_0_1429_858%2F1429.jpg>
 Photograph: Film Frame/AP 
The great thing about Star Wars movies is that inconvenient plot holes can 
always be explained away by referring to the omnipotency of the Force as a 
factor in ongoing story development. How did Finn manage to escape General 
Hux’s battlecruiser, or infiltrate the First Order’s base and capture Captain 
Phasma, if not for the aforementioned all-powerful mystical energy field 
guiding him on his path? Why was he even allowed to wield a lightsaber, with 
some success against trained stormtroopers using melee weapons – and even 
briefly against Kylo Ren himself – when previous Star Wars movies have never 
allowed non-Jedi to pick up a laser sword for more than a few seconds? Maz 
Kanata, who told us she knows a fair bit about Jedi matters, trusted the rogue 
stormtrooper with the dangerous weapon in the absence of Rey to wield it. Why?

Is Finn, too, in some way Force-sensitive? Or did the team behind The Force 
Awakens simply choose to sacrifice Star Wars internal logic on the altar of 
rapid-fire story beats?


How did Maz Kanata get Luke’s lightsaber and why does she know about The Force?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd54d5f8751c36bbb02ecd5b90b463897cdf1f0a3%2F40_0_1120_672%2F1120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can't%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can%27t%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd54d5f8751c36bbb02ecd5b90b463897cdf1f0a3%2F40_0_1120_672%2F1120.jpg>
 Photograph: PR company handout 
Rogue One introduced into the Star Wars universe (at least on the big screen) 
the concept of Force acolytes who have no Jedi powers themselves, in the form 
of Donnie Yen’s Chirrut Îmwe. There were heavy suggestions in The Force Awakens 
that Kanata has a deep knowledge of Force matters, but no explanation 
whatsoever of how she came into the possession of a lightsaber that once 
belonged to Anakin Skywalker, and was passed to Luke in 1977’s Star Wars.

This is the laser sword that Luke lost in his Cloud City battle with Vader on 
the planet of Bespin in The Empire Strikes Back, rather than the one he 
constructed himself for their final father and son duel in Return of the Jedi. 
So there is no question of the younger Skywalker having passed the weapon to 
Kanata before going into exile – he did not have it in the first place.A plaque 
at a Star Wars display at California’s Disneyland 
<https://www.fx-sabers.com/forum/index.php?topic=47854.0> revealed last year 
that the lightsaber was recovered from the depths of Cloud City by a scavenger, 
who one assumes must have sold it on to Kanata. So is she merely a renowned 
collector of old Jedi paraphernalia? That doesn’t seem like a particularly 
satisfactory explanation.

Who is Supreme Leader Snoke and how did he recruit Kylo Ren to the dark side?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ccccc807f704551768ff5d215a552b9535c1f27%2F0_294_3504_2104%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can't%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fandom%20menace%3A%20the%20story%20threads%20Star%20Wars%3A%20Episode%20VIII%20can%27t%20afford%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fstar-wars-episode-viii-force-awakens-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ccccc807f704551768ff5d215a552b9535c1f27%2F0_294_3504_2104%2F3504.jpg>
 Photograph: Allstar/Disney/LucasFilm 
Say what you like about the prequels (and I am far from a fan), but they did 
at least provide a logical, if bearly watchable, explanation for why Anakin 
Skywalker turned to the Dark Side: the young Jedi’s fear of losing his wife 
Padme to the grim reaper, and his growing distrust of the rigid and impassive 
Jedi Council. But we are a long way from knowing what possible reasons a young 
apprentice in Luke Skywalker’s school for young Jedis might have had for even 
listening to the monstrous, waifish, horribly scarred – possibly T-Rex-sized – 
Snoke. How was Ben Solo groomed, and why did he choose to turn? Did Snoke 
somehow manage the conversion from across the reaches of space? Or did he 
infiltrate in some as-yet-unseen, non-threatening guise, perhaps by proxy?

Anakin had a reason – at least initially – to trust Palpatine, the future 
Emperor, as a trusted, high-ranking politician, the leading light of the 
Republic in its fight against the separatists in the prequels. What reason 
could Solo possibly have had to trust Snoke?
 