
Can it really be true that a Labour council is in cahoots with an offshore 
property speculator to undermine and conceivably force the relocation of the 
London borough’s only professional sporting organisation, one moreover that was 
founded more than a century ago and is supported by the very working-class 
voters who have long sustained Labour in power in Lewisham (Millwall having to 
move would be ‘heartbreaking’ says Lib Dem leader, Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/millwall-stadium-sadiq-khan-conservatives-letter>
, 9 January)?

Vote on compulsory purchase of Millwall land dramatically postponed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/vote-compulsory-purchase-order-millwall-postponed-till-february>
Steve Morison, who scored in Millwall’s commendable defeat of Premiership 
Bournemouth in Saturday’s FA Cup tie, has spoken of the “fantastic” work 
undertaken by the Lions in the local community over many years; those of us who 
marched in protest against recent proposals to close substantial parts of 
Lewisham hospital recall with gratitude the substantial part played in that 
campaign by Millwall FC. It used to be said that the characteristic refrain of
Millwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> supporters was “ 
Everyone hates us, we don’t care”. It appears that the ruling Labour group on 
Lewisham council is determined to emulate such opprobrium. So find your voices, 
Mr Corbyn, Mr Khan and any other Labour representative who claims to value your 
party’s link with its “traditional” supporters, and persuade your colleagues in 
Lewisham to ditch this madcap scheme which is increasingly attracting roars of 
outrage from way beyond the Lions’ Den.
Edward Lloyd-Jones
London

• The Jockey Club’s decision to sell off one of horseracing’s most important 
racecourses, Kempton Park, for housing (Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/kempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans>
, 11 January) is at best shortsighted, and at worst foolhardy. Kempton Park is 
home to the King George VI Chase on Boxing Day, which has been National Hunt 
racing’s midwinter championship race for eight decades and has allowed such 
great racehorses as Arkle, Desert Orchid and Kauto Star to display their 
talents in front of sell-out crowds. History and tradition underpin horseracing 
and to lose Kempton Park will be a huge blow to the sport that even the 
expected revenue from the sale won’t compensate for.

The demands for housing in London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> are 
great and must be met, but British sport will be poorer if this much-loved 
racing venue is sold for this purpose. The Jockey Club is “of the view that 
British racing is better served” with this action, but it must listen to the 
voices of the racing fans who firmly oppose this decision.
Alice Kay
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 