
Beetroot juice on tap, cropped frayed jeans in the front row and frilled 
blouses on the catwalk at J. JS Lee’s opening show. So far, so familiar for
London fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week>, 
which began on Friday morning with a Soho car park as its headquarters.

But the newest trend at London fashion week is one coming from within the 
industry in what might be called “Insta-gratification” – the ability to buy the 
clothes seen on the runway immediately. The biannual event is due to be 
transformed from September, when Burberry will show a “see-now, buy-now” 
collection, doing away with the up to six month wait between the show and the 
clothes appearing in the shops.

London Fashion Week: key fashion trends of the season – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/feb/19/london-fashion-week-key-fashion-trends-of-the-season-in-pictures>
Following the announcement, other designers including Paul Smith and Michael 
Kors said they would make similar switchups. But London, the home of Burberry, 
is keen to claim the innovation as its own. In a speech on Thursday morning, 
Natalie Massenet, chair of the British Fashion Council (BFC), was quick to make 
this point. “Burberry’s recent news shines such a strong light on our 
leadership in this field,” she said. “We are very proud that this started in 
London.”

Burberry announced on Friday that a taster of September will come with their 
Monday show. The collection will be displayed in stores, and customers will be 
able to pre-order designs.

Massenet, the founder of Net-a-Porter, was nowhere to be seen on Friday. She 
was, instead, at Buckingham Palace, in the process of becoming a Dame. There 
are some things, it seems, that can stand even in the way of fashion.

This season boasts two notable catwalk returns on Sunday. Alexander McQueen 
will show on the womenswear schedule for the first time in London in over 10 
years in the evening. It is the first time a Sarah Burton-designed womenswear 
collection, usually shown in Paris, will be seen here. And Mulberry, the 
Somerset-based brand famed for accessories like the Alexa handbag, returns to 
the catwalk for the first time since the designer Emma Hill left in 2013.

The new creative director, Johnny Coca, is tasked with returning the brand, 
which has struggled in recent years, to the kind of success that saw profits 
rise 207% in the second half of 2011. His previous gig was as an accessories 
designer at Celine, the Parisian house with a fervent cult of followers in the 
front row. “London is a global fashion capital so it makes sense for 
international businesses to show here,” said the BFC chief executive, Caroline 
Rush.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Flondon-fashion-week-catwalk-shows-insta-gratification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F023ac6847dca49c13c3420160559a76fa86c40eb%2F557_0_2329_1398%2F2329.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20to%20go%3A%20from%20the%20London%20catwalk%20shows%20straight%20into%20the%20shops&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Flondon-fashion-week-catwalk-shows-insta-gratification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20to%20go%3A%20from%20the%20London%20catwalk%20shows%20straight%20into%20the%20shops&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Flondon-fashion-week-catwalk-shows-insta-gratification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F023ac6847dca49c13c3420160559a76fa86c40eb%2F557_0_2329_1398%2F2329.jpg>
 A model walks the runway at the Charlotte Olympia catwalk show at the 
Roundhouse in London. Photograph: David M Benett/Getty Images 
Topshop will broadcast the setup of their Unique show on Sunday to their 6.2 
million followers on Instagram, but, if that seems old hat, the shots will be 
taken by Nick Knight, who usually shoots covers for Vogue and videos for Kanye 
West, rather than the brand’s digital marketing team. The brand describe it as 
a way to “challenge the classic, often ubiquitous documentation process”.

In what is being billed as a battle of the handbags, Charlotte Olympia goes up 
against Anya Hindmarch with both of the accessories designers having catwalk 
shows. Charlotte Olympia, designed byCharlotte Dellal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/nov/09/charlotte-olympia-fashion-designer-charlotte-dellal>
, is famed for fun bags and shoes and an photogenic inner circle that numbers 
models and socialites, had her first a catwalk show on Friday evening. 
Hindmarch’s shows have featured gymnasts and choirs in the past. Sunday’s, 
which had a Rubik’s cube as an invitation, will no doubt come with further 
bells and whistles.

Sales in the accessories sector reached £2.7bn in 2015, up 3.4% from the 
previous year. Handbags, it seems, are big business.

 