
The chief executive of auto giant Fiat Chrysler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/fiat-chrysler> has warned that the 
company would have to consider closing its Mexican factories if Donald Trump 
decides to impose his threat of tough new tariffs on imports from Mexico.

Sergio Marchionne, chief executive officer of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, said 
on Monday that the entire industry wasdogged by uncertainty since Trump’s 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/auto-industry-donald-trump-twitter-jobs-outsourcing-mexico>
 and added that if the president-elect followed through onthreats to tax 
Mexican car imports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/toyota-trump-border-tax-mexico-corolla>
, he would have to consider shutting factories.


“It’s possible that if the economic tariffs that are imposed by the US 
administration on anything that comes into the United States, if they are 
sufficiently large, it will make the production of anything inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> uneconomical and therefore we will 
have to move on. It is quite possible,” Marchionne said addressing reporters at 
the North American International Auto Show in Detroit.


Auto industry's Trump fear: 'Everyone dreads being subject of a tweet'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/auto-industry-donald-trump-twitter-jobs-outsourcing-mexico>
Repurposing the Mexican factory would be “costly and uncertain”. Asked if he 
would consider investments in Mexico if he was offered substantial inducements 
by the Mexican government, Marchionne said it would be “incredibly imprudent on 
our side to try and make commitments to that country”.


A Mexican-US trade war over cars would have “relatively limited” impact on the 
US – but would be terrible for Mexico. “If it’s a rejection of international 
trade in a wider sense, the implications are much more severe,” he said.

Scaling back by US car firms is already hitting Mexico. Julian Eaves, managing 
director of Preferred Compounding de México, a US-owned maker of rubber 
compounds operating in central Mexico, told the Guardian that the economic cost 
could run into the hundreds of millions or billions of dollars over the next 
five years, if manufacturing, contracting and indirect jobs fall short of 
current plans.

Marchionne’s comments came shortly after Trump had praised Fiat Chrysler and 
Ford for announcing new investments in the US. Trump made US auto production a 
key part of his campaign and won in part with the backing of voters in states 
with the largest percentage of autoworkers.


Last week Ford abandoned plans to build a $1.6bn plant in Mexico and said it 
would invest $700m in a Michigan plant. On Sunday, Fiat Chrysler announced a 
$1bn investment in plants in Ohio and Michigan to build new SUVs and pickup 
trucks that will add 2,000 jobs.


'Just the beginning': Trump may disrupt 20-year boom for Mexico auto industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/mexico-auto-industry-jobs-donald-trump-manufacturing-cars>
“It’s finally happening – Fiat Chrysler just announced plans to invest 
$1BILLION in Michigan and Ohio plants, adding 2000 jobs. This after Ford said 
last week that it will expand in Michigan and U.S. instead of building a 
BILLION dollar plant in Mexico. Thank you Ford & Fiat C!”Trump posted on Twitter
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818460862675558400>.


Marchionne said he had not spoken to Trump or his advisers and that the 
“decision has been in the works for a long time”. Fiat Chrysler – whose brands 
include Alfa Romeo, Chrysler, Dodge, Fiat, Jeep and Maserati – makes about 17% 
of its vehicles in Mexico, according to analysts.

He said it was difficult for the industry to manage in the current political 
environment. Trump has threatened to scrap the Northa American Free Trade 
Agreement (Nafta) between the US, Mexico and Canada, but so far the most detail 
he has given has been on Twitter.


“I don’t know if it’s a new political language, but if it is we’ll adjust to 
that too,” said Marchionne.


On Sunday Mary Barra, CEO of General Motors and a Trump adviser, said GM would 
not be changing its sourcing decisions because of Trump. “This is a long-lead 
business with highly capital-intensive investments – decisions that were made 
two, three and four years ago,” Barra told reporters in Detroit.


Detroit auto show 2017 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2017/jan/09/detroit-auto-show-2017-in-pictures>
The company also revealed it is planning to build a newly unveiled vehicle, 
GMC Terrain, a crossover SUV, in San Luis Potosí, Mexico.

Barra’s comments came after the Trump threatened the company with a “big 
border tax” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/donald-trump-general-motors-tax-chevrolet-cruz>
 for importing some of GM’s Chevrolet Cruze compact cars from a plant in 
Mexico. The imported models account for some 5% of the Cruze cars sold in the 
US. The rest are manufactured at its Ohio factory.

On Monday Barra touted GM’s creation of US jobs. “We have more than 40 
manufacturing facilities in the US and over the last two years alone, we have 
investment more than $11bn creating thousands of new jobs in the US, as well as 
recruiting technical talent,” Barra said unveiling new vehicles at the Detroit 
auto show.

Michelle Krebs, senior analyst with Autotrader, said the US car firms were 
reeling from the uncertainty Trump has created. “It takes four years to develop 
a vehicle, longer still to build a plant,” she said. “This is an industry that 
needs clarity.”
 