
1 | Get people out of their cars


Novo Nordisk built a research partnership with C40 <http://www.c40.org/>, the 
global mayor’s partnership on climate, to map the co-benefits of climate and 
health 
<http://www.c40.org/blog_posts/novo-nordisk-and-c40-partner-to-improve-environment-and-health-in-cities>
. For example, city bikes and bike lines contribute to improving climate (lower 
particle pollution, lower CO2) and improved health (exercise).Niels Lund, vice 
president,Novo Nordisk <http://www.novonordisk.co.uk/> and Cities Changing 
Diabetes <http://www.citieschangingdiabetes.com/>, @lund_niels 
<https://twitter.com/lund_niels>

Our Lancet Series on urban design transport and health 
<http://www.thelancet.com/series/urban-design>, emphasised that cities need 
more than bike share programmes, cycle paths and sidewalks to promote health. 
To ensure equity, we need to think about local urban design and regional 
planning to ensure accessibility to work by public transport, minimise parking 
and redistribute employment across regions. This requires integrated planning.
Billie Giles-Corti, lead of theNHMRC Centre for Research Excellence in Healthy 
Liveable Communities <http://mccaughey.unimelb.edu.au/programs/cre>, @billiegc 
<https://twitter.com/billiegc>


In cities such as Bogotá, Addis Ababa, Mumbai and São Paulo, 50% of traffic 
fatalities are among pedestrians, and another 20-30% are among cyclists. If we 
want to increase physical activity, we need to work on making biking and 
walking safe for all. TheBloomberg Philanthropies initiative for global road 
safety <https://www.bloomberg.org/program/public-health/road-safety/> has 
created a network of 10 cities in Africa, Latin America and Asia that are 
actively working on improving safety.Claudia Adriazola, director, health and 
road safety, WRI Ross Center for Sustainable Cities 
<http://www.wri.org/our-work/topics/sustainable-cities>, @cadriazola 
<https://twitter.com/cadriazola>

Transport can be the cause of poor health through physical inactivity, air 
quality and noise, but it can also be the cure – through active travel and 
improving air quality. People who are physically active have a 20-35% reduced 
risk of coronary heart disease and stroke, a 40-45 % reduced risk of 
Alzheimer’s and 35-50% reduced risk of type 2 diabetes.Susan Claris, associate 
director, transport planning, Arup <http://www.arup.com/>

2 | Build partnerships for clean energy


In 2015, Washington DC entered into a 20-year power purchase agreement (PPA) 
with Iberdrola Renewables 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjT0OzxhPTQAhUUM8AKHfi-ByQQFggcMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fsustainia.me%2Fresources%2Fpublications%2FCities100_2015.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHiP7mR013eqOAYNtXYKNN2NBGgcQ&sig2=RQEVEG2UljJgjmFbYuSZYA>
 (pdf). The PPA prevents the release of air pollutants such as soot, smog and 
mercury that are harmful to human health. Wind power procured under the PPA 
will supply roughly one-third of the district government’s electricity from a 
46MW wind farm. The district does not pay for the wind farm itself, but agrees 
to purchase 125,000 to 150,000 MWh of wind electricity every year at a fixed 
rate 30% lower than fossil fuel power.Jess Beagley, policy research officer, 
NCD Alliance <https://ncdalliance.org/>,  @JessicaBeagley 
<https://twitter.com/JessicaBeagley>

The Institute for Market Transformation <http://www.imt.org/> works with local 
governments committed to reducing energy and carbon emissions attributed to 
buildings. The cities participating in theCity Energy Project 
<http://www.cityenergyproject.org/>, which we co-lead with NRDC [Natural 
Resources Defense Council], are often motivated by energy and health benefits 
alike. Our private sector engagement is largely with the real estate community 
(building owners and managers, service companies and relevant NGOs). This 
collaborative approach ensures the programmes and policies are effective in 
reducing emissions, but are not overly burdensome for those who must comply.
Julie Hughes, director,Institute for Market Transformation <http://www.imt.org/>



3 | Place-based care in health services


We need to find more holistic approaches to place-based healthcare. Two good 
examples of these new models of care in the UK are Northfield in Stoke-on-Trent 
where a range of housing options enable people to continue to live at home with 
supporting preventative services, a community hub, a doctors surgery and a 
specialist dementia home. Also in the UK is theNelson health centre 
<http://www.mertonccg.nhs.uk/Local-Services/the-nelson/Pages/default.aspx> in 
south London. It’s an integrated health centre, outpatient and diagnostics 
services and specialist rehabilitation care for elderly patients as well as a 
private sector extra care housing scheme of 50 flats.Laurence Carmichael, head, 
WHO Collaborating Centre for Healthy Urban Environments 
<http://www1.uwe.ac.uk/et/research/who.aspx>, @laurencecarmich 
<https://twitter.com/laurencecarmich?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>


4 | Focus on social inequality to tackle poor health outcomes


At the World Health Organisation we developed the Urban HEART 
<http://www.who.int/kobe_centre/measuring/urbanheart/en/> tool that enables 
communities and cities to collect a limited set of health, governance and 
socio-economic indicators; to analyse it, and to translate it easily for 
decision makers. Using evidence from the WHO’s commission on social 
determinants of health, Urban HEART encourages policymakers to develop a 
holistic approach in tackling health equity. Officials in nearly 50 countries 
have been trained on using Urban HEART.Alex Ross, director, World Health 
Organisation Centre for Health Development (WHO Kobe Centre) 
<http://www.who.int/kobe_centre/about/en/>, @directorwkc 
<https://twitter.com/directorwkc>

Detroit is the first American city to use Urban HEART. The critical ingredient 
is educating departments about where and how health needs to involved, usually 
much earlier and more critically. Our core efforts centre around leveraging 
health to disrupt intergenerational poverty, focusing on those health outcomes 
that drive poverty among children. Detroit is the poorest city in the US with 
health outcomes that mirror that.Abdul el-Sayed, director, Detroit Health 
Department <http://www.detroitmi.gov/health>, @AbdulelSayed  
<https://twitter.com/abdulelsayed?lang=en>


5 | Tackle suspicion between public and private sectors


Elected officials have to be on board and ensure they look good too. We’ve 
tried to ensure that elected officials don’t see us as competition or risky 
business, but as strengthening partners. In some cases you can overcome that 
mutual suspicion. In others you won’t, and you’ll have to be stubborn enough to 
prove the concept and work with those that support you. Having citizen approval 
and support is critical: we had a petition signed by more than 20,000 people 
asking for the project to succeed.Federico Cartín Arteaga, director, Rutas 
Naturbanas <http://www.rutasnaturbanas.org/>, @fedecartin 
<https://twitter.com/fedecartin>

Read the full Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/dec/02/live-qa-public-private-partnerships-build-healthier-cities>


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 