
Fleetwood Mac’s Lindsey Buckingham and Christine McVie are set to record a 
duet album together under the name Buckingham McVie. The moniker harks back to 
the cult duo Buckingham Nicks, whichLindsey and Stevie Nicks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/15/fleetwood-mac-stevie-nicks-lindsey-buckingham-relationship-tense-rolling-stone>
 formed before joining Fleetwood Mac.

The singers told the LA Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/music/la-ca-ms-lindsey-buckingham-christine-mcvie-20170113-story.html>
 that their new record should be released in May, with Buckingham commenting on 
the particular chemistry between the two: “All these years we’ve had this 
rapport, but we’d never really thought about doing a duet album before.” he 
said.

McVie added: “We’ve always written well together, Lindsey and I, and this has 
just spiralled into something really amazing that we’ve done between us.”


The partnership had been hinted at several months previously when drummer Mick 
Fleetwood told Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/features/mick-fleetwood-talks-maui-gallery-fleetwood-macs-future-w430527>
 that the pair “could probably have a mighty strong duet album if they want.”


However the project is slightly more of a group affair than the title suggests 
– fellow Mac members bassist John McVie and Fleetwood are set to perform on it. 
This is despite the fact there is still no sign of the first Fleetwood Mac 
since 2003’sSay You Will 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/apr/25/popandrock.artsfeatures1>. Fans 
had hoped thatwhen McVie rejoined the band in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/01/fleetwood-mac-christine-mcvie-back-stevie-nicks-tour-review>
 following a 16 year break, there would be a new album – but securing time with 
Stevie Nicks, who has been concentrating on her solo career, has been the 
stumbling block.

In October last year, McVie told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/06/christine-mcvie-on-fleetwood-mac-without-one-of-us-were-incomplete>
 that the album was “half-finished … it’s just seven tracks that we’ve got, and 
they’re only with guide vocals”. Talking of its “fantastic variety of songs” 
she said she hoped to finish the album before last Christmas.
 