
Flo Morrissey and Matthew E White are enough to make you sick. They radiate 
pleasure in each other’s company and are both very much in the ascendant after 
recording an album of covers so good you don’t want to go back to the 
originals. To make matters worse, there’sa YouTube video about the making of 
the album <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6Fdv05wPSA> that gives the 
impression it was more like a Netflix series about hip kids having the best 
summer of their lives in smalltown America than a bunch of musicians working 
12-hour days to get a record made in little more than a week. As I say, 
sickening.

“And we cooked out every night,” White offers, “which was really nice,” 
completing the contrast between Instagram-filtered summer evenings in Richmond, 
Virginia, and a grey winter afternoon in west London, where the buskers around 
the corner have embarked on a seemingly endless gyspy rock/electro swing 
version of Jingle Bells, arranged for duelling accordions.

Gentlewoman, Ruby Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/05/flo-morrissey-and-matthew-e-white-gentlewoman-ruby-man-review>
 takes 10 songs and reconfigures them, more or less as duets. Some are badges 
of exquisite taste – theVelvet Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/velvetunderground>’s Sunday Morning 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RAKt9q2QB20>, Leonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen>’s Suzanne; some are 
unexpected curveballs –Frank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean>’s Thinking Bout You, James Blake
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/james-blake>’s The Colour in Anything; one 
isa fantastic version of a song everyone loves 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8QuwwnNIZ3I> but which rarely gets thought of 
as a classic – Barry Gibb’s theme forGrease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/grease>, originally sung by Frankie Valli.

Still, Grease is one of those songs everyone knows, isn’t it? One you just 
pluck from the ether. Apparently not, at least for White. “Grease isn’t 
something I grew up with. It’s not something my brothers love. Not something my 
parents love. I have a little bit of a gap because I spent a lot of time 
growing up overseas,” by which he means his parents were missionaries, and he 
spent a good chunk of his youth in the Philippines. Morrissey seems a little 
surprised by the notion that anyone could have grown up without seeing Grease 
three times a year – “It’s one of those films that’s on when people are off 
school,” she explains to him, gently, as if she’s pointing out that, no, you 
don’t pull the string to ring the bell on the bus any more, dear – especially 
since it was White’s choice to record it.

“I really love those tunes that are larger than life, larger than music, but 
the musical craft is what makes them that way,” White says. “It’s an 
interesting journey for a song like that, where it’s such a killer song, but it 
has become almost a parody of itself. People think of it as a kitschy disco 
throwaway, but it’s a lot more than that.” He marvels at the fact that Gibb, 
asked to produce to short order a theme tune for the movie of Grease, could 
produce something so perfect. “That’s such a level of craft. TheBee Gees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bee-gees> – Barry Gibb in particular – 
that’s part of their reputation that’s not glorified as much as it should be.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgrease-is-a-lot-more-than-kitsch-disco-flo-morrissey-matthew-e-white-gentlewoman-ruby-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77006b59aba752fd00042e55846bb1da2ebdee41%2F0_96_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flo%20Morrissey%20and%20Matthew%20E%20White%3A%20%E2%80%98Grease%20is%20a%20lot%20more%20than%20kitsch%20disco%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgrease-is-a-lot-more-than-kitsch-disco-flo-morrissey-matthew-e-white-gentlewoman-ruby-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flo%20Morrissey%20and%20Matthew%20E%20White%3A%20%E2%80%98Grease%20is%20a%20lot%20more%20than%20kitsch%20disco%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgrease-is-a-lot-more-than-kitsch-disco-flo-morrissey-matthew-e-white-gentlewoman-ruby-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77006b59aba752fd00042e55846bb1da2ebdee41%2F0_96_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 White and Morrissey at the Roundhouse, London, January 2016. Photograph: Rob 
Ball/Redferns 
White talks a lot about the craft. You rather get the impression that his 
Spacebomb studio/collective/house band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/22/inside-the-spacebomb-studio-with-natalie-prass-and-matthew-e-white>
 is not big on laying down tracks when inspiration strikes between bong hits, 
so much as meticulously planning what they’re going to do and how they’re going 
to do it, which suited Morrissey. “I don’t even drink,” she says. “A little bit 
of a grandma over here.” She’s all of 22. “Sometimes I wish I could be much 
more spontaneous,” she says. “But I do need a plan. And I think that’s part of 
growing up as one of nine children.”

I don’t even drink,' says Morrissey. 'A little bit of a grandma over here

“What’s important, and this is overly pragmatic,” White says, “is minimising 
worst-case scenarios so you can maximise your best-case scenarios. You’re 
constantly making sure the bottom doesn’t fall out of a session, so you can 
have that mystical moment with a group of people. You have to do all these 
practical things so you can get to the place where all the practical stuff goes 
out the window, and you’re experiencing this moment of art and creation that 
has nothing to do with any of that.”

Morrissey and White met – as all the best people do – thanks to the Guardian. 
White saw a mention of her music in this paper, decided what she was doing was 
up his street, and contacted her. “You got back in touch,” he says, looking at 
her, “and it was very gradual, very organic.” A year or so on, they were 
scheduled to duet at a Lee Hazlewood tribute night at the Barbican in London.

“We still didn’t really know each other,” Morrissey says. “Then we went to Bob 
Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> at the Royal Albert Hall.”

“The night before the Lee Hazlewood thing,” White explains, correcting the 
chronology. He sighs a little. “We’d have so much more fun now than we did 
then.”

Morrissey picks up. “So when you said, ‘Why don’t we do an album?’ it felt 
very natural.”

Morrissey had already released one album, 2015’s Tomorrow Will Be Beautiful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/11/flo-morrissey-tomorrow-will-be-beautiful-review>
 – a folk record centred around her voice and acoustic guitar – but she had 
already decided she didn’t want to be caricatured as “a depressing girl with a 
guitar” before the pair started on Gentlewoman, Ruby Man. In sound, the new 
album is very much a Spacebomb record: lush, impeccably arranged music of the 
American south, dipping its toes into soul without ever quite becoming a soul 
record. White, she says, was very much the boss in the studio, “but in a way 
that isn’t over the top”. She turns to him: “You respect your musicians. You’re 
a mediator. You being the person who holds it all together and is the grounding 
force is really apparent.”

Also, she says to White, when they were out and about in town: “It felt like 
you were the big guy in Richmond [Virginia].”

The don, with the beard and the guitar? “Yeah, it felt like that. Which was 
cool for me to see.” White blushes at this, his face filling with colour. “I 
set it all up like that,” he mumbles.

White has to be on top of things, he says, because he’s making records to a 
tight budget in limited time. He likes to work from noon to midnight, with one 
break for dinner, and get a track a day done. The time up to dinner is spent 
getting the basic take, and then the time after is when the magic happens, he 
says.

What? Does a session really change that much in that last couple of hours?

“Oh, definitely,” he says. “One hundred percent.”

He cites the guitar solo on The Colour in Anything as an example, when Alan 
Parker’s late-night take won a round of applause from the rest of the team. “It 
was crazy,” White says. “I was crying during the take. It was completely wild. 
The whole record can’t be moments like that. Those moments are special and 
there’s a time in the day when they tend to happen more, so there are practical 
considerations: you need the daytime space to be focused so you can lock 
something in, then the nighttime space is where you are a little loose and 
free-flowing and can get to those moments.”

Which was all a bit of a change for Morrissey. “I’m more of daytime person. I 
think I’m more afraid of the night. I don’t know if that sounds weird, but I 
get a little bit more sad. But the night definitely does help you access 
something.”

Gentlewoman, Ruby Man is an album that’s going to be played a lot late at 
night. It’s lush and warm and enveloping; it sounds like the summer evenings on 
which it was recorded. It sounds like cold beer and hot food on the grill and 
friends lounging around on garden furniture. It sounds like the summer you want 
to have, but know you won’t be able to. It sounds like the best time ever. As I 
say, Morrissey and White are enough to make you sick.

Gentlewoman, Ruby Man is out now on Glassnote
 