
Floyd Mayweather <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> took a 
moment on Wednesday to mock Conor McGregor – even though the prospect of a 
fight between the two stars seems distinctly unlikely.

Conor McGregor is taking a break – and yet we can't stop talking about him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/conor-mregor-ufc-fight-talking> 
Mayweather posted a video <https://www.instagram.com/p/BOBmdb3ga-f/> to 
Instagram of McGregor tapping out to Nate Diaz at UFC 196 in March – and the 
boxer offered $10,000 to the best caption posted about the video. The video 
ends with a caption: “49-0 vs. Connor the Notorious Quitter.” Conor McGregor 
spells his first name with one N.

Later on Wednesday, again on Instagram, Mayweather referred to McGregor as 
“Conor McTapout” and vowed: “I’m gonna slap the shit out of McGregor when I see 
him.”

Earlier in December, McGregor obtained a boxing licence in California, but 
despite all the posturing, a match-up between two of fighting’s biggest names 
seems a world away.

UFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> president Dana White told Yahoo 
earlier this month: “It’s fun to talk about this [Mayweather] fight and what 
might happen, but what commission would let that fight happen? Really, think 
about that.”

Leonard Ellerbe, the CEO of Mayweather Promotions, called McGregor’s 
acquisition of the boxing licence a “con job” and said: “It’s all a game. It’s 
all calculated to get more fans.”

The UFC announced in November that McGregor had vacated his featherweight 
title after failing to defend the belt, instead opting for a pair of 
welterweight fights against Nate Diaz before claiming the lightweight belt by 
defeating Eddie Alvarez in New York on 12 November. McGregor, however, disputes 
that he has relinquished the belt. McGregor, whose girlfriend is expecting a 
baby next year, is unlikely to return to the Octagon before May.

Mayweather retired from boxing after beating Andre Berto in September 2015, 
walking away with a 49-0 professional record.
 