
Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton>, the former 
two-weight world champion from Manchester, has revealed he tried to kill 
himself several times during his battle with depression.

Hatton admitted there was a huge gap in his life after retiring from a career 
that saw him take on the likes of Floyd Mayweather Jr and Manny Pacquiao in 
front of his army of supporters in Las Vegas.

Ricky Hatton can be ranked among the best of British boxers | Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/nov/25/ricky-hatton> 
“I tried to kill myself several times,” Hatton said in an interview aired on 
BBC Radio 4’s Today programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b085xpzc>.

“I used to go to the pub, come back, take the knife out and sit there in the 
dark crying hysterically. There were times when I hadn’t had a drink for days 
and I’d still come home and if something went through my mind I’d start 
pondering something. It was the same outcome whether I was having a drink or 
wasn’t having a drink.

“But in the end I thought I’ll end up drinking myself to death because I was 
so miserable. I was coming off the rails with my drinking and that led to 
drugs. It was like a runaway train.”

In October, the former world champion Tyson Fury opened up about his battle 
with depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/oct/07/tyson-fury-boxing-depression-compassion>
 and Frank Bruno is among other former fighters to havesuffered from the illness
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/oct/09/frank-bruno-world-mental-health-day>
.

“I think more should be done for boxers,” said Hatton. “Footballers have an 
agent that looks out for them and a football club that gets behind them; the FA 
and the players’ football association [PFA] can also be there.

Tyson Fury is facing his toughest opponent and needs our compassion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/oct/07/tyson-fury-boxing-depression-compassion>
“Whereas boxers it’s like once your time has gone it’s ‘on your way’ and move 
on to the next champion coming through. The thing is with boxers we don’t come 
from Cambridge and places like that, we come from council estates.

“So in boxing it’s very, very hard. If boxing had a professional boxing 
association or something like that, I think it would be a better place. It 
seems to be happening more with boxers. It’s an individual sport so you get in 
the ring on your own and then when you retire you tend to spend the rest of 
your life on your own.”

On Fury, Hatton added: “I contacted him to see if he was all right and I never 
got a reply. Tyson is a very complex person. When he said what he said it was 
heartbreaking. To think Tyson had become the heavyweight champion of the world 
and should kick on with his life and his career and for it to go pear-shaped 
was a real crying shame. Having said that, he doesn’t help himself in some 
interviews.

“From my point of view, having not spoken to him, I don’t know how poorly or 
how bad he is. He might just be Tyson being Tyson. But if he is in a bad place 
and is depressed, I hope he’s speaking to the right people in order to sort it 
out.

“As boxers we don’t do that. We think: ‘I’m Ricky Hatton or I’m Tyson Fury, I 
can take on the world.’ You can take on the world in the ring but this problem 
called depression, you can’t take it on.

“We’re out of our comfort zones with depression. I certainly was and whenever 
I have bad days now I speak to someone to get it off my chest. I have no shame 
telling that and that’s why I’m here today.”

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Helplines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.
 