
What started as an Instagram row has escalated to such an extent that the 
greatest pound-for-pound boxer of his generation has become involved in the 
beef between R&B starsChris Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown> and Soulja Boy.

Floyd Mayweather <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather>, who was 
undefeated in his 49 fights, winning world titles at super featherweight, 
lightweight, light welterweight, welterweight and light middleweight, is to 
train Soulja Boy for a three-round bout with Brown, to take place in Las Vegas 
in March.

The dispute began on Tuesday, when Brown took exception to Soulja Boy liking 
an Instagram photo posted by Brown’s former girlfriend, Karrueche Tran. The two 
stars began posting threatening Instagram videos directed at each other, as 
well as mocking tweets. Soon, Brown challengedSoulja Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/soulja-boy> to a fight, and his offer was 
accepted.

Though Soulja Boy posted a remorseful video in which he said he hoped to work 
with Brown, he also tweeted a message involving Brown’s infant daughter, to 
which Brown responded furiously in a video, saying: “We gonna set up this 
fight, it’s gonna be professional, you can do all of that. But one thing you 
gotta stop doing my nigga, I’m gonna be real with you: stop bringing my 
daughter into this my nigga. Stop saying shit about my fucking daughter.”

The fight became a reality on Thursday, when Mayweather – who is now a boxing 
promoter – posted an image on his Instagram plugging the fight as “Mayweather 
Promotions Presents … celebrity boxing live on pay-per-view”. Soulja Boy 
reposted the image, adding: “Signed my contract I’m leaving the fight with 
$1,000,000 I got the best ever my big bro @floydmayweather training me damn … 
March in Vegas!! On TV.”

He followed that with a video of him and Mayweather, with the former boxer 
saying, “We gotta get the money” and Soulja Boy responding: “The biggest fight 
of the century.”
 