
As public health researchers we noted your article on fracking (Friends of the 
Earth ticked off over claims in anti-fracking leaflet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/friends-of-earth-ticked-off-claims-anti-fracking-leaflet>
, 4 January) and wish to highlight the following: fracking operations involve 
pumping millions of litres of water containing fracking fluids underground and 
a small percentage of wastewater contains returned fracking fluids. Estimates 
vary depending on geological conditions but recent research suggests typically 
4-8%. It is well established in peer-reviewed studies and government reports 
that fracturing fluids and wastewater have contaminated ground and surface 
waters.

An early peer-reviewed study on chemicals in fracking fluids found 25% could 
cause cancer and mutations, 37% could affect the endocrine system, 40-50% could 
affect the brain/nervous system, kidneys, immune system and cardiovascular 
systems. More recent studies support these findings, including a systematic 
evaluation that examined 240 fracking substances and found evidence suggesting 
43% were linked to reproductive toxicity and 40% to developmental toxicity.

In 2011, the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/27/us/27gas.html>: “In Texas, which now has 
about 93,000 natural-gas wells, up from around 58,000 a dozen years ago, a 
hospital system in six counties with some of the heaviest drilling said in 2010 
that it found a 25% asthma rate for young children, more than three times the 
state rate of about 7%.” Astudy published in JAMA Internal Medicine 
<http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine> this year found asthma 
sufferers who lived near certain levels of shale gas activity were 1.5 to 4.4 
times more likely to have an increased risk of asthma attacks.
Professor Andrew Watterson University of Stirling, Dr Will Dinan University of 
Stirling, Prof Emeritus Vyvyan Howard University of Ulster, Dr David Brown 
Southwest Pennsylvania Environmental Health project, Professor Richard Clapp 
Boston University School of Public Health, Adam Law Weill Cornell Medicine

• You quote Cuadrilla’s Francis Egan (Cuadrilla begins work at Lancashire site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/05/cuadrilla-starts-work-on-lancashire-fracking-site-fylde>
, 6 January) as claiming, “we will respect the right for people to make their 
feelings known”. The people, through their democratically elected 
representatives in county hall, have made their feelings known loudly and 
clearly on more than one occasion, rejecting Cuadrilla’s application to 
continue fracking in Lancashire, only to have that legitimate decision 
summarily overturned by secretary of state Sajid Javid. It’s one thing having a 
right to make your feelings known, it’s another to have them fall on 
determinedly cloth ears.
Austen Lynch
Garstang, Lancashire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 