
24 fans rejoice! Jack Bauer's gone, but the new show has thrown us a brilliant 
bone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/13/24-legacy-fans-rejoice-jack-bauers-gone-but-the-new-show-has-thrown-us-a-brilliant-bone>
The people love a sequel. Or a prequel, or a spin-off. Audiences have spoken, 
and they have said: “Please do not give us new characters or premises, they 
scare us and we would rather see our old friends from Full House again, thank 
you.” Which is whyThe Good Wife will soon beget The Good Fight 
<http://www.eonline.com/news/802360/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-good-wife-spinoff>
,24: Legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/24-legacy-is-already-the-best-show-of-2017-thats-a-guarantee>
 will serve up a familiar premise with a new cast, andRogue One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story> saw the Star 
Wars factory continue its unceasing cycle of production and distribution. This 
is why the Duggars of 19 Kids And Counting fame keep getting TV shows; why so 
many things are getting Extreme Makeovers. This is why any low-stakes craft 
contest can be Great and British.

So what makes a good spin-off? How can a broadcaster avoid a Joanie Loves 
Chachi and make a Laverne & Shirley instead? Read on for some Dos and Don’ts of 
the fine art of the spin-off.

Don’t put all your eggs in one boring basket
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F513976d50736695ee8bd5014175e007f9980531f%2F0_273_2980_1788%2F2980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frasier%2C%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%20and%20Joey%3A%20the%20dos%20and%20don%E2%80%99ts%20of%20TV%20spin%20offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frasier%2C%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%20and%20Joey%3A%20the%20dos%20and%20don%E2%80%99ts%20of%20TV%20spin%20offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F513976d50736695ee8bd5014175e007f9980531f%2F0_273_2980_1788%2F2980.jpg>
 Matt LeBlanc as Joey Tribbiani. Photograph: NBC/Getty 
While Friends was one of the most successful and long-running sitcoms in 
history, it also wrought the champagne of failed spin-offs: Joey. The show 
relocated the second-least-interesting Friend (we all know the No 1 spot goes 
to Ross) to Los Angeles, with no friends, eliminating in one fell swoop 
everything that made its predecessor a hit. The show was cancelled after two 
seasons, when it was discovered that “always hungry and/or horny” was not a 
fully realised character description.

Do change the game

All In The Family – a 70s sitcom about the working-class Bunker family, 
inspired by British series Til Death Do Us Part – was something of a spin-off 
matryoshka, containing within it five spin-offs. Of these, the most 
revolutionary by far sprang from a several-episode arc for guest star Bea 
Arthur. A feminist foil to the often backwards Archie Bunker, Maude Findlay got 
her own series in Maude, a trailblazing sitcom that covered issues like 
abortion, aesthetic pressure on women, and mental health in primetime. All In 
The Family pushed the envelope; Maude opened it up entirely.

Don’t fix it if it ain’t broke
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a89dacb3312df858850e6b6214e0198cf93add2%2F0_514_1556_933%2F1556.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frasier%2C%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%20and%20Joey%3A%20the%20dos%20and%20don%E2%80%99ts%20of%20TV%20spin%20offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frasier%2C%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%20and%20Joey%3A%20the%20dos%20and%20don%E2%80%99ts%20of%20TV%20spin%20offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a89dacb3312df858850e6b6214e0198cf93add2%2F0_514_1556_933%2F1556.jpg>
 Lindsay Wagner as The Bionic Woman. Photograph: Cine Text / 
Allstar/Sportsphoto Ltd. / Allstar 
Fans of CSI were thrilled to discover CSI’s Miami, Cyber, and NY all featured 
the same anonymous murdered women and cause-of-death puns as their progenitor. 
Teen Mom, Teen Mom 2, Teen Mom 3 and Teen Mom OG also subscribe to the “change 
nothing, produce more” school of television-making. The Bionic Woman was an 
early adopter of this formula, giving the Six Million Dollar Man treatment to 
Jaime Sommers, a beautiful tennis pro-turned-bionic super babe after a 
skydiving accident. When it comes to spin-offs, more is definitely more.

Do mine for gold in deep cuts

A short French & Saunders sketch spawned five seasons, eight specials, and one 
film we won’t talk about of Absolutely Fabulous. The sketch featured Saunders’s 
iconic performance as Edina Monsoon, while French was her mild-mannered 
daughter Saffron (played by Julia Sawalha in the series). Three minutes of a 
sketch into years of classic comedy? That’s value, sweetie darlings.

Don’t be afraid to move cities
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd13d2edae9442f92c0219aaae97596b280811772%2F0_144_1536_921%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frasier%2C%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%20and%20Joey%3A%20the%20dos%20and%20don%E2%80%99ts%20of%20TV%20spin%20offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frasier%2C%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%20and%20Joey%3A%20the%20dos%20and%20don%E2%80%99ts%20of%20TV%20spin%20offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Ffrasier-absolutely-fabulous-joey-dos-donts-tv-spin-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd13d2edae9442f92c0219aaae97596b280811772%2F0_144_1536_921%2F1536.jpg>
 The cast of Frasier. Photograph: Channel 4 
It can be risky to set a spin-off in a new locale (see: Joey), but a big move 
paid off big for a newly single Massachusetts psychiatrist. Frasier’s creators 
took the doctor from Boston to Seattle to avoid having to feature former Cheers 
cast members. Although they couldn’t avoid a few crossover cameos, the new cast 
of Frasier worked out just fine: the show ran for 11 seasons. Added to his nine 
seasons on Cheers, Frasier Crane spent 20 consecutive years on TV, though fans 
were denied the Eddie spin-off we all deserve when the dog portraying him died, 
aged 15-and-a-half, in 2006.

Do take a risk

Spin-offs usually follow a popular character’s life after their departure from 
the original show. 2015’sBetter Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul> blazed trails with 
a spin-off prequel ofBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> focused not on Walter 
White or Jesse Pinkman, but their dodgy attorney, Bob Odenkirk’s Saul Goodman. 
Fans of the original were worried: would it be too shticky? Would the shadow of 
the original loom too large, and prove impossible to live up to? Two seasons 
in, viewers and reviewers remain rapt, with not a pork pie hat in sight.

24: Legacy begins on FOX in February
 