
The news that fashion has anointed a new designer as a star can be signposted 
in various ways. For Amie Robertson, who debuted her labelAV Robertson 
<http://www.avrobertson.com/about.html> at London Fashion Week 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk> on Saturday morning, the evidence came in 
the form of front-row guest Marc Jacobs, who had flown in from New York, and a 
coterie of superstar models includingVogue’s March cover star, Edie Campbell 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2016/02/01/edie-campbell-british-vogue-cover-march-2016>
, celebrity offspring Georgia Jagger, and Lineisy Montero, currently in the 
Chanel campaign.

For a fledgling label, still designed from a bedroom in Robertson’s parents’ 
house in Manchester, these signals were enough to make the assembled guests at 
the Tate Britain show sit up and take notice. The show notes crediting Katie 
Grand also ensured that they paid attention. Grand, who is editor-in-chief of
Love magazine, has styled for Prada and works with Jacobs. Her endorsement of 
an unknown like Robertson is a Big Deal. It turns out that the Central Saint 
Martins fashion illustration BA graduate met Grand when she completed a year’s 
internship in 2014 atMarc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marc-jacobs> in New York.

Robertson showed as part of Fashion East, the young talent initiative that 
presents collections by three young designers each season. Jacobs’s influence 
could be seen in her eclectic collection. She mixed striped flannels, satin and 
beaded embellishment. Long, striped dresses and wide-legged trousers were worn 
with knee-high jewel-coloured boots and short-sleeved satin blouses. Few hems 
were straight, and some dresses featured ties that looked like jumpers were 
tied around models’ waists. Grand’s styling was present in the fun makeup and 
piled-up hair. It added a slickness that most young designers would kill for.

Jacobs, dressed in his signature Stan Smiths along with a sweatshirt, backpack 
and printed scarf, said he came to support Robertson “because she was bright 
and talented when she worked with us”. The designer is in London to attend the 
launch of his beauty brand at Harrods, but whether or not he would be attending 
shows at the rest of London Fashion Week was unclear. “I’m here, but I’m not 
here,” he said, with a wave of the hand and the air of someone who likes to 
keep his public guessing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faime-robertson-marc-jacobs-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4761b6eae37d5f925141c1bd6119e668b172cff%2F196_0_3322_4932%2F3322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20bedroom%20to%20catwalk%3A%20new%20star%20Amie%20Robertson%20earns%20her%20stripes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faime-robertson-marc-jacobs-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20bedroom%20to%20catwalk%3A%20new%20star%20Amie%20Robertson%20earns%20her%20stripes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faime-robertson-marc-jacobs-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4761b6eae37d5f925141c1bd6119e668b172cff%2F196_0_3322_4932%2F3322.jpg>
 Marc Jacobs was a front-row guest at Amie Robertson’s Tate Britain show. 
Photograph: Jeff Spicer/Getty Images 
Backstage, Robertson – who wore the bookish outfit of pulled-back ponytail, 
glasses and jumper – was mobbed forsquad goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/11/squadgoals-whitesplaining-black-culture-taylor-swift>
 selfies with Jacobs, Grand and friends. These posts are priceless for building 
buzz – collectively, the designer and stylist share 720,000 followers on 
Instagram. Robertson, by contrast, is on1,600 
<https://www.instagram.com/av_robertson/>. After today that number is bound to 
increase. “Katie took me under her wing,” said Robertson, who still had the 
rabbit-in-the-headlights look of someone new to being the centre of attention. 
“I don’t know why, but it’s great, she’s been amazing.”

'Aliens came to a magical land and flowers started growing out of the earth,' 
she said of the collection

The designer’s inspirations are already showing signs of being up to fashion 
muster. “Aliens came to a magical land and flowers started growing out of the 
earth,” she said of the collection. The stripes were down to her “exploring 
men’s and womenswear” and also part of the “horror element”, namechecking
Beetlejuice. The cult 1988 Tim Burton comedy-horror stars Michael Keaton and 
Winona Ryder, who wear stripes, wonky lengths and layers. It was also 
referenced by Jacobs last week, following his show in New York on Thursday 
night.

Being part of a trend that also includes a household-name designer is a long 
way from that Manchester bedroom, but Robertson may have to get used to this 
new environment.

Someone more accustomed to the spotlight is Caitlin Price 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?DesignerID=2714>, 
the London-based designer who had her third outing with Fashion East. Price is 
building a following who appreciate her mix of streetwear with couture 
references. For autumn/winter, she used her trademark pastel colours on 
tracksuits but also long, gathered satin skirts and short bomber jackets. There 
was an early 00s feel that recalled UK grime artist Lady Sovereign and rapper 
Lil’ Kim. Price said it was based on the “British ritual of girls getting 
dressed up to go out” and a “sophistication and glamour, but not quite being 
able to pull it off”. The cutout silhouettes were inspired by both a Madame 
Grès dress and a Lycra catsuit designed as clubwear. “It’s about a hybrid,” she 
said.

Fashion East also featured Richard Malone 
<http://www.fashioneast.co.uk/cw1.asp>, with a show dominated by striped 
knitwear gathered at the waist and across shoulder blades.Mimi Wade 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?DesignerID=2856> had 
a presentation in the venue, with leather party dresses worn by models, and 
other highlights of London Fashion Week yesterday on Saturday included JW 
Anderson 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?designerID=1664> and 
Gareth Pugh 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?designerID=123>. The 
shows continue on Monday.

FIVE HIGHLIGHTS

Topshop Unique


The high street store’s catwalk brand 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?designerID=1054> 
always brings the zeitgeisty references, not to mention a great front row.

Mulberry

The debut of Johnny Coca 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?DesignerID=225>, who 
joined the brand from Céline last year. Highly anticipated by the fashion crowd.

Alexander McQueen


The return of the very British brand from the Paris show schedule, and the 
first womenswear show in London bySarah Burton 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?DesignerID=2248>. 
Drama is guaranteed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faime-robertson-marc-jacobs-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15cf54940a2d5e7a25ee2212e02cdda42b6d24f9%2F0_43_3280_2275%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20bedroom%20to%20catwalk%3A%20new%20star%20Amie%20Robertson%20earns%20her%20stripes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faime-robertson-marc-jacobs-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20bedroom%20to%20catwalk%3A%20new%20star%20Amie%20Robertson%20earns%20her%20stripes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faime-robertson-marc-jacobs-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15cf54940a2d5e7a25ee2212e02cdda42b6d24f9%2F0_43_3280_2275%2F3280.jpg>
 High-vis yellow at the Christopher Kane show. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock/REX/Shutterstock 
Christopher Kane


The jewel in the crown of fashion week’s “Super Monday”, Kane 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?DesignerID=69> is 
the master of turning the mundane – cable ties, high vis yellow – into a 
must-have.

Marques Almeida


Youth culture from the past put in a blender and whizzed to make exactly the 
right recipe for Generation Y. Ripped denim and a slacker feel arethe duo 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?DesignerID=1797>’s 
trademarks.
 