Boom! Shake the Room by Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince went to No 1 in the UK 
this week in 1992. In the song, what does the Fresh Prince – Will Smith 
nowadays – do when he sees an attractive woman?  I flip ’em around and then I 
work that bootyAccording to the song, he “never wrote a whack jam”.  I say she 
looks my momma and I got a momma thing  I say something corny, even though I’m 
getting horny  I pretend I never seen her, say I don’t know her name is Tina 
Liam Gallagher was stopped by customs officials at Heathrow on 25 September 
1999 and made to pay £1,300. What item had he failed to declare on his return 
from the US?  His genius  A complete collection of original mono Beatles albums 
on vinyl, all signed by Ringo Starr  A fur coat for his then wife, Patsy 
Kensit, and toys for their son Lennon“At first he made quite a fuss,” said a 
customs official.  Nine bottles of Johnny Walker black and 426 packets of 
Marlboro reds Happy birthday, Tracey Thorn, 54 on 26 September. Back in 1983, 
she sang on the Working Week single Venceremos – We Will Win, which was a 
tribute to which great South American figure?  World Cup-winning football 
manager César Luis Menotti  Beret-wearing revolutionary Che Guevara  Murdered 
leftwing folk singer Victor JaraJara was killed following the Chilean coup of 
September 1973.  Notorious drug baron Pablo Escobar David Bowie went to No 1 in 
the UK album charts this week in 1980 with the album Scary Monsters (and Super 
Creeps). Which of the following musicians did not appear on it?  E Street Band 
pianist Roy Bittan  Who guitarist Pete Townshend  King Crimson guitarist Robert 
Fripp  Cream bassist Jack Bruce A version of Cream’s I Feel Free was recorded 
during the album sessions, but not used on the album. Who became the oldest 
person to top the US charts this week in 2011?  Bob Dylan  Aretha Franklin  
Loretta Lynn  Tony Bennett Duets II featured collaborations with Lady Gaga and 
Amy Winehouse. Nirvana’s album Nevermind was released this week in 1991, 
prompting the grunge explosion. The New York Times duly published a lexicon of 
grunge for its readers, though it was entirely fictitious, composed by Sub Pop 
receptionist Megan Jasper. Which of the following phrases did she not fool the 
NYT into printing?  Swingin’ on the flippity flop – hanging out  Kurted out – 
Asked to leave a room so someone can take drugs in privateJasper still works 
for Sub Pop, though she’s no longer a receptionist.  Lamestain – Uncool person  
Cob Nobbler – Loser What did Jerry Lee Lewis accidentally do at his 41st 
birthday party, on 29 September 1976?  Burn down his house, after leaving the 
cake – with candles lit – next to his curtains  Cause terror in his 
neighbourhood after allowing his pet tiger out of the front door  Shoot his 
bass player in the chestNorman Owens survived, but later sued his boss.  Insult 
the President Gerald Ford when he told what he thought was a prank caller to 
“leave me the fuck alone, asshat” Happy 30th birthday, Ben Lovett out of 
Mumford & Sons! How many Grammy and Brit awards have the braces-bearing folk 
rockers won so far in their career?  None  Four Two of each. Though one of the 
Grammys was for “best music film”.  Six  Seven How long did it take for the 
Spice Girls’ reunion show at the O2 in London to sell out after tickets went on 
sale on 1 October 2007?  38 seconds More than a million people registered to 
buy tickets.  Two minutes and 23 seconds  31 minutes  Tickets were still on 
sale on the night of the show Jessie J recorded her last UK No 1 single this 
week in which year?  2010  2011  2013  2014 Bang Bang was recorded with Ariana 
Grande and Nicki Minaj.  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  