
Teaching and politics have an uneasy relationship. The ways that educators 
work – from the curricula they follow to the budgets they are set – are heavily 
influenced by the decisions of politicians, yet expressing our views about 
politics in the classroomremains controversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/13/-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils>
.

Why don’t more schools focus on public speaking? Discuss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/why-dont-schools-focus-on-public-speaking-campaign>
One difficulty, particularly in subjects like citizenship, history, sociology, 
and government and politics, is maintaining an objective view of the 
conflicting political perspectives we teach in class. In sociology, for 
example, I’ve had to keep my own views under wraps in discussions on 
immigration policy and its effects on demographics, healthcare and education, 
to avoid bias in how the students view the competing perspectives.

Issues such as these have been all the more difficult to teach over the past 
year, as political discourse has become increasingly polarised 
<https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/our-work/news/letter-all-political-parties-westminster>
 during and after the EU referendum, and with other big changes, such as Donald 
Trump’s election as US president, taking place.

Thinking for themselves

Although it’s been good to see students engaged with the topics and linking 
them to current affairs, their arguments about the EU referendum have veered 
from an evidence-based analysis of facts, figures and research – which they 
have shown themselves so capable of in essays and assessments – and focused 
instead on the questionable soundbites from politicians and dubious statistics 
presented by both the remain and leave campaigns. These included labelling 
leave voters as ignorant and believing the seemingly concrete assurance that 
the NHS would be getting an extra £350m a week.

The passionate classroom debates were often matched by similar ones in the 
staffroom. But whatever an individual teacher’s views might be, it is important 
to remember that sections 406 and 407 of the1996 Education Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1996/56/contents> prohibit the promotion 
of partisan political views in schools.

Headteachers, governors and education authorities are responsible for ensuring 
that teachers offer an objective presentation of opposing political views, and 
teachers need to be aware of their own biases. This is vital – if we expect 
students to think for themselves, we must teach them to do so rather than 
depending on the opinions of others.

If they can provide reasoned points as to why they hold these opinions, 
shouldn’t we respect and nurture their interest?

Ted Huddleston of the Citizenship Foundation offers some practical strategies 
<http://www.citizenshipfoundation.org.uk/lib_res_pdf/0118.pdf> (pdf), which 
include giving equal importance to conflicting views; presenting these views as 
open to interpretation; and avoiding putting forward personal opinions as 
facts. We should take care not to patronise or dismiss others’ viewpoints, to 
avoid facial expressions or tones of voice that may prejudice a point of view, 
and to establish an environment where students are free to express their views.

Where students make assertions that are unsupported but prevalent in the media 
or political discourse, we need to get them to further their reasoning and find 
additional evidence without putting them off joining political discussions. And 
while we may not agree with all of their views, if they can provide reasoned 
points as to why they hold these opinions, shouldn’t we respect and nurture 
their interest in the issues being studied?

In class discussions, teachers can employ the “neutral judge” approach, where 
they merely chair the debate, offering constructive feedback on students’ 
opinions. Here, political positions are judged purely on the merits of the 
arguments made for them. Another way of ensuring debate is balanced is to play 
devil’s advocate by explaining alternative views (stating that they are not 
necessarily your own).

Finding balance

All this is easier said than done. Students often want to know what we think 
about topical issues – and as many will see us as a source of authority, our 
views can be more pervasive than we realise.

There are two ways to respond to this. The first is by keeping your views to 
yourself and sticking to the content of the lesson; this is a safe bet and 
adheres fully to the 1996 act. For instance, if a student asked you which way 
you voted in a general election, you could simply state that you don’t want to 
bias their opinion, and could even paraphrase the 1996 act. You could also 
advocate the importance of analysing evidence in relation to forming a reasoned 
political opinion.

My pupils are young UK Muslims – and they're scared about Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/nov/14/most-of-my-pupils-are-muslim-and-they-are-afraid>
The second, more controversial, response involves telling students what you 
believe while at the same time emphasising that it’s a personal view. If you 
choose to do this, you must also be clear that students must make up their own 
minds on the issues you are discussing. As the act stipulates balance, you 
should then acknowledge that people disagree with you and that their ideas can 
be seen to have merit.

Of course, your reaction largely depends on your relationship with students 
and should reflect their age and maturity. Teachers’ political neutrality in 
the classroom is likely to be tested throughout 2017 – with Brexit negotiations 
dividing parliament, Trump’s inauguration splitting public opinion, and 
populist politicians making headlines across Europe. But we must always be 
mindful of balance, regardless of our own political sympathies.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 