
Tom Hanks played six different characters in Cloud Atlas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/09/cloud-atlas-review-toronto>, 
Eddie Murphy played seven inThe Nutty Professor 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BS8zi7Dg8TM> and Alec Guinness notched up 
eight inKind Hearts and Coronets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/18/kind-hearts-and-coronets-review>. 
But James McAvoy sets a new benchmark with his new movie,Split 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/split-review-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-fantastic-fest-austin>
. He plays Kevin, a man with at least 23 distinct personalities – not all of 
them nice. This presents extra challenges for the young women Kevin has 
abducted and locked in his basement. Every time he walks into the cell, they 
have to work out who they are dealing with. Is it “Dennis”, the frowny, 
buttoned-up neat-freak? Is it “Patricia”, the prim, English-accented governess? 
Could it be “Hedwig”, the nine-year-old Kanye West fan? We don’t get to see all 
of Kevin’s alter egos, but enough to get the picture and to make this lurid 
little horror stand out from the crowd.

Split’s writer and director, M Night Shyamalan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mnightshyamalan>, professes to having had a 
lifelong fascination with dissociative identity disorder (DID), formerly known 
as split personality, or multiple personality disorder, and frequently 
mislabelled as schizophrenia (which is an entirely different condition). He is 
clearly not the only one. DID is relatively rare in real life, but we have all 
heard of it, and we all think we know what it entails because cinema and 
television seem to be obsessed with it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fsplit-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-thriller-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Split%20trailer%3A%20James%20McAvoy%20plays%2023%20characters%20in%20one%20in%20psychological%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fsplit-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-thriller-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Split%20trailer%3A%20James%20McAvoy%20plays%2023%20characters%20in%20one%20in%20psychological%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fsplit-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-thriller-trailer-video&media=>
Split trailer: James McAvoy plays 23 characters in one in psychological thriller
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/28/split-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-thriller-trailer-video>
You can see the appeal: DID is a condition that lends itself to extremes of 
behaviour, conflict, torment, secrets and mysteries – everything a juicy drama 
requires in one character. Unfortunately, those dramas have tended to be horror 
movies and psychological thrillers, which has not really helped us understand 
the condition.

So many movies in these genres have used DID as a dramatic driver or a 
“gotcha” twist, it would be spoiling most of them just to mention their titles 
in this context (cough Fight Club cough). One conspicuous example old enough to 
spoil, though, is Alfred Hitchcock’sPsycho 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dYDxxHrlmUg>, ostensibly based on real-life 
serial killer Ed Gein but essentially a murder mystery with a DID twist. “He 
began to think and speak for her, give her half his life, so to speak. At times 
he could be both personalities, carry on conversations. At other times, the 
mother half took over completely,” explains a doctor at the end of the movie. 
Psycho is a horror masterpiece but as a portrayal of a real-life mental-health 
condition, it’s nonsense. Just as autism in the movies makes you a maths 
genius, so DID makes you a “psycho”.

The connection between DID and horror was made before cinema was even 
invented. In 1886, Robert Louis Stevenson published The Strange Case of Dr 
Jekyll and Mr Hyde, a multilayered literary classic that is, in essence, a 
study of an extreme DID case: a respectable Victorian gentleman and a bestial 
monster residing in the same body. Stevenson denied any real-life inspirations 
for the story, but that same year, Frederic Myers, a founder of the Society for 
Psychical Research, published an article on what he called“multiplex 
personality” 
<https://www.bl.uk/collection-items/multiplex-personality-from-the-nineteenth-century>
 (a more prescient description than he could ever have known), citing two 
well-known French cases of the time, Louis Vivet and Felida X. He sent 
Stevenson a copy. Stevenson’s wife also maintained that the author had read a 
scientific paper on “sub-consciousness” at the time.

An English actor named Richard Mansfield quickly acquired the rights to Jekyll 
and Hyde, and within a year was performing the dual role on stage in both the 
US and in Britain. His performance was apparently so convincing that, for a 
time,Mansfield was suspected of being Jack the Ripper <http:>.

Jekyll and Hyde has been dramatised countless times since, on stage, screen 
and radio.Fredric March’s 1931 portrayal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uN4Di8DEPf8> is still considered the 
definitive version; others to take on the challenge have included Boris 
Karloff, Christopher Lee, Anthony Perkins, even Robbie Coltrane. Next up, we 
have the enticing prospect of Russell Crowe as Dr Jekyll in the Tom Cruise-led 
reboot ofThe Mummy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/05/the-mummy-trailer-watch-tom-cruise-die-in-monster-reboot-video>
.

Jekyll and Hyde’s DNA runs through movies such as Psycho and Split, but, the 
more you look, DID themes can be found across the entertainment landscape. 
Movies about demonic possession, werewolves, vampires – all are stories of two 
personae within one body. And what about superheroes?The Incredible Hulk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/13/actionandadventure.sciencefictionandfantasy>
 is essentially a comic-book update of Jekyll and Hyde. Many others live as two 
discrete identities: Clark Kent and Superman, Peter Parker and Spider-Man, 
Bruce Wayne and Batman. There’s Tolkien’s Gollum, who struggles to retrieve his 
former hobbit self, Sméagol. Harry Potter’s psyche is fatefully connected with 
that of his arch-enemy, Voldemort, who shatters his persona into pieces. Even 
Eddie Murphy’s Nutty Professor, come to think of it.

Special mention must go to the Farrelly brothers’ Me Myself and Irene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/sep/22/1>, an ill-fated attempt to 
render DID as comedy. Jim Carrey did his best portraying a nice-guy cop who 
literally wrestles with his Dirty Harry-like alter ego for the affections of 
Renée Zellweger, but the laughs proved hard to come by. What’s more, the movie 
was criticised by mental-health experts for repeatedly referring to Carrey’s 
condition in such misleading terms as “involuntary schizoid disorder”.

Shyamalan, whose parents were both doctors, has clearly done some reading up 
forSplit <https://www.theguardian.com/film/split>. He gets the name right for a 
start, and roots Kevin’s disorder in childhood trauma – which is often the 
trigger for DID. He also includes Kevin’s psychiatrist in the narrative, 
although she is too interested in how Kevin’s condition could “unlock the 
potential of the brain” to check if he is abducting young women. DID can 
actually change the chemistry of the human body, she believes, which doesn’t 
bode well when one of Kevin’s personalities believes he has supernatural powers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcinema-dissociative-personality-disorder-split-james-mcavoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc96392e4722f2eb4efe5ef2cf9abe9a0547ea1d2%2F0_10_1528_917%2F1528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Split%20to%20Psycho%3A%20why%20cinema%20fails%20dissociative%20identity%20disorder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcinema-dissociative-personality-disorder-split-james-mcavoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Split%20to%20Psycho%3A%20why%20cinema%20fails%20dissociative%20identity%20disorder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcinema-dissociative-personality-disorder-split-james-mcavoy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc96392e4722f2eb4efe5ef2cf9abe9a0547ea1d2%2F0_10_1528_917%2F1528.jpg>
 Anthony Perkins in Psycho. Photograph: Allstar/UNIVERSAL 
At least Shyamalan knows he’s going out on a limb. “I wanted to take something 
scientific and psychologically proven and keep going with it,” he explained 
recently. “The first two, three steps have been proven, then the next one was 
not proven, but it’s a question. Do you believe it, what I’m suggesting?”

Movies such as Split can be extremely damaging, argues Dr Simone Reinders, a 
neuroscientist studying DID at King’s College London in collaboration with 
universities in the Netherlands. “They make it seem as if patients with DID are 
extremely violent and prone to doing bad things. This is actually not true and 
it very badly misrepresents the psychiatric disorder. Individuals with DID 
definitely do not have a tendency to be violent; more a tendency to hide their 
mental health problems. I’m very concerned about the effects that the movie 
will have for patients with DID, and how the general public will now see these 
patients. There’s already a lot of stigma and scepticism concerning this 
specific disorder.”

DID is a contested condition. Some professionals have argued it does not exist 
at all, others that multiple personalities are brought on as a result of 
therapy. Certainly there have been cases where the condition has been faked or 
misdiagnosed. Reinders’ research seeks to understand the condition through, for 
example, neuroimaging – scanning the brains of people with DID. Despite the 
condition’s worrying “psycho” portrayal, Split’s notions about altering body 
chemistry turn out to be close to her findings: “With some of my patients, I 
asked two identity states to listen to a text, and my research has shown that 
in one state, the blood flow in the brain is different to the other identity 
state in response to this text. So it is true that the neurobiology is 
dependent on the identity state that the patient is in.” Some of her patients 
show different abilities in different personas, such as the need to wear 
glasses or handedness.

There is another side to DID in the movies: away from the far-fetched genre 
fiction, a number of film-makers have instead sought to dramatise real-life 
cases. Intriguingly, where the former category is overwhelmingly dominated by 
men – usually violent ones – the latter is more of a women’s genre. In 1957, 
two movies concerning women with DID were released: the pulpy Lizzie, based on 
a novel by Shirley Jackson (she dismissed the adaptation as “Abbott and 
Costello meet a multiple personality”), and the vastly more successfulThe Three 
Faces of Eve <http://www.imdb.com/video/screenplay/vi751895577>, which made a 
star of Joanne Woodward. Her character is a demure, dutiful housewife, “Eve 
White”, but then “Eve Black”, a more flirtatious persona, takes over and 
destroys her life, before a third persona “Jane” resolves the conflict.

From today’s perspective, the movie says more about postwar attitudes to 
gender than the human mind, but The Three Faces of Eve was based on a real case 
study: a woman named Chris Costner Sizemore. The screenplay was co-written by 
the psychologists who treated her. She revealed her identity in the 1970s, and 
died last year. When she signed away the movie rights to her story, the studio 
made Sizemore give three different signatures, one for each persona.

Fifteen years later, in 1973, the US was gripped by the bestselling Sybil 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_(book)>, “the true story of a woman 
possessed by 16 separate personalities”, which detailed her treatment by a 
psychiatrist named Cornelia B Wilbur. Sybil, whose real name was Shirley Ardell 
Mason, became something of a celebrity and a controversy. Her case was later 
alleged to be a total sham, cooked up by Wilbur and Mason, the latter of whom 
confessed to lying about her multiple personalities. But Sybil sold more than 
six million copies, and Mason was portrayed very effectively by Sally Field in 
a hit 1976 TVminiseries <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8kPIDt3yu1M>. Joanne 
Woodward played the psychiatrist.

Others have followed in this reality DID vein. In 1990 Shelley Long portrayed 
Truddi Chase <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3w_YvQTmXA> – an abuse victim 
who developed multiple personalities (the real life Chasereduced Oprah Winfrey 
to tears <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=29zAS4kNnkc>when she appeared on her 
show). Tammy Blanchard played Sybil in a 2007remake 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aUjEKXv4OyU>. Halle Berry played both leads in 
the 2010 movieFrankie and Alice <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mmXssz_O89A> 
(the former a black stripper; the latter a white racist), again based on a true 
story.

All of these portrayals have brought DID into the mainstream to the extent 
where we have even had a primetime sitcom with a twist. In United States of Tara
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZL0NXZUfqKk>, Toni Collette’s various 
colourful personae present challenges to family life. Or, in the latest 
small-screen manifestation (another spoiler alert), Mr Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot> – a so-very-now hacking 
thriller whose protagonist, portrayed by Rami Malek, turns out to have been an 
unreliable narrator owing to his mental-health issues.

The makers of both United States of Tara and Mr Robot consulted health 
professionals, and sought to reflect the condition as accurately as possible – 
with mixed results. Collette’s characters were judged as implausibly showy by 
real-life DID patients, though they praised the show’s compassion. Another 
reviewer with DIDpraised 
<https://medium.com/@pluraldoxa/i-am-mr-robot-defe6ee93edf#.vz2h9li42> Mr Robot 
(anonymously, because “patients who have made themselves known to the media 
have had very negative experiences”, he pointed out) for increasing 
understanding of the condition. “Where else can I witness thousands of people 
engaging with the raw struggle that makes up my day-to-day reality?” But he was 
disappointed by press coverage that used words such as “deranged”, “breakdown” 
and “damaged”.

Split review – James McAvoy is 23 shades of creepy in M Night Shyamalan chiller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/split-review-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-fantastic-fest-austin>
Let’s be honest, though, promoting greater understanding of mental illness has 
never been the priority for the entertainment industry. Another explanation for 
the fascination with DID could simply be that actors love it. They could not 
ask for a better way to demonstrate their range. And it often works. March won 
an Oscar for his Jekyll and Hyde; as did Woodward for The Three Faces of Eve. 
Sally Field won an Emmy for Sybil, Toni Collette an Emmy and a Golden Globe, 
among others, and Rami Malek and Christian Slater have won shelf-loads of 
awards for Mr Robot. Even Halle Berry won a few minor gongs for Frankie and 
Alice.

James McAvoy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesmcavoy> deserves praise 
for Split, too. Despite its ludicrous premise, he does a fine and fearless job 
of selling his character’s varied personae. There’s even a showreel-worthy 
moment towards the end where he cycles between different personae in one scene. 
It’s a little like the T-1000 at the end of Terminator 2. But there are no 
special effects here, just acting.

When you think about it, that’s what acting is. It is adopting another 
persona. Actors feign dissociative identity disorder for a living, for our 
pleasure. So, in effect, DID isn’t just an obscure, misunderstood condition; 
it’s the foundation for the whole vast entertainment industry that so often 
misrepresents it.

Split is released in the UK on 20 January
 