
Britain’s blue-chip share index has soared to a new all-time closing high 
powered by soaring confidence in the US, a surge in the share prices of mining 
companies and the impact of the falling pound.

On the first day’s trading after the Christmas break the FTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 index of the biggest listed 
companies in London jumped by 37 points, or 0.5%, to close at 7,106.08 points 
on Wednesday night, two points above the previous high set in April 2015.


Traders said the rally was the result of optimism in the American economy, 
with data earlier this week showing consumer confidence in the US had hit a 
15-year high.


Investors are also anticipating a surge in US government spending, with 
president-electDonald Trump having pledged a new $1tn fiscal stimulus programme 
once he takes office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-1-trillion-infrastructure-pledge-american-investors>
.

Mining companies led the way, with their shares jumping in quiet trading, on 
the first session since the Christmas holidays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/28/housebuilder-bovis-profit-warning-december-slowdown-brexit-fears-business-live>
.

Silver producer Fresnillo leapt 5.2%, gold miner Randgold gained 4.8%, while 
mining giant BHP Billiton rose 4.2% and Anglo American picked up 3.5%.

Major international firms benefited from the weak pound, which fell to a 
two-month low of $1.222 against the US dollar.

With just two sessions to go, the FTSE-100 has now gained 13% since the start 
of 2016, despite a series of market shocks includingthe Brexit referendum result
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/ftse-100-and-sterling-plunge-on-brexit-panic>
 andthe US election. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/04/sterling-pound-ftse-currencies-dolalr-donald-trump-brexit-hopes-eu-referendum>
 That rise means the worth of the 100 most valuable companies listed in London 
has jumped by about £230bn this year.


Mining shares have been the star performers in 2016, after suffering major 
losses in 2015 when commodity prices crashed. This year, the prices of oil, 
iron ore, copper, nickel and coal have all risen, as fears that China would 
suffer an economic “hard landing” have eased. Trump’s vow to rebuild America’s 
highways, schools and airports has also driven up commodity prices.

Anglo’s shares have almost quadrupled in value this year, highlighting how 
2016 has been the best year for mining companies since 2009.

Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG, says mining firms have made a 
“remarkable comeback” over the past 12 months.


“Small losses are the order of the day across most stock markets today, but 
London’s traders have evidently come back from Christmas with a festive bounce 
in their step. The FTSE 100 is the star performer today, helped on its way 
higher by an excellent turn from the index’s mining contingent,” Beauchamp 
explains.

Energy stocks also gained ground, after the price of oil traded near one-year 
high.


Mike van Dulken of Accendo Markets said shares were boosted by “gains by oil 
and optimism regarding what Trump can do for the economy following his 
inauguration in a few weeks time.”

David Cheetham, market analyst at online trading group XTB, said shares 
typically rally in the quiet period at the end of a year.

“Observers of the markets have for many years noticed a strong propensity for 
stocks to rise in the period between Christmas and the New Year and this 
phenomenon appears to be playing out once more,” Cheetham said. These increases 
are known as a “Santa rally” by City workers.

The FTSE 100 is now just 23 points shy of its all-time intraday high, set in 
October.


The index has gained 12% since the EU referendum in June, despite fears that a 
vote for Brexit would derail the economy. However, the FTSE 100 is priced in 
sterling, which hastumbled by 17% against the US dollar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/pound-continues-to-fall-against-dollar-and-euro-amid-hard-brexit-fears>
. This has made Britain’s companies particularly attractive to US investors, 
helping to push up share prices.

The FTSE 250 index, which contains medium-sized UK companies, also rose on 
Wednesday, gaining 0.5%. But it is only up 3% for 2016, substantially lagging 
the internationally-focused FTSE 100.

Wall Street was unable to follow the City’s lead by setting its own record 
highs.

The Dow Jones industrial average faltered in morning trading, dropping by 0.4% 
to 19,863, dashing hopes that it might finally crash through the 20,000 point 
mark for the first time ever.

Some investors are also bracing for fresh volatility in 2017, with a Trump 
presidency and the triggering of formal Brexit negotiations likely to rock 
markets next year.

A survey of top City economists and fund managers found that 40% expect the 
pound to be languishing below $1.20 in a year’s time.

“The UK economy has held up relatively well in the short time since the 
referendum, although without clarity on the blueprint for exiting the EU, the 
longer-term consequences are still open to debate,” said Chris Saint, currency 
analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, who conducted the survey.

“Exchange rates are determined by the interaction of a diverse range of 
political and economic factors, including interest rates, inflation and growth, 
all of which are up for grabs in 2017, which is likely to make for lively 
currency markets in the coming year.”
 