
9.55am EST 09:55  <> 

Preamble

Hello. Let’s not perfume a dungheap: most of the matches in the first round of 
this tournament were total stinkers. Of the most fancied countries only Senegal 
and, at a push, DR Congo have vindicated their status so far, while the other 
most notable performers have been less highly billed sides, with Zimbabwe, 
Guinea Bissau and Togo doing well to justify their presence. Everyone else has 
been varying degrees of plod.

The good thing is that means that the second round of matches should be 
contested by teams doing their utmost to improve, starting with Gabon and
Burkina Faso <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso>. There is, of 
course, the danger that the tightness of Group A (both of the opening matches 
ended 1-1) could lead to caution but let’s hope that both sides choose audacity 
and, more to the point, show that they have the talent to match their 
ambitions. Go Panthers! Go Stallions! Pretty please!

The onus is on Gabon, in particular. The hosts first performance was 
error-strewn. Perhaps nerves were a factor, though the first mistake was 
committed by the manager, Jose Antonio Camacho, who deployed an unbalanced 
side, as Merlin Tandjigora turned out to be not quite magical enough to secure 
midfield on his lonesome. Gabon also suffered from a grievous lack of 
creativity, with no sign of Malick Evouna’s dribbling skills or Mario Lemina’s 
passing ability. Poor old Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang was more akin to a blowfly 
than a Panther, left to feed off rotten remains.Gabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gabon> need to provide their brilliant 
striker with far better service if they are to progress.

 The players from the Country of Honourable People, meanwhile, looked 
defensively vulnerable and on course for a walloping in their opening match but 
fought back well in the second half to draw with Cameroon. Banou Diawara, the 
super sub who triggered those super scenes in the final game of the qualifying 
campaign by hitting a stoppage time winner against Botswana, made another big 
impact from the bench in the match against Cameroon, though the equaliser was 
scored by Issoufou Dayo. Paulo Durate, Burkina’s Portuguese manager, admitted 
that he got his initial tactics wrong against Cameroon – actually, he said that 
his players, though very experienced, seemed confused by his plan, which is the 
same thing as admitting he messed up – so it’ll be interesting to see whether 
they make a better start today. Duarte should know enough about Gabon and his 
own players to at least devise a clear plot, as he managed the Panthers, 
unsuccessfully, before returning for a second spell in charge of Burkina.

In short, the stakes are high for this one and there’s no telling which way 
it’ll go. But 2-1 to Gabon in a drama-filled contest seems the most likely 
denouement. Will you stay tuned now?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81%23block-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gabon%20v%20Burkina%20Faso%3A%20Afcon%202017%20%E2%80%93%20live!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81%23block-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81%23block-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81%23block-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gabon%20v%20Burkina%20Faso%3A%20Afcon%202017%20%E2%80%93%20live!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81%23block-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81%23block-587f80bee4b01065cf597d81&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
7.55am EST 07:55  <> 

TEAMS

 Gabon: Ovono; Palun, Ecuélé Manga, Appindangoyé, Obiang; Ndong, Tanjigora, 
Poko, Bouanga; Evouna, Aubameyang

 Burkina Faso: Koffii 
<http://www.eurosport.com/football/kouakou-koffi_prs439481/person.shtml#national>
; Malo, Dayo, Koné, Coulibaly; Traoré, Kaboré; Jonathan, Pitroipa, Traoré; 
Diawara

 Referee: B Gasama (Gambia)

Afcon 2017 nicknames quiz: do you know the Warriors from the Pharaohs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/17/afcon-2017-nicknames-quiz-africa-cup-nations>
Updated at 10.14am EST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3%23block-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gabon%20v%20Burkina%20Faso%3A%20Afcon%202017%20%E2%80%93%20live!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3%23block-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3%23block-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3%23block-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gabon%20v%20Burkina%20Faso%3A%20Afcon%202017%20%E2%80%93%20live!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3%23block-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fgabon-v-burkina-faso-afcon-2017-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3%23block-587f65cbe4b0f0efb00f53b3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
Hello. Let’s not perfume a dungheap: most of the matches in the first round of 
this tournament were total stinkers. Of the most fancied countries only Senegal 
and, at a push, DR Congo have vindicated their status so far, while the other 
most notable performers have been less highly billed sides, with Zimbabwe, 
Guinea Bissau and Togo doing well to justify their presence. Everyone else has 
been varying degrees of plod.

The good thing is that means that the second round of matches should be 
contested by teams doing their utmost to improve, starting with Gabon and
Burkina Faso <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso>. There is, of 
course, the danger that the tightness of Group A (both of the opening matches 
ended 1-1) could lead to caution but let’s hope that both sides choose audacity 
and, more to the point, show that they have the talent to match their 
ambitions. Go Panthers! Go Stallions! Pretty please!

The onus is on Gabon, in particular. The hosts first performance was 
error-strewn. Perhaps nerves were a factor, though the first mistake was 
committed by the manager, Jose Antonio Camacho, who deployed an unbalanced 
side, as Merlin Tandjigora turned out to be not quite magical enough to secure 
midfield on his lonesome. Gabon also suffered from a grievous lack of 
creativity, with no sign of Malick Evouna’s dribbling skills or Mario Lemina’s 
passing ability. Poor old Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang was more akin to a blowfly 
than a Panther, left to feed off rotten remains.Gabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gabon> need to provide their brilliant 
striker with far better service if they are to progress.

 The players from the Country of Honourable People, meanwhile, looked 
defensively vulnerable and on course for a walloping in their opening match but 
fought back well in the second half to draw with Cameroon. Banou Diawara, the 
super sub who triggered those super scenes in the final game of the qualifying 
campaign by hitting a stoppage time winner against Botswana, made another big 
impact from the bench in the match against Cameroon, though the equaliser was 
scored by Issoufou Dayo. Paulo Durate, Burkina’s Portuguese manager, admitted 
that he got his initial tactics wrong against Cameroon – actually, he said that 
his players, though very experienced, seemed confused by his plan, which is the 
same thing as admitting he messed up – so it’ll be interesting to see whether 
they make a better start today. Duarte should know enough about Gabon and his 
own players to at least devise a clear plot, as he managed the Panthers, 
unsuccessfully, before returning for a second spell in charge of Burkina.

In short, the stakes are high for this one and there’s no telling which way 
it’ll go. But 2-1 to Gabon in a drama-filled contest seems the most likely 
denouement. Will you stay tuned now?
 
 Gabon: Ovono; Palun, Ecuélé Manga, Appindangoyé, Obiang; Ndong, Tanjigora, 
Poko, Bouanga; Evouna, Aubameyang

 Burkina Faso: Koffii 
<http://www.eurosport.com/football/kouakou-koffi_prs439481/person.shtml#national>
; Malo, Dayo, Koné, Coulibaly; Traoré, Kaboré; Jonathan, Pitroipa, Traoré; 
Diawara

 Referee: B Gasama (Gambia)

Afcon 2017 nicknames quiz: do you know the Warriors from the Pharaohs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/17/afcon-2017-nicknames-quiz-africa-cup-nations> 