
Australia is on the move.

The continent drifts in a north-north-east direction at rate of 7cm a year. 
But, from this year, its recorded latitude and longitudewill move 1.8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/03/mind-the-gap-australias-latitude-and-longitude-to-shift-2m-next-year>
 metres – a scheduled update to the local coordinate system to reflect the 
movement of the Earth’s tectonic plates.

The transition to the new datum, overseen by Geoscience Australia, will be 
gradual over the next two years. But for the 10,000 or so Australians who use 
coordinates for geocaching, it has sparked much discussion.

Geocaching began in the early 2000s as a sort of real-world treasure hunt, or 
high-tech orienteering, in which players hunt for registered “caches” hidden 
and recorded by other players.

The cache itself is a box, often a reusable food container, though the only 
requirement is that it is watertight and large enough to hold a logbook. A 
player hides it and records its location with enough detail for it to be found 
by another player, who will then take something out of the box and replace it 
with an item of equal or greater value.

James Finger, a forensic scientist and president of Geocaching NSW, says it 
combines “bushwalking and geeky technology”.

“The old axiom is ‘Geocachers: We use multi-billion dollar satellite 
technology to hunt for boxes in the bush. What’s your hobby?’”

Mind the gap: Australia's latitude and longitude to shift 2m next year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/03/mind-the-gap-australias-latitude-and-longitude-to-shift-2m-next-year>
Since 2009, he has made about 5,800 finds, which he says puts him “at about 
the middle of anyone who’s taking it seriously”. He managed just over 400 this 
year, but backpacking through Europe “in a previous life”, he racked up a 
streak of more than 1,000 days.

With between six and eight million players (and 2.8 million caches) registered 
around the world, the game has grown as the technology has become more 
accessible. In 2000, a top-of-the-line, over-the-counter GPS unit could take a 
player to within 20m of the hidden cache, Finger says.

“But now your new smartphones have got comparable accuracy – if you know how 
to use them – with a basic bushwalkers’ unit. That’s what’s spurred the 
popularity. You no longer have to buy a dedicated piece of kit, you can do it 
on your smartphone.”

Though the change of Australia’s latitude and longitude has “sparked some 
conversation amongst the community”, he says it will have little impact on 
geocachers, who use the global World Geodetic System – not the Australian datum.

When GPS systems on most web-enabled smartphones, such as Apple maps or Google 
maps, take you to between 10-20m from the cache – “so a 1.8m shift is not 
really significant” anyway.

Finding a cache also depends on the accuracy of the coordinates recorded by 
the person who hid it – which could be as much as 30m out from its true 
location, depending on factors such as nearby buildings or power lines that 
might have compounded the reading.

Clockmaker John Harrison vindicated 250 years after ‘absurd’ claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/19/clockmaker-john-harrison-vindicated-250-years-absurd-claims>
“When the numbers on your screen say you’re about 10m away, you generally put 
this thing away in your pocket, and you start looking around, and you rely on 
your own experience and intuition,” Finger says.

The game has changed in the best part of two decades, he says: with most 
players introduced to geocaching through their smartphones, its links to 
orienteering skills and geographic systems have become more nebulous.

Discussion of the technology involved – even of latitude and longitude – is 
more interesting for “the old guard”.

AI, self-driving cars and cyberwar – the tech trends to watch for in 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/25/ai-self-driving-cars-and-cyberwar-the-tech-trends-to-watch-for-in-2017>
“Your modern generation of geocachers may not know there is such a thing as a 
dedicated GPS handheld device,” he says. “It’s like trying to explain to your 
kids the days when mobile phones did not have the internet.”

Most geocachers simply interact with the game at face value, as they would 
Pokémon Go <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go>, to which it’s 
often compared. (“Except it’s been around 15 years. It’s as old as the original 
Pokémon games are, in fact.”)


Finger predicts that games and interests incorporating GPS technology will 
only increase. “It’s basically a free thing for the public and game developers 
to utilise, and it’s one the average person is now familiar with and 
comfortable with.

“Nearly everyone who owns a smartphone will use Google maps: they know what it 
is, they know vaguely what it can do for them. Turning that into a hobby or 
interest is not as massive a step as it was to those first bushwalkers who were 
told to trust instructions to find a hidden box.”

 * This article was corrected on 3 January to distinguish between Geocentric 
Datum of Australia, which is changing, and the World Geodetic System, which is 
not  