
Those who insist European Champions Cup rugby is simply a matter of the big 
English and French clubs flexing their muscles shouldtake a look at the Pool 
One table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action>
. It could hardly be better reading for the Pro12, with Munster and Glasgow 
lording it over Racing 92 and Leicester after four rounds. Might it also be a 
preliminary taster of what to expect in next month’s Six Nations?

Glasgow seal double over beleaguered Racing to go top of Champions Cup pool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/16/glasgow-warriors-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report-johan-goosen>
Saturday’s visit of Munster to the artificial surface of Scotstoun also has 
possible Lions implications, particularly for some of Glasgow’s prominent 
individuals. Finn Russell, Jonny Gray, Stuart Hogg, Tommy Seymour and Alex 
Dunbar are all influential figures and, as Racing and Leicester have already 
discovered,there is nothing remotely lily-livered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/16/glasgow-warriors-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report-johan-goosen>
 about the entire Glasgow pack.

With the smart Gregor Townsend entering the final furlong of his tenure before 
taking over as the Scotland coach, Glasgow will certainly never have a better 
chance of reaching Europe’s last eight for the first time. There have been 
impressive patches here and there, not least in 2014-15 when they hammered Bath 
at home and overcame Montpellier away in their first two pool fixtures, but 
winning three of their four games this time has finally left them in control of 
their own destiny.

Defeating the pumped-up men of Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/munster-anthony-foley-racing-92>
, who have lost once since the tragic death of Anthony Foley in October, would 
also send a blunt message to Leicester, with Glasgow at Welford Road for their 
final fixture next week. As Seymour stresses, however, the encounter with the 
Tigers can wait. “We’ve got a huge game first,” said the prolific Scotland 
wing, who will line up opposite the recalled Keith Earls. “It would be very 
dangerous to look past that. If we do that we can then look forward to 
Leicester with a lot of ambition.”

Seymour, who would surely be the first Nashville-born player to represent the 
Lions, had a peripatetic childhood and represented Ireland at under-19 level 
before switching to Glasgow in 2011. He has scored 31 tries in 95 games for the 
club, as well as 14 tries in 31 Tests for Scotland, establishing a reputation 
as a quality finisher and interception poacher. Eight tries in ninePro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12> games this season have also clearly 
played a part in the 28-year-old’s decision to sign a new two-year club 
contract.

Munster ‘honour the big man’ Anthony Foley with emotional win at Racing 92
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/munster-anthony-foley-racing-92> 
Another factor is the impending arrival of Dave Rennie, the former coach of 
the free-flowing Chiefs in New Zealand, with Seymour firmly of the view Glasgow 
can improve further if they stick to their positive approach.

“It’s important for everyone to know that style and mindset will be carried 
on,” said Seymour, also keen for the club to give Townsend a fitting sendoff.

“If there’s one goal we have it is a collective one to progress into the last 
eight in Europe, to get back into the top four of the Pro12 and be competitive 
for the league title at the end of the season.”

The bookmakers are more inclined towards Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> topping the pool, their 
comprehensive away win over Racing in Paris last Saturday having once again 
underlined the influence of their loose forwards and the Ireland scrum-half 
Conor Murray.

Tommy O’Donnell has a sprained ankle, however, and Seymour reckons Glasgow are 
on the up. “We’d be very worried as a squad if we were paying any attention to 
betting odds. The most important thing is where we feel we are as a squad and 
as a club,” he said.“We’ve had some really big wins since the start of December 
and confidence is high. Munster won’t be concerned about odds and we won’t 
either. I think it’ll be one hell of a game.”
 