
Global regulators have postponed a meeting to agree major reforms to the 
banking sector prompted by the 2008 crisis.

A leading group of central bankers was due to meet on 8 January to agree 
changes that could have forced some banks, largely inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, to hold more capital, but it 
was announced on Tuesday that the meeting had been called off.

No new date was given for the meeting of the group of central bank governors 
and heads of supervision (GHOS), which was due to discuss rules that influence 
how muchcapital banks hold and the way they measure the risks they are taking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/italy-failing-banks-new-japan>
.

UK manufacturing PMI rises to two-year high as FTSE 100 hits fresh record – 
business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2017/jan/03/markets-wait-for-uk-manufacturing-data-ftse-100-business-live>
It was reported that the US had been pushing for tighter measures despite 
concern from European regulators that any further restrictions might impede 
lending.

The postponement comes just weeks before Donald Trump is inaugurated as US 
president. Trump has discussed the need to change banking regulation.

The GHOS, chaired by Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, oversees the 
Basel committee, the forum where central bankers meet to discuss banking reform.

 The group said “more time is needed to finalise some work, including ensuring 
the framework’s final calibration, before the GHOS can review the package of 
proposals.

“A meeting of the GHOS, originally planned for early January, has therefore 
been postponed.”

Stefan Ingves, the Swedish central bank governor who chairs the Basel 
committee, said it would keep working to “finalise its reforms aimed at fixing 
shortcomings highlighted by the financial crisis to make banks safer and more 
resilient”.

The difficulties in clinching agreement have been simmering for some time, but 
in a speech last month Ingves had said the committee was on track to finalise 
the reforms, known as Basel III, by the end of 2016.


The changes relate to banks using their own internal models to measure their 
risks and the impact this has on risk reduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/mps-test-rules-uk-bank-bailouts-andrew-tyrie>
.

Draghi said: “Completing Basel III is an important step towards restoring 
confidence in banks’ risk-weighted capital ratios, and we remain committed to 
that goal.”


Sir Howard Davies, a professor at the Paris Institute of Political Science, 
wrote last weekthat agreement had “ so far proved impossible” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/28/global-banking-standards-treacherous-political-water-basel-us-europe-regulation>
.

Davies, who is also chairman of Royal Bank of Scotland, said: “The Europeans 
argue that their banks’ corporate lending is inherently less risky.”
 