
Marks & Spencer is expected to defy the high street gloom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/christmas-cheer-fades-for-high-street-as-buyers-shop-online-from-home>
 by delivering its first increase in clothing sales at Christmas for six years.

M&S is among the big retailers lining up this week to reveal sales over the 
critical trading period. Major supermarketsMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/morrisons-sales-growth-price-cuts>
 andTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/tesco-supermarket-sales-rise-profits-tumble>
, as well as department store chain John Lewis, are expected to have weathered 
the storm but groups exposed to a tough clothing market and a steep decline in 
high street shoppers have suffered.

After only one Christmas in charge, M&S chief executive Steve Rowe is expected 
to report a small increase in like-for-like clothing sales in the third quarter 
aided by the inclusion of extra sale trading days in the period. Cold weather 
at was also helpful after 2015’s mild conditions dented demand for coats and 
knitwear.

Last week’s dismal figures from Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
, which wiped £2bn off retailers’ share price on the day, fuelled fears that 
Christmas 2016 was a washout for clothing retailers as Britons cut spending on 
clothing.

But while the upset at Next <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> capped 
a long period of financial outperformance, M&S’s progress follows five years of 
dire figures, with clothing sales down nearly 6% over the last two Christmases.

Independent retail analyst Nick Bubb predicted a 3.7% increase in 
like-for-like sales at John Lewis for the six weeks to 31 December, a figure 
underpinned by the strength of its click and collect business. But Bubb fears 
heavy discounting in the Christmas run up will haveeaten into the 
employee-owned retailer’s profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/john-lewis-and-next-declare-falling-profits>
. John Lewis’s “never knowingly undersold” promise means it has to match 
rivals’ price cuts.


“The worry is that increased discounting/price matching will have cost John 
Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> quite a bit of gross 
margin,” said Bubb. “Also the skewing of sales growth to online will have been 
expensive in terms of fulfilment and distribution costs.”

Although the UK clothing market is in decline, Retail Economics analyst 
Richard Lim predicts Britons will have spent £700m more in December than in 
2015, a 1.7% increase that will push takings for the month to £42.1bn.

“Overall I think retailers had a reasonable but not spectacular Christmas,” he 
said. “Although the conditions for 2017 look bleak, consumers told us the 
Brexit vote has not had an impact on their incomes yet.”

The speed at which sales are transferring from physical stores to a digital 
high street is one of the biggest trends weighing on retailers with extensive 
store networks. According to the association for online retailersIMRG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/britons-expected-to-spend-13bn-on-black-friday-bargains>
, online sales increased 21.2% in November compared with a year ago. The 
£16.5bn spent in November was the biggest ever monthly spend, pushing online 
takings to £118.5bn for the first 11 months of the year.

While established retailers such as M&S and Debenhams struggle to eke out 
growth – analysts predict underlying sales at constant currency exchange rates 
will be down 1% at Debenhams – online fashion sites Asos and Boohoo are riding 
the online boom, with growth rates of 30% and more than 40%, respectively.

“M&S is still very much in recovery mode under Steve Rowe,” said David Jeary, 
an analyst at Canaccord Genuity. “I’m still nervous in terms of their 
experience on the clothing front. Some people are looking for a small positive 
increase in like-for-like sales but I’m not persuaded of that and think it will 
be a small negative number.”

Analyst predictions on the performance of M&S’s key clothing business range 
from a 2% decline to a 1.5% rise. Its food business is expected to deliver a 
small decline in underlying sales. “If they delivered another 6% decline [on 
clothing] the market would clobber them,” said Jeary.

With food a key component of the Christmas spending spree analysts are 
optimistic that, as in 2015, the major supermarket chains will deliver decent 
figures, withMorrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> leading 
the pack amid its renaissance under chief executive David Potts. The City has 
pencilled in like-for-like sales growth of 1.1% for the 9 weeks to 1 January 
for the Bradford-based grocer.

Bernstein analyst Bruno Monteyne said Morrisons would be the “relative winner” 
of the listed pack with growth of 2.5%. Growth at Aldi and Lidl slowed towards 
the end of 2016 but Monteyne predicted the discounters will have gained market 
share in December.

Market leader Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is also 
expected to have traded well but it is up against strong figures compared with 
last year. As a result James Anstead, an analyst at Barclays, one of the 
grocer’s house brokers, predicted like-for-like sales will be flat over the 
six-week Christmas trading period.

At Sainsbury’s, the UK’s second largest grocer, analysts have pencilled in a 
0.8% fall in like-for-like sales and growth of 1.6% at its Argos chain – 
although the latter’s profit margins could have been damaged by a fierce price 
war on toys with Tesco.
 