
The current “inefficient and confusing” system of government-backed financial 
help for consumers is to be replaced witha new one-stop-shop organisation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-financial-guidance-body-unveiled> that 
will advise consumers about debt, pensions and scams.

This new body will replace three existing publicly-funded organisations, one 
of which came under fire for spending more than £100m on marketing and 
advertising in an attempt to increase brand awareness.


The Treasury said the new system would make it easier for consumers to get the 
financial help they needed at a time when demand for debt advice was increasing 
and millions of people had more choices about what to do with their retirement 
cash.


FCA considers £1m compensation limit to increase protection for pensioners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/14/fca-considers-1m-compensation-limit-to-increase-protection-for-pensioners>
This new body, which is yet to be named, will replace the Money Advice Service 
<https://www.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/en> (MAS), the Pensions Advisory Service 
<http://www.pensionsadvisoryservice.org.uk> (TPAS) and the government’s Pension 
Wise <https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk> service, which all provide free and 
impartial financial guidance.


In his March 2016 budget 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/budget-2016-documents/budget-2016>, 
the then chancellor George Osborne said the plan was to create two new 
organisations, one of which would focus purely on pensions. However, the 
government said that, following a consultation, it now intended to set up a 
single body. It will provide debt advice and help with pensions, advise people 
on how to avoid falling victim to scams and coordinate financial education 
programmes for children and young people.


However, this new organisation will not come into being until autumn 2018 at 
the earliest and the three bodies will continue to operate until then.


In a consultation document, the Treasury and the Department for Work and 
Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> were critical of the 
existing arrangements, saying: “There are gaps in the guidance available to 
consumers and duplication of content between MAS, TPAS and Pension Wise. The 
government believes this arrangement is inefficient and confusing for 
consumers, with a lack of coherence between the strategies and business plans 
of the three services.”

MAS was set up in 2010 to improve people’s money management skills and spent 
more than £100m on marketing and advertising, but “achieved only a 5% to 10% 
brand recognition,” stated the document. This demonstrated that untargeted 
advertising was ineffective in raising brand awareness and helping people 
access services, so it was vital that the new organisation had a website that 
was well optimised for search engines. There will also be a phone-based 
service, plus face-to-face debt advice and pension guidance.

The three existing services are funded by levies on the financial services and 
pensions industries and it is planned that this will continue. The government 
believes it may be possible to reduce the overall costs as efficiencies 
generated from merging the three services begin to materialise.

Simon Kirby, the economic secretary to the Treasury, said: “We want to help 
people take charge of their finances and make the financial decisions that are 
right for them. This new body will ensure that help is readily available for 
people who need to access debt advice, information on their pensions or 
guidance on other money matters.”

Tom Selby, a senior analyst at investment company AJ Bell, said that moving to 
a single body should reduce the costs paid by the industry and, ultimately, by 
the consumers who buy products and services. ”It’s absolutely critical that 
savers are warned of the dangers posed by scammers intent on stealing their 
savings,” he said.
 