
As many as 100,000 grandparents are missing out on national insurance credits 
that could boost their state pension by thousands of pounds over the course of 
their retirement, a former minister has claimed.

The former Liberal Democrat MP Steve Webb, now director of policy at mutual 
insurer Royal London, said a freedom of information request to HM Revenue & 
Customs had laid bare the “massive non-take-up” of a scheme designed to help 
grandparents who make sacrifices to help their children get back to work after 
the birth of a child.

The government launched the scheme – known officially as specified adult 
childcare credits, and unofficially as the grandparents’ credit – in 2011. It 
means that if a mother goes back to work after the birth of a child, she can 
sign a form that allows a grandparent or other family member to receive NI 
credits for looking after the child, provided the child is under the age of 12.

If a working-age grandparent misses out on one year of state pension rights 
because they are spending time with a grandchild instead of doing paid work, 
this would cost them 1/35th of the full rate of state pension, which is £231 
per year. Over the course of a 20-year retirement this would add up to a loss 
of more than £4,500.

But the figures from HMRC, Webb said, showed that this system “is so little 
known” that just 1,298 grandparents and other family members across the country 
benefited in the year to September 2016. As such, Royal London is calling on 
the government to improve the publicity about these rights, so that new mothers 
and grandparents are aware of the scheme.

Based on an analysis of official data, the insurer estimated that around 1.27 
million working mothers with one or more children under 12 were relying on a 
grandparent to provide childcare. Of these mothers, around 230,000 were in 
their 20s, so in these cases the grandparents were likely to be below state 
pension age. Some of these grandparents would still be working and not need the 
credit, but even if only half could benefit, that would still mean there were 
more than 100,000 potential beneficiaries, Webb said.

“Many families rely heavily on the support provided by grandparents to enable 
them to combine paid work and family life,” he added. “The fact that there is a 
scheme to make sure that grandparents do not lose out by protecting their state 
pension rights, is a good thing. But the scheme is not much use if hardly 
anyone takes it up. The government needs to act quickly to alert mothers to the 
fact that they can sign over the NI credits that they do not need.”

The charity Grandparents Plus said grandparents were a lifeline to families 
squeezed by falling incomes and rising childcare costs, adding: “When they give 
up their own jobs to help out, they shouldn’t damage their future state pension 
in the process.”

 