
Following Guardian writers recalling the breaks that almost broke them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/dec/29/my-worst-holiday-guardian-writers-on-breaks-that-nearly-broke-them>
, we asked you to tell us about your own holiday nightmares – and you responded 
with hundreds of tales of disappointing destinations, missed flights, 
robberies, breakdowns, bad company and lots and lots of vomiting.

Your underwhelming international holiday photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2016/aug/27/your-underwhelming-international-holiday-photos>
Creatures great and small – bears, mosquitoes, rats and roaches – also made an 
appearance in stories of holiday hell, including this episode of cockroaches on 
a plane via19lux <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4307192>:

On a flight to Indonesia, the second the plane became airborne, hundreds of 
thousands of cockroaches swarmed out and over us. I was one of the fortunate 
ones, having decided at the last minute to wear socks and long trousers, so I 
could keep my hems tucked. There were so many people in shorts or skirts and 
sandals. I will never ever fly in anything but trousers and socks again. I 
think the most unbelievable part of that journey was when the stewardesses came 
along to offer us dinner.

And a tide of rats as told by PoppyMandragora 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3209555>:

The lifeguards on the beach in Majorca this October blew their whistles 
ferociously and gesticulated for me to get out of the beautiful, calm, 
azure-blue sea that I had had to myself. After the previous day and night of 
torrential downpours, the weather had finally broken and the sun was fantastic. 
Irritated, I got out and stomped back up the beach.

A little further down the bay other holiday makers ignored them. Right up 
until the moment about 40 minutes later when large-ish, grey-ish blobs began 
floating gently towards the beach.

At first I assumed it was sewage. It wasn’t. It was rats. Hundreds of them 
bobbing towards us, first drowned and then flushed out by the previous days’ 
downpours. The sight of the lifeguards cheerfully flinging the rats into bin 
bags as they laughed at the holiday makers who had previously chosen to ignore 
them was certainly memorable.

Vomiting bugs, lice, broken limbs, fevers (and other outbreaks of disease) 
featured prominently:

groovylordpingu <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2849943>

Norovirus in a Welsh cottage at Christmas with the mother-in-law. Five people, 
one toilet. Boxing Day shopping trip for bleach (too late to stop infection but 
needed for morale). Wife and mother-in-law fell out – not spoken since. Many 
££££ of food left untouched and forgotten. Pretty much a Christmas clusterf*ck.

missyme62 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16178982>

It was to be our first real family holiday. Car packed to bursting, 3 kids 
strapped in, off we went on our 6 hr drive (which funnily enough takes 7 1/4 
hrs with 3 kids in tow) to the south coast. My daughter vomited, which set off 
the other two in unison. I had one bucket, running across the mouths of 3 kids. 
We had run out of water, so was using coke to wipe off vomit. Could not 
pullover, were in a mountainous area.

30mins from home, we came across some drovers moving hundreds of head of 
cattle. What a wonderful sight, if a little intimidating. Then some idiot 
started blowing his horn, which in turn spooked the cattle.

My daughter once again vomited, this time a projectile vomit right into the 
back of her father’s head, who was attempting to drive us out of danger, with 
the help of one of the drovers. The stench of vomit was breathtaking to say the 
least, couldn’t wind windows down because of the cattle.

tigerm <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4165300>

In 2004, I agreed to help my brother-in-law out by babysitting my nephew 
before a trip to Hawaii. My nephew is dropped off with a slight cold, which I 
quickly diagnose as a high grade fever. As I board the plane to Hawaii, I have 
a slight sore throat. By the end of the flight I have a fever and for the next 
9 days have the worse ear and throat infection.

I spent the entire trip in the most expensive hotel room I have ever booked 
overlooking Waikiki Beach pretty much delirious and constantly running a fever.

I can say this was the most miserable trip ever, despite me having being 
caught up in a war, getting bitten by bed bugs and going to Hull.



Esther Doyle <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10373299> recalled her 
“Shite Fest au Jardin” in County Wicklow:


Took two teenage grandsons with me to stay with elderly aunt in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. Aunt’s cottage has somewhat 
primitive sanitation involving a septic tank, which seemed to work well enough 
on previous visits. This particular year though, just before we arrived, there 
had been two weeks of apocalyptic rain.

We arrived to find the back garden six inches deep in stinking water. The 
septic tank had backed up due to the excessive rain and decanted its contents.

No matter, the aunt called in the local farmer with his slurry tank and he 
drained the septic tank. The sewage came back the next day.

Farmer did the business again and explained that the over-saturated ground was 
leaching water into the tank. He assured me that as soon as we got a bit of 
good weather it would be grand. We didn’t get good weather and the next day we 
had the usual Shite Fest au Jardin.

And by now the farmer had gone on hols. (This was Ireland in August...)

Aunt immediately banned all bathing/showering or flushing the toilet unless 
we’d done something completely unspeakable, on the grounds that we would only 
flood the garden more.

There are no words to describe being in that small cottage with two teenage 
unwashed chaps, plus aunt and her three dogs.

The weather became humid, and exacerbated by the gallons of water now 
evaporting into the already water-sodden air, herds of midges came from all 
over County Wicklow to devour the pallid and enticingly stinky flesh of the 
Londoners.

Aunt still refused to allow us to shower despite the huge itching buboes all 
over any exposed parts.

Then the announcement came over the local radio station that due to the 
previous deluge, the local water supply had been tainted so we couldn’t drink 
that either. We lived on Club Orange and Cidona for days.

Then aunt went to bingo one night. That was the only happy day we had.

We leapt into the shower and stood under the cold water scratching for hours. 
Such bliss.

Raw sewerage (again) and more vomiting: 


BahBunny <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4357115>

Corfu 1979. First ‘romantic’ break with the boyfriend. Arrived at our luxury 
villa to find raw sewage regurgitating from the shower drain. The smell was 
dire. Complained to the tour operator who promised to do something and then 
disappeared. Headed to the beach on day 2. Beautiful azure water as warm as a 
bath. Boyfriend runs in escstatic and emerges in 2 minutes covered in jelly 
fish and screaming hysterically. Day three was when the vomiting started. By 
day 6 it was green water coming up every ten minutes. 4 hour delay at the 
airport with horrific toilets and profusive diarrhoea. Arrived home at 10pm 
weak as a kitten and stayed in bed for a week after.

Hannah MacLeod <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15132015> warned of 
the perils of trying something new:

Long weekend in Amsterdam. I witnessed great civilisations rise and fall 
whilst I cowered in a youth hostel bog for ten thousand fucking years. Note to 
self: avoid magic mushrooms.

Plus, there was a side-serving of racism in Spain from hairymo 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3057294>:

Worst holiday Barcelona 2005. Shop owner refused to sell me a bottle of water, 
my blackness seemed to truly upset him and he advised we needed to leave his 
shop.

Waitress refused to seat us in a restaurant and just left us standing there 
whilst she and her backward colleagues stood and laughed.

A man on the street, tried to pull me away from my boyfriend and called me a 
‘black whore’. I still cannot believe I paid for this experience.

Nice architecture, awful people.

Luckily, all those terrible holidays weren’t in vain, at least some saw the 
lighter side:

ID1895456  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4391146>

Thanks people! I enjoyed that. Reading it all took most of the afternoon 
though, with popping about here and there to do bits. But very funny. Phew! 
Need a holiday after all that reading....

Claudio58  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2031119>

As a child we didn’t really have family holidays (my parents lived in the same 
house but that was about it) and I used to think I was missing out. As I’ve got 
older I’ve realised that I may have had a lucky escape.
 