
When I tell people that I am in charge of documentary films at the Guardian, 
it can cause some confusion: it is normally only broadcasters who have 
documentary departments.

This week the Guardian is reaffirming its commitment to documentary with the 
launch of our new documentary strand. We’ll be releasing monthly films on our 
website, each lasting about 20 minutes. Online, even five minutes is considered 
a challenging length for viewers, but we believe there is an audience for these 
longer, more considered films.

News organisations with their roots in print can often approach documentaries 
as if they are extended news articles. We’re trying to do more than that with 
these documentaries, which tell complex stories from around the world. They’re 
not intended to replace text articles or news videos, we just recognise that 
these stories are best suited to film, where a short scene can tell you as much 
as thousands of words.

Gun nation: a journey to the heart of America's gun culture – video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/16/gun-nation-a-journey-to-the-heart-of-americas-gun-culture-video>
The first of these documentaries is called Gun Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/16/gun-nation-a-journey-to-the-heart-of-americas-gun-culture-video>
. It’s a film about guns in America, and we wanted to get beyond the typical 
polemic focused on only victims and anti-gun campaigners. Instead, directorZed 
Nelson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/zed-nelson> captured unguarded 
interviews with the Americans who use guns every day, as well as one affected 
by disaster. It starts from a place of an outsider’s bewilderment and asks 
gun-lovers “Don’t you want a solution too?”

As with other Guardian documentaries, Gun Nation is made by an independent 
film-maker and production company. I receive pitches from all over the world; 
it’s part of my job to spend time travelling, meeting independent voices. It’s 
important we don’t just commission the loudest voices, so that sometimes means 
working with emerging talent and helping them develop their ideas.

The Guardian is part of a small movement of print organisations including the 
New York Times, the New Yorker, the Economist and Der Spiegel that are serious 
about making documentary and other video content. I admire what these other 
organisations are doing, but I want the Guardian to offer stories that feel 
different and really tell you something new.

How do we do that? I hope by commissioning film-makers who have spent long 
periods in communities that are difficult for us to reach and are dedicated to 
following theese stories from start to end. Workingwith Bertha Foundation 
<http://www.documentary.org/feature/how-bertha-foundation-has-transformed-global-nonfiction-media-landscape-0>
, a social justice organisation, we want to give a platform to voices that 
don’t get heard enough and for stories outside the news cycle, which means 
minimising voiceover and letting characters speak for themselves.

Getting a film to screen is a long process. Gun Nation was in planning for a 
year, shooting lasted for six weeks, and the edit took more than three months. 
All that to make a documentary of just under 30 minutes. Zed and our editor, 
Noah, started the edit with hours and hours of footage. As well as the 12 
characters featured in the film, we had talked to another 10 from across the 
country, including survivors of gun violence.

Sifting and logging this material so we can work out the structure of the film 
takes weeks – it is in the process of trimming, refining and rearranging that 
the documentary really gets made. The background to Gun Nation wasZed’s photo 
project <http://www.zednelson.com/?GunNationTheBook> of the same name made at 
the turn of the millennium and, in our documentary, Zed pays a return visit to 
the subjects of his portraits. We hoped to balance this with a wider story of 
America in crisis.

I come from a background in the documentary industry, and I am all too aware 
of how few documentaries reach a broad audience. Some make it to Netflix, 
Amazon or iTunes, some are screened on the BBC’s Storyville, some find other 
ways to reach viewers. Unless you go to film festivals or you live in a big 
city, trust the algorithms or already know what you’re looking for, you can 
miss many of the great ones.

This is frustrating for film-makers, who spend years developing, shooting and 
editing these films. They want to reach as big an audience as possible but, 
among the massive diversity of films online, documentaries have to fight for 
attention and can struggle. We’re trying to do something about that.

I probably get pitched more than a thousand documentaries a year. Nearly all 
of them sound as if they would tell important or entertaining stories, but I 
can make only a fraction of them. We’ve got documentaries coming from Peru, 
Hong Kong, Sudan, Italy, Australia and more besides. Some are worrying, some 
are uplifting, some you won’t know how to feel about, but they’re all united by 
being stories that could be neglected if we didn’t cover them in depth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fgun-nation-us-guardian-documentary-film-zed-nelson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04d8d15485a30bea8327009a846a059813ce8698%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gun%20Nation%3A%20inside%20the%20US's%20deadly%20obsession&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fgun-nation-us-guardian-documentary-film-zed-nelson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gun%20Nation%3A%20inside%20the%20US%27s%20deadly%20obsession&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fgun-nation-us-guardian-documentary-film-zed-nelson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04d8d15485a30bea8327009a846a059813ce8698%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Gun Nation features unguarded interviews with Americans who use guns every day 
It feels important that the Guardian commits itself to these stories, because 
documentaries can pull attention to big issues and stories in a way other 
formats can’t.

A one-off documentary such as Blackfish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/jul/26/blackfish-video-review>, or 
a series likeNetflix’s Making a Murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/07/making-a-murderer-the-netflix-documentary-beating-tv-drama-at-its-own-game>
 shows that documentaries can prompt change and provoke debate on a huge scale.
The Act of Killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/14/act-of-killing-review>, for 
instance, brought the Indonesian genocide of the 1960s to an international 
audience who would otherwise remained ignorant, and did it while breaking the 
boundaries of what a documentary could look like.

I love documentary in its ever-evolving shapes, and I think I’m not the only 
one. Online audiences, particularly younger ones, are watching documentaries 
that stimulate political thought and action. And the ethos of the documentary 
industry has a lot in common with the principles of the Guardian – a commitment 
to truth, a commitment to rigorous research, a commitment to independence.


I hope you enjoy our new documentaries as they are lunched on the website in 
the next year. And I hope also that you will suggest the stories, people and 
places we should look to for our next commissions.
 