
As H&M’s website crashed this morning under demand from its collaboration with 
Kenzo, virtual shoppers would have been better off heading to the brand’s 
flagship store in London’s Oxford Circus. An efficient wristband system meant 
that the hundreds waiting in line were methodically herded into the shop at 
10-minute intervals, in a marked contrast to the stampede seen last year at the 
launch of its collection with French fashion houseBalmain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/05/hm-balmain-designer-fashion-launch-scuffles-regent-street>
.

The cold didn’t stop some keen fashionistas and self-proclaimed “hype-beasts” 
from camping out all night to have first dibs on the annual designer 
collaboration items. TheKenzo collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/oct/20/kenzo-x-hm-what-to-buy-from-the-new-collaboration-in-pictures>
, which has been supported by Lupita Nyong’o, Chloë Sevigny and Chance the 
Rapper, includes a range of colourful, gaudy prints, accessories, bomber 
jackets, petticoat dresses and off-the-shoulder tops. It also includes Kenzo’s 
classic logo sweatshirts; with prices starting from £7.99 and going up to 
£299.99.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0fe51f4e48c06274bf1e5bea023644c0ebc5449%2F643_0_3085_3024%2F3085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=H%26M's%20Kenzo%20launch%20causes%20website%20to%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=H%26M%27s%20Kenzo%20launch%20causes%20website%20to%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0fe51f4e48c06274bf1e5bea023644c0ebc5449%2F643_0_3085_3024%2F3085.jpg>
 Yves Alawe with his Kenzo X H&M purchase. Photograph: Charlie Brinkhurstcuff 
Adam, 25, a stylist, was first in line at the store before it opened at 9am, 
and had flown in from Milan for the launch. Arriving at 8.30pm the night 
before, he said that the queue was like “my little pony” compared to “Balmania” 
last year but that the experience, which saw him spend £4,500, had been 
“intense”.

“I like Kenzo because it’s fun and contemporary; it’s part of pop culture 
now,” he said. “I have their main line and it will be interesting to see what 
the reception is here, because the brand is quite affordable anyway – this is 
even more affordable.”

Nineteen-year-old LSE student Ben Johnson had arrived at the store at 11.30pm 
the night before to buy a faux-leather, pink fluffy jacket for his girlfriend 
because “she really bloody loves pink”. Meanwhile, 27-year-old Tom Dunn had 
arrived slightly later in the morning at 6.30am, but was also queuing to buy 
clothing for his girlfriend and a few friends.

“I work in advertising and was honest about why I was taking the time off,” he 
laughed. “It was so mad in there; I tried to grab as much stuff as I could. I 
was a bit panicky, as I’d heard about Balmain last year.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc296e5895c4c82ba79b1c5e4e754163613e90af7%2F0_0_3184_4791%2F3184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=H%26M's%20Kenzo%20launch%20causes%20website%20to%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=H%26M%27s%20Kenzo%20launch%20causes%20website%20to%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc296e5895c4c82ba79b1c5e4e754163613e90af7%2F0_0_3184_4791%2F3184.jpg>
 A customer races to get the limited edition clothes. Photograph: Ray 
Tang/REX/Shutterstock 
Japanese designer Kenzo Takada launched his eponymous brand in 1970, and it 
found particular popularity in the 1980s with its “ethnic” inspired patterns 
and bright colours, but saw a decline in the nineties as fashions changed.

In 1999 Takada stepped down, and by 2011 creative directors Carol Lim and 
Humberto Leon, founders of Open Ceremony boutiques, were installed and brought 
the brand back to life with a modern take on Takada’s original style.

Shoppers, who ranged from students to grandmothers, seemed chilly but happy 
with their purchases, with many spending in the region of £400. Yves Alawe, 20, 
a fashion designer, said he had budgeted £1,000 for the collection, but after 
seeing the colour scheme went down to £600. “The jackets are nice but the 
colours are a bit much,” he said, adding that he believed most of the people 
who had queued in the morning were “resellers”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba6027b045f85200694a0121ef002c482ed028e0%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=H%26M's%20Kenzo%20launch%20causes%20website%20to%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=H%26M%27s%20Kenzo%20launch%20causes%20website%20to%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhms-kenzo-launch-causes-website-to-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba6027b045f85200694a0121ef002c482ed028e0%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
 Chance the Rapper at the Kenzo X H&M launch directed by Jean-Paul Goude. 
Photograph: Neilson Barnard/Getty Images for H&M 
On the other hand, Red Palulu, 46, who was dressed in a handmade pink 
dashiki-style dress and said that she had never queued for a collection of 
clothing before, said she had been enticed by the bright shades of blue, pink 
and green.

“I’m going to get a dress, a jacket and a pair of trousers,” she said before 
heading into the store. “I was looking through and I thought: ‘This combination 
will be alook.’ I like to make my own clothes so I wanted to buy stuff that I 
could mix and match with. I just want to go out clubbing wearing fantastic 
creations.”

H&M said their most popular Kenzo items in the UK so far had been the logo 
jumpers, the pinafore dress for women and the leather bomber jacket for men.

“Demand has surpassed all expectations,” said a spokesperson, “The response 
has been incredibly positive, and we are proud and delighted to have achieved 
yet another successful designer collaboration, proving once again that design 
and quality are not a matter of price.”
 