
Half a million people over the age of 60 usually spend each day alone, with no 
interaction with others, and nearly half a million more commonly do not see or 
speak to anyone for five or six days a week, a poll suggests.

Age UK, which commissioned the research, said the results highlighted a 
growing number of chronically lonely older people, which was placing increasing 
demand on health services.

The charity has been running a pilot programme in eight areas where Age UK 
groups have been actively trying to identify lonely older people and offer them 
companionship.

Caroline Abrahams, Age UK’s charity director, said: “This new analysis shows 
that about a million older people in our country are profoundly alone, many of 
whom are likely to be enduringthe pain and suffering of loneliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/14/age-of-loneliness-killing-us>
.

Jo Cox's campaign to tackle loneliness lives on with help of friends
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/jo-coxs-campaign-to-tackle-loneliness-lives-on-with-help-of-friends>
“That’s why the early results of our pilot programme into tackling loneliness 
in later life are so important: nine in 10 older people who were often lonely 
when they started the programme were less lonely six to 12 weeks later, with 
many also saying they felt generally happier, more confident and more 
independent as a result.

 “Unfortunately, there is no simple solution for loneliness, but our pilot 
programme shows we really can make a difference and provides crucial insights 
into how the problem can be successfully overcome.”

The Age UK groups worked with local people such as hairdressers, shopkeepers 
and faith groups to help identify older people experiencing or at risk of 
loneliness.

They developed networks with professionals in voluntary and statutory 
services, such as GPs, practice and community nurses, social workers and police 
community support officers. Age UK has also developed aloneliness heat-mapping 
tool 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/professional-resources-home/research/loneliness-maps/>
, which assesses risk factors such as age, marital status and number of 
household members.

Loneliness is a hazard of old age. A phone call can mean a lot | Michele Hanson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/loneliness-old-people-age-uk-christmas>
People identified as lonely by Age UK groups were provided with telephone 
support and short-term, face-to-face companionship, with the aim of helping 
them reconnect with their communities.

Many were introduced to existing social groups, such as lunch clubs. Others 
were enabled to set up their own social networks, via introductions to people 
with similar interests, or via IT skills enhancement that allowed them to use 
Skype to stay in touch with friends and family.

“We dare to hope that our pilot programme contains the seeds of a new 
grassroots movement with the potential to transform lonely older people’s lives 
for the better,” Abrahams said.

 The results will feed into Age UK’s submissions to the commission on 
loneliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/jo-coxs-campaign-to-tackle-loneliness-lives-on-with-help-of-friends>
, devised by the Labour MP Jo Cox before she was murdered last year by the 
far-right terrorist Thomas Mair.


The research agency TNS polled UK residents aged over 60, asking them how many 
days a week they usually spent alone with no visits or telephone calls. Out of 
2,241 people, 498 said they spent seven days on their own and 464 said five or 
six days. The results were then extrapolated to reach the national figures.
 