
For fans of the BBC tea-time quiz Pointless, today’s episode will look as odd 
as tuning in to find Boris Johnson presenting Question Time with David Dimbleby 
as a panelist.


Since 2009, as the series has been progressively promoted, up to seven million 
regular viewers have seen Alexander Armstrong stand at a lectern to introduce 
guests, while Richard Osman sits at a desk, offering glosses on right and wrong 
answers.

But – to celebrate the 1,000th episode – at 5.15pm, a standing Osman will 
reveal his legs for the first time, while the seated Armstrong conceals his. 
Characteristically of a show in which the appeal is the gently teasing banter 
between the two presenters, no direct mention is made of the job-swap, except 
for Osman wondering aloud whether they shouldn’t have done something special to 
mark the occasion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhappy-anniversary-pointless-the-unusual-pleasure-of-hit-tv-quiz-show-alexander-armstrong-richard-osman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ba1152126d654a2af965014827d799241fa713%2F0_0_1400_2027%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Happy%20anniversary%2C%20Pointless!%20The%20unusual%20pleasure%20of%20the%20hit%20TV%20quiz%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhappy-anniversary-pointless-the-unusual-pleasure-of-hit-tv-quiz-show-alexander-armstrong-richard-osman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Happy%20anniversary%2C%20Pointless%21%20The%20unusual%20pleasure%20of%20the%20hit%20TV%20quiz%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fhappy-anniversary-pointless-the-unusual-pleasure-of-hit-tv-quiz-show-alexander-armstrong-richard-osman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ba1152126d654a2af965014827d799241fa713%2F0_0_1400_2027%2F1400.jpg>
 ‘Nothing but a pleasure’ … Richard Osman pays his co-host the ultimate 
compliment. Photograph: Mark Yeoman/BBC/Remarkable, part of Endemol Shine Group 
At first, the reverse image is as disconcerting as seeing a ventriloquist’s 
dummy with its hand up the bum of a human operator. And, touchingly, despite 
having watched the other man do the reverse job 999 times, each requires 
occasional prompting over what comes next.

It’s appropriate that for the candle-blowing show, Pointless should offer a 
counter-intuitive image, as its format depends on flipping the logic that rules 
most quiz shows. Competitors must try and score as few points as possible by 
predicting the answer that the smallest number among 100 members of the public 
will give to a particular question.

Tonight’s rounds, fittingly, are all anniversary-themed. So, in one relating 
to the use of the word “thousand” in popular culture, contestants – all 
significant former winners – have to gamble whether fewer people will be 
familiar with a classic modern American novel than with a popular salad 
dressing, although, in order to make the bet, they would need to know the name 
of the book.

Armstrong and Osman have stressed, though, that their adoption of a new 
position in the Kama Sutra of TV quiz-show hosting will be a one-off. That 
seems sensible – because much of the pleasure of Pointless is in its 
repetition, with the co-hosts saying much the same things at much the same time 
every day.

Beyond that, the unusual popularity of Pointless (not many programmes reach 
this landmark) can be attributed to its unusual combination of intelligence and 
gentleness. The questions offer a genuine intellectual work-out: the 
calculation between how much you know and how little you think others might is 
like trying to do a crossword with the wrong hand, always having to suppress 
your natural instincts.

Yet, although the questions can be as challenging as on Mastermind or 
University Challenge, the presentational style is crucially always more vets’ 
receptionist than dentist’s chair. Although we suspect that Osman would know 
all the answers without the flatscreen or cue-cards before him, he is never 
cruel to the blank-minded, while Armstrong has such perfect manners that even 
the most abjectly failing contestants sound as if they are being congratulated.

Typically, Osman finishes tonight by telling Armstrong that their thousand 
collaborations have been “nothing but a pleasure”, a compliment his co-host 
elegantly returns. Although it celebrates tonight by trying something 
different, the strength of Pointless has always come from sticking to a 
brilliantly designed template.
 