
European leaders and industry chiefs welcomed the clarity brought by Theresa 
May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
, but said the course she had chosen would hurt Britain more than the remaining 
EU member states.

Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, summed up the bloc’s 
official reaction in a tweet: “Sad process, surrealistic times, but at least 
more realistic announcement on Brexit. EU27 united and ready to negotiate after 
article 50.”

Less officially, Volker Treier, of the German chamber of industry and 
commerce, made it clear that Britain’s departure from the single market and 
customs union would do substantial damage to business ties between the UK and 
Germany.

Theresa May Brexit speech's shows UK getting 'more realistic', says Tusk - 
Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>
“Without a doubt a hard Brexit limits chances of growth on both sides of the 
Channel. But for Britain the economic damage is likely to be greater,” Treier 
said, adding that the UK had chosen to “lower its economic attractiveness”.

Many on the continent were also sceptical about the prime minister’s ability 
to follow through on her promise for the UK to be “a great, global trading 
nation”. The French centre-right MEP Alain Lamassoure said Britain had chosen 
to sink itself.

He said: “It’s clear the interest for the British is 500 million customers in 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, not just 65 million in 
Britain. When May comes to negotiating with a country like China, she can only 
offer 65 million British customers. It’s a kind of economic and business 
suicide.”

An Italian government official said he doubted the UK could be as strong 
outside the EU as it was within it. “Good luck on being a ‘global Britain’,” he 
said.


Guy Verhofstadt, the chief Brexit negotiator for the European parliament, 
accused May of pursuing tactics that would “hurt British people”.
Guy Verhofstadt (@GuyVerhofstadt) 
Threatening to turn the UK into a deregulated tax heaven will not only hurt 
British people—it is a counterproductive negotiating tactic
 <https://twitter.com/GuyVerhofstadt/status/821420516158435328> January 17, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/GuyVerhofstadt/status/821420516158435328> Guy 
Verhofstadt (@GuyVerhofstadt) 
May must take the concerns of the 48% on board. The current lack of clarity 
for UK citizens in the UK & vice versa is disrupting many lives
 <https://twitter.com/GuyVerhofstadt/status/821420744961916929> January 17, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/GuyVerhofstadt/status/821420744961916929> 
In her speech May said she did not believe Europe would harm “German 
exporters, French farmers and Spanish fishermen” in an attempt to hit Britain 
with a punitive deal.

In Spain, however, Javier Garat, the president of Europêche, which represents 
80,000 fisheries workers across the EU, said a mutually agreeable deal was the 
preferred option, but British workers stood to lose far more than their 
continental rivals if things turned ugly.

“When it comes to exports, 68% of all the UK’s fish products are exported to 
the EU, much of that to Spain,” he said. “If anyone’s going to lose out in the 
market it would be the UK, not Spain.”

Thomas Prouza, the Czech Europe minister, said on Twitter May’s wishlist 
looked “a bit ambitious”, adding: “Trade as free as possible, full control on 
immigration … where is the give for all the take?”

Speaking to the Guardian, he criticised her address as a “domestic policy 
speech” that declared “what Britain could take from the table” without 
explaining what it would bring in return.

“On the one hand, she wants to be part of the customs union but at the same 
time she will want the UK to have its own trade policies towards other 
countries,” he said. “That’s one thing that is going to be hard to square. She 
has also not spelled out in sufficient detail how she wants to address the 
rights of all those citizens currently living in the UK and what agreement 
could be struck to guarantee the British citizens living in EU countries.

“I expected more details about the status of people living and working in 
Britain and currently paying taxes. Still very fresh in our memory is the 
proposal ... a few months ago about British companies publishing lists of 
foreigners they employ. People are worried not only about physical attacks but 
about the threats to their jobs. This current atmosphere is really damaging.”

Our panel’s verdict on Theresa May’s Brexit speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-prime-minister-britain>
Several commentators and organisations said their – and the EU’s – top 
priority must now be to protect the single market. “The EU has to show a united 
front,” said Dieter Kempf, the president of the federation of German industry 
(BDI).

“There can only be one motto for politics in Brussels and Berlin during the 
Brexit negotiations, to keep together and strengthen Europe. The four basic 
freedoms are immovable. There must not be borders for goods, services, capital 
and workers.”

EU institutions have resolutely refused to negotiate until the UK government 
triggersarticle 50 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50>. 
Jean-Claude Juncker, the European commission president, who had been briefed on 
the speech, was due to speak to May later on Tuesday.

EU ministers were generally diplomatic and positive. Germany’s foreign 
minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, welcomed “a bit more clarity” and the fact 
Britain was seeking “a constructive partnership, a friendship, with a strong 
EU. That is good.”

Sandro Gozi <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sandro-gozi>, Italy’s 
undersecretary for European affairs, was also pleased that May had at last 
confirmed what many had long suspected. “It is now finally clear what they 
want. They want to leave for good and they want a full Brexit.”

Gozi told BBC’s Newsnight on Tuesday night: “What I found rather odd about 
Theresa May’s speech is that she says that the UK shouldn’t be half in half 
out, after all the UK has always been half in half out in theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. We have given to Brits so many 
exceptions since you joined the economic community in 1973.”

Poland’s minister for European affairs, Konrad Szymański, welcomed May’s 
indication that securing a deal on therights of EU citizens in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2017/jan/16/the-rights-of-eu-citizens-in-the-uk-brexit-podcast>
 – and British citizens in the EU – was “the right and fair thing to do”.

He also told May that Poland would insist that any plans to control 
immigration to the UK “must be proportionate and ensure fair treatment of all 
EU citizens, regardless of their professional profiles”.

The Irish government welcomed May’s commitment to maintaining the pre-EU 
common travel area between Britain and Ireland, and her promise that there 
would be no hard border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic.

Several politicians and commentators on the continent were critical of aspects 
of the speech, particularly the perceived threat to turn Britaininto a tax haven
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/philip-hammond-suggests-uk-outside-single-market-could-become-tax-haven>
 if it were to be shut off from the single market.


Philippe Lamberts, the co-chair of the Greens-European Free Alliance 
<http://www.greens-efa.eu/en/> group in the European parliament, described the 
speech as a slap in the face for anyone who hoped a future UK-EU relationship 
would be about more than just economic cooperation.

The French liberal MEP Sylvie Goulard welcomed May’s generally friendlier 
rhetoric toward Europe, but said the prime minister’s threat to turn Britain 
into a low-tax island amounted to blackmail.

She pointed out that May’s speech also contained no direct reference to the 
€60bn (£51bn) Brexit bill being prepared by the EU Brexit negotiator, Michel 
Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/eus-chief-divorce-negotiator-michel-barnier-to-make-first-brexit-statement>
. “This is her version of what a good deal would look like, and there is still 
a lot of work to do,” Goulard said.

“Blackmailing partners is never a good thing,” she added, saying that the 
whole issue of tax was “very worrying. As far as I know, the UK is a member of 
the OECD and is committed … not to encourage tax avoidance.”

Key points from May's Brexit speech: what have we learned?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
The implied threat led one diplomat present at Lancaster House to say: “If you 
are willing to sell your soul, make sure that you have something to sell.”

Another said the framework of the speech was a “bit of a strange mixed bag”. 
“The prime minister said she shared our values, but then there was a not very 
implied threat to be a tax haven, trying to drive down conditions across 
Europe,” they said.

Jean-Claude Piris, a former head of the European council’s legal service, said 
the speech contained no big surprises except the proposal for “a bizarre 
customs union” with the EU, which he said would not be allowed under the World 
Trade Organisation’s GATT accord.


“Otherwise she is asking for the moon, which is normal at the start of 
negotiations,” Piris said. May said in her speech she wanted a completely new 
customs agreement but had an open mind about how to work this out.

Other commentators, such as the former Swedish prime minister Carl Bildt, saw 
the speech simply as a retreat from Europe. He said on Twitter that Britain 
seemed to be seeking something slightly less than Ukraine’s free trade 
agreement with the EU.

“I regret the approach the UK government has taken,” he said. “I think most of 
the EU would have preferred a closer relationship with the UK.”

Additional reporting by Stephanie Kirchgaessner in Rome, Sam Jones in Madrid, 
Jennifer Rankin in Brussels, Patrick Wintour in London, Christian Davies in 
Warsaw and Henry McDonald in Dublin
 