
Henrik Stenson believes the physicality of swings as used by Rory McIlroy and 
Jason Day inevitably play a part in injuries.The Open champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/henrik-stenson-phil-mickelson-open>
 has warned emerging players of the need to prepare their bodies for the strain 
caused by modern techniques.

Rory McIlroy’s rib injury – is it really as big a deal as everyone seems to 
think? | Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/18/rory-mcilroy-rib-injury-masters>
McIlroy had to miss the Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/18/rory-mcilroy-rib-injury-masters>
 after suffering a stress fracture to a rib. Stenson has incurred a series of 
injuries in the recent past as have Day, the world No1, and Justin Rose. With 
Tiger Woods attempting his latest comeback from back trouble there is a rising 
sense that players are putting more pressure on their health.

“You see how hard Jason and Rory go after it,” Stenson said. “Not that I 
necessarily just pat it myself but they really go after it and that’s going to 
put a lot of pressure on knees, back and neck, and so on. You’ve got to watch 
it.

“The advice I would give to the next generation is make sure you work hard 
from the beginning on your fitness. A lot of guys do, not everyone; it doesn’t 
show up normally when you’re 20 or 25. It comes at a later stage. That’s when 
you’re paying for the wear and tear and a very one-sided motion that we do.

“If you’ve got more injuries now, possibly a little bit more because of the 
way everyone tries to hit it and get it a far distance off the tee, that’s 
going to give you the chances of being injured a little bit more.”

This is not an isolated view. The five-times major winner Phil Mickelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-mickelson> has expressed similar 
concerns. “You can play for a lifetime and injury-free if you swing the club 
like Bobby Jones did, where it’s a swinging motion rather than a violent 
movement,” he said. “A lot of the young guys continue to get hurt as they 
create this violent connected movement and I don’t believe that that’s the 
proper way to swing the club.

“Hopefully, kids will swing the club with less of a violent body movement and 
be able to play for a lifetime.”

Stenson, in the desert for his first start of 2017, admitted to fatigue after 
stopping off in Stockholm en route from his Florida home. There, the 
40-year-old pipped Zlatan Ibrahimovic to be named Sweden’s male athlete of 
2016. “I had some pretty good competition,” he said with a smile.

Ryder Cup qualifying set to get wildcard shakeup from Thomas Bjorn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/thomas-bjorn-ryder-cup-2018-europe>
Stenson was among those to praise the European Tour for fresh regulations 
relating to Ryder Cup qualification. The changes, as laid out by Europe’s 
captain, Thomas Bjorn, on Wednesday,include four wildcard options for 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/thomas-bjorn-ryder-cup-2018-europe>
 plus enhanced qualifying points for tournaments towards the end of the 
automatic process. Players need to play four regular European Tour events to 
retain membership status and thereby be eligible for the Ryder Cup.

“I gave my input,” Stenson said. “We came to a good system and it gives enough 
room for movement with an extra pick for Thomas. Weighing the qualification 
points a little heavier towards the end to get players that are in form to pick 
up some extra points toward the end is also good.

“The ask of being a member is not that hard. If you can’t make the effort to 
play four tournaments, then you’re not really that interested in being part of 
that team.”

In what represents the top group for play on Thursday and Friday, Stenson will 
have Dustin Johnson and Danny Willett for company. Willett, who confirmed he 
will take up his PGA Tour card for this season, is seeking a fresh start after 
the poor form and dismal Ryder Cup experience that followedhis Masters triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-masterrs-2016-jordan-spieth-lee-westood>
 last April.

“It was nice to put the clubs away for a few weeks after what was the best 
year of my career but also one with a few lows,” he said. “We needed an 
in-depth look at what was good and bad, then map out what we wanted to do this 
year.”
 