
Back when he used to bore in on opponents and pummel them into submission his 
fans called him “Hammering Henry”, “the Miniature Freight Car” and “the 
Hustling Hebrew”. At 68 years of age, Henry Nissen is still hustling, still 
hammering away. He has to. Only now the streets are his arena and, while 
Melburnians need his help, Nissen feels compelled to give it.

 Thirty-five years as a social worker caring for Melbourne’s most vulnerable 
have left Nissen with an Order of Australia and plenty of esteem in the local 
community. Yet for that work and his glittering athletic career, he is perhaps 
not feted with the lasting acclaim that might have come were it football or 
cricket and not boxing at which he’d excelled. In Melbourne’s close-knit 
pugilist fraternity he is an adored and revered hall of famer and his family 
name is the stuff of legend.

“I was always happiest when I was helping people rather than bashing them,” 
Nissen says with a hearty laugh when he talks to Guardian Australia of his 
years serving the local community. “I figured that was the way to go.”

Away Days: boxer Joseph Parker's Rumble in Paradise thrills Samoa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/01/away-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa>
 In the 1970s the Australian flyweight champion regularly dazzled crowds and 
looked well set for a world title fight. He and his identical twin, Leon, were 
household names back then – the pint-sized Jewish-Australian scrappers who had 
ducked into Mick and Peter Read’s back alley gym as scrawny, 14-year-old 
neighbourhood easybeats from postwar Carlton in Melbourne’s north and strode 
confidently back out on to the streets as sporting champions.

“Dad, come quickly,” Peter Read had said the first time Leon followed his 
brother down for some self-defence training to counter the local louts who 
picked on him. “There’s two of them!”

Nothing came easy. “We always struggled to have things,” Nissen once said, 
“and it was difficult for my parents to cope with everything.” The strain of 
five children, several miscarriages and the horrors of war weighed heavily on 
Nissen’s mother, Sonia, periodically institutionalised for most of her life 
after the family emigrated to Australia.

Back then, as father, Simche, worked day and night as a machinist, the Nissen 
brood moved constantly between the family home on Amess Street in Carlton, 
various children’s homes and foster care, where they might be separated from 
their parents for up to six months at a time. “I’m thinking, ‘I’m a Jewish boy 
living with a Methodist priest. What am I doing?’’ Leon Nissen says of their 
disjointed family life. “It threw me around a bit. But that made us the people 
we are today: loving, caring and willing to help others.”

 To that end 2016 has been something of a renaissance for the Nissens after 
the publication of The Fighter, Arnold Zable’s moving work of creative 
nonfiction, which traces the brothers from their birth as Henry and Leon 
Nissenbaum in the displaced-person’s camp outside the Bergen-Belsen 
concentration camp, through their arrival in Melbourne’s working-class inner 
north of the early 1950s and the horrors endured in the aftermath of the 
Holocaust by their mother.

Zable writes evocatively of “the rage that courses through the single-fronted 
cottage” and “the woman bereft, in terror of shadows and ghosts”, painting the 
picture of children heartbreakingly attuned to their mother’s fragile 
equilibrium, ever alert for the signs that family life is beginning to splinter 
and fray.

 Father Bob Maguire, with whom Nissen has worked for decades helping 
Melbourne’s most disadvantaged, has said his friend and longtime colleague can 
empathise with anyone down on their luck because he himself “knows the dark 
side” of life.

“We’ve had that broken family upbringing,” is how Henry puts it. “When things 
were good and we were all back at home when Mum got better, and we were all 
reunited and living as a normal family again, it was good. In the times when it 
wasn’t good it was terrible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhenry-nissen-from-boxing-hero-to-champion-of-melbournes-most-vulnerable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6fbdf1d66cc0ae9be237635b29e32026640c8e4%2F0_57_1024_602%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boxing%20hero%20Henry%20Nissen%20the%20people's%20champion%20in%20more%20ways%20than%20one%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhenry-nissen-from-boxing-hero-to-champion-of-melbournes-most-vulnerable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boxing%20hero%20Henry%20Nissen%20the%20people%27s%20champion%20in%20more%20ways%20than%20one%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhenry-nissen-from-boxing-hero-to-champion-of-melbournes-most-vulnerable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6fbdf1d66cc0ae9be237635b29e32026640c8e4%2F0_57_1024_602%2F1024.jpg>
 Henry (second from left) and Leon Nissen talk with fellow boxing champion Jeff 
Fenech (left) and former Victorian premier Ted Baillieu at the 2011 funeral of 
Lionel Rose. Photograph: Hamish Blair/Getty Images 
 Father Bob calls Henry “the people whisperer” and in that role he has worked 
for love not money, which stopped well over a decade ago when the meagre wage 
for his social worker role disappeared and Father Bob found him a job on the 
docks. Nissen remained until three months ago, happily pulling night shifts and 
doing dangerous physical labour for to subsidise his work on Melbourne’s 
streets, often within sight of Festival Hall, whose walls once rattled with the 
fight-night chant “Nissen! Nissen! Nissen!”.

Twenty years on, the wharves came with just as many risks as the fight game. 
Nissen once fell three metres between the wharf and the hull of a boat, 
crashing into the water and fracturing his shoulder. The foreman who bravely 
lowered a ladder into the water and pulled Nissen to safety was himself killed 
a year later – crushed between two containers before falling 30 metres head 
first on to a steel floor.

Now, at an age at which most of his contemporaries are settling into relaxed 
rounds of golf and idle hours of sudoku, Nissen pounds the pavement on his 
regular rounds, handing out meals and organising crisis accommodation. He 
reckons he’ll do it until the day he dies, continuing to make countless 
appearances in court, where he vouches for luckless and forgotten people, 
talking them into second chances from judges who know Henry like a colleague.

A life devoted to others hasn’t come without its costs. Leon Nissen, who 
speaks glowingly of his brother’s longtime role as Father Bob’s right-hand man 
(“Behind every good Catholic is a good Jewish man,” he says, laughing), adds 
that Henry’s own family has suffered most for his work.

“He’s helped the rest of the world but he couldn’t always help his own 
family,” Leon says. “That’s the sad part of it. His wife and kids grew up, not 
strangers, because he loves them very much and they love him, but he couldn’t 
devote enough attention to his family because he was helping the rest of the 
world. I used to say to him, ‘Henry, you don’t have to go looking for street 
kids, I’ve got two at home and I need you to chat to them.’”

All you can do is try and help and encourage people. You can’t force people to 
change their ways
Henry Nissen 
Once Leon “bollocked” his brother for neglecting family duties and Henry 
pointed immediately to a headline in that day’s newspaper – a young man who had 
overdosed after another crisis call to Henry hadn’t come through. For once he’d 
turned off his always-buzzing mobile phone. “Henry took it as a life-and-death 
situation through all of them and as a result he’s spent all of his life 
helping these people and giving them his all,” his brother says. “But it’s not 
easy.”

Leon now works in insurance. Though he is cut from the same cloth as his 
brother and they remain close, he says their paths since their boxing careers 
ended reflect the subtle differences in their character. “Henry is very 
tolerant,” Leon says. “I could never do what he does because I can’t forgive. I 
would put them all in jail and throw away the key, but that’s not the right 
way. You can’t always judge everyone the same.”

As athletic champions, the twins were chalk and cheese. Leon had ring craft. 
He was a true boxer. Henry was afighter. “Leon could move around better and 
box, whereas I just went in there to knock the hell out of them,” is how Henry 
puts it. “I finished the fight as quickly as I could. Leon was a much more 
skilful boxer, whereas I was more of a brutish type of fighter.”

 At the peak of their renown they concurrently held the Australian title for 
the flyweight division in both professional and amateur ranks, an unprecedented 
feat. “The Nissen family had a monopoly,” Henry says, laughing. On account of 
work commitments and a mutual reluctance to fight against or hurt his brother, 
Leon never turned professional – a truly selfless gesture and a poignant 
insight into the love and respect the brothers share.

“For years later I felt something lacking but eventually I got used to it,” 
Leon says with no hint of jealousy. “I would have loved to have continued but 
it wasn’t to be. I just took it as fate, respected that I’d retired and focused 
on watching Henry.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhenry-nissen-from-boxing-hero-to-champion-of-melbournes-most-vulnerable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20a20b15004757830923f6c4b2b613b40e21f4e6%2F4_18_1648_2108%2F1648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boxing%20hero%20Henry%20Nissen%20the%20people's%20champion%20in%20more%20ways%20than%20one%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhenry-nissen-from-boxing-hero-to-champion-of-melbournes-most-vulnerable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boxing%20hero%20Henry%20Nissen%20the%20people%27s%20champion%20in%20more%20ways%20than%20one%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhenry-nissen-from-boxing-hero-to-champion-of-melbournes-most-vulnerable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20a20b15004757830923f6c4b2b613b40e21f4e6%2F4_18_1648_2108%2F1648.jpg>
 Henry and Leon Nissen on the cover of Fighter magazine in June 1971 
 Rumours always lingered that the Nissens were fond of puling a switcheroo 
when it suited them, stepping in for one another in fights. “We won’t confirm 
or deny that one,” Henry says. “But our records aren’t exactly right because we 
didn’t always tell them what we were doing.”

 Henry’s greatest victory was taking the Commonwealth title off Scotland’s 
John McClusky, a belt he eventually lost himself to “Big Jim” West, whose 
number he felt he’d had. A slew of state and national titles came too, and for 
Leon, a Commonwealth Games appearance in 1970.

There were no truly individual wins. When Henry claimed gold at the 1969 
Maccabiah Games – the highlight of his amateur career – he did so raging 
against the treatment of his brother; Leon had been robbed by the judges in his 
semi-final so Henry came out swinging in his own fight, knocking out a taller, 
stronger opponent within two minutes in a flurry of angry blows. The gold medal 
bout was a walkover.

Henry’s great disappointment and regret is that he didn’t take a world title 
fight offered when he’d first cracked the top 10 in his division. He and the 
Reads – finally reaping some financial reward for the years of free training – 
thought he wasn’t quite ready. Two fights later he was ranked third in the 
world. Too great a risk to those above him, he couldn’t get a fight, so retired 
in 1974, disappointed but proud, with 16 wins from his 18 professional bouts.

The selfless work life that followed, Henry says, was the result of a simple 
but compelling need to give back. He sold his share of a burgeoning family 
empire (the Nissens had a chain of sportswear stores and Henry Nissen’s Jeans 
Joint outlets) before linking up with Father Bob. “There was a big void in my 
life and I thought, ‘What can I do now to fill that void’? I thought I’d spent 
so much time bashing people up that I’d like to try and help them and win back 
some good karma.

“All you can do is try and help and encourage people. You can’t force people 
to change their ways. I use friendship and encouragement and whatever I can to 
try and help them to change their ways. Unfortunately a lot of them die of drug 
overdoses and accidents. But there’s quite a few success stories too.”


 Henry reckons his childhood as a small, bewildered Jewish boy being moved in 
and out of houses of different faiths gave him a worldliness and respect for 
other people that helps in his work. It also sent him on a spiritual quest in 
life and an ongoing journey to understanding fellow human beings more fully. He 
has studied theology and spiritualism, visiting the Vatican and Jerusalem. He 
lived on a kibbutz in Israel, studied faith healers in the Philippines and sat 
at the feet of gurus in India. Out-of-body and near-death experiences have also 
influenced him greatly.

'Real-life Rocky' to sue over copycat film based on heavyweight contender's 
life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/23/real-life-rocky-chuck-wepner-to-sue-over-copycat-heavyweight-biopic>
 “Just having that broken family upbringing and having been brought up in 
different families – some Jewish, some Christian – whatever the home you were 
taken to, whatever the way it was being run, we just went along with it,” he 
says. “I guess it was a way of learning and becoming more cultural.” The care 
he gives others is simply an extension of his upbringing and the lessons he 
learned from boxing. “I know what it’s like to be down and out.”

Decades after they won headlines and filled TV news bulletins, Henry and Leon 
Nissen are still finishing each other’s sentences. “Becoming a boxing champion 
made me feel better in myself because I’d achieved something, and I’d never 
achieved anything beforehand,” Henry says at one point. Leon finishes with a 
quick thought of his own, like a reflexive jab: “And self-esteem.”

Asked how he wants people to remember him, Henry doesn’t linger on the answer. 
“Just as a kind, caring person,” he says, thinking back for a moment to all the 
people he’s helped in life and parting with a message on their behalf. “I’ve 
learned one thing: while there’s life there’s hope. We’ve got to keep them 
alive until we can help them to improve.”
 