
When Theresa May set out her vision for a “shared society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-tories-party-social-justice-speech>
” this week, there were plenty of slogans but there was minimal proposed 
action. If Britain is actually going to tackle the “everyday injustices” as May 
claimed, it’s going to take some real reform. Here are my six ideas for 
achieving a truly shared society.

NHS funding, not rhetoric

“It’s wrong to assume the only issue is about funding. The issue of mental 
health is more about the stigma,”May said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/we-will-reduce-stigma-mental-illness-theresa-may>
 in her speech. The prime minister’s emphasis on the stigma around mental 
health rather than, say, mental health patients travelling300 miles for a bed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-mental-health-pledges-cuts>
 was not merely a policy but a bid to redefine social justice. In a 
Conservative “shared society”, social justice is – somewhat conveniently – 
achieved by changing attitudes, not government spending. (I’m reminded of Iain 
Duncan Smith’sCentre for Social Justice 
<http://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/about/story> that claimed poverty was 
about “much more than the simple absence of money”.)

No improvements will be made until we have a culture shift that sees benefit 
claimants not as idle scroungers in need of discipline but as human beings who 
need help

Yes, the attitudes society holds matter, but at a time when the NHS is said to 
be in a “humanitarian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-denies-humanitarian-crisis-in-britains-nhs>
” rhetoric that “money isn’t that important” is outright dangerous. As one 
reader with mental health problems said to me: “I don’t care about dealing with 
stigma. I care about getting no treatment to make me well enough to fight.” A 
shared society will not be achieved by abstract solutions and false depictions 
of the key problems, but long-term, adequate health funding plans; from child 
and adolescent mental health services to social care for older and disabled 
people.

Ending food poverty 

In many ways, food banks are the epitome of the Tory line on a shared society: 
community action that conveniently requires nothing from the state. Indeed, 
much like with David Cameron’s“big society” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/20/the-big-society-civil-exchange-audit-shows-coalition-contempt-and-hypocrisy>
, it’s an action that actually sweeps up after the horrors the government is 
creating.

A genuinely shared society – one that respects “the responsibilities we have 
to each other,” as May said this week – would not accept a situation in which 
more than a million citizens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/15/reliance-food-banks-new-normal-trussell-trust-charity>
 need to turn tocharity to be able to eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/08/trussell-trust-to-deliver-more-emergency-food-parcels-than-ever-before>
. Instead, it would finally address the factorsproved time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2016/jul/22/no-money-for-over-a-month-how-benefit-delays-lead-to-hunger>
 aftertime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/benefit-sanctions-food-banks-oxford-university-study>
 to be forcing people there: benefit cuts; low wages; and primarily, benefit 
delays and sanctions.

‘Scrounger culture’

No improvements will be made to the “benefit bureaucracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/23/ken-loach-benefits-system-a-cruel-bureaucracy-cannes-win>
” until we have a culture shift that sees benefit claimants not as idle 
scroungers in need of discipline but as human beings who need help. This is 
surely central to any sort of shared society. After all, there’s no real 
division between people on benefits and so-called “hard workers”. The majority 
of new housing benefit claimants have a job, low-paid workers need top-up 
benefits, and disabled people or jobseekers pay tax or VAT.

A shared society would build a social security system that’s fit for purpose: 
stop handing out benefit sanctions when there’sno evidence they work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/no-evidence-welfare-sanctions-work-says-national-audit-office>
, endUniversal Credit’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/26/universal-credit-the-essential-guide>
 rule that leaves families automatically left to copewithout benefits for six 
weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/universal-credit-first-payment-delay-christmas>
, and eradicate the up to year-longdelays for disability benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/pip-disaster-disabled-access-report-benefits>
.

Income inequality

No society can be “shared” when its wealth is put in the hands of the few. 
Despite news of agradual decline in income inequality 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfinances/incomeandwealth/bulletins/householddisposableincomeandinequality/financialyearending2016>
, Britain is stillone of the most unequal nations in the developed world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/oxfam-calls-on-theresa-may-to-tackle-rising-uk-inequality>
. While FTSE 100 CEOs take home130 times more than their staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-maximum-pay-panel>
 (and the myth prevails that even the best boss can be more than 100 times as 
productive as an employee), workers now routinely earn too little to pay the 
rent.

Jeremy Corbyn’s proposal of a maximum wage this week may have been muddled in 
delivery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-calls-for-maximum-wage-law>
 – and not withoutpractical problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyns-morning-interviews-politics-live>
 – but the bones of the idea were bang on:Britain’s inequality needs tackling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/inequality-world-economy-wef-brexit-donald-trump-world-economic-forum-risk-report?platform=hootsuite>
. Whether it’s through a cap on wages, or other moves such ascharging capital 
gains at income tax rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyns-morning-interviews-politics-live?page=with:block-5874becee4b0f10ba20b6a92#block-5874becee4b0f10ba20b6a92>
, a more equal society would be better for almost all of us. Reducing income 
inequality tends to lead toimproved social mobility 
<https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/social-mobility-and-education>, higher levels 
ofhappiness and civic participation 
<https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/trust-participation-attitudes-and-happiness>, 
andbetter health <https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/health>.

Funding domestic violence services

There are few worse “everyday injustices” than how many women aren’t safe in 
their owns homes in this country – or the fact that the government iscutting 
the services needed to help them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/17/domestic-violence-protesters-sisters-uncut-direct-action>
. An estimated1.8 million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/one-in-10-crimes-recorded-by-police-are-domestic-abuse-cases-ons>
 – predominantly women – were victims of domestic abuse in the year to March 
2016, while men have killed more than 900 women in England and Wales since 2009 
(most killed by current or former partners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/men-killed-900-women-six-years-england-wales-figures-show>
).

May announced a welcome £20m funding boost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/theresa-may-approves-20m-fund-womens-refuges-new-guidance-council-accomodate-domestic-violence>
 for women’s refuges at the end of last year. But it’s not enough. Charities 
such asRefuge <http://www.refuge.org.uk/> have suffered funding cuts to 80% of 
their services since 2011, while30% cuts to Ministry of Justice expenditure 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/tools_and_resources/fiscal_facts/public_spending_survey/cuts_to_public_spending>
 have impacted on legal aid, so that we’re seeing abuserscross-examine their 
victims in family courts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/the-guardian-view-on-family-courts-cuts-hurt>
. A country that’s serious about tackling domestic abuse and sexual violence 
would invest in sustainable, long-term funding.

Support when disabled or sick

The political rhetoric of the past six years has done its best to vilify 
British belief in a decent safety net for disabled or chronically ill citizens. 
That, in fact, is the true definition of a shared society: if I’m healthy and 
earning a good wage, my tax is being used to support those who aren’t as lucky. 
In turn, I get the security of knowing that if one day I become sick – cancer, 
multiple sclerosis or depression can, after all, hit any of us – that safety 
net will be there for me and my family.

Fighting back is possible. At the end of a bleak year, here are my winners | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/fighting-back-against-system-hard-possible>
As tough as it is in the face of constant stories that the welfare bill is out 
of control, a society that shares the “responsibility” and “bonds” that May 
spoke about this week would increase some benefits, rather than cut them. As we 
begin a conversation about inequality in income – and the low wages many 
workers live on – a shared society should also think about the disabled people 
too ill to earn a wage. Living off around£100 a week sickness benefits 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/benefits/sick-or-disabled-people-and-carers/employment-and-support-allowance/before-you-apply-for-esa/esa-how-much-you-can-get/>
 for a few months is tough. To have to do that for years – or be a family carer 
on the£60 a week the state pays 
<https://www.carersuk.org/help-and-advice/financial-support/help-with-benefits/carers-allowance>
 – is simply cruel.

To pay for it, the government could look at the £500m that it’s handed private 
firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/27/private-firms-500m-governments-fit-to-work-scheme>
 running the “fit for work” tests. Whatever May claims, a shared society needs 
a government able and willing to inject money where it’s actually needed.
 