
Over the past 10 years, Lizzie Nunnery has pursued an unusual dual career, 
both as a playwright and as a singer-songwriter on the folk circuit. Or perhaps 
that’s not so unusual, given that she comes from Liverpool. “I grew up going to
the Everyman <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/everyman-theatre>, where new 
plays were always packed with songs,” she says. “They wouldn’t be billed as 
musicals, though – it was just expected that there would be singing in them. 
I’ve always been inspired by somethingWilly Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/willyrussell> said: when he gets an idea, 
he never knows if it’s going to turn into a scene or a song. The best ones find 
their way into both.”

Nunnery’s debut play, Intemperance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/sep/28/theatre>, was an extraordinarily 
accomplished drama about Liverpool’s Irish-Scandinavian underclass, written in 
the dark, moralistic fashion of her literary hero, Henrik Ibsen. It appeared at 
the Everyman in 2007 when Nunnery was 25, shortly before her first album 
Company of Ghosts made it to Radio 2’s folk records of the year. But it has 
taken a while for both halves of Nunnery’s creativity to fuse – and the result 
isNarvik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/11/narvik-review-liverpool-playhouse-lizzie-nunnery>
, a folk drama inspired by Nunnery’s grandfather, a naval radio operator who 
sailed with the north Atlantic convoys during the second world war.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F843d0bae3d3a810be11a9121f94e00d1eebf0639%2F0_0_1876_1672%2F1876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horror%20on%20the%20arctic%20seas%3A%20Lizzie%20Nunnery%20on%20her%20play%20about%20the%20liberation%20of%20Narvik&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horror%20on%20the%20arctic%20seas%3A%20Lizzie%20Nunnery%20on%20her%20play%20about%20the%20liberation%20of%20Narvik&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F843d0bae3d3a810be11a9121f94e00d1eebf0639%2F0_0_1876_1672%2F1876.jpg>
 Soundscapes … Lizzie Nunnery singing with husband Vidar Norheim 
“It’s a play I had always wanted to write, but its form kept eluding me,” 
Nunnery says. “The story of Norway’s occupation is so complex: I had to find a 
way of representing English, German, Norwegian and Russian voices all at the 
same time.”


It was the soundscape, developed with her Norwegian husband and regular 
musical collaboratorVidar Norheim <http://www.nunnerynorheim.com>, that 
provided the key. For Narvik’s first run, presented byBox of Tricks 
<http://boxoftrickstheatre.co.uk/production/narvik-2017/> at Liverpool 
Playhouse in 2015, Nunnery’s skein of contemporary sea shanties was 
electronically enhanced by Norheim and an onstage band. “That really unlocked 
my grandfather’s experiences for me,” Nunnery says. “As a wireless operator, 
his life was all about listening – and I wanted the play to express the enigma 
of the radio room, the sounds of sonar signals, coded instructions and 
fragments of intercepted transmissions.”


Winston Churchill identified the Arctic port of Narvik 
<http://www.visitnarvik.com/Home> as vital in order to blockade the Nazi war 
effort. The two battles fought for the town in April 1940 were among the first 
Allied successes of the war. Even so, it’s a theatre of conflict that has 
received little attention in drama and literature. “The fighting was vicious,” 
Nunnery says, “at times practically hand-to-hand. Yet there was a code of 
honour in which neither side left enemy sailors to drown.”

Perhaps the most harrowing revelation is that the heaviest British losses were 
self-inflicted. “If a ship took a direct hit, it was procedure to close the 
hatches even if there were still men on the lower decks,” Nunnery says, this 
being the only way to save the ship. “My grandfather only spoke of this once, 
but he told me how he had to follow orders, ignoring the screams of drowning 
men below.”


Nunnery’s grandfather died in 2015 at the age of 91, just missing being able 
to see the work he inspired. “But he was immensely proud of the fact that he 
was among the flotilla that returned the Norwegian royal family to Oslo after 
the war,” Nunnery says.


Having married Norheim five years ago, Nunnery now has a half-Norwegian son, 
named Henrik after her idol. “When I went over to Oslo to meet Vidar’s family, 
the first thing I wanted to do was to visit Ibsen’s apartment. I touched his 
writing desk. I think I was hoping to pick up the vibrations.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedd800d9574b5538b2b38af670cea1521baed13d%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horror%20on%20the%20arctic%20seas%3A%20Lizzie%20Nunnery%20on%20her%20play%20about%20the%20liberation%20of%20Narvik&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horror%20on%20the%20arctic%20seas%3A%20Lizzie%20Nunnery%20on%20her%20play%20about%20the%20liberation%20of%20Narvik&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedd800d9574b5538b2b38af670cea1521baed13d%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘Its form kept eluding me’ … Lizzie Nunnery’s play with songs, Narvik. 
Photograph: Alex Mead/Decoy Media 
Something must have stirred as, in addition to Narvik, Nunnery has three other 
projects coming to fruition this year. In April, she presentsThe People Are 
Singing 
<https://www.royalexchange.co.uk/whats-on-and-tickets/the-people-are-singing> 
at the Royal Exchange in Manchester. This is a collaboration with Ukrainian 
director Tamara Trunova for which she travelled to Kiev to meet people who had 
participated in the Maidan protests of February 2014. “I suppose I’m drawn to 
stories of occupation and resilience,” Nunnery says, “though most of the 
Ukrainians I spoke to are tired of being portrayed as victims. I hope it will 
be received as an optimistic piece.”


Later in the summer Nunnery, Norheim and fellow musician Martin Heslop will be 
stagingHorny Handed Tons of Soil 
<https://www.unitytheatreliverpool.co.uk/whats-on/hornyhanded-tons-of-soil.html>
 at Liverpool’s Unity theatre – a film and music event inspired by the poetry 
of Adrian Henri to mark the 50th anniversary of the publication ofThe Mersey 
Sound anthology <https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/41393/the-mersey-sound/>. “The 
Liverpool poets were another huge influence on me,” Nunnery says. “Adrian Henri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/dec/22/guardianobituaries.books>’s house 
was round the corner from where I now live in Toxteth. The show is about how 
the area has always been left for dead, but keeps springing back to life.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3eda909c72054aecafcb3473c4ca4d72d22d971%2F0_485_3160_1896%2F3160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horror%20on%20the%20arctic%20seas%3A%20Lizzie%20Nunnery%20on%20her%20play%20about%20the%20liberation%20of%20Narvik&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horror%20on%20the%20arctic%20seas%3A%20Lizzie%20Nunnery%20on%20her%20play%20about%20the%20liberation%20of%20Narvik&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Flizzie-nunnery-interview-playwright-liverpool-everyman-narvik%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3eda909c72054aecafcb3473c4ca4d72d22d971%2F0_485_3160_1896%2F3160.jpg>
 Hostile waters … ships in the Atlantic during the second world war Photograph: 
Corbis via Getty 
When it was announced that the Everyman would be establishing its first 
permanent acting company since the 1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/12/liverpool-everyman-reveals-first-repertory-cast-in-25-years>
, Nunnery was a natural choice for in-house dramatist. Her contribution is a 
new play entitledThe Sum <https://www.everymanplayhouse.com/whats-on/the-sum>, 
which she describes as “an angry comedy about the mathematics of austerity – 
how we seem to have reverted to Victorian distinctions about the deserving and 
undeserving poor”. Being a true Everyman drama, it will be bursting with songs, 
which Nunnery is working flat-out to finish off.

“They’re turning out to be as close to straightforward pop songs as I’ve ever 
written,” she says. “But then again, the Mersey sound has always just been 
rebel music with an infectious beat.”

 * Narvik will be at Home, Manchester, from 31 January-4 February 
<http://homemcr.org/production/narvik/>, then tours until 25 March 
<http://boxoftrickstheatre.co.uk/production/narvik-2017/>  