
Australia’s historically high and rising housing prices are widely debated and 
have prompted a number of government inquiries into housing affordability.

The question stands open: is housing affordable in Australia?

Affordability is often confused with related concepts such as ease of entry, 
serviceability and valuation. Ease of entry refers to the difficulty of 
purchase, whereas serviceability measures the burden of mortgage repayments 
relative to household income.

Housing affordability, inequality, and our flatlining household incomes | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/21/housing-affordability-inequality-and-our-flatlining-household-incomes>
Valuation considers whether prices are efficient relative to economic 
fundamentals. Opinions are divided on this: housing prices could be 30% 
undervalued, a bubble which is 40% overvalued, or somewhere in between.

It is often claimed housing is affordable because nominal mortgage interest 
rates are low, having significantly declined since the peak of 17% in 1990. The 
standard mortgage payment formula shows nationwide debt repayments relative to 
household incomes are lower today than in 1990 and the smaller peak in 2008.

This metric is problematic because it is static, capturing the 
payments-to-income ratio at each particular point in time. The ratio at the 
peak in 1990, for instance, is very high if, and only if, prices, interest 
rates and incomes are constant over the life of the mortgage. This doesn’t 
reflect reality and a more dynamic approach is required.

First, the deposit-to-income ratio is the highest on record. Lenders may 
accept smaller deposits today but this is not a genuine choice for first home 
buyers. Starting out with larger loan repayments and lower equity is unlikely 
to be compensated for in a low interest rate and anaemic wage growth 
environment, especially with the added cost of lenders mortgage insurance.

Second, due to larger mortgages, repayments are higher than suggested by 
interest rates alone. Unfortunately, principal repayments are not officially 
recorded in our national accounts. The Bank of International Settlements has 
developed internationally standardised debt service ratios (DSR) to derive 
estimates of aggregate principal and interest repayments to income.


Household debt and prices escalated, interest rates declined and principal 
payments rose over the years. The gap has widened between interest payments to 
income and the DSR from around 1% between the late 1970s and early 1990s to a 
record 6% today.

By disregarding rising principal payments, vested interests downplay the 
immense debt burden assumed with a typical mortgage.

Worryingly, the bank states <http://www.bis.org/statistics/dsr.htm>, “the DSR 
is a reliable early warning indicator for systemic banking crises. Furthermore, 
a high DSR has a strong negative impact on consumption and investment.” The DSR 
is currently 15% nationwide, far higher than the US, UK and Spain at the peaks 
of their housing bubbles. Estimates of the DSR for New South Wales and Victoria 
are 18%, which demonstrates extreme indebtedness.

Third, past research <http://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/1997/sp-ag-081097.html> 
from the RBA recently surfaced in the media, examining the effects of wage 
inflation on mortgage payments. While high interest rates result in onerous 
payments relative to income, this only occurs in the early phase as high wage 
growth inflates away the burden. In contrast, borrowers facing high housing 
prices with low interest rates and poor wage growth face a greater burden 
across the life of the mortgage due to greater payments-to-income.

Everyone apart from the very wealthy has to purchase with a mortgage. 
Therefore, only by anchoring serviceability of payments-to-income can a genuine 
estimate of affordability be made. Generally, 30% of income is the accepted 
maximum.

High wage growth relative to interest rates and prices during the 1960s and 
1970s made housing quite affordable. Higher prices and interest rates in the 
1980s increased the burden. When interest rates peaked in 1990, payments were 
arduous but quickly declined.

While interest rates and wage growth for the next 25 years cannot be known, 
they are assumed to hold still at the present rates: 5.7% for the average 
imputed mortgage interest rate and 1.4% for wages. While the present interest 
rate may seem high, lower rates will inevitably prompt further housing price 
growth.

Buyers from, say, 2010 face onerous payments over the life of their mortgage 
compared to those who purchased in 1980 and 1990 when interest rates were much 
higher. The average ratio across the lifetime of the mortgage for all purchases 
dates are 1960 (10%), 1970 (10%), 1980 (18%), 1990 (27%), 2000 (23%) and 2010 
(37%).

Although not shown, affordability is even worse in 2016 due to rising prices, 
with an estimated average payment ratio of 42%. The payment burden for 2010 and 
2016 is still extreme and higher than 1990, even when factoring in lower 
estimated interest rates (4%) and higher wage growth (2%).

The measures presented above are absent from mainstream analysis today 
precisely because they demonstrate severe unaffordability, confirmed by the 
highest deposit-to-income ratios, the highest debt repayments relative to 
income over the lifetime of the mortgage and very high DSRs. Over50% of first 
home buyers 
<http://www.digitalfinanceanalytics.com/blog/is-the-bank-of-mum-and-dad-data-right/>
 today are reliant on parental assistance.

There are three ways to assist affordability: declining interest rates, rising 
wage growth and falling housing prices. Aspiring first home buyers are severely 
disadvantaged; nominal wage growth is currently at the lowest level since the 
second world war and there is little room for interest rates to go lower. The 
only path to improved affordability is by reducing housing prices.

This is obviously opposed by political parties, the finance, insurance and 
real estate sector and economists employed by vested interests. Instead, we are 
bombarded with a disgraceful litany of pronouncements, fabricated to defend 
record high housing prices and unaffordability.

Young adults are condemned as lazy and inept, allegedly misspending their 
income on alcohol or stuffing themselves withsmashed avocado toast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/baby-boomers-have-already-taken-all-the-houses-now-theyre-coming-for-our-brunch>
 in hipster cafes. To protect unjustified privilege – unearned rises in housing 
prices – vested interests have twisted a very real affordability crisis into 
moral failing by the young. They are told to get onto the housing ladder by 
purchasing an investment property or to “get a good job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/09/joe-hockey-tells-aspiring-first-home-buyers-get-a-job-that-pays-good-money>
”.

I could get outraged by this boomer-millennial war, but I'd rather look at the 
evidence | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/18/i-could-get-outraged-by-this-boomer-millennial-war-but-id-rather-look-at-the-evidence>
The appalling government report 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/House/Economics/InquiryintoHomeOwnersh/Report>
 recently published on home ownership (at which I testified) was a miserable 45 
pages short and made no recommendations. The government made no pretense of 
objectivity; dissenting reports by the ALP and Greens were more informative.

The evidence shows housing prices and unaffordability are at record highs. 
This appalling state of affairs is maintained by an undemocratic politburo of 
vested interests accustomed to extracting a staggering proportion of unearned 
income and wealth. Manufacturing claims of youthful indolence is merely another 
day at the office.

Will anything be done to lower housing prices? On the contrary, the politburo 
endlessly champions higher prices by seeking further interest rate cuts, 
increasing our already third-world rates of population growth via immigration 
and could implement another inflationary first home owners boost on the pretext 
of assisting first home buyers – which enriches existing landholders and 
bankers.

The state of policymaking and economic management in Australia is extremely 
poor and entirely intentional. If the young are to learn an important lesson, 
it is this: no matter how hard things are, vested interests are committed to 
making their lives ever more difficult.
 