
UK main office

Please address written correspondence to The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York 
Way London N1 9GU, United Kingdom.


The switchboard number for the London office of the Guardian, the Observer and 
the Guardian website is:

020 3353 2000 or dialling from overseas +44 20 3353 2000.

US main office

Contact details for the Guardian US office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/about-guardian-us/contact>

Australia main office

Contact details for the Guardian in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/may/26/contact-guardian-australia>

Contact the Guardian securely

Got a story? Get in touch while protecting your security and anonymity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>

To contact editorial departments and desks

Please take care to send queries to the correct destination as there is no 
guarantee that messages will be forwarded.

For information on how to contact Guardian journalists securely please read 
this guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
. We recommend you use the Guardian’sSecureDrop portal 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>.

To contact any member of staff
Individual staff, whether editorial or commercial, can be contacted using this 
email format:


 * Firstname.lastname@theguardian.com 
 * Firstname.lastname@observer.co.uk

Letters to the editor
Letters for publication should be sent to these addresses. The sender’s full 
postal address and phone number are required, for verification only:
Guardian: guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
Observer: observer.letters@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:observer.letters@observer.co.uk>

Corrections and clarifications of editorial content – the readers’ editors*
It is the policy of the Guardian and the Observer to correct significant 
editorial errors and handle editorial complaints as soon as possible. The 
readers’ editors are independent internal ombudsmen and can be contacted as 
follows:

Paul Chadwick – Guardian global readers’ editor
guardian.readers@theguardian.com <mailto:guardian.readers@theguardian.com>
Guardian readers’ editor page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/sep/23/guardian-readers-editor>

Stephen Pritchard – Observer readers’ editor
observer.readers@observer.co.uk <mailto:observer.readers@observer.co.uk>
Observer readers’ editor page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/oct/28/observer-readers-editor>

Please note that queries about subscriptions, vouchers, reader offers, 
advertising, marketing and other non-editorial areas are not handled by the 
readers’ editors. These should be addressed to the relevant non-editorial 
departments. Story suggestions should also be sent to the relevant editorial 
departments.

Legal complaints
Legal complaints should be addressed to our Editorial Legal Services 
department at: Kings Place, 90 York Way London N1 9GU

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
Moderation
For more information about moderation and to contact the moderation team, 
please see this page:
theguardian.com/community-standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community-standards>

The Guardian: editorial departments and desks

 * Arts desk culture@theguardian.com <mailto:culture@theguardian.com> or 
arts@theguardian.com <mailto:arts@theguardian.com> 
 * Books competitions and events books@theguardian.com 
<mailto:books@theguardian.com> 
[This address is used for correspondence about online competitions, poetry 
work shops, and the like. For all other emails about books, see Review, below] 
 * Business desk and financial staff financial@theguardian.com 
<mailto:financial@theguardian.com> 
 * Consumer desk money@theguardian.com <mailto:money@theguardian.com>. 
Consumer investigative column in weekly Money section
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
 * Cook supplement cook@theguardian.com <mailto:cook@theguardian.com> 
 * Education desk education@theguardian.com <mailto:education@theguardian.com>.
 * Education letters offered for publication in the weekly Education Guardian 
sectioneducation.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:education.letters@theguardian.com> 
 * Environment: find us on Twitter @guardianeco 
<http://twitter.com/guardianeco> 
 * Family weekly Saturday section family@theguardian.com 
<mailto:family@theguardian.com> 
 * Film desk film@theguardian.com <mailto:film@theguardian.com> 
 * Foreign news – See international 
 * G2 (features) desk g2@theguardian.com <mailto:g2@theguardian.com> 
 * Gardening desk gardens@theguardian.com <mailto:gardens@theguardian.com> 
 * The Guide listings submissions 01430 455505; 
http://addyourevent.pressassociation.com 
<http://addyourevent.pressassociation.com/> 
 * International news desk international@theguardian.com 
<mailto:international@theguardian.com> 
 * Law desk law.editors@theguardian.com <mailto:law.editors@theguardian.com> 
 * Letters guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com> 
 * Life and style lifeandstyle@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lifeandstyle@theguardian.com> 
 * Media Guardian media@theguardian.com <mailto:media@theguardian.com> 
 * Money personal finance section money@theguardian.com 
<mailto:money@theguardian.com> 
 * Money letters column your.shout@theguardian.com 
<mailto:your.shout@theguardian.com> 
 * Money section’s Personal effects column where readers share advice 
personal.effects@theguardian.com <mailto:personal.effects@theguardian.com> 
 * Music culture@theguardian.com <mailto:culture@theguardian.com> 
 * News desk, for UK national news national@theguardian.com 
<mailto:national@theguardian.com> 
 * Notes and queries nq@theguardian.com <mailto:nq@theguardian.com> 
 * Obituaries desk obituaries@theguardian.com 
<mailto:obituaries@theguardian.com> 
 * Opinion desk opinion@theguardian.com <mailto:opinion@theguardian.com> 
 * Personal finance: See Money and Consumer 
 * Pictures: for emails from readers, agencies and PRs pictures@theguardian.com
 <mailto:pictures@theguardian.com> 
 * Pictures: for advisories on film openings, PR openings and similar 
photocalls@theguardian.com <mailto:photocalls@theguardian.com> 
 * Political staff politics@theguardian.com <mailto:politics@theguardian.com> 
 * Readers’ editor guardian.readers@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.readers@theguardian.com> 
 * Review review@theguardian.com <mailto:review@theguardian.com> 
 * Science desk science@theguardian.com <mailto:science@theguardian.com> 
 * Society society@theguardian.com <mailto:society@theguardian.com> 
 * Space space@theguardian.com <mailto:space@theguardian.com> 
 * Sport desk sport@theguardian.com <mailto:sport@theguardian.com> 
 * Technology desk: contacts can be found at Technology editorial team contacts
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/29/1> 
 * Travel desk travel@theguardian.com <mailto:travel@theguardian.com> 
 * Weekend magazine weekend@theguardian.com <mailto:weekend@theguardian.com> 
The Observer departmental emails

 * Business financial@theguardian.com <mailto:financial@theguardian.com>

 * Cash cash@observer.co.uk <mailto:cash@observer.co.uk>

 * Consumer investigative column your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> 

 * Escape escape@observer.co.uk <mailto:escape@observer.co.uk>

 * Food Monthly food.monthly@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:food.monthly@observer.co.uk>

 * Letters to the editor observer.letters@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:observer.letters@observer.co.uk>

 * Magazine magazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>

 * Review review@observer.co.uk <mailto:review@observer.co.uk>

 * Sport sport@observer.co.uk <mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>

 * Travel – See Escape TV and radio review@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:review@observer.co.uk> 
CUSTOMER SERVICES

Website and mobile user help at the Guardian

For any problems using the website, our mobile apps and their links, or 
general questions and feedback about the Guardian network, please contact:
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>.

Subscriptions


Please ensure that you quote your Subscriber ID when contacting customer 
services.

Voucher subscription
Email: vouchersubs@theguardian.com <mailto:vouchersubs@theguardian.com>
Phone: 0330 333 6767. Lines are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm.
Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm

Home delivery subscription Email: homedelivery@theguardian.com 
<mailto:homedelivery@theguardian.com> Phone: 0330 333 6767. Lines are open 
Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm. Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm. Calls cost no 
more than 01 or 02 numbers from landlines or mobiles.

Guardian daily edition and Guardian app
Email - digitalpack@theguardian.com <mailto:digitalpack@theguardian.com>
Phone: 0330 333 6767. Lines are open Monday-Friday 8.00am- 8.00pm. Saturday & 
Sunday 8.00am-6pm. Calls cost no more than 01 or 02 numbers -from landlines or 
mobiles.

Membership


If you have a question about membership, please email 
membershipsupport@theguardian.com <mailto:membershipsupport@theguardian.com> or 
phone 0330 333 6898.

Guardian Weekly

To read the Guardian’s global edition see Guardian Weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weekly>. If your query concerns your subscription 
please contactguardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com 
<mailto:guardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com> or call 0330 333 6767

Getting the Guardian abroad

The availability of the Guardian and Observer in newsagents is very limited 
outside of the UK. However, you can still purchase these publications in a 
small selection of countries and cities, or you can subscribe and have your 
copy delivered to your door.

For more information on purchasing copies of the Guardian abroad, please 
contact the international publishing team.

You can subscribe to the Guardian by clicking here 
<https://www.qssweb.co.uk/guardiansubscriptions/subscribe/default.aspx?title=gua&prom=web6>
 and Observer abroad byclicking here 
<http://www.qssweb.co.uk/guardiansubscriptions/subscribe/default.aspx?title=obs&prom=webc>
 or contact our customer service department at Quadrant Subscription Services:


Telephone: +44 (0) 330 333 6767 Fax: +44 (0) 208 261 8433 Email: 
guardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com <mailto:guardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com>
Address: The Guardian and Observer Quadrant Subscription Services, Rockwood 
House, 9-17 Perrymount Road, Hayward Heath RH16 3DH, United Kingdom

Missing sections

If a section of your Guardian or Observer is missing please telephone 0800 839 
100. This is a 24-hour freephone number.

Back issues and circulation

For information on ordering a back issue of the Guardian, click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2005/jul/19/1>.

If your query concerns a subscription please contact 
guardian.pub.subs@quadrantsubs.com <mailto:guardian.pub.subs@quadrantsubs.com> 
or call 0330 333 6767.

If your query concerns a missing section of the paper or supplement please 
contact 0800 839 100.

If your query concerns UK distribution please contact 
roger.clapham@theguardian.com <mailto:roger.clapham@theguardian.com>

If your query relates to retail supplies please contact 
business.information@theguardian.com 
<mailto:business.information@theguardian.com>

Feedback around customer services

If you have some feedback about customer services, please contact the Head Of 
Customer Experience, Natasha Yelland and her team by email on
customer.experience@theguardian.com <mailto:customer.experience@theguardian.com>
.

Advertisers, sponsorship and e-commerce

To find out more about all advertising and sponsorship opportunities in the 
Guardian and the Observer, and the Guardian website,click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/advertising>.

How to contact the press office

If you are a journalist with a media inquiry, please visit the press office 
page <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office> for the relevant contact 
information.

Freelance contributions

If you would like to contribute freelance content, please ensure you have read 
ourContributors’ guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/1999/nov/22/contributors-guide-and-contacts>.

Story pitches should be sent to relevant editorial department, as listed below.

Any queries you have relating to the freelance charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter>, or 
other terms and conditions for the supply of content to GNM, should be directed 
to our Rights department atrights@theguardian.com 
<mailto:rights@theguardian.com>

Employment and work experience

If you are interested in working for Guardian News and Media, please see our 
dedicated careers site attheguardian.com/workforus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/workforus>. All current work experience and 
internship schemes are detailed on this site under the “Other opportunities” 
heading.

Content distribution and syndication


For permission to re-publish Guardian or Observer content, or acquire a 
licence to re-distribute our content, please visit ourSyndication website 
<http://syndication.theguardian.com/>.
 