
Dawn Penn, singer-songwriter

I grew up in Jamaica <http://www.dawnpenn.com/>, near Studio One, the famous 
recording studio in Kingston. It became a second home, especially on Sundays, 
when they would hold auditions. I was barely into my mid-teens when I got a 
chance to sing for the legendary producer“Sir Coxsone” Dodd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/may/06/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
. It was 1967, the early days of rocksteady, and he liked my voice.

You Don’t Love Me (No No No) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_29o3bSZti0> was 
our first recording and I remember standing next to Jackie Mittoo, the keyboard 
player fromthe Skatalites <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UDX2A0gxMjM>, 
following his chords as I sang about lost love. In church, we used to sing this 
old gospel thing, “Yes, yes, yes, Jesus loves me”, so I sang, “No, no, no.” 
People said: “It’s too negative. It’ll never sell.” But it was a big hit in 
Jamaica.

I made more records, but never saw any money for them, and in 1970 left 
Jamaica to trace my family ancestry. This took me to Pennsylvania and the 
British Virgin Islands. After 17 years, I came back to Jamaica and found the 
island alive with dancehall. I was askedto rerecord the song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=weFxKPsYTf4> for Studio One’s 35th 
anniversary. They made it a bit more dancehall, then Atlantic picked it up and 
it became a global smash.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhow-we-made-you-dont-love-me-no-no-no-dawn-penn-clevie-browne-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd18e9b80e93af11c09cbeeec6c4e05d734b37940%2F0_922_2618_1571%2F2618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20You%20Don't%20Love%20Me%20(No%2C%20No%2C%20No)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhow-we-made-you-dont-love-me-no-no-no-dawn-penn-clevie-browne-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20You%20Don%27t%20Love%20Me%20%28No%2C%20No%2C%20No%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fhow-we-made-you-dont-love-me-no-no-no-dawn-penn-clevie-browne-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd18e9b80e93af11c09cbeeec6c4e05d734b37940%2F0_922_2618_1571%2F2618.jpg>
 Dawn Penn in 1994. Photograph: Raymond Boyd/Getty Images 
The moment that happened, eight different people claimed they wrote it. 
Eventually, it was decided that some of my lyrics were similar to Willie Cobbs’ 
1961 blues songYou Don’t Love Me <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZsJMfYDUNCE>, 
which itself was similar to Bo Diddley’s 1955 trackShe’s Fine, She’s Mine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QhEL45dJjrY>. This was the first I’d heard 
these records, but the royalties were split three ways and some of my payments 
are still held up today.

It’s been a rough ride at times, but I was nominated for a Grammy and now 
everyone wants to sing the song: Beyoncé, Lily Allen, Rihanna, even the Wu-Tang 
Clan. I’ve never earned enough to buy myself an aeroplane or anything, but I’ve 
made seven albums and people all over the world still want to hear me sing my 
signature song.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DweFxKPsYTf4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DweFxKPsYTf4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DweFxKPsYTf4&media=>
 ‘The first cut is the deepest’ … watchDawn Penn’s video for You Don’t Love Me 
(No No No) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=weFxKPsYTf4> 
Cleveland ‘Clevie’ Browne, producer

I used to play the original version of You Don’t Love Me so much, I wore a 
hole in the vinyl. Then, in 1992, Dawn Penn came to our studio, trying to sell 
a tape. I couldn’t believe it was her. When I told Steely [fellow producer
Wycliffe Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/28/wycliffe-steely-johnson-obituary>
], it was like telling a child that Santa Claus was outside. We told her we’d 
love to re-record You Don’t Love Me.

The vocal on the single is actually the demo: the first take, recorded just to 
help us lay down the track. Dawn’s voice was so perfect that we didn’t have to 
do any equalisation or anything, which amazed me. When she sang it again, it 
wasn’t the same. As they say, sometimes the first cut is the deepest.


The art of Studio One
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/24/the-art-of-studio-one> 
A great song is always a great song, but we gave it some new clothes. The 
sample at the beginning is fromU-Roy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jJn1EyGWgeE>: “Wake up the town and tell the 
people.” Great sample! We were still just learning the business: I didn’t think 
about copyright and eventually had to pay for it. Steely’s keyboard created a 
smooth, deep bass, like the old sound system recordings. We couldn’t find the 
trumpeter from the original record, so David Madden, who was Bob Marley’s 
trumpeter, did a great job. Sometimes when you work on a record, you get a 
feeling it is going to be a hit, but we had no idea how big. We made it 
timeless, a bridge between the old and new.


• Dawn Penn is part of the Outlook Orchestra: A Celebration of Sound System 
Culture 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/118696-southbank-centre-outlook-festival-presents-outlook-orchestra-celebration-soun-2017>
, at the Southbank Centre, London, on 12 January.Steely & Clevie 
<http://soundcloud.com/steelyandclevie>’s work can be heard on SoundCloud. 
 