
Further information has emerged surrounding the medicine Fluimucil, stated by 
Sir Dave Brailsford to be the substance in the mystery Jiffy bag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/mystery-package-fluimucil-dave-brailsford-cycling>
 delivered to Team Sky’s doctor at the time, Richard Freeman, at the final day 
of the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011. The medicine is indeed a common mucolytic 
used to clear the airways but it has also been shown to enhance recovery after 
intense cycling effort and it has been used by at least one team, and possibly 
others, in injection form to that end, before the UCI’s needle ban in May 2011.

In a 2014 interview with Paul Kimmage, Chris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> stated that when riding for 
the Barloworld team, before his signing for Sky in 2010, he had been given 
injections of a substance he believed was Fluimucil. This was within the rules 
at the time.

Mystery package contained Fluimucil, Brailsford tells select committee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/mystery-package-fluimucil-dave-brailsford-cycling>
“On Barloworld they did do injectable… was it Fluimacil [sic]?” Froome told 
Kimmage 
<http://www.independent.ie/sport/other-sports/paul-kimmage-chris-froome-in-the-eye-of-the-storm-part-2-30394950.html>
. He added: “It was an amino acid or something and the doctor would administer 
that at certain points. And I did have some Fluimacil … It’s possible once or 
twice. Before [the doctor] would do it he would show it to me and say, “This is 
Fluimacil, an amino acid. It will help you to recover.”

Froome, who at Sky has become a triple Tour de France winner, said the first 
time he was injected “it was definitely in a stage race, about halfway through 
or two thirds of the way through. The doctor came around to everyone’s room and 
said: “OK guys, you’ve had three hard days, here are some amino acids to help 
you recover.’ At first I thought: ‘This is a bit weird,’ but he explained there 
were no problems with it and that it was completely allowed.”

The former team doctor at Barloworld Massimiliano Mantovani confirmed to the 
Guardian that the team had used Fluimucil by injection as an antioxidant before 
the no needle ban came into force, reiterating that it was totally legal. “It 
is the only antioxidant that has been tested and shown to work. It was used 
only for recovery, not to enhance performance, it is better by injection as the 
absorption is more efficient. It’s a very small injection, about 2-3ml. It was 
totally legal, absolutely legal.”

Fluimucil is one brand name used to market an amino acid derivative named 
N-Acetylcysteine, also marketed as Mucomyst, which is a powerful antioxidant. 
It is available in three main forms, as a tablet taken in water used commonly 
as a cold cure, as a preparation for a nebuliser, when it is breathed as a 
vapour via a face mask to help the lungs dislodge mucus, and as an intravenous 
preparation used in particular to treat acute paracetamol overdose. Among its 
other properties, it appears to restore the body’s levels of the antioxidant 
glutathione.

Several scientific studies between 1994 and 2006 indicate that when infused it 
can improve recovery from exercise. One study into cyclists carried out in 2004 
concluded: “NAC infusion during prolonged sub maximal exercise … substantially 
enhanced performance in well-trained individuals,” and a second, in 2006, came 
to an almost identical conclusion. This might explain why it was being used via 
injection to enhance recovery at Barloworld, as Froome relates.

Dave Brailsford faces grilling from MPs over doping in cycling – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/19/shane-sutton-and-dave-brailsford-face-mps-over-team-skys-use-of-tues-live>
In his testimony before the select committee for culture, media and sport on 
19 December, Brailsford stated that Dr Freeman had informed him that the 
substance in the package delivered by the BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> coach Simon Cope was Fluimucil, “a 
decongestant that you put in a nebuliser. I couldn’t see any anti-doping rule 
violation.” He added: “I have third party information. I can only relate what I 
was told by Dr Freeman. He told me it was Fluimucil.”

Brailsford was asked whether anything else was in the package, replying: “I 
hope not.”

Earlier, while giving his evidence to the MPs, Shane Sutton, who was Bradley 
Wiggins’s coach at the time, stated that Wiggins had a breathing problem of 
some kind and that the substance in the package – which he did not name – had 
been “administered” to Wiggins by Dr Freeman, but he did not specify how this 
had been done.

Asked by the Guardian to specify whether the Fluimucil in the package was 
administered by inhalation as might have been assumed from his explanation that 
Fluimucil was used with a nebuliser, or whether it might have been administered 
to Wiggins by injection – which would have been against the rules due to the 
“no needle” ban – Brailsford said he could make no comment on account of the 
continuing inquiry intoTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> 
and British Cycling being carried out by UK Anti-Doping. “I’ve told everything 
I know to Ukad and that process is still ongoing, which I am respecting.”

Wiggins: ‘I was paranoid about making excuses. It wasn’t something I was going 
to shout from the rooftops’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues> 
The Guardian also asked Brailsford to comment on an allegation from a source 
formerly within Team Sky that the team had been using legal recovery products 
such as vitamins and amino acids before the needle ban, which would have been 
within the rules, although counter to the team’s founding philosophy, but 
received no answer.

When Dr Freeman was asked by the Guardian to specify in what form the 
Fluimucil was delivered to him at the Dauphiné, he replied that Ukad have asked 
him to refrain from comment until the inquiry is complete.

Wiggins’s spokesman asked for the question to be put to the former cyclist’s 
lawyers, who are dealing with inquiries relating to the Ukad inquiry, but they 
did not provide a response despite being contacted four times by email and 
telephone. The same question was put by text to Phil Burt – the British Cycling 
physio who made up the package – but no response was forthcoming.

In the interview in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues> 
where he detailed the allergies that led him to use injections of the 
corticosteroid triamcinolone, Wiggins describes using a variety of substances 
to treat his various allergies and breathing difficulties, including 
salbutamol, fluticazone, Clarityn and nasal sprays. He did not mention 
using Fluimucil.
 