
We are told that this will be the year Brexit is set in motion. That could be 
good or bad, depending on your perspective. But in any event, we are 
overlooking a serious point. The problem with “Brexit”, as shorthand for 
“British exit”, is that there is no such place as Britain.

Once upon a time there was a Roman province called Britannia, but it did not 
include Ireland, or Scotland north of Hadrian’s Wall. What does exist today is 
a state called the United Kingdom of Great Britain andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. It is not a nation state like 
France or Denmark. It is a multinational state, like the former Yugoslavia or 
the Austro-Hungarian empire.

The Brexit resistance: ‘It’s getting bigger all the time’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/brexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups>
It is also a distinctly odd state. It contains four nations, one far richer, 
more populous and more powerful than the other three. England contains almost 
84% of the UK population,Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> has 
just under 8.5%, Wales just under 5%, and Northern Ireland just under 3%. The 
state populations of Germany and the United States vary widely, but none towers 
over the rest to remotely this extent. To judge by what they say and do, the 
London-centred political and media elites are blind to the tangled history this 
oddity reflects. As a result the union state is now heading for break-up.

The story of the United Kingdom, the story that should shape the current 
debate but hasn’t thus far, is one of relentless English expansion – sometimes 
peaceful and sometimes warlike – at the expense of the non-English nations of 
the Britannic archipelago. Northern Ireland is the legatee of a war of conquest 
between the English crown and the native Irish, which ebbed and flowed for 
centuries and ended with the island’s partition between the overwhelmingly 
Catholic south and west and the predominantly Protestant north-east.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbritain-doesnt-really-exist-exit--eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5722e2c657908071b9760ff55fcd4abc8101da9d%2F0_130_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20Britain%20exit%20the%20EU%3F%20As%20a%20nation%20state%20Britain%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20really%20exist%20%7C%20David%20Marquand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbritain-doesnt-really-exist-exit--eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20Britain%20exit%20the%20EU%3F%20As%20a%20nation%20state%20Britain%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20really%20exist%20%7C%20David%20Marquand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbritain-doesnt-really-exist-exit--eu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5722e2c657908071b9760ff55fcd4abc8101da9d%2F0_130_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Anti-Brexit protesters in Cardiff. Photograph: Matthew Horwood/Getty Images 
Wales was conquered by the English crown in complex medieval struggles, in 
which Welsh warlords were as apt to fight one another as to fight the English; 
the title “Prince of Wales” is a reminder of the English victory, not an emblem 
of Welsh defiance. Scotland was never conquered, despite brutal incursions by
Edward I <http://www.bbc.co.uk/scotland/history/articles/edward_i/> and Oliver 
Cromwell 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/scotland/history/covenanters/cromwell_invades_scotland/>. 
But theAct of Union of 1707 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/may/01/scotland.devolution1> that 
incorporated Scotland and England (an England that included Wales) into the new 
polity of Great Britain provoked fierce resistance in Scotland, overcome only 
by a mixture of threats and bribes.

It is not a pretty story: state-building is rarely a pretty process. Yet for 
much of the past two centuries, most of the inhabitants of the union state have 
taken it for granted; it has been in serious contention only in Ireland. The “
mystic chords of memory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/05/britain-union-abraham-lincoln-cameron-miliband>
” that Abraham Lincoln evoked in his first inaugural speech, when he hoped to 
forestall the secession of the southern states, have pulled three of the four 
nations of the United Kingdom together – thanks, not least, to its astonishing 
success as an imperial predator.

National tensions exposed within Brexit Britain | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/national-tensions-exposed-within-brexit-britain>
Now all is changed. The empire on which the sun never set has been consigned 
to the dustbin of history. Welsh steelworkers’ jobs depend ondecisions taken by 
an Indian conglomerate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/tata-decision-india-britain-steel>
, headquartered in Mumbai. More important, Lincoln’s mystic chords have been 
pulling the nations of the UK apart, instead of together, for nearly 20 years.

The first term of the Blair government saw a Scottish parliament sitting in 
Edinburgh for the first time since 1707, and a Welsh assembly sitting in 
Cardiff for the first time ever. TheGood Friday agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/apr/11/northernireland.northernireland>
 set up a new form of “power sharing” in Northern Ireland. There are now four 
capital cities, four administrations and four legislatures in the once 
monolithic union state. Each of the devolved administrations has its own 
political priorities and follows its own political trajectory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbritain-doesnt-really-exist-exit--eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed86bbf2d64dd7d5149e35ce4722c4f5150b3034%2F0_142_3042_1825%2F3042.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20Britain%20exit%20the%20EU%3F%20As%20a%20nation%20state%20Britain%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20really%20exist%20%7C%20David%20Marquand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbritain-doesnt-really-exist-exit--eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20Britain%20exit%20the%20EU%3F%20As%20a%20nation%20state%20Britain%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20really%20exist%20%7C%20David%20Marquand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbritain-doesnt-really-exist-exit--eu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed86bbf2d64dd7d5149e35ce4722c4f5150b3034%2F0_142_3042_1825%2F3042.jpg>
 Pro-EU campaigners outside the Scottish parliament in Edinburgh. Photograph: 
Andy Buchanan/AFP/Getty Images 
In the last Westminster election, different parties or groups of parties won 
majorities in each of the four nations, for the first time in history: the
Scottish National party won overwhelmingly in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/04/snp-set-for-56-of-59-scottish-seats-in-general-election-poll-suggests>
; the Labour party won comfortably in Wales; the Conservatives won easily in 
England; and the Democratic Unionists were the largest party in Northern 
Ireland.

Like a mortar bomb crashing into a building infested with dry rot, the EU 
referendum has torn great holes in the structure, the operational codes and the 
underlying assumptions of the increasingly rickety union state.Two of the 
union’s four nations voted to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/england-wales-eu-brexit-article-50>
; two voted to remain. There were dramatic differences within three of the 
four. The Scottish vote to remain was pretty uniform across the nation. But in 
Northern Ireland, Sinn Féin areas voted to remain while DUP areas voted to 
leave. England voted to leave butLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/eu-voting-map-lays-bare-depth-of-division-across-britain>
,Liverpool and Manchester 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36598635> voted to stay. 
Wales also voted to leave but Cardiff, the Vale of Glamorgan and Monmouth in 
the south, and Ceredigion andGwynedd 
<http://www.dailypost.co.uk/news/north-wales-news/eu-referendum-gwynedd-votes-remain-11518446>
 in the north,voted to remain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2011/may/06/av-referendum-results-map>
.

Meanwhile the constitutional status of the referendum – and therefore of the 
leave majority – is in dispute. Since the UK is a parliamentary democracy, 
referendums can only be advisory. It is up toparliament to decide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 whether or not to accept the advice. But one thing is clear: the union state 
is not a unitary state, still less an English state. It would be outrageous to 
force Scotland and Northern Ireland to leave the EU in defiance of the wishes 
of their peoples. What is sauce for the English and Welsh leavers is also sauce 
for the Scottish and Northern Irish remainers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fbands-of-brothers-could-brexit-bring-the-troubles-back-to-northern-ireland-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bands%20of%20brothers%3A%20could%20Brexit%20bring%20the%20Troubles%20back%20to%20Northern%20Ireland%3F%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fbands-of-brothers-could-brexit-bring-the-troubles-back-to-northern-ireland-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bands%20of%20brothers%3A%20could%20Brexit%20bring%20the%20Troubles%20back%20to%20Northern%20Ireland%3F%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fbands-of-brothers-could-brexit-bring-the-troubles-back-to-northern-ireland-video&media=>
Bands of brothers: could Brexit bring the Troubles back to Northern Ireland? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/oct/20/bands-of-brothers-could-brexit-bring-the-troubles-back-to-northern-ireland-video>
The Scottish government has every right to hold another independence 
referendum; and now that the oil price is rising again, the only prudential
argument against Scottish independence within the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/19/scottish-independence-7bn-worse-off-oil-forecasts-show>
 has lost its force. Equally, Northern Ireland has every right to rejoin the 
rest of the island of Ireland – a right guaranteed by the 1998 Good Friday 
agreement. Theresa May now faces one of the hardest choices ever faced by a 
British prime minister. She can strain every nerve to make sure that Scotland 
and Northern Ireland remain in the EU while also remaining in the UK – 
difficult but not impossible.

If, however, Scotland leaves the EU, along with a Northern Ireland rendered 
unstable once again by this week’sresignation of Sinn Féin’s Martin McGuinness 
as deputy first minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/martin-mcguinness-decision-to-stand-northern-ireland-assembly-election>
 – with a consequent threat to power sharing – Wales will be yoked for ever to 
a Conservative-dominated England. That will stick in the throats of all 
self-respecting Welsh people. The United Kingdom will be of past tense. To 
neglect this bigger picture in the months to come would be a monumental mistake.
 