
As the audience find their seats they listen to a medley of 1940s music: 
Gracie Fields, George Formby, Noël Coward. Hidden backstage, less than four 
metres from them, I indulge in a funny little ritual that has become a comfort 
to me: dancing.

This is my version of a warm up. Actors get into the zone in many different 
ways: singing relevant songs, touching objects endowed with superstitious 
importance, putting on their left sock first. One of my fondest memories of my 
brother,Simon Cadell 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituary-simon-cadell-1340890.html>
, is of him waiting in the wings for his first entrance, clearing his throat 
umpteen times, then saying “fuck ’em” rather too loudly and marching on. 
Tonight, my two colleagues,Reece Shearsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/live/2015/sep/21/reece-shearsmith-webchat-hangmen>
 andHarriet Thorpe <https://twitter.com/harriet_thorpe?lang=en>, simply chat 
and wait in the backstage corridor for their first entrance, tapping their feet 
and singing along to Gracie.

The huge set cuts diagonally across the stage like a train carriage in a 
shunting shed. It does in fact spin round on itself, pushed by five members of 
our crew. In this way, our backstage corridor is revealed to be part of the 
world of the play. The door that Harriet and Reece are waiting outside will 
take them into a perfect replica of a 1940s dressing room in a tatty provincial 
theatre.

Our play is The Dresser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/16/the-dresser-review-duke-of-yorks-ken-stott-reece-shearsmith-ronald-harwood>
, byRonald Harwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/25/the-dresser-returns-to-west-end-after-a-decade>
. Our theatre isThe Duke of York’s <http://www.dukeofyorkstheatre.co.uk/> on St 
Martin’s Lane. I play Madge, the stage manager, and this evening I have already 
made four entrances on to the stage. There is not always enough time to return 
to my dressing room so sometimes I wait behind the set, sitting on the raised 
platform, like a stoop on an American porch, doing the crossword with a couple 
of our stage-management team. Concentrating is taxing in case you miss your 
cue, so the easy crossword is a wiser choice than the cryptic. I sometimes 
bring my knitting, but it has to be a simple pattern, and I do need good light. 
I have one ear cocked to the play, following the scene that Ken Stott and Reece 
are playing and that I will eventually join. I am not just listening to the 
words, but to how the audience reacts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fselina-cadell-actor-the-dresser-reece-shearsmith-harriet-thorpe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d778232c5c9cccf67a8d2413212a439407e3ee%2F0_0_898_1097%2F898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20actors%20do%20the%20same%20thing%20every%20night%3F%20Easy%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20never%20the%20same&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fselina-cadell-actor-the-dresser-reece-shearsmith-harriet-thorpe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20actors%20do%20the%20same%20thing%20every%20night%3F%20Easy%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20never%20the%20same&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fselina-cadell-actor-the-dresser-reece-shearsmith-harriet-thorpe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d778232c5c9cccf67a8d2413212a439407e3ee%2F0_0_898_1097%2F898.jpg>
 Awaiting their entrances … Selina Cadell, Harriet Thorpe and Reece Shearsmith. 
Photograph: Selina Cadell 
The big question, often asked, is: “How do you do the same thing night after 
night?” The simple answer is: “It’s never the same.” Nor should it be.

Acting in a long-running play is like walking along a familiar path. There are 
subtle differences in the landscape. The weather, the light, the shade, the 
temperature. The play is, of course, the map, but we are all different every 
day. Energy or tiredness swings our barometers; our listening skills are 
blunter on some days than on others. Our moods affect pace, our physical 
wellbeing governs voice and breath. We are athletes of a sort. Our health is 
important. Years ago, when I was in Galileo at the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, I realised with horror that I 
couldn’t project to the back of the Olivier auditorium because I smoked. I gave 
up sharpish.

Each audience, too, has its character. In a comedy the touchstone is their 
laughter. Audiences quiet from the outset often develop to be the most 
appreciative by the end. The opposite can also hold: hysterical responses in 
the first scene can pall by the interval. Tonight Reece comes off stage (from a 
scene in which he cheers the leading actor with the promise of a “full house”), 
and says: “They’re so quiet tonight.” I reassure him: “They’re fine. They’re 
listening.”

He smiles wryly, spots the flashing red light that warns him his cue is 
coming, and, as it turns to green, mutters “we’ll see” and seamlessly alters 
his physique into Norman’s, tightening his torso and splaying his hands 
slightly, as he runs through the open door and on to the stage to join Ken. The 
scene continues. I am now all ears. The red light flashes again: I am outside 
the door, I see the green light, and I stride on. My job in this scene is to 
tell the actors they have a quarter of an hour left before the start of the 
play. Life and art mix exquisitely on some strange other level, and as I play 
the scene I notice Reece is right: they are a little quiet. But it’s a brief 
scene and I am off now, and this time I can get to the dressing room, the one I 
have in our real world, up the grey painted stairs, to Room 5.

Things have changed a little since the 1940s period dressing room of our set. 
I share a large, warm, comfortable space with Harriet. We have a sofa, a fridge 
and lots of room for costumes and makeup. Also we have a public address system. 
Gone are the days when the call boy or girl (like Madge in our play) would 
knock on the door to announce the time left. On one famous occasion, this 
system failed. During a run of a play called The Old Ladies, with Edith Evans 
and Athene Seyler, my grandmother (Jean Cadell) inexplicably went home in the 
interval, certain that it was the end of the play. When she arrived at her 
house in Kensington, a call from the stage door keeper relayed the dreadful 
news. My grandmother returned, after an interval lasting over an hour, 
mortified.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fselina-cadell-actor-the-dresser-reece-shearsmith-harriet-thorpe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b940aa9986678ba6523e870784fd13197b95470%2F0_242_4745_2847%2F4745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20actors%20do%20the%20same%20thing%20every%20night%3F%20Easy%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20never%20the%20same&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fselina-cadell-actor-the-dresser-reece-shearsmith-harriet-thorpe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20actors%20do%20the%20same%20thing%20every%20night%3F%20Easy%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20never%20the%20same&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fselina-cadell-actor-the-dresser-reece-shearsmith-harriet-thorpe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b940aa9986678ba6523e870784fd13197b95470%2F0_242_4745_2847%2F4745.jpg>
 Reece Shearsmith (Norman) and Ken Stott (Sir) in The Dresser. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Our interval is now over and I go down to collect my “cans”, the early 
microphone contraption that some stage managers wore. I move into the wings 
from where I will enter the stage. In the next scene, I will stage-manage the 
entrance of the leading man in our play. Off stage, Reece and I hum toA 
Nightingale Sang in Berkeley Square 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xTeiYN_Vq6E> as we wait. Our stage manager 
signals clearance and we walk on. I am about to do the same thing, as Madge, to 
cue the start of the second half.

This part of the play goes to plan. But later on, during my scene with Ken, a 
phone goes off in the audience. Ken is saying the title of an old play: A New 
Way to Pay – and he stops, suspends his breath, and waits until the phone is 
switched off, before finishing the sentence – Old Debts. With my eyes I show 
Ken that I understand and we continue the scene.

Towards the end of the play I come off stage and sit on the stairs behind the 
set leading up to the street, where other lives are walking and working. Cafes, 
shops, businesses and people who stop their work and choose to play, by coming 
to see us. In our play.

This is our work. Our funny old life. The parallel worlds that we inhabit 
every night, no matter what the subject matter is. From where I sit, I can see 
the dim chandelier that hangs high above the audience. I can see the ropes that 
hang high above me in the hemp house flies of the old theatre, I can see the 
pretend ropes that are slung across the top of our set in imitation of them. 
And for a couple of hours, these real and pretend worlds have collided and 
echoed and shifted the thoughts of our audience a touch. Perhaps.

The lights go down. We move on in the half light to take the curtain call. The 
lights go up. Now we see who we have played to more clearly. We have been 
through this journey together. It is over. The dust settles behind the door. We 
all go home.

 * The Dresser is at the Duke of York’s, London until 14 January 
<http://thedressertheplay.com/>, then at Chichester Festival theatre, 25 
January to 4 February <https://www.cft.org.uk/whats-on/event/the-dresser>
 