
When he was growing up in Bolton, Hetain Patel was a shy and solitary boy, 
sheltered within his extended Indian family, struggling to fit in at school. 
But inside his head, he was Spider-Man andBruce Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bruce-lee>. “I had a whole fantasy world 
going on,” he says. “I would dress up in my bedroom, in this very DIY way. When 
I was being Spider-Man, my entire costume was a piece of string around my 
wrist, with a paperclip attached to it.”

Morphing between his British, Indian and superhero selves became second nature 
to Patel, and that pattern continued into his teens as he started to absorb a 
wider cast of mostly American TV, film and music personalities. Twenty years 
on, he reincarnated that gawky obsessive teenager in his solo showAmerican Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/22/hetain-patel-american-boy-review>
, a funny, clever feat of physical and verbal dexterity in which he 
shape-shifted between his pop culture idols.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3039a2a872e370d7f70fedb8cf176f6d6e0965e%2F0_291_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Hetain%20Patel%20shape-shifted%20from%20Spider-Man%20to%20'bad%20Obama'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Hetain%20Patel%20shape-shifted%20from%20Spider-Man%20to%20%27bad%20Obama%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3039a2a872e370d7f70fedb8cf176f6d6e0965e%2F0_291_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Hetain Patel: ‘I’m so unfit … When I’m performing, I have to get by on 
adrenaline.’ Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
In real life, a highly articulate and stylish 35-year-old, with no discernible 
string attached to his wrist, Patel is interested in the fact that all of us 
are formed from a magpie assortment of cultural and biographical influences. 
However, when he first began exploring identity, he focused only on his own 
story. Those early works were explorations of his Indian heritage, playing up 
the exoticism of his brown-skinned body in a series of projects that included 
writing all over himself in henna and thengrowing a luxuriant moustache, 
identical to the one his father had sported 
<http://www.hetainpatel.com/projects/its-growing-on-me-2008-2/> when he’d come 
to Britain in the 1960s.


Patel’s plan had been to photograph a meticulous record of the moustache’s 
growth but he discovered he was far more interested in other people’s wildly 
divergent reactions to what it symbolised. Back in 2008, facial hair had yet to 
become hip, and the moustache aroused ridicule or disgust from his friends. “I 
didn’t get many kisses,” he says. Among the traditional Indian community, 
however, it afforded him a new respect. “One of my uncles, who I’d hardly 
spoken to for years, would pat my shoulder and say, ‘It looks good, it suits 
you.’ I would even get discounts in Indian shops.” Most surprisingly, the whole 
experience felt very liberating. “Whatever I was wearing, whatever I was doing, 
what people saw first was always the moustache. It made me feel free.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad5c4a47df1a3905459bab0fc0cf4db28ba4ff5e%2F0_0_3840_2758%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Hetain%20Patel%20shape-shifted%20from%20Spider-Man%20to%20'bad%20Obama'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Hetain%20Patel%20shape-shifted%20from%20Spider-Man%20to%20%27bad%20Obama%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad5c4a47df1a3905459bab0fc0cf4db28ba4ff5e%2F0_0_3840_2758%2F3840.jpg>
 Hetain Patel performs Be Like Water with Yuyu Rau in 2012. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The following year Patel developed another project about his father, making a 
video of him at his workplace – a coach-building factory – and shooting a 
parallel video in which he constructed a dance based on his father’s moves. He 
called itTo Dance Like Your Dad 
<http://www.hetainpatel.com/projects/to-dance-like-your-dad-2009-2/> and was 
startled by the number of people who identified with it, seeing their own 
father-son relationship in it. “That resonated with me and it made me want to 
communicate more widely in my work. I wanted to look through other people’s 
eyes as well as my own.”


It was that shift away from the autobiographical that drove Patel to explore 
live performance, developing text and movement pieces for the stage. He says 
the novelty of performing in theatres was exhilarating. “It’s not like a 
gallery where people are floating in and out. You have them for a whole hour, 
and you have the immediacy of talking to them, performing for them.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe65ee588eaf67b0d51f6d47e56856cbd7b67e8e9%2F1313_0_4337_4338%2F4337.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Hetain%20Patel%20shape-shifted%20from%20Spider-Man%20to%20'bad%20Obama'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Hetain%20Patel%20shape-shifted%20from%20Spider-Man%20to%20%27bad%20Obama%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhetain-patel-american-man-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe65ee588eaf67b0d51f6d47e56856cbd7b67e8e9%2F1313_0_4337_4338%2F4337.jpg>
 Dystopian possibilities … American Man 
The fact that much of this performance came to feature a strong element of 
dance was less deliberate. Patel admits that the “generosity of the dance 
community” in funding and embracing his work has encouraged him to develop the 
choreographic element more extensively – though even now, when he collaborates 
with a choreographer, Patel will never describe himself as a dance 
professional. “I’m so unfit. I keep meaning to join a gym, but I don’t. When 
I’m performing, I have to get by on adrenaline.”

Yet Patel is selling short his natural gift for physical mimicry and 
expression. He recently created a work for the mixed-ability dance groupCandoco 
<http://www.candoco.co.uk/>, and he’s testing his own chameleon body language 
even further in his latest solo,American Man 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/hetain-patel-american-man/>. This is 
an exploration of the influences that bombard us from the internet and the 
power they have on our lives. One of the main characters is a post-presidential 
Obama, who has decided to use all the respect and trust he accrued for evil 
ends. “I wanted to imagine what it would be like if he became bad Obama, if he 
had his own YouTube channel and began to spout horrible things.”

Some of the dystopian possibilities he’s come up with have unnerved even 
himself. “They make the time I grew up in seem so innocent.” Yet he still 
retains an old-fashioned conviction of the power of art to inform and improve. 
“When I start a new work I don’t necessarily know if it’s going to end up as a 
sculpture, a film or a performance. But I always have to believe that it’s 
going to make my life better.”

 * Hetain Patel – American Man is at the Lilian Baylis Studio, London, 24 and 
25 November 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/hetain-patel-american-man/>. Box 
office: 020-7863 8000.
 