
Penelope Lively said that her namesake and fellow literary genius Penelope 
Fitzgerald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/penelope-fitzgerald> was 
sometimes tricky to talk to. She could be “evasive, or rather, elusive … You 
kept wanting to yank her back on course, but couldn’t.”

As many interviewers and literary festival chairs discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/26/fiction>, to probe her too 
deeply was to find yourself led astray. Fitzgerald only gave people the 
information she wanted them to have.

And so it is with her books. If I tried to write too much more about The Blue 
Flower, I’d probably end up getting further away from the heart of it. 
Certainly, the more I know, the more I realise I don’t know. Commenters here 
have provided a wealth of fascinating information about the novel’s hero 
Novalis, about German Romanticism, about morality, about“cognitive 
defamiliarisation” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2017/jan/10/the-blue-flower-penenelope-fitzgerald-magic#comment-91065619>
 and the novel’s historical and philosophical underpinnings. It’s all enriched 
my experience, but also left me feeling that if I truly want to deepen my 
knowledge of this book, I’ll need to put in hours of study. I also suspect that 
the truest understanding I’d be likely to get is that some things just can’t be 
tied down, that the book won’t make entirely rational sense and it can’t be 
neatly boxed and packaged.

So while there’s certainly more to say about this wonderful book, we have more 
immediately pressing business.

The Blue Flower's elusive magic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2017/jan/10/the-blue-flower-penenelope-fitzgerald-magic>
There’s a lovely description in Hermione Lee’s biography of Fitzgerald, by her 
long-time editor Stuart Proffitt. While describing how it felt to read one of 
her new books, Proffitt said: “the only parallel I could make to the effect it 
had on me was that of music, that I had felt physically better after reading 
it.”

I think I know what Proffitt means. Fitzgerald is a remarkable writer. She’s 
also hilarious and dazzling and entertaining. Her prose makes you feel good. I 
couldn’t stop at just one book: I had to move on tothe second choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2017/jan/03/reading-group-the-blue-flower-by-penelope-fitzgerald-is-januarys-choice>
 on our list for this month’s reading group, The Beginning of Spring. And oh, 
boy!

“How is it done?” asked Jan Morris in her review in the Independent of The 
Beginning of Spring. (A few years later, Michael Dibdin would also ask “How on 
earth was this done?” when reviewing The Blue Flower, as did AS Byatt.) The 
answer partly, as Hermione Lee shows, was diligent research. The Beginning of 
Spring is set in Moscow in 1913 and tells the story of Frank, an English 
printer whose wife has just left him. Frank falls for Lisa, a beautiful Russian 
woman he employs to look after his children. It feels immersive and vivid 
because Fitzgerald is so easily able to scatter details of her subjects’ lives 
over her pages. She makes the reader feel what it is to live in their world. We 
seem to experience what it is to hear the trams rattling along the streets, to 
see the snow and grit on the Novinskaya, to feel the warmth of rooms enclosed 
behind double winter windows, to taste birch-sap liqueurs – and to avoid 
tasting the infusion of “nine herbs of healing” (among them dead nettle, wild 
parsley, St John’s Wort, clover, balsam and, worst of all, grass) offered up by 
Selwyn, Frank’s Tolstoy-favouring employee.

There’s magic in The Beginning of Spring – and a lot of it happens outside the 
text. It comes from what isn’t said and what we can’t know. Lisa is a case in 
point: she’s rarely even on the page, barely speaks, and when she does, it’s 
often to request that her employer doesn’t make her answer difficult questions. 
Yet by the end of the novel, Fitzgerald has us obsessing about her and her 
unfathomable mystery almost as much as poor besotted Frank does. Is she simple 
or hyper-intelligent? Is she a plain village girl or a revolutionary leader? Is 
she attached to Frank or does she have another lover? What are we to make of a 
strange meeting she has later on in the book, where “what look like” human 
hands, and then, apparently, men and women, emerge from the shadows of trees? 
Is it a political meeting? Or is it something more strange, more numinous? Why 
is nothing said - again?

Talking of spirituality, Fitzgerald also creates an atmospheric sense of the 
country, of ‘’dear, slovenly, mother Moscow.” I’d be tempted to start writing 
about the ancient soul of Russia, if it weren’t for how brilliantly Fitzgerald 
sends up English people who think they understand the place, attempting poetry 
about “birch trees and snow”. So let’s just say that she creates a warm sense 
of the wonder in Russia, as well as a feeling for the danger and corruption of 
its political rulers. All of which makes ita fascinating book to read now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/uk-british-former-moscow-ambassador-andrew-wood-trump-dossier>
, as well as one that will resonate whenever it is read. The Beginning of 
Spring is, like The Blue Flower (and also like The Bookshop, I might add, since 
I couldn’t resist reading that too) a formidable novel. Small wonder that 
Penelope Lively also noted that as well as elusive, her friend was 
“extraordinary”.
 