
For many people, this was the first full working week after the Christmas 
break, and for Londoners who faced separatetube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-all-lines-hit-and-most-central-london-stations-closed-live-updates>
 andrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/strike-southern-rail-commuters-british-airways>
 strikes, it was even more trying.


It’s too early to say how many days of work were lost as a result of these 
strikes, but it is possible to look at the sectors that have experienced the 
most disruption in recent years.

uk strikes and industrial action 2008-2015 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/sat_graphic_industrial_action/giv-39025CGLHCQryetk/>
In 2011, up to 2 million public sector workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/nov/30/strikes-public-sector-pensions-impact>
 went on strike over proposed government reforms to their pensions, in the 
largest strike for three decades. While hospitals, the ambulance service and 
courts were all affected, the largest impact was in education, with 655,000 
days lost in the sector that year, just short of half the full-year total of 
days lost.

By 2015, strike actions had lessened considerably: fewer people went on strike 
in 2015 than in any year on record, while the number of working days lost was 
at its second-lowest in 126 years, despite action byLondon Underground staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/tube-strike-london-travel-mayhem-24-hours>
 andpublic sector strike in Northern Ireland 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-31858483>. 

Although final figures for 2016 won’t be released until mid-February, figures 
covering January-October were already running at more than 1.5 times the 2015 
total.


A series of strikes by junior doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/26/80-percent-junior-doctors-took-part-in-all-out-strike>
 led to the highest disruption in those 10 months, contributing to the loss of 
more than 130,000 working days. The 2016 figures do not incorporate industrial 
actions that occurred toward the end of the year, including theSouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/when-where-why-southern-rail-strike-industrial-action>
 rail andpost office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/post-office-says-it-will-mostly-be-business-as-usual-despite-strike>
 strikes.


The disruption caused by strike actions of recent years is, however, minimal 
compared toindustrial actions from earlier eras 
<http://visual.ons.gov.uk/the-history-of-strikes-in-britain/>.
Estimated working days lost due to labour disputes in the UK, 1891-2015 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-13T10:24:46/embed.html>
The 1926 general strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1926/may/04/past.fromthearchive> saw more 
than 1.5m workers picket for nine days in support of coal miners, resulting in 
the loss of 162m working days that year, eclipsing all recorded actions before 
and since and led to a ban on “sympathy strikes”.

Major miner’s strikes in 1972 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/feb/26/miners-win-battle-against-heath-1972-archive>
 and1984 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/miners-strike-1984-85> 
contributed to the loss of 24m and 27m working days respectively. The public 
sector strikes of1979 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/23/general-strike-public-sector-trade-unions-1979>
, better known as the winter of discontent, contributed to more than 29m days 
lost to strike action.

 