
Winter smog returned to our cities in December. Modern smog is less visible 
than Victorian pea-soupers but a thin brown layer could be seen on the horizon 
as still weather trapped the air pollution.

Paris had ten days of smog 
<http://www.airparif.asso.fr/actualite/detail/id/183> at the start of the 
month; the worst pollution for a decade.Emergency actions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/paris-bans-cars-for-second-day-running-as-pollution-strikes>
 to reduce the health impacts included free public transport, reduced traffic 
speeds, lorry bans in the city centre, a ban on wood burning and four days of 
alternating bans on cars with odd or even number plates.

At the same time London had its worst pollution since 2012 
<http://www.londonair.org.uk/london/asp/PublicEpisodes.asp?species=All&region=0&site=&postcode=&la_id=&level=All&bulletindate=27%2F12%2F2016&MapType=Google&zoom=9&lat=51.4750&lon=-0.119824&VenueCode=&bulletin=peakvalues&episodeID=PM10andNO2endNov&cm-djitdk-djitdk>
. The initial three days of smog were caused by diesel exhaust and wood smoke. 
The mixture then changed as polluted air combined with agricultural emissions 
as it drifted slowly between cities, spreading from southern England and France 
as far as central Scotland.

There was more smog between Christmas and New Year in southern and eastern 
England, south Wales, Paris and also in Madrid where over a week ofemergency 
controls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/madrid-bans-half-of-cars-from-roads-to-fight-air-pollution>
 were invoked to protect residents, including banning odd and even numbered 
cars on alternate days.

UK smog warnings encourage vulnerable people to avoid exposing themselves to 
polluted air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/dec/15/breathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution>
. During December,London’s bus stops were used 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/london-mayor-issues-pollution-warnings-at-bus-stops-and-tube-stations>
 to display these warnings for the first time. TheRoyal College of Physicians 
<https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/outputs/every-breath-we-take-lifelong-impact-air-pollution>
 has called for action on polluters to protect us when air pollution is high, 
including reducing traffic near schools to protect our children, but emergency 
vehicle bans and free public transport are not part of the UK’s current armoury 
of controls.
 