
Ten years ago, New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg released a plan to create 
what he called “the first environmentally sustainable 21st-century city”. The 
blueprint, known asPlaNYC 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/planyc/html/about/about.shtml> and released on Earth 
Day <http://www.earthday.org/>, outlined more than 100 projects and policies to 
create that sustainable city by 2030.


It set a precedent <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/23/nyregion/23mayor.html> 
for local action on climate change; cities around the world began drafting 
their own sustainability plans. But then in October 2012, it got a harsh 
reality check.

“We would talk about sea-level rise and how it was this thing that would 
happen in the future,” says Amy Chester, part of the team that created PlaNYC. 
“Never once in that office did we imagine a storm likeHurricane Sandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hurricane-sandy> could hit New York.”

Hurricane Sandy made landfall north of Atlantic City, New Jersey, on 29 
October 2012. Within hours, it was inundating New York harbour with a storm 
surge of waves that reached a record height of nearly 14 feet. The stormravaged 
coastal communities 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/decision2012/powerful-storm-devastates-new-york-new-jersey/2012/10/30/5acd4d68-2280-11e2-8448-81b1ce7d6978_story.html?utm_term=.226f0ee6b5e0>
: an estimated 80% of the city of Hoboken wasunder water 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/mayor-christie-camp-held-sandy-money-hostage#49735>
. The power went out in most of Lower Manhattan as its basements, tunnels and 
subways flooded, bringing the biggest city in the country to a near-standstill.

Across the region, Sandy caused an estimated $65bn in damages and economic 
loss, destroyed or damaged more than 650,000 homes, and killed more than 100 
people. It was a visceral reminder that, despite the wealth and power of the 
world’s biggest cities, many are inadequately prepared for the effects of 
extreme weather.

As the disaster recovery funds began flowing, the US federal government 
realised that even the best sustainability plans, such as PlaNYC, weren’t 
thinking comprehensively enough about the vulnerabilities cities and regions 
face. They didn’t recognise the inherent uncertainty of changing climate, nor 
how to respond.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9eb93d5918f760f8bb7af001869cc7852f5ca193%2F0_104_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9eb93d5918f760f8bb7af001869cc7852f5ca193%2F0_104_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Hurricane Sandy caused $65bn-worth of damage. Photograph: John Minchillo/AP 
On a trip to Europe in the weeks after Hurricane Sandy, then-secretary of the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (Hud), Shaun Donovan, visited the 
Netherlands to learn how a country, around a third of which is below sea level, 
protects itself. His guide was Henk Ovink, the country’s acting director 
general of spatial planning and water affairs. The Dutchman promptlyoffered to 
help the US 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/13/magazine/how-to-think-like-the-dutch-in-a-post-sandy-world.html?_r=0>
 rethink its approach to water.

“Mankind lost track in the last century,” Ovink says, referring to his 
proposal that cities such as New York should be redesigned with a better 
understanding of the natural processes that have guarded settlements against 
flooding for generations.

“It’s not new to the United States, and it’s not new to a lot of places in the 
world. But we lost track of that knowledge. And now with challenges like 
climate change, we are forced to un-forget that; to remember better and to 
start building new approaches based on that memory. And of course we will do 
better than we did before.”

Based on hundreds of years of Dutch flood prevention experience, Ovink’s 
approach called for a systematic rethinking of American traditional disaster 
response: to simply rebuild whatever was destroyed.

“Instead we needed to ask not just how can we build back, how can we repair, 
but how can we look at the future?” Ovink explains. “This was not only about 
rethinking how our governments work, but how we think about future 
uncertainties like climate change.”

In June 2013, the US housing department launched a $1bn multidisciplinary 
design competition informed by this new approach. DubbedRebuild by Design 
<https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/sandyrebuilding/rebuildbydesign> and 
funded by the Rockefeller Foundation (which also supportsGuardian Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities>) and other organisations, nearly 150 
interdisciplinary design teams applied to participate.Ten finalist teams 
<http://www.architectmagazine.com/design/ten-finalists-announced-for-rebuild-by-design-competition_o>
 were chosen in August 2013, after which Ovink led them through a year-long 
process of research and collaboration with community stakeholders to understand 
and design around local conditions and needs.

The design teams – world-class architects, landscape architects, engineers and 
urban planners – were forbidden from offering any design solutions at the 
start. Instead, they engaged in three months of research, travelling the region 
to meet stakeholders and learn about local concerns directly from the people 
affected by Sandy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F750f7348a002a96d18b3419efe7cbdc3a2e06c82%2F0_70_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F750f7348a002a96d18b3419efe7cbdc3a2e06c82%2F0_70_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
 Rebuild by Design teams spent three months doing on the ground research in the 
region affected by Hurricane Sandy. Here, finalists visit a site in Milford, 
Connecticut, where locals explained how the storm affected the area. 
Photograph: Cameron Blaylock 
Only after that intensive research period could the designers actually begin 
designing. Even then, they had to submit not one solution but five – a 
requirement intended to encourage holistic thinking. It was a new approach to 
design for almost everyone involved.

“Everything was a challenge,” says Chester, who became the competition’s 
project manager. She was in charge of orchestrating the large number of design 
teams and even larger number of community groups and local participants to 
develop projects that could be built and replicated, all on a tight deadline to 
qualify for federal funding. “We were literally building the plane as we were 
flying it.”

The winning designs were announced 
<http://www.rebuildbydesign.org/our-work/sandy-projects> in June 2014. Seven of 
the projects were eventually awarded a total of $930m in federal grants. 
They’re now being implemented – using ecological and landscape design 
techniques to address issues such as coastal storm surges and inland flooding 
of low-lying areas.

In the US, the Rebuild By Design competition represents a dramatic shift in 
disaster planning, adopting a more comprehensive and collaborative research and 
design approach to address complex problems and improve resiliency – in the New 
York region and beyond. “The whole idea was to start something that would have 
a larger impact,” says Ovink.

The competition was widely hailed 
<https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/press/press_releases_media_advisories/2015/HUDNo_15-126>
 as a success, but there was room for improvement before its approach could be 
replicated. A 2014 Urban Institutereview 
<http://www.urban.org/research/publication/evaluation-rebuild-design-phase-i/view/full_report>
 praised its ambition but called its original vision “more aspirational than 
operational”. To have a larger impact beyond the New York region, the process 
would have to be systemised.

With that goal in mind, Rebuild By Design spun off to become its own 
organisation <http://www.rebuildbydesign.org/>, focused on using its research 
and interdisciplinary design approach to help cities and regions prepare for 
climate-related disasters before they strike. It is currently working withfive 
cities and regions <http://www.rebuildbydesign.org/our-work/city-initiatives> 
in North America, helping them to understand and respond to existing and 
potential vulnerabilities – from water insecurity to sea-level rise, to ageing 
infrastructure. They use the same research and collaborative design approach 
from the competition, linking local stakeholders and public agencies with 
experts and international design talent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e9514765edec83b0d881ab6bb84dbcd0260d628%2F0_210_1200_870%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e9514765edec83b0d881ab6bb84dbcd0260d628%2F0_210_1200_870%2F1200.jpg>
 A shoreline retrofit designed by a team led by the architecture firm OMA for 
Hoboken, New Jersey, integrating barriers to protect against storm surges while 
providing new recreational opportunities. Illustration: Rebuild by Design 
“What we try and do with cities is have them acknowledge that they may not 
know what the problem is. They may know what one aspect of the problem is, but 
not really the root cause,” says Chester. “Only after that’s understood can we 
start to think about what the solutions are. The challenge is, there are so 
many interdependencies in what cities face.”

That means bringing together multiple parties – local infrastructure agencies, 
elected officials, transit authorities, community members and others – to see 
how the vulnerability to a threat like sea-level rise is experienced across the 
spectrum.

“It’s about understanding the opportunity that you could do things 
differently,” says Ovink, who is now a special envoy for international water 
affairs for the Netherlands. “If you would take the responsibility to engage 
with others across government, across business, across communities, then we 
could invest and build better communities that are far better prepared for an 
uncertain future.”


Rebuild By Design’s first large-scale test of this approach will be Resilient 
By Design <http://resilientbayarea.org/>, a competition Rebuild is helping to 
organise in the San Francisco Bay Area to develop projects to address flooding.

This competition is different from the post-Hurricane Sandy effort in that the 
disaster hasn’t yet struck – but the Bay Area can literally see it coming. In 
mid-December,San Francisco experienced its annual “king tides” 
<http://www.sfchronicle.com/bayarea/place/article/King-tides-expected-to-have-more-impact-as-sea-10794305.php>
 – the highest tides of the year, which have grown in recent years to overwhelm 
the concrete edge of some of the city’s piers. The result is little more than a 
shallow puddle, but it’s a preview of what will happen with greater intensity 
in the future.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35b47330cec320d8a3be57f7bdf570cad8dc0bae%2F0_194_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35b47330cec320d8a3be57f7bdf570cad8dc0bae%2F0_194_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 After the destruction caused by Hurricane Sandy, Rebuild By Design is offering 
a more proactive approach to disaster response. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty 
Images 
And that future may not be far off. A recent report 
<http://www.bayareacouncil.org/economy/new-report-puts-damage-toll-from-overdue-mega-storm-at-10-4-billion/>
 from public policy advocacy organisation the Bay Area Council found that 
flooding from an overdue major storm could cause upwards of $10bn in damages to 
the region, about the same amount caused by the devastating1989 Loma Prieta 
earthquake <https://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/nca/1989/>. With nine counties 
and 41 cities touching the bayshore, flooding is a regional risk that will 
require widespread cooperation.

“Climate change writ large is very much a regional issue,” says Larry 
Goldzband, a member of the design competition’s executive board. He’s also 
executive director of San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development 
Commission, a state planning agency, so he’s seen the region’s individual 
cities and counties begin to take action on rising tides. “They recognise that 
solutions have to be holistic, they have to be large scale, and they can’t 
simply deal with only one aspect of the rising sea level problem.”

The competition seeks to unite these efforts into a set of 10 implementable 
projects. Organisers are currently raising money from foundations and corporate 
sponsors to run the competition and award prize money to the winning design 
teams. The competition will launch later this year and is expected to cost 
about $5.8m – not including the cost of building the winning projects. But with 
commitments from counties, cities and various infrastructure and planning 
agencies, the organisers are confident the winning projects will get built.

“We don’t have the big sum of funds that Hud put up for the Sandy competition, 
so we really needed to structure the Bay Area competition differently and get 
all the infrastructure agencies on board,” says Chester. “Cities are going to 
spend millions and billions of dollars in the future shoring up for climate 
change.” There’s an incentive to commit funds to the competition’s winners, she 
says, because eventually “they’ll have to spend that money anyway”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83fa4b8341f5612f34f6bca488a7bfc037c62fdf%2F0_13_4440_2663%2F4440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20design%20competition%20changed%20the%20US%20approach%20to%20disaster%20response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Frebuild-by-design-competition-disaster-respone-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83fa4b8341f5612f34f6bca488a7bfc037c62fdf%2F0_13_4440_2663%2F4440.jpg>
 It is hoped the Rebuild by Design approach will help stop the contamination of 
the Xochimilco lagoons in Mexico City. Photograph: Rebecca Blackwell/AP 
None of the cities Rebuild By Design is now working with are in disaster 
recovery mode. Instead, they’re recognising vulnerabilities to future disasters 
and planning ahead for how they’ll respond. It’s a more proactive form of 
disaster planning, which is why Rebuild By Design joined forces with100 
Resilient Cities <http://www.100resilientcities.org/> (also supported by the 
Rockefeller Foundation), a growing network of global cities that understand the 
importance of planning for future disasters and uncertainties before they 
happen.

Mexico City is one of the 100 resilient cities participants now using Rebuild 
By Design’s research and design approach to address one of its 
disasters-in-waiting, the environmentally sensitiveUnesco World Heritage Site, 
Xochimilco <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/412>.

About 17 miles south of the city centre, it’s a pre-Hispanic settlement of 
canals and artificial islands that’s one of few remaining examples of 
traditional lagoon land use and development – and a popular tourist site. On 
weekends, garishly painted boats logjam through the canals in a slow caravan, 
carrying beer drinking revellers and floating mariachi bands.

But years of dropping water tables, contamination and encroaching urbanisation 
have put the area’s ecological stability at risk. The city hopes to use the 
Rebuild By Design process in conjunction with its resilience plan to counter 
the contamination, while still sustaining its local economies.

More than just a flood defence: how Vejle built a blueprint for resilience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/19/flood-defence-vejle-denmark-resilience>
“This is a very traditional place where we have a lot of marginal communities, 
but still it’s a world heritage site and an area of one of the key elements of 
Mexican identity,” says Arnoldo Matus Kramer, Mexico City’s chief resilience 
officer. “So we don’t want to have just ideas from the outside; we want to also 
integrate ideas from the communities and to have this dialogue.”

He’s now convening local stakeholders and outside experts to begin the process 
of researching and understanding how these different systems interact. “It’s a 
very complex situation that will not be solved by just one solution. There 
should be multiple different solutions – some of which will succeed, and some 
will not. But we need to build a process and a system that can learn around 
that and provide a long-term vision.”

Ovink says the process that developed out of the original Rebuild By Design 
competition is an effective way to find those solutions – whether in Mexico 
City, San Francisco or New York. And he wants it to take off in other cities 
that are facing future uncertainties: “If I would lean back a little and dream, 
I would say it would explode into a movement around the world.”

But he also recognises that there’s a limit to the power of plans. “I really 
hope we can show in the New York region that those ambitions are for real, and 
that whatever administration is going to continue to build on that,” he says. 
“That’s a scary thing to say at this time. We better build these projects to 
showcase that this is the new reality, the new world.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 