
For everyone outraged by the rise and rise of Milo Yiannopoulos, it may be 
some consolation that the British journalist has yet, for all his efforts, to 
join the list of notables – Madonna, Boris, Adolf, Popeye – who are 
internationally recognised by their first names.

Most reports of Yiannopoulos’s new book deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/04/uk-publishers-shy-away-from-alt-right-star-milo-yiannopoulos>
 with Simon & Schuster have been obliged to include some biographical 
background, on behalf of the completely baffled, if only to the effect that the 
Milo byline at Breitbart is the same Milo who, under the name Milo Andreas 
Wagner, self-published a slim volume of verse,Eskimo Papoose.

Why the youthful choice of a Germanic pseudonym with antisemitic associations? 
Presumably the Wagner/Yiannopolous forthcoming memoir,Dangerous, will 
elucidate. Meanwhile, there was a clue in the acknowledgments toEskimo Papoose; 
in a proof copy available online, Wagner/Yiannopoulos credited “many 
inspirational artists and thinkers, including Friedrich Nietzsche, Richard 
Wagner, Thomas Mann, TS Eliot, Esther Ritchie, Gilles Deleuze and Myra Ellen 
Amos”. Writing, later, for theCatholic Herald, he reverted to Yiannopoulos.

Reportedly a great power in the world of video games, the writer is probably 
best known, beyond his hobbyist following, for having posted Twitter comments 
so hateful that he waslast year banned from using that platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-nero-permanently-banned-twitter>
. Thus persecuted, Yiannopoulos was soon adding another career, in free speech, 
as the hammer of thin-skinned “snowflakes”, who understandably feel there is 
something deeply unacceptable about, say, calling transgender people “retarded”.

He seems to have found his vocation, for now, within the great, 
liberal-baiting tradition whose practitioners have included, in this country, 
Auberon Waugh, Julie Burchill, Taki, David Starkey, AA Gill, Rod Liddle, Jeremy 
Clarkson and any number of lesser exhibits now clustered around theSpectator. 
What seems to have placed Yiannopoulos, lacking their writing talent, ahead of 
many more experienced irritants, who had to make a name without any help from 
Twitter mobs, Breitbart or safe spaces, is a combination of physical charm and 
astonishing verbal ugliness. Generally, earlier exponents have been apt, when 
facing the prospect of lasting career damage or ignominy, to succumb to nerves 
and feign amazement that their words could have upset anyone.

My night out in Cleveland with the worst men on the internet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/my-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet>
Indeed, the effectiveness of Yiannopolous’s different tactic, of continually 
ramping up his abuse, suggests, as with the successfully loutish Nigel Farage 
and brave experiments in gay-trolling onThe Grand Tour, a climate in which 
there is now more to lose, professionally, from restraint. The allegedly 
snowflake-damaged era finds safe spaces for men who could have been schooled in 
offence-giving by David Irving, the Holocaust denier. In a 1991 speech, shortly 
before he was hired by the Sunday Times, Irving said, when it came to insulting 
Auschwitz survivors 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/holocaust-denier-im-no-nazi-6108768.html>
: “Ridicule isn’t enough, you’ve got to be tasteless about it. You’ve got to 
say things like more women died on the back seat of Edward Kennedy’s car at 
Chappaquiddick than in the gas chambers at Auschwitz.”

As for Yiannopoulos, his lesson to future provocateurs (as trolling 
professionals prefer to be designated) is that it’s not enough to express your 
reservations about, say, women; you must, as a lone speaker of unpopular 
truths, call them fat, thick, ugly. When these targets protest against guest 
appearances, the menacer is neatly recast as gagged victim. He hascomplained 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/cultural-comment/the-sad-attempt-to-make-trumpism-cool>
: “There’s a problem in popular culture. People are not allowed to say things 
that are true or real.” In his case, this orchestrated marginalisation 
culminated in an invitation from Simon & Schuster.

In the writer’s own words, he “spent half an hour trying to shock them with 
lewd jokes and outrageous opinions. I thought they were going to have me 
escorted from the building, but instead they offered me a wheelbarrow full of 
money.” The $250,000 deal, still way less than the £400,000 that Penguin paid 
for Pippa Middleton’sCelebrate, has duly horrified the people that Yiannopoulos 
makes a living from horrifying; it appears to have stunned readers who may have 
thought big publishers only brought out sensible books by nice people.

“Shame on @simonschuster”, or words to that effect, said people who never 
blamed Verso for publishing the Trump supporter Slavoj Žižek, or Random House 
for Blair or, for that matter, decided to leave Twitter when it still hosted 
Yiannopoulos. But if this ethical watchfulness catches on, the publisher – 
Hodder – which commissioned Boris Johnson’sShakespeare: The Riddle of Genius 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Shakespeare-Riddle-Genius-Boris-Johnson/dp/0399184546>
 may come, with the return, post-referendum, of his £500,000 advance, to think 
it got off lightly.

Even his most loyal fans must wonder how and in what voice the campus 
entertainer will construct an entire memoir

It is no excuse for the publisher’s critics that Yiannopoulos’s book will be 
brought out by Threshold Editions, a conservative imprint of the type that 
several conglomerates now run, whether to protect their brand or to reassure 
readers that they are guaranteed a read that is cast-iron, 100% odious. 
Threshold Editions’ current strapline (one of its authors is about to become US 
president) is the triumphalist: “Celebrating 10 years of being right”. The 
editor-in-chief of theChicago Review of Books, Adam Morgan, will not be 
featuring any Simon & Schuster authors for a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/simon-schuster-alt-right-hate-breitbart-milo-yiannopoulos>
. It’s hard, he admits, on guiltless writers, but their publisher needs 
correcting, in a way that it evidently did not when it was promoting Donald 
Trump (whom Yiannopoulos calls “Daddy”) during his election campaign. “How is 
handing a purveyor of hate speech a $250,000 megaphone,” Morgan asks, “not 
condoning his rhetoric?”

The current controversy, being another kind of megaphone, has naturally 
magnified the life and dismal words of Yiannopoulos as never before, along with 
his heartbreaking claim, as a rich Breitbart star currently enjoying a national 
speaking tour of US colleges and universities, to be a free-speech martyr, 
censored by phoney victims. If that weren’t counterproductive enough, for 
anyone who wanted to frustrate this writer’s path to glory, reporting of his 
university speeches also confirms that critics may have more to gain if the 
first big Yiannopoulos book comes out conventionally, unlike his self-published 
poetry.

If denied, by his editors, the extremes of name-calling and bullying that 
would bring Simon & Schuster into further disrepute, even Yiannopoulos’s most 
loyal fans must wonder how and in what voice the campus entertainer will 
construct an entire memoir, even one heaving with the fabulous portraits and 
sexual disclosures that are also his trademark. Penguin had merely to invent, 
for Pippa Middleton, a personality. Simon & Schuster, in the US, must finesse 
lines such as “never feel bad for mocking a transgender person”, or
“thick-as-pig shit media Jew 
<http://forward.com/fast-forward/358909/milo-yiannopoulos-slams-thick-as-pig-st-media-jews/>
”, so as to vindicate its claim that “we do not and never have condoned 
discrimination or hate speech in any form”.

And what if Yiannopoulos does, with help from his publisher, manage to pass 
off a shortish history in concerted abuse as a gracious, non-hate-ridden 
meditation that confirms, to supporters of Daddy, that the real authoritarians 
are progressives? The very best way to help that happen would be, by agitating 
against the book’s publication, to supply the necessary victimhood. Just don’t 
buy it.
 