
In the sweltering heat of a summer day, I walked along the visitor trails of 
Yosemite national park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/17/top-10-national-parks-california>
. I had just made the five-hour drive from my childhood home in Los Angeles to 
glimpse a vision of the future. There in the valley surrounded by high towers 
of stone, I watched as thousands of tourists from all over the world marvelled 
at thesheer granite walls of El Capitan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/25/google-street-view-el-capitan-yosemite-california>
, Washington Column and Half Dome. Like ancient cathedrals of divine 
architecture, these magnificent features stand as monuments to the notion that 
the natural heritage of our nation must be preserved for all time.

Throughout my life I have enjoyed spending time in the outdoors. Despite 
having grown up in the urban heart of LA, I frequently ventured into the wild 
places of California, from the slopes of the San Gabriel mountains to the 
summit of Mount Whitney. Though I was blessed, thanks to sacrifices of my 
parents, with a lifetime learning and playing in nature, on this occasion, as 
with many visits to the valley, I noticed that I was among the very few people 
of colour there. And though I felt no less welcome to enjoy the splendour of 
this magnificent place, I wondered how it might be possible to encourage 
tourism to Yosemite – and other national parks – that reflects the diverse 
population of the US as a whole.

There are many reasons why African Americans and other ethnic minorities don’t 
make more use of the great outdoors. Racial oppression of the past gouged deep 
wounds which persist today, in the form of the limited disposable income and 
leisure time necessary to holiday in remote places. Add to that few personal 
mentors or family traditions of days away from the city to enjoy camping, 
hiking and fishing, and the result is a generation of citizens disenfranchised 
of a rich cultural legacy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F441ea9683021135ba9c5d735bb2538c1805dcfc9%2F139_353_4649_2789%2F4649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20US%20national%20parks%20are%20to%20continue%20to%20thrive%20they%20must%20reflect%20the%20diversity%20of%20our%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20US%20national%20parks%20are%20to%20continue%20to%20thrive%20they%20must%20reflect%20the%20diversity%20of%20our%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F441ea9683021135ba9c5d735bb2538c1805dcfc9%2F139_353_4649_2789%2F4649.jpg>
 James Edward Mills with Yosemite national park ranger Shelton Johnson. 
We are seldom told of the Buffalo Soldiers 
<http://www.buffalosoldiers-amwest.org/history.htm>, black members of the US 
Cavalry, who patrolled Yosemite and Sequoia national parks at the turn of the 
last century and became the world’s first park rangers. And few know about
George Melendez Wright <http://www.georgewright.org/gmwright>, an El 
Salvadoran-American biologist who conducted the first scientific survey of 
fauna for theNational Park Service <https://www.nps.gov/index.htm> (NPS). 

I know that if our beautiful national parks are going to survive they must be 
made accessible to everyone

On this latest visit to Yosemite I reconnected with my old friend Jonathan 
“Moose” Mutlow. As the project director of theNational Environmental Science 
Center <https://naturebridge.org/NESC>, Moose has dedicated much of his life to 
inspiring young people to spend time in the outdoors. A long-time staff member 
atNature Bridge <https://naturebridge.org/>, an environmental education 
institute based in San Francisco, he has worked to help kids appreciate and 
revel in the wonders of nature. But as young black people predominantly live in 
urban areas, Moose says he is constantly challenged to create opportunities, 
such as nature walks and natural history lessons, that are culturally and 
socially relevant to the emerging ethnic groups.

“When the national parks were first conceived, the grand lodges were a way to 
sell the idea to the American people. But they were places for the elite to 
stay, people of power who would back the parks with their money,” Moose said. 
“The grand lodges of the 21st century need to be schools. The constituent group 
we’re building now are the users, people whose experiences in nature as kids 
sparks their sense of exploration and discovery and that belongs to them.”

He puts it simply: “They will own it. And if they own it, they will fight to 
protect it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6e481e8ac37aecbbffc06117716a06b307aea10%2F0_268_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20US%20national%20parks%20are%20to%20continue%20to%20thrive%20they%20must%20reflect%20the%20diversity%20of%20our%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20US%20national%20parks%20are%20to%20continue%20to%20thrive%20they%20must%20reflect%20the%20diversity%20of%20our%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6e481e8ac37aecbbffc06117716a06b307aea10%2F0_268_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Jonathan “Moose” Mutlow, project director of the National Environmental 
Science Center 
Moose is currently overseeing the construction of the National Environmental 
Science Center building, a remarkable education facility for young people. With 
a budget of more than $35m, this state of the art hands-on learning centre in 
the heart of Yosemite national park will open this autumn and expects to 
receive 17,000 students a year. This beautiful campus will give young people – 
many of whom live in low-income urban neighbourhoods or rural farming 
communities – the chance to experience the wonders of nature, as well as 
learning practical skills in camping, hiking and climbing.

I am optimistic for the power of nature to bring us together, despite our 
differences, as a united people

As the NPS celebrates its 100th anniversary 
<https://www.nps.gov/subjects/centennial/birthday-invitation.htm> this week, 
the idea of public land for everyone to enjoy is the basis of a new vision of 
environmental conservation to carry us through the next 100 years. Though rival 
candidates in our presidential election debate the many social issues which 
drive us apart, too often along racial and socio-economic lines, I am 
optimistic for the power of nature to bring us together, despite our 
differences, as a united people. TheNext 100 Coalition 
<http://next100coalition.org/>, led by national park advocate Audrey Peterman, 
aims to raise awareness about making our natural spaces more accessible and 
inviting for all people, regardless of race or ethnicity, to enjoy.

The Next 100 Coalition includes a variety of different organisations, including
Outdoor Afro <http://www.outdoorafro.com/>, a community network with leaders in 
28 states, which promotes positive experiences in nature for African-American 
families.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac2543e5833159bb13c8bd64e19ebd526b5e60d7%2F0_368_7398_4438%2F7398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20US%20national%20parks%20are%20to%20continue%20to%20thrive%20they%20must%20reflect%20the%20diversity%20of%20our%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20US%20national%20parks%20are%20to%20continue%20to%20thrive%20they%20must%20reflect%20the%20diversity%20of%20our%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fus-national-parks-survive-must-reflect-diversity-of-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac2543e5833159bb13c8bd64e19ebd526b5e60d7%2F0_368_7398_4438%2F7398.jpg>
 Buffalo below the Grand Teton Mountains, Yellowstone national park. 
Photograph: Matt Anderson Photography/Getty Images 
Similar groups in the coalition, such as Latino Outdoors 
<http://latinooutdoors.org/>, the Asian Pacific Policy and Planning Council 
<http://www.asianpacificpolicyandplanningcouncil.org/>, the Hispanic Access 
Foundation <https://hispanicaccess.org/> and Eco Cheyenne 
<https://www.facebook.com/Ecocheyenne/>, are working together with agencies of 
the federal government including the NPS and theUS Forest Service 
<http://www.fs.fed.us/>.

In the next century of national park conservation, the coalition insists that 
we must acknowledge the contributions of African-American, Latino, Asian and 
Native American explorers and adventurers.Matthew Henson 
<http://www.unmuseum.org/henson.htm> (it is the 150th anniversary of his birth 
is this week) was a black man from Baltimore, Maryland, who, with Robert Peary, 
was the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909. And Walter Harper, a 
native Athabaskan of Alaska, was the first to reach the summit of Denali, the 
highest peak in North America, in 1913. We have to inspire young people from 
all backgrounds to pursue study that will expand their knowledge and love of 
the natural world and preserve it into the future.

Our national parks were created as an escape from the tribulations of the 
modern world. Described by the writer and naturalist Wallace Stegner as “the 
best idea we ever had 
<https://www.nps.gov/parkhistory/hisnps/NPSThinking/famousquotes.htm>”, the 
parks are meant to instil not only a passion for the outdoors but also a spirit 
of co-operation in the long-term preservation of humanity. As the Next 100 
Coalition rallies the collective interests of under-represented members of our 
society, we can envision a new century in which our national parks continue to 
thrive.

James Edward Mills is creator of the Joy Trip Project 
<http://joytripproject.com/about/> a blog covering outdoor recreation and 
environmental conservation, and author ofThe Adventure Gap: Changing the Face 
of the Outdoors <https://www.facebook.com/theadventuregap/>, which chronicles 
the first all-African-American summit attempt on Denali
 