
You may have seen this week that the Department of Justice unveiled details of 
a national system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/police-officer-related-deaths-department-of-justice?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 that will require police to report officer-involved deaths for the first time.

It’s a significant step forward for transparency in the criminal justice 
system, and this vital form of record keeping is something Guardian US has been 
calling for since launchingThe Counted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
 in June 2015, our project to document and expose all police killings across 
America.

Our database, which has influenced the government’s new program, aimed to 
construct the most thorough public accounting for the use of deadly force by 
the police in the United States.

We realized there was no reliable data to test claims of racial bias or 
brutality within police forces around America, and, as such, no true picture of 
the scope and scale of the issues at the center of an intense national debate.

The Counted records not just police shootings but other fatalities, including 
deaths in custody like Freddie Gray in Baltimore, and the fatal chokehold such 
as that used on Eric Garner in New York City in 2014.

This undertaking – and the sheer enormity of the task – was something that no 
government agency has done, despite the disturbing number of fatal encounters 
with police, and the protest movement that has followed black teenager Michael 
Brown’s death at the hands of a white police officer in Ferguson, Missouri, in 
2014.

Our team of reporters has worked tirelessly over the past 18 months to bring 
together this data and verify it – and, in doing so, to tell the stories of the 
people who have been killed.

It has required hours and hours of reporting time, countless freedom of 
information requests, many miles of travel across the United States to uncover 
stories firsthand, and rigorous analysis.

We have pursued individual cases and brought them to national attention. Last 
week in Virginia,a rare manslaughter conviction was handed down in the case of 
a police officer, Stephen Rankin, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/04/william-chapman-shooting-officer-stephen-rankin-guilty>
 who killed William Chapman, an unarmed black 18-year-old accused of 
shoplifting in Portsmouth in April last year. Chapman’s mother, Sallie, had 
told the Guardian: “I feel alone. Because my son is gone and because nobody is 
trying to help me understand why.”

The killing of Chapman was brought to widespread attention by our senior 
reporter Jon Swaine, who told the story of his life and death and revealed that 
Rankin, who had killed before, was the officer who opened fire on Chapman.

Without this kind of comprehensive, independent reporting, bringing much 
needed scrutiny to these cases, more families would grieve alone.

Until the news this week, the Guardian, alongside other crowdsourced projects 
such as Killed by Police and Fatal Encounters, and the Washington Post, who 
collated police shootings, were the only outlets bringing this information 
together.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-counted-police-killings-guardian-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20record%20every%20police%20killing%20in%20the%20United%20States%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-counted-police-killings-guardian-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20record%20every%20police%20killing%20in%20the%20United%20States%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fthe-counted-police-killings-guardian-us-video&media=>
How we record every police killing in the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/apr/11/the-counted-police-killings-guardian-us-video>
What the data shows is confronting: last year, we recorded 1,146 people killed 
by the police in the United States, and young African American men werenine 
times more likely to be killed than any other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/31/the-counted-police-killings-2015-young-black-men>
 demographic group. Black people were almost twice as likely to be unarmed. Our 
total was more than twice the rate last documented by the FBI, which relied on 
police departments voluntarily submitting data.

This year, so far we have counted 653 fatalities. We hoped that by showing 
this could be done, we could make clear the case for national recording of 
police killings.

If you value such journalism – the kind that pushes for real change and 
requires dogged, time-consuming, investigative reporting work –I’d like to ask 
you to help us fund it by becoming a Guardian Supporter for just $4.99 a month 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=mem_us_editorial_lgc_copy>.

It is expensive to produce this journalism, and like many other US media 
outlets, we are operating in a volatile media landscape. But we care deeply 
about doing this work here at Guardian US, which is also why we’d like to keep 
you updated on key developments and stories around issues of criminal justice.

Once a month, the reporters on the Counted team – Jon Swaine, Oliver 
Laughland, Jamiles Lartey and Ciara McCarthy – will send you a newsletter with 
news related to The Counted and broader US reporting on the criminal justice 
system.

Thank you for reading and supporting the Guardian.

Lee Glendinning

Editor 
Guardian US

 * Support us with a monthly or annual contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=mem_us_editorial_lgc_footer> 