
Alastair Campbell, of cherished memory, used to bang on about how the 24-hour 
news cycle had first transfixed and then transformed Downing Street’s press 
operation. But now try the next great leap in an unspecified direction: the 
24-minute news cycle, as masterminded byDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. The shape and shrill sound 
of media things to come.

Trumpism means Trumpism. When attacked – by anyone from Meryl Streep to the 
CIA – the commander-in-chief of democratic righteousness will kick right back. 
He’ll say that she’s a lousy actor and Hillary hack. He’ll snarl about 
intelligence “Nazis”. And he’ll carry on tweeting incessantly.

Don’t expect much, if anything, from traditional daily White House press 
conferences. You won’t see many of them on TV – and the familiar cast of 
characters in the briefing room is also under dire threat. “Big media” doesn’t 
rule OK here any longer, according to his incoming press secretary, Sean 
Spicer. There’s a “proliferation” of new voices, “especially on the 
conservative media side”. They deserve “equal access” in the name of 
“perspective”.

All of which means that the Trump team is remixing the representational pot. 
“Next question, please, from our friends at Breitbart …” Meanwhile the 
president himself will mostly be cloistered far off stage, available for photo 
opportunities, interviews with Fox News and tweets unlimited. Ubiquitous but 
elusive. A scarlet pimpernel of social media.Last week’s mass presidential 
snarl-in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
, in short, will be the rarest of events.

So the strategy is clear enough already. Journalism’s twisted titans are 
supposedly out to get the Donald, out to distort and malign him as though the 
election had never been. (Variations on a Brexit theme by Sir Humphrey and his 
elite string quartet.) Worse, they’re part of a huge conspiracy peopled by spy 
chiefs, big drug companies, retired Brit spooks and occasional Russians. Keep 
them in that box – huffing and puffing while Middle America curls a lip – and 
you’ve a platform of infinite durability. Scandals of every kind, from 
bottom-pinching to lurid antics in a Moscow hotel room, never sink in. They’re 
a confected charivari, current for 15 moments. You can embrace triumph and 
victimhood simultaneously.

Thus far, all this seems to be working perfectly. Random effusions via Twitter 
still get newsdesks shifting after midnight. Rationed access to Trump still 
gets maximum replay (because it remains a scarce commodity). And “dishonest big 
media” are still in a bind.

On the one hand, if you’re some TV-cum-industrial giant with merger problems 
on your mind, you’re probably anxious not to declare a four-year war. On the 
other hand, if you’re a lofty, battling newspaper who’s seen subscription rates 
soar since the election, then readers have backed you as a voice of 
questioning-cum-opposition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Ftrump-post-factual-presidency-both-victor-and-victim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F162cb3197989d19bcd50725b5e8a47c09c3d2c52%2F0_97_2069_1241%2F2069.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20a%20post-factual%20presidency%2C%20Trump%20can%20play%20both%20victor%20and%20victim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Ftrump-post-factual-presidency-both-victor-and-victim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20a%20post-factual%20presidency%2C%20Trump%20can%20play%20both%20victor%20and%20victim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Ftrump-post-factual-presidency-both-victor-and-victim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F162cb3197989d19bcd50725b5e8a47c09c3d2c52%2F0_97_2069_1241%2F2069.jpg>
 Meryl Streep was branded an overrated actor after speaking out against Trump. 
Photograph: Mike Marsland/WireImage 
There are inevitable trade-offs here. One chunk of public opinion has already 
decided that “Giving Donald a chance, even though we didn’t vote for him” is 
today’s pragmatism. Another chunk is out on the streets. After Megyn Kelly’s 
defection, Fox has added yet another rightwinger to its primetime team. Fact 
checkers around and about are being laid off. And in a land of local, monopoly 
newspapers, there’s no easy way to launch or maintain a crusade against a 
Republican party that speaks for the readers who throng your supermarkets and 
country clubs.

In Trump terms, there are no “facts” – from Moscow, Prague or random bedrooms 
– that can bring him down. This is a post-factual administration. If you’re a 
walking, talking conspiracy theory, more allegations mean more of the same. And 
as for the great, disregarded legions of foreign correspondents based in DC, 
what balance can they strike? Trump near the edge? Trump sails through? Pity 
the poor BBC, thought worthy of Trumpian scorn already.

These are infernal difficulties. The Washington Post criticised Democrats last 
week for delivering long scripted speeches of complaint in the House, for 
staging routine rallies and banner-waving, for defining protest in traditional 
ways. No good, thePost seemed to think. Now newsgathering, like politics, seems 
to consist of making it up as you go along.

• Ethical bind time. You’re an editor who’s seen a sheaf of “unverified 
allegations” about the president-elect. You work away quietly at trying to 
verify them. But then these selfsame allegations are shown to the present 
president and Capitol Hill dignitaries as well as the PEOTUS himself by the FBI 
and CIA. Their very existence is news.

What do you do? Stick, or twist like BuzzFeed? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/buzzfeed-publishes-donald-trump-russia-documents-ethics-questions>
 Since you knew what’s alleged, what’s there on paper, there’s an imperative – 
with certain “unverifiable”, going on unbelievable, caveats – to stick the 
whole damned thing on the web. Otherwise you’re the metropolitan elite of 
professional news self-regard opting to keep Joe Public in the dark – and 
otherwise, too, there can’t be a rational, even halfway-informed discussion 
about a development of clear public interest.

Observe, too, the way in which, in digital times, one decision to post the 
whole thing on the net frees other papers to offer links to it. A single click 
of a decision covers all. There’s no need for everyone to publish: digitally, 
one is enough. Is that freedom to be righteous and practical, or a freedom to 
duck for cover? A very post-Leveson situation.
 