
Outside the Poundland in Hanley, in the centre of Stoke-on-Trent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stoke-on-trent>, there is a statue of Sir 
Stanley Matthews, the Staffordshire city’s most famous son. Arguably the 
greatest English footballer ever, Matthews was a local boy and played for Stoke 
City until 1947. His likeness stands in the shadow of the Potteries shopping 
centre, a name which evokes another aspect of an illustrious past.

Stoke-on-Trent would be Ukip’s battleground of choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/14/ukip-prospect-stoke-on-trent-voted-leave>
The city’s glory days have long gone and as its fortunes have declined, a deep 
suspicion of politics and politicians has taken root. According to Mark Breeze, 
who stood as an independent candidate here in the 2015 general election: “One 
of the perennial frustrations in Stoke is that the place feels left behind. 
People feel nobody national cares about their problems.”

For the next few months though, the political spotlight will be on Stoke as 
never before. Local MPTristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
’s announcement on Friday that he is standing down has triggered a political 
high noon which the Labour party in particular cannot afford to lose.

A high-profile byelection in the city dubbed the “Brexit capital of Britain” 
is the last thing Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn’s strategists need.Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has held all three seats in Stoke 
since 1950. But the party is struggling in the polls, currently eight points 
behind the Tories, and terrified of losing a grip on strongholds in the 
Midlands and the north, where Ukip is targeting its working-class base. Now it 
faces a battle royal in which the vexed subjects of its stance on Brexit and 
immigration will loom frighteningly large.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcorbyn-byelections-opportunity-challenge-government-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%3A%20byelections%20are%20opportunity%20to%20challenge%20government%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcorbyn-byelections-opportunity-challenge-government-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn%3A%20byelections%20are%20opportunity%20to%20challenge%20government%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcorbyn-byelections-opportunity-challenge-government-video&media=>
Corbyn: byelections are opportunity to challenge government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/15/corbyn-byelections-opportunity-challenge-government-video>
The turnout here in 2015 was a shockingly low 49.9%. “People in Stoke-on-Trent 
aren’t voting Labour because they love Labour,” said Breeze. “They’re voting 
Labour because they’re voting against the Tories.” At the last election, Hunt 
won his seat by more than 5,000 votes, but Ukip came second.

In a city which recorded a 69.4% vote for Leave in last June’s referendum, a 
Ukip pledge to hold Theresa May’s feet to the fire on leaving the EU could go a 
long way. Local Conservatives, whose candidate finished third by a mere 33 
votes, also fancy their chances.

Alastair Watson, a Labour councillor and the former chair of Stoke Central 
constituency Labour party, spent most of yesterday on the doorsteps of Hanley. 
Over tea at the Mango Tree restaurant, he said Labour’s strong local presence, 
and its opposition to the council (a coalition between the Tories, Ukip and 
independents which has announced a series of cuts to children’s centres) would 
probably see it through.

“People need a campaign that’s going to resonate with them,” he said. “And any 
fight’s going to be a hard fight, and we have to fight for every vote. We can’t 
be complacent.”

According to Watson, loyalty to Labour will trump concerns over leaving the EU 
in what has always been a rock-solid area for the party. “Though Brexit’s been 
the issue that everyone’s talking about,” he said, “people recognise that 
there’s more to life than Brexit.

“This is a working-class area, a Labour area. People aren’t going to forget 
that easily when it comes to a significant vote like this byelection. People 
identify with the Labour party and will remember that there’s lots of issues 
beyond Europe where a local MP has done great work for them.”

One of the favourites to become the Ukip candidate is Tariq Mahmood, the 
barrister son of Pakistani immigrants. He insists the party can run Labour very 
close indeed in what is the most deprived of Stoke’s constituencies.

“I certainly think we can do it,” said Mahmood. “The fundamental question 
playing on people’s minds in the aftermath of the referendum is whether we’re 
going to get a hard Brexit or a soft Brexit. The people of Stoke are still very 
concerned.”

Mahmood is a former Labour member. “I was a member in 2010, when Tristram was 
parachuted in. There was a general concern and resentment both within the city 
and the local Labour party – people felt that it was wrong for the party to 
parachute somebody in from London who could then dictate to us how to run the 
city.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Flabour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Labour%20supporters%20backing%20Brexit%20in%20Stoke-on-Trent%20heartland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Flabour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Labour%20supporters%20backing%20Brexit%20in%20Stoke-on-Trent%20heartland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Flabour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video&media=>
The Labour supporters backing Brexit in Stoke-on-Trent heartland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/jun/14/labour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video>
“Labour has always considered the seats in Stoke as safe seats – they think 
they can bring anyone in and they’ll get elected. There is a lot of discontent 
among Labour voters and Labour members. This time around, it’s going to be 
different.”

In recent years, Labour has just about managed to ward off the threat from the 
populist and nativist right in the city; theBritish National party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/bnp> reached a high-water mark of nine 
city councillors in 2009 (six of whom represented wards in Hunt’s 
constituency), but their general election challenges faltered and by 2011 they 
had been wiped out.

Not many local people remember those days fondly, and the memory of the city’s 
national ignominy as a BNP hotspot makes many hostile to the idea of a Ukip MP.

Labour must not allow Trump’s ugly populism to blight the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/labour-trump-ugly-populism-blight-uk>
Liberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> are 
also confident of a strong showing here as they continue to hoover up Remain 
supporters disappointed by Labour’s lacklustre stance on Europe. The night 
before Hunt’s resignation, the party won a council byelection in a Sunderland 
ward that had voted for Brexit by a margin of 61.3%, on an astonishing 42% 
swing from Labour. They finished second in 2010 and believe they can at least 
put up a respectable fight with an unequivocally pro-Remain campaign.

Labour must not allow Trump’s ugly populism to blight the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/labour-trump-ugly-populism-blight-uk>
Breeze believes that if Ukip are to pull off a famous victory they will need 
to go for broke. “IfNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, not Paul Nuttall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/04/ukip-leader-paul-nuttall-under-fire-over-phd-claim-and-nhs>
, stood, people would vote for them in their droves, but otherwise the Ukip 
brand isn’t strong enough. It would give people a reason to go out and vote. We 
saw the same with Brexit. There would be a buzz in the air. People thought a 
high turnout would be good for Remain, but it was clear that it was making 
people come out and vote who’d never had much to vote for before.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farage%20accuses%20Brendan%20Cox%20of%20backing%20extremist%20groups%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farage%20accuses%20Brendan%20Cox%20of%20backing%20extremist%20groups%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video&media=>
Farage accuses Brendan Cox of backing extremist groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/20/farage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
“People feel angry and bitter, and justifiably so. A lot of people who know who
Tristram Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> is don’t 
like how he was parachuted in and that he’s not from a working class 
background. And people increasingly see Labour as a middle class party, not a 
working class party.”

First impressions this weekend suggested that the departing Hunt will not be 
greatly mourned. The MP’s resignation did not set the airwaves in Stoke alight 
as it did in Westminster. A brief story was buried on page seven of the Sentinel
, Stoke’s daily paper – lower billing than the opening of a CBeebies-themed 
attraction at Alton Towers. But one contribution to the paper’s Facebook page 
underlined the stakes now in play. “I can only see one clear winner in this by 
election and it will be Ukip,” Rachel Jennings told the Sentinel. “What type of 
grants, investment and business will we get into Stoke with Ukip in charge?”

 * This article was amended on 15 January 2017. An earlier version quoted Mark 
Breeze as saying: “IfNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, or maybe Paul Nuttall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/04/ukip-leader-paul-nuttall-under-fire-over-phd-claim-and-nhs>
, stood, people would vote for them in their droves, but otherwise the Ukip 
brand isn’t strong enough.” This has been corrected.  