
Amid the clutter of instruments in Barr’s Fiddle Shop 
<http://barrsfiddleshop.com/> on Galax’s Main Street, three guys sat playing 
bluegrass tunes on guitar. Sometimes, the owner Stevie Barr – a man who had 
played for the Queen when she visited Virginia in 2010 – would join in. They 
took turns at lead while connecting only briefly by eye contact. At the end of 
the song, I asked how long they’d been together as a band?

“We met just a few minutes ago,” said the eldest, a man in his late 30s, while 
the two guys in their 20s grinned at my surprise. I should have known. In this 
part of south-west Virginia tunes are passed down, passed on. The arrangements 
might be different but the chords and the melody are hardwired into the 
musicians’ memory bank.
Virginia road trip map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/travel_virginia_web/giv-1406fE9ZKZpOQaBQ/>
Stevie showed me the memorabilia he had collected – old bluegrass 45s, 
setlists, posters and photos – and introduced me to the elderly ladies enjoying 
coffee and cake in the cafe area. They shared tales of their Irish, Scottish 
and English ancestry; Virginia has that settler makeup, though it also had a 
German influx – which brought the dulcimer, an instrument later co-opted into 
the Appalachian sound.

Since I was a teenager learning the guitar, I’d dreamed of a road trip like 
this: where the intoxicating landscape inspired the music and that music 
reflected the communities along its byways. Galax, the last stop on my four-day 
adventure, had that spirit in abundance. It’s a town of 7,000 and famous for 
its annualOld Fiddlers’ Convention <http://www.oldfiddlersconvention.com/> and 
theRex Theater <http://www.rextheatergalax.com/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7b6d63f9743644d53b0fd8cd925114090db9929%2F0_158_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7b6d63f9743644d53b0fd8cd925114090db9929%2F0_158_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Musicians at Barr’s Fiddle Shop in Galax, with Stevie Barr on banjo. 
Photograph: Robert Hull for the Guardian 
This is a tale of two roads. The first is real, one of America’s most scenic 
highways: the 90-mile stretch of theBlue Ridge Parkway 
<http://www.blueridgeparkway.org/> (the 469-mile-long road that links the 
Shenandoah and Great Smoky Mountains national parks). The second is symbolic, 
an evocation of the region’s cultural traditions: theCrooked Road 
<https://www.myswva.org/tcr> (subtitled Virginia’s Heritage Music Trail) links 
nine major venues plus concert halls, stores and festivals connected to the old 
time, bluegrass and country artists whose stories are sprinkled across the 
majestic, often melancholic Blue Ridge mountains.

The two roads frequently overlap and when they do, the mixture of music and 
mountains is irresistible.

I began in Roanoke <https://www.visitroanokeva.com/>, a city within the 
beautiful Roanoke Valley and less than 10 minutes’ drive from the Blue Ridge 
Parkway. I set course for Ferrum, then Floyd – both major Crooked Road venues – 
and hit the Parkway for the hour-or-so drive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ac311923e1940fdf79177b2dd95927873de6be8%2F0_141_2165_1299%2F2165.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ac311923e1940fdf79177b2dd95927873de6be8%2F0_141_2165_1299%2F2165.jpg>
 Entrance to the Blue Ridge Parkway, near Roanoke 
This part of the road affords fantastic views of valleys, of spruce and firs, 
oak and pine forests, and acres of mixed hardwood trees. The road, however, 
doesn’t allow for cruise control. It provides fauna and flora but also requires 
focus, as it twists, turns and undulates through the landscape. Fortunately, 
the Parkway – maintained by theNational Park Service 
<https://www.nps.gov/index.htm> (NPS), and 80 this year – has many pull-in 
observation points (known as overlooks) for safely contemplating the view.

At milepost 135.9, I turned off and headed for Ferrum, and its Blue Ridge 
Institute and Museum <http://www.blueridgeinstitute.org/>. The institute 
provides a superb insight into the region’s musical heritage: in the main 
gallery is a timeline – using photos, video clips, news reports and letters – 
of the evolution of what was originally called “string music” but is now more 
commonly known as “old time” and bluegrass. It also introduces the leading 
musical families, names that crop up repeatedly in these parts: the Carters, 
the Stanleys and the Stonemans.

Appalachian music – driven by guitars, banjos and fiddles – wasn’t as 
straightforward to define as I thought. I learned “old-time” is for (flat foot) 
dancing to, while bluegrass is mainly for listening to. Though, as with many 
“definitions”, there are no hard-and-fast rules. To hasten my education, I was 
loaded up with CDs for the rest of my journey by the museum’s director, Roddy 
Moore. Roddy was also insistent he wanted me to come back, and much sooner than 
I’d expected.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf25aa3ce44fe1e9dada9f309617c43a8cd46606%2F0_0_3546_2400%2F3546.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf25aa3ce44fe1e9dada9f309617c43a8cd46606%2F0_0_3546_2400%2F3546.jpg>
 Memorabilia at the Carter Family Fold. Photograph: Robert Alexander/Getty 
Images 
“Whatever you’re supposed to be doing tomorrow, don’t. Saturday is our 
festival. You need to see this. It’s a pretty big deal,” he said.

And so, with Buster Pack and His Lonesome Pine Boys’ Indian Boogie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U4gqTwW-W0Y> spinning on my car stereo, I made 
a note of the Blue Ridge Folklife Festival’s main musical attractions, and then 
wondered just what “mule jumping” and “coon-dog water racing” might look like.

The mountains imprint themselves on songs written in (and about) this region, 
but as well as the scale of the landscape there is also a hemmed-in feel to 
parts of it. Roads curl around peaks and there are epic switchbacks to 
navigate. These tracks inspire tales, too, such as Shooting Creek Road, which 
led me down from Ferrum towards Floyd. It is one of the most beautiful, 
curving, tree-festooned routes I’ve ever driven – and once moonshine territory. 
The story goes that if a police car was on the road, moonshiners would fire 
their rifles to signal to brothers-in-stills that trouble was afoot. True or 
not, I know that if I hadn’t had to be in Floyd for theFriday Night Jamboree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/dec/09/floyd-country-store-virginia-us-music-venue-bluegrass>
 at the Floyd Country Store, I may still be on that road taking pictures and 
looking for ghosts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc17ca5dc150deac8b323a623bfd713b06ebabc31%2F0_0_5616_3374%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc17ca5dc150deac8b323a623bfd713b06ebabc31%2F0_0_5616_3374%2F5616.jpg>
 Friday Night Jamboree at Floyd Country Store. Photograph: Woody Crenshaw 
Over a honey barbecue chicken dinner at Floyd’s Oddf3llows 
<https://www.facebook.com/Oddf3llows/> restaurant, tourism director Pat Sharkey 
explained to me how this “one-stoplight town” (pop 400+) had become a 
“progressive, artsy and creative” hub amid Floyd County and an otherwise 
conservative, rural south-west Virginia. Her colleague, Vera, put it 
differently. “You remember that 90s TV show Northern Exposure? It’s like that 
here,” she said.

Little Floyd’s big thing is the Floyd Country Store 
<http://www.floydcountrystore.com/> and it’s Friday night extravaganza 
(admission $5): a family-friendly musical get-together that welcomes all styles 
of Appalachian music – and broadcasts it on its own radio show. Run by Heather 
Krantz and husband Dylan Locke, the store is filled with a happy vibe. Though 
my imagination was fired by the music at the store and at the louder, brasher
Dogtown Roadhouse <http://dogtownroadhouse.com/> a few minutes’ walk away, my 
body clock said “sleep”. So I drove five minutes out of Floyd toBella La Vita 
<http://www.bellalavitainn.com/index.html> (doubles from $149+ tax B&B), a 
guesthouse close to the Parkway and run with warmth and enthusiasm by Lisal and 
Matthew Roberts. The four individually themed rooms are spacious but full of 
homely touches. And they do a phenomenal home-cooked breakfast.

Road trips can be beautiful, mysterious things, but they are often only a 
widescreen view of a world you’re passing through, with little time to take in 
the detail, which is what made the visit to theBlue Ridge Folklife Festival 
<http://blueridgefolklifefestival.com/> so rewarding. Amid the displays of hot 
rods and show cars, threshing and rock-crushing machines, molasses and apple 
butter making, and horse-pulling competitions was an array of music that gave 
everyone in the community a voice. I moved between the three music stages, 
listened to the bluegrass gospel ofTrue Life Travelers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9tBKs71GwPM>, the Virginia Piedmont-style 
blues ofJeffrey Scott <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T0cVPqPLnXA>, the “Old 
Time Tunes and Songs” of Gerald Anderson and Friends, and the “Southern 
Virginia African-American Gospel” ofthe RC Gospel Singers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7I_OxPsCpms>. Roddy was right, it was a pretty 
big deal, and as big and tasty a rural musical treat as anyone could handle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e88a1fd15c7de4214b593d15674248b626fb18d%2F0_143_2256_1353%2F2256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e88a1fd15c7de4214b593d15674248b626fb18d%2F0_143_2256_1353%2F2256.jpg>
 Horse Pullling competition at the Blue Ridge Folklife Festival. Photograph: 
Robert Hull for the Guardian 
In following the music of the mountains it was occasionally necessary to leave 
the Parkway, to stay on the Crooked Road. After Ferrum, this meant a blast 
along highway I-81, followed by such a meandering road that I wondered if I 
might meet myself coming back round it. Fortunately, no speed limits (or laws 
of physics) were broken in the search for Hiltons, home to theCarter Family Fold
 <http://www.carterfamilyfold.org/> ($10 adults, $2 children).

The musical legacy of the Carter, and Carter-Cash, family is as rich as any in 
US folk music. The Fold is not only a venue for a weekly celebration of the 
family’s music, and Appalachian sounds in general, it also features the Carter 
Family Museum and the AP Carter birthplace cabin. Both can be visited before 
the 7.30pm shows, and during the interval. As the Mountain Park Old Time Band 
took to the stage at the 850-seat venue, I chatted to Rita Forrester, 
granddaughter of AP and Sara Carter, about the tribute the Fold pays to the 
family’s songs and its overarching role in protecting the region’s musical 
roots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F171e337b26eb15034c7ccedaf3cbf29eb8c8716f%2F0_346_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F171e337b26eb15034c7ccedaf3cbf29eb8c8716f%2F0_346_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Mountain Park Old Time Band at the Carter Family Fold. Photograph: Robert Hull 
Abingdon and Bristol were on my horizon, but only after a night at the Hilton 
Garden Inn 
<http://hiltongardeninn3.hilton.com/en/hotels/virginia/hilton-garden-inn-bristol-TRIGIGI/index.html>
 (doubles from $120, room-only) on the outskirts of Bristol. It was one of 
those stays where I arrived so late I may as well have taken a seat for 
breakfast. It was, however, perfectly positioned for Heartwood, in Abingdon, 
which is the headquarters of the Crooked Road, as well as a venue and museum. I 
met Jack Hinshelwood, the Road’s executive director, and he told me: “It’s 
important to be sensitive about how the road is developed, so as not to damage 
the culture. We don’t want tourism in a form that then kills what is being 
celebrated here.”

A great example of the respect Jack alluded to is at Bristol’s Birthplace of 
Country Music Museum <http://www.birthplaceofcountrymusic.org/> ($13.65 adults, 
$11.55 concessions, 5 and under, free). The museum, which only opened in 2014, 
is already an essential stop (Bristol also has its own fantastic annual outdoor
music festival <http://www.birthplaceofcountrymusic.org/festival/>) and 
celebrates the recordings made here in 1927 by Ralph Peer, a record executive 
from the Victor Talking Machine Company in New Jersey. Peer set up a portable 
recording studio, advertised for performers, and over two weeks recorded 76 
songs by 19 acts, including Ernest Stoneman, the Carter Family and Jimmie 
Rodgers. It’s a fun and educational place that brings the “Bristol sessions” to 
life through displays that allowed me to add vocals in a recording booth and 
play with recording desk sliders to create a mix for a song.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4c5b0c08a6ec7e785f9cd1ffa8ca5e365ed9a09%2F0_183_4817_2890%2F4817.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20Blue%20Ridge%20mountains%20of%20Virginia%2C%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20its%20old-time%20musical%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fblue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4c5b0c08a6ec7e785f9cd1ffa8ca5e365ed9a09%2F0_183_4817_2890%2F4817.jpg>
 Display at Bristol’s Birthplace of Country Music Museum. Photograph: Neil 
Staples 
Galax would come tomorrow, and also a return to the Parkway for a stop at the 
Blue Ridge Music Center <http://www.blueridgemusiccenter.org/>. But road trips 
should have quirks: for me this was a stay in Wytheville, at theBolling Wilson 
Hotel <http://www.bollingwilsonhotel.com/> (doubles from $129+tax B&B). Classy 
and understated, the hotel was a refuge from the interstate and blessed with 
superb Blue Ridge views from the Perch, its stylish rooftop terrace bar. The 
hotel is named after US president Woodrow Wilson’s second wife,Edith Bolling 
Wilson <http://edithbollingwilson.org/>, who was born in Wytheville. Opposite 
is a museum dedicated to her. Next door to that isSkeeter’s World Famous Hotdogs
 <https://www.facebook.com/SkeetersWorldFamousHotdogs/> – fuelling locals and 
people like me since 1925. Quirky but good.

After winning a satnav battle to get me back on the Parkway, I pulled in at the
Blue Ridge Music Center <http://www.blueridgemusiccenter.org/>. The centre has 
a small museum dedicated to old time and bluegrass history, but its jewel is 
the free, noon-4pm concert run daily from late May to late October. As a 
bluegrass band played in this intimate space, I listened to the performers just 
a few feet from me, who between tunes provided insight into a song or its 
arrangement. I also made a note, from what I learned in the museum. It was 
about how, though Scots and Irish heritage is strong in this region, the banjo 
had its origins in west Africa, as an instrument called axalam. It made me 
think of the scope and diversity of music in general, and how playing it is a 
collective, unifying experience. But I also made a deal with myself: that the 
next time I come down this road, I’ll bring my guitar with me.
• Flights and itinerary assistance were provided by Brand USA and the Virginia 
Tourism Corporation <http://www.virginia.org/>. For more information on 
holidays in the US, seevisittheusa.co.uk <http://www.visittheusa.com/> 
 