
Nicola Sturgeon has signalled that Theresa May’s decision to take the UK 
entirely out of the EU single market makes asecond Scottish independence vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/sturgeon-reiterates-hard-brexit-threat-scottish-independence-vote-referendum>
 very likely.

Accusing May of pursuing a hard-right, divisive agenda, Scotland’s first 
minister saidquitting the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/brexit-may-single-market-scotland-fears>
 could be “economically catastrophic”. It was against Scotland’s national 
interests, she said, and raised fundamental issues about what kind of country 
the UK would become.

Sturgeon said the prime minister had to urgently address the conflict between 
her decision to entirely quit the single market with the Scottish government’s 
counter-proposal to giveScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> its 
own special access to the EU. Scotland’s Brexit minister Mike Russell is due to 
present the Scottish government’s EU plan to David Davis, the UK’s Brexit 
secretary, this Thursday during joint ministerial talks on Brexit between the 
UK and devolved governments, in what is expected to be a tense and difficult 
encounter.

Nicola Sturgeon has marched her party to the top of the hill. Where next? | 
Libby Brooks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/nicola-sturgeon-snp-referendum>
With Scottish opinion polls showing declining support for a snap second vote 
on independence, Sturgeon carefully avoided using the words “independence 
referendum” in her statement on May’s speech. She had insisted earlier this 
month she was not bluffing about her threat to stage one, beforeconceding no 
referendum was expected this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/sturgeon-rules-out-second-scottish-independence-referendum-this-year>
.

Challenging May’s renewed pledge on Tuesday to carefully consider Scottish 
proposals, Sturgeon said: “One thing should remain crystal clear: the Tory 
government cannot be allowed to act against Scotland’s wishes and our 
interests, and reject all attempts at compromise.

“It seems the Westminster Tory government now think they can do anything to 
Scotland and get away with it. They must start to understand how wrong they 
are. The UK government cannot be allowed to take us out of the EU and the 
single market, regardless of the impact on our economy, jobs, living standards 
and our reputation as an open, tolerant country, without Scotland having the 
ability to choose between that and a different future.

“With her comments today, the prime minister has only succeeded in making that 
choice more likely.”

Sturgeon dismissed May’s explicit assurances the UK would import all EU laws 
immediately after Brexit, particularly protecting workers and EU citizens 
rights. The first minister accused her counterpart of plotting a low-wage, 
low-tax economy in a “race to the bottom”.

Despite rejecting Sturgeon’s core demand on single market access for Scotland, 
May said she wanted to work constructively with the Scottish government and the 
Welsh and Northern Irish devolved administrations. She said she was determined 
to strengthen the “precious union” between the UK’s four nations.

“At this momentous time, it is more important than ever that we face the 
future together, united by what makes us strong: the bonds that unite us as a 
people, and our shared interest in the UK being an open, successful trading 
nation in the future,” May said.

Yet she appeared to close down those options further by warning that Sturgeon 
was unlikely to win all the extra powers for Holyrood she would like.

May said Scotland would gain greater political and policymaking powers once 
the EU’s powers were repatriated. But she failed to set out what those might be 
and implied they would be limited. She stressed those would be the “right” 
additional powers and warned: “We won’t agree on everything.” She then hinted 
some Scottish demands for increased autonomy in areas such as immigration, 
trade or employment policy would be rejected.

“Our guiding principle must be to ensure that, as we leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, no new barriers to living and doing 
business within our own union are created,” May said.

“That means maintaining the necessary common standards and frameworks for our 
own domestic market, empowering the UK as an open, trading nation to strike the 
besttrade deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/a-uk-trade-deal-with-trump-be-careful-what-you-wish-for>
 around the world, and protecting the common resources of our islands.”

May’s stance put a cross-party consensus on Scotland’s first response to the 
June referendum vote under further deep strain. Some Scottish Green MSPs have 
urged Sturgeon to begin preparing for a second referendum. Ross Greer, the 
party’s external affairs spokesman and a former Yes Scotland official, 
suggested it could be held in spring 2018.

Kezia Dugdale <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/kezia-dugdale>, the 
Scottish Labour leader, agreed with Sturgeon’s case for continued Scottish 
access to the single market. But she said pressing for a second independence 
referendum would be a disaster for Scotland. “Scottish Labour will not back any 
attempts by the nationalists to force another independence referendum on the 
people of Scotland,” said Dugdale. “We need to reform where power lies within 
the UK.”

The Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/ruth-davidson-tory-scotland-independence-referendum-nicola-sturgeon>
, who campaigned for a remain vote in the referendum, challenged Sturgeon to 
accept that May was offering a “clear and reasonable plan” that met many of 
Sturgeon’s demands, including protection of workers and EU citizens’ rights.

“Ever since the Brexit vote, the SNP has tried to use the result as an excuse 
for holding a divisive second referendum on independence,” Davidson said. “It 
has failed to persuade people in Scotland of that case. Now that the UK 
government has spelled out this plan of action, that case has collapsed 
altogether.”

Later, in an interview with the BBC following May’s speech 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-38642213>, Sturgeon 
went further by agreeing with a question on whether the prime minister’s 
rejection of the single market option made a new independence referendum “all 
but inevitable.”

Sturgeon replied: “Well, I think that is very likely the case. Because what I 
have heard today from the prime minister is her inability to engage in 
discussions about further compromise.” She believed Scottish voters had the 
right to choose between May’s vision for the UK outside the EU or “an 
independent future” for Scotland.
 