
Authorities in northern India have ordered the closure of a Coca-Cola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cocacola> bottling plant at the centre of 
protests that it is extracting too much groundwater, an official said Wednesday.

An anti-pollution official said the Mehdiganj plant in Varanasi in the state 
of Uttar Pradesh had breached the conditions of its operating licence, 
prompting the order closure earler this month.

"The plant is closed following our orders," Uttar Pradesh Pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution> Control Board member 
secretary J.S. Yadav told AFP.

"They have also been asked to take suitable measures to recharge the depleting 
groundwater level by twice the amount they have extracted.

"Also, the effluents released by the plant contain pollutants beyond the 
permissible limits."

The plant was also asked to produce a permission certificate from a government 
agency that regulates ground water use, Yadav said.

The company has appealed the closure order to India's environment court, the 
National Green Tribunal, he said.

Coca-Cola, the world's largest soft-drinks maker which has consistently denied 
the allegations, could not immediately be contacted for comment.

The Indian unit of the company hit a hurdle earlier this year when local 
authorities said they would demolish the plant 
<http://www.industryweek.com/global-economy/indian-authorities-threaten-demolish-coca-cola-plant>
, claiming it was built on village council land and was "illegal".

The authorities also imposed a 126,000 rupee ($2,000) fine on Hindustan 
Coca-Cola Company Private Limited, over the land issue.

India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> is one of Coke's 
fastest-growing markets thanks to an expanding middle class.

The bottling plant, one of 58 that Atlanta-based Coca-Cola has in India, has 
been at the centre of protests for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/aug/18/marketingandpr.business>. 
Demonstrators accuse the company of creating major water shortages through 
excessive extraction of water and of polluting groundwater and soil.

Coke last year announced the completion of work to expand the Varanasi 
bottling facility which can produce 600 polyethylene terephthalate bottles a 
minute.
 