
A freezing and squalid Belgrade railway depot where up to 2,000 people are 
seeking shelter from the bitter Serbian winter risks becoming a “new Calais” 
for refugees and migrants abandoned by European authorities, the humanitarian 
groupMédecins Sans Frontières 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/medecins-sans-frontieres> has warned.

Children as young as eight are struggling to survive temperatures that have 
plunged to -16C this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/europe-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb>
, with no running water or sanitation.

At a Belgrade clinic set up by the charity, doctors have seen frostbite and 
burns resulting from the inhalation of toxic smoke, as people burn anything 
they can find to stay warm, among dozens of other medical problems.

Greece: severe weather places refugees at risk and government under fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/greece-severe-weather-places-refugees-at-risk-and-government-under-fire>
MSF estimates that up to 2,000 people are living in a cluster of warehouses 
and other buildings around the city’s main station. It estimates that nearly 
half the patients they have treated are under 18.

“Serbia risks becoming a dumping zone, a new Calais where people are stranded 
and stuck,” warned Andrea Contenta, humanitarian affairs officer for MSF in
Serbia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia>.

The country is not part of the European Union, but it borders several 
countries that are part of the bloc, including Hungary,Bulgaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bulgaria> and Romania, and has become a key 
transit point for those hoping to start a new life in western Europe.

Serbia won praise for its treatment of migrants, but increasing numbers have 
become stranded there as the EU tried to shut down the Balkan route and 
tightened border controls. Processing camps are now badly overcrowded and more 
people are arriving every day. Although they ultimately hope to move on from 
Serbia, many are spending months there, making repeated failed attempts to 
cross into the EU.

“We cannot continue avoiding talking about reality, which is that the Balkan 
route is still open but people are getting stuck because there is no safe way 
to travel,” Contenta said. He added that unofficial estimates were that up to 
8,000 refugees and migrants were stranded in Serbia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Finflux-of-refugees-means-belgrade-risks-becoming-new-calais%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51b4dd104e8b0f4c1ae95d44803a325afe959667%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Influx%20of%20refugees%20leaves%20Belgrade%20at%20risk%20of%20becoming%20'new%20Calais'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Finflux-of-refugees-means-belgrade-risks-becoming-new-calais%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Influx%20of%20refugees%20leaves%20Belgrade%20at%20risk%20of%20becoming%20%27new%20Calais%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Finflux-of-refugees-means-belgrade-risks-becoming-new-calais%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51b4dd104e8b0f4c1ae95d44803a325afe959667%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A person collects water outside a crumbling warehouse that has served as a 
makeshift shelter in Belgrade, Serbia. Photograph: Darko Vojinovic/AP 
The grim conditions endured by thousands outside the government camps were 
highlighted at the start of this week when afreezing cold snap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/several-die-poland-european-cold-weather-snow-continues>
 put lives at risk. MSF was given permission to try to heat the derelict 
shelters, where there is no glass and walls and roofs are full of holes.

“It was –16C outside and we managed to get the warehouse to –1C,” said MSF 
spokeswoman Gemma Gillie. There is also no sanitation and an application to set 
up toilets and showers, submitted to Serbian authorities a month ago, has still 
not been approved.

The cold has already claimed too many lives. Writing in the Observer, William 
Lacy Swing, the head of the UN’s International Organisation for Migration 
(IOM), said theplight of migrants and refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/greece-severe-weather-places-refugees-at-risk-and-government-under-fire>
 should be a focus for leaders gathering inDavos for the World Economic Forum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> this weekend. “They should reflect 
on the growing number of helpless migrants who have frozen to death in the 
current cold snap, with the possibility of many more to be found in a grim 
archipelago of makeshift settlements,” he wrote.

The warehouses used as temporary shelter in Serbia lie behind the main 
Belgrade train station in a litter-strewn no-man’s land dotted with puddles and 
wintry sludge. Graffiti is scrawled across many of the walls.

“No one leaves home unless home is the mouth of a shark,” reads one message on 
the wall of the former Railwaymen’s Club. Other messages read: “We are 
helpless” and “Please don’t forget about us.”

The air is thick with the smoke of a dozen fires of railway sleepers smeared 
with tar and other toxic, scavenged fuel; some smoke billows out of broken 
window panes. “We sleep here,” said a small child, who gave his age as eight, 
as he guided a visitor around the large warehouse.

Some refugees have set up small tents inside the building alongside empty 
cans, plastic bottles and waste, while other groups have used sheets of 
plywood, empty bookcases or doors to block off their own areas of muddy floor 
space.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Finflux-of-refugees-means-belgrade-risks-becoming-new-calais%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19a7c113dadb3f8a04e5ab01cebc5a903a32888b%2F0_231_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Influx%20of%20refugees%20leaves%20Belgrade%20at%20risk%20of%20becoming%20'new%20Calais'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Finflux-of-refugees-means-belgrade-risks-becoming-new-calais%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Influx%20of%20refugees%20leaves%20Belgrade%20at%20risk%20of%20becoming%20%27new%20Calais%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Finflux-of-refugees-means-belgrade-risks-becoming-new-calais%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19a7c113dadb3f8a04e5ab01cebc5a903a32888b%2F0_231_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 People wash themselves outside a makeshift shelter. Many people are stranded 
in Serbia as they try to make their way to Europe. Photograph: Darko 
Vojinovic/AP 
“There’s no place for sleeping, no good food, nowhere to have a shower. There 
are so many sick people, there’s no medicine,” says Shamir Khan, a 22-year-old 
Pakistani from Sadda on the Afghan border, who says he worked in human rights 
before fleeing the country.

Peter Van der Auweraert, western Balkans coordinator for the IOM, said the 
Serbian government had offered places in reception centres for everyone living 
in the warehouses, but were turned down. Although conditions were not ideal in 
some centres, he said they ensured that people had basic protection from the 
cold. He feared migrants were being exploited for cash and politics.

“These people are refusing to move for a couple of reasons. Based on the 
stories that migrants tell us, it seems that some smugglers have infiltrated 
the groups and threaten them – [saying] ‘If you go to these centres, you will 
not be able to get to Europe’,” he said.

“Some of the more radical activists are doing the same thing, saying, ‘You 
should stay and tellEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> how 
you are suffering here.’ To my mind these people are being used to make a 
political point.”

UK urged to transfer child refugees from freezing Europe camps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/uk-urged-to-transfer-child-refugees-from-freezing-europe-camps>
The refugees gave several reasons for not going to the official camps, saying 
they were closed or only took families, but most of all that they feared 
deportation to Bulgaria orMacedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia>. “We had so many problems in 
Bulgaria, so many problems with the police and the people. There is a mafia and 
people were kidnapped,” says Khan.

When the UN warned this week that European countries were mistreating refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/european-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un>
 in cold weather, three of the five deaths it cited were in Bulgaria. The 
country has become notorious among refugee and human rights groups for its 
mistreatment of migrants, who arrive across a land border with Turkey or are 
deported back from other EU countries under the Dublin agreement. That 
provision means asylum seekers coming to the bloc must stay in the country 
where they first arrive.

“Bulgaria has been registering them since the very beginning, which means that 
their first country of entry is Bulgaria. Even if they go somewhere else, they 
could be legally brought back,” said Daniel Smilov, programme director at the 
Centre for Liberal Strategies, a Sofia-based thinktank.

Both official security forces and vigilante groups have been accused of 
brutality <https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/01/20/bulgaria-pushbacks-abuse-borders>
. People trying to cross the country are often wary of seeking help or shelter, 
making them particularly vulnerable.
 