 Cities is supported by  
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/?source=100RC_Guardian_Banner_9.22&utm_medium=display&utm_campaign=100RC_Guardian_Banner_9.22>
About this content <> 
“One bucket, one life,” says Ojo, puffing on a marijuana rollup. We have 
stopped by theFloating School 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/02/makoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings>
, a two-storey solar-powered wooden structure that floats on the Lagos lagoon 
on a bed of plastic barrels. I ask him to explain what he means. It’s the young 
fisherman’s way of summing up the dangerous exertion that is his part-time 
vocation: sand dredging off the coast of Makoko, the world’s biggest floating 
city.


The dredgers, he explains, descend a wooden ladder into the depths of the 
lagoon, armed with only a bucket and the will to live. The depths to which they 
go mean total submersion. Then they have to climb out with a sand-laden bucket 
that will be emptied on to the floor of a boat. When the boat is piled high 
with wet sand – high enough so that it’s on the verge of sinking – it sails to 
shore, from where the sand is loaded on to trucks, for delivery to building 
sites around the city.




On this, my fourth visit, Makoko is as I’ve always known it: the tiny “jetty” 
from which visitors and residents board dugout canoes into the labyrinths of 
the floating settlement; the grey-black sludge that passes for lagoon water; 
the tangle of boats impatiently slithering through the labyrinth of waterways, 
making the traffic of Makoko reminiscent of the notorious Lagos roads. Then 
there’s the hustle and bustle of human activity: women smoking fish or peddling 
food and bric-a-brac; half-naked children rowing their own boats or playing on 
the verandas of the wooden shacks; congregants in white garments, singing and 
dancing in impromptu churches on boats.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fwater-world-makoko-floating-school-lagos-kunle-adeyemi&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20water%20world%3A%20the%20story%20behind%20the%20floating%20school%20of%20Makoko%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fwater-world-makoko-floating-school-lagos-kunle-adeyemi>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20water%20world%3A%20the%20story%20behind%20the%20floating%20school%20of%20Makoko%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fwater-world-makoko-floating-school-lagos-kunle-adeyemi&media=>
Video: Welcome to water world – the story behind the floating school of Makoko 
Makoko is also the perfect nightmare for the state government – a slum in full 
view, spread out beneath the most travelled bridge in west Africa’s largest 
city. Everyone who flies into Lagos to do business on the Islands is likely to 
find themselves passing over the Third Mainland Bridge. For a city keen to 
re-create itself as forward-looking, Makoko is a dismal advertisement, and the 
government knows this. It is, therefore, ever keen to pursue the seemingly 
easiest solution to this “embarrassment”.


Some 2,000 people a day enter Lagos, many ending up in settlements like Makoko

On 16 July 2012, four days after the State Ministry of Waterfront 
Infrastructure Development issued a 72-hour quit notice to residents, a band of 
machete-wielding men laid siege to Makoko’s buildings. Five days later, 
according to the Social and Economic Action Rights Centre (Serac, a legal 
advocacy group for underprivileged Nigerian communities threatened with forced 
evictions), the assault escalated: the demolition workers set fire to targeted 
structures and deployed armed police who allegedly fired gunshots 
indiscriminately. One resident was killed, shaming the demolition workers into 
suspending their efforts. By then, 30,000 people had been rendered homeless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3b4eb1604197ea7beb6ac5e8fd7238304fcbc66%2F0_212_4073_2788%2F4073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world's%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world%27s%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3b4eb1604197ea7beb6ac5e8fd7238304fcbc66%2F0_212_4073_2788%2F4073.jpg>
 Makoko was founded as a fishing village in the 19th century. Photograph: 
Andrew Esiebo for the Guardian 
An estimated 2,000 people enter Lagos every day, many ending up in informal 
settlements like Makoko. It was founded as a fishing village in the late 19th 
century, by immigrants from the Egun ethnic group. As its population swelled 
and land ran out, they moved on to the water. Today Makoko is home to people 
from a variety of riverine communities along Nigeria’s coast.


Water world

The area known to outsiders as Makoko is actually six distinct “villages” 
spread across land and water: Oko Agbon, Adogbo, Migbewhe, Yanshiwhe, Sogunro 
and Apollo. The first four are the floating communities, known as “Makoko on 
water”; the rest are based on land. The appellation used for the collective, by 
the Lagos State Government and NGOs, is Makoko-Iwaya Waterfront. But both sides 
are united by the water, upon which they depend for livelihood, as well as the 
Yoruba language, which serves as a lingua franca in a settlement where multiple 
languages are spoken: French, English, Yoruba and Egun.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17d6e207381b7ef3ec430e041276efcd4f6ac6c0%2F0_282_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world's%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world%27s%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17d6e207381b7ef3ec430e041276efcd4f6ac6c0%2F0_282_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
 One of the many churches in Makoko. Photograph: Andrew Esiebo for the Guardian 
From the Third Mainland Bridge – the fastest route from the island “downtown” 
to the airport – Makoko looks serene. Wooden shacks stand on stilts, as boats 
named Bejamin, Gbenon Nu or Ahude glide across the still water. Amid the 
evening rush-hour traffic on the bridge, Makoko basks in the dull orange light 
of the setting sun, a soothingly familiar presence.


The idea the government can push people from their homes with no discussion 
seems normal in Lagos
Robert Neuwirth 
Close-up, though, it throbs with the kind of energy that marks Lagos out and 
has made it a darling of urban theorists. Makoko shares with Lagos the 
exceptional situational inventiveness that makes the entire city tick. Take the 
matter of clean drinking water: criss-crossing the lagoon bed are pipes, paid 
for and laid by enterprising residents to bring in clean water – for a modest 
fee – from boreholes in neighbouring Sogunro.

The population estimates vary widely, from 40,000 to as much as 300,000. 
“Nobody knows, there’s no [credible] data available,” says Monika Umunna, of 
the Heinrich Böll Foundation, one of the most active non-governmental 
organisations at work in Makoko.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d995177424c136e3e1f03ac01deebe151bf0611%2F0_299_4498_2701%2F4498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world's%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world%27s%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d995177424c136e3e1f03ac01deebe151bf0611%2F0_299_4498_2701%2F4498.jpg>
 A boy casting his fishing nets in the lagoon by Makoko. Photograph: Andrew 
Esiebo for the Guardian 
Presiding over various parts of the waterfront are local chiefs, known as 
Baales. One of them is Emmanuel Shemede, crowned in 2005 as the Baale of Adogbo 
Village. His territory contains the only two primary schools: Whanyinna Nursery 
and Primary School, founded in 2008 by his younger brother Noah; and the 
floating school, which has generated more positive buzz for Makoko than any 
other thing in recent years.

Baale Shemede’s house is built from wooden planks, and rises, like every other 
structure here, on stilts out of the brackish water. On the ground floor are 
two sections: one his living quarters, the other a Baptist church that he 
gifted to a missionary friend. The Baale wants to know why we are visiting. His 
voice carries a hint of guardedness, which is not surprising to me.

I have now visited Makoko enough times to realise just how wary its people 
have become of the “tourists” – many of them white – who stream past, cameras 
in hand. In the minds of Makoko’s children, the long-lens DSLR camera has come 
to symbolise white privilege. Some call out “Yevo!” – “white person” – to my 
companion, the black Nigerian photographer Andrew Esiebo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c96f6d91583a54e83d4231bef3ebb53511f683d%2F0_250_4500_2702%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world's%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world%27s%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c96f6d91583a54e83d4231bef3ebb53511f683d%2F0_250_4500_2702%2F4500.jpg>
 Makoko Floating School, designed by architect Kunlé Adeyemi, has become the 
community’s most popular and famous building. Photograph: Andrew Esiebo for the 
Guardian 
There’s a widespread feeling that many of the people who come to Makoko to 
take photographs do so to make money off it – selling photos or stories to 
raise funds from which the people of Makoko will never benefit. Some of the 
wariness is also self-protective: the community has had to face up to 
government officials displeased by the embarrassment they believe photographs 
from Makoko attract.

Resistance

This embarassment is what spurs demolitions like the one in 2012. In the last 
few years, Lagos state has seen several. Badia, a swampland settlement on the 
edge of the city’s Apapa Port,was one of the worst-hit targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/16/forced-evictions-badia-east-lagos-this-is-not-right>
. More than 15,000 people have lost their homes.

 “The idea that the government can simply push people from their homes, with 
no discussion, no recognition of decades of residency … seems unfortunately 
normal in Lagos,” says Robert Neuwirth, who lives in and writes about informal 
settlements like Makoko around the world. “The authorities in Lagos seem to 
approach city planning from an authoritarian point of view – as if their desire 
for development transcends everything.”

The forced evictions of Badia East, Lagos: 'This is not right'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/16/forced-evictions-badia-east-lagos-this-is-not-right>
There was a strong push back against the 2012 demolition. Two months later, a 
Serac housing affiliate known as the Urban Spaces Innovation began work on a
regeneration plan for Makoko 
<http://bfi.org/ideaindex/projects/2014/makokoiwaya-waterfront-regeneration-plan>
. It was meant, they said, to be “a community-led and people-centred 
development model”, and brought members of the community together with 
academics, non-profits and international consultants. In January 2014, USI 
submitted the plan to the Lagos State Ministry of Urban and Physical Planning.


 “The people of Makoko told the governor that we have a plan to develop the 
community,” says Lookman Oshodi, a USI project manager who helped develop it. 
“Governor Fashola said, ‘OK, if you’re saying you don’t want to go, go and 
bring us your plan, let’s look at it.’”

 Oshodi says the regeneration plan achieved two things: “One, it put the 
demolition and forced eviction on hold. If any government wants to carry out 
demolitions in the community today, the people will say ‘But you’ve requested a 
plan, and that plan has been submitted, so what steps have you taken?’ Second, 
the plan was able to outline various strategies for redeveloping Makoko into a 
livable and sustainable community.”

 Not everyone is a fan of slum redevelopment or plans for regeneration. 
Neuwirth bristles at the idea of deliberately transforming slums into models of 
urban development. “Why can’t communities simply be communities and develop in 
the organic way that we allow other communities to develop?” Pointing to 
Brazil’s favelas and Istanbul’s gecekondu communities, he says: “They are 
inspirational in that people have developed them themselves, without government 
and real estate types pushing them around. Without a doubt, they still have 
problems. But they are stabilising themselves and, over time, knitting 
themselves into the fabric of their cities. This is a true marvel of global 
urbanism.”

 It is also a marvel that, for a crowded community that sits on a fetid 
lagoon, Makoko’s biggest health challenges are not communicable diseases such 
as cholera, but non-communicable diseases: malaria, respiratory diseases and 
malnutrition. In the absence of antenatal care, childbirth is also a major 
challenge. Residents, however, hint of an immunity to epidemic. “The government 
thinks that this will be a hub of disease, there’s nothing like that,” Baale 
Emma told me in 2014 at the height of the Ebola scare. “We don’t have cholera 
here. No epidemic here. Go and check the hospitals.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4f295e36e3a021562d9e57d25d931c73c40690b%2F0_299_4498_2701%2F4498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world's%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Makoko%3A%20danger%20and%20ingenuity%20in%20the%20world%27s%20biggest%20floating%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fmakoko-lagos-danger-ingenuity-floating-slum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4f295e36e3a021562d9e57d25d931c73c40690b%2F0_299_4498_2701%2F4498.jpg>
 Fishing, timber and sand dredging are the predominate occupations in Makoko. 
Photograph: Andrew Esiebo for the Guardian 
There are none. Doctors Without Borders opened a floating clinic in January 
2011; although very popular when it launched, it stayed open less than a year. 
Today Makoko continues to be served by a network of informal, unregistered 
clinics that attend to basic ailments. There are also a number of traditional 
birth attendants who deliver Makoko’s babies in an atmosphere ofhigh levels of 
maternal mortality <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DZtjOvF6j4o>. Oshodi tells 
me of an ongoing plan, led by Arctic Infrastructure, an engineering company he 
founded, to build a healthcare centre with support from the government of 
Switzerland. “The community will build it, we will supply drugs, staff and 
equipment,” he says.


A real community

 There are three possible options for Makoko’s future. First is that it goes 
the way of Badia East, razed for high-rises, or Bar Beach, site of a massive 
land reclamation project that is turning nine square kilometres of Atlantic 
Ocean into what developers are touting as “the Manhattan of west Africa”, a
residential and commercial mini-city called Eko Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/true-north/2014/jan/21/new-privatized-african-city-heralds-climate-apartheid>
. Lagos is starved of land, but has no shortage of property developers; were 
Makoko to sink (or be crushed), in its place would rise apartment blocks and 
villas priced out of the reach of all but the wealthiest Lagosians.

 Second is that the government will stop obsessing with demolition and focus 
instead on providing the infrastructure that citizens expect of their 
administrators – hospitals, schools, electricity – and allow Makoko to develop 
in its own way and at its own pace, as Neuwirth recommends.

Makoko Floating School, beacon of hope for the Lagos 'waterworld' – a history 
of cities in 50 buildings, day 48
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/02/makoko-floating-school-lagos-waterworld-history-cities-50-buildings>
 Third is a middle road of sorts: the implementation of the regeneration plan, 
a collaborative compromise between residents, civil society groups and 
government. The floating school may have acted as a catalyst here: built using 
local labour, with financial support from the UNDP, it was nominated for the 
Design Museum’s Design of the Year Award and has become Makoko’s most famous 
and popular building. “The floating school has been adopted by the Lagos State 
government as a model that’ll be used for developing the houses on water in the 
community,” says Oshodi. In 2013, Kunlé Adeyemi, who designed the school, told 
me: “Eko Atlantic is about fighting the water; [here in Makoko] we’re saying – 
live in the water!”

 Nine months ago a new governor, Akinwunmi Ambode, took office in Lagos. 
Makoko’s fate in the new regime is unclear. The Baale thinks politicians’ first 
terms are periods of respite: no one wants to needlessly alienate critical 
voting blocs when there’s a second term to be won.

 “It would seem sensible, before engaging in rhetoric and planning about 
redevelopment, to come to a full understanding of what’s actually there,” says 
Neuwirth of Makoko. “The smokehouses, and the circuits of importing that bring 
the fish there to be smoked. The home building industry. The boat building 
industry. The businesses that bring clay and laterite for landfill. Whatever 
the politicians and developers might think of it, Makoko is a real community, 
built by the families that live there. It is valuable to them – and to the city 
as a whole.”

Drone footage by Adekanmi Ojuri and Oxford Brookes University

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 