
Paintbox Bistro is a typical modern restaurant: high ceilings, framed art and 
hand-built wooden tables, serving everything from snacks to wraps to flank 
steak by a chef who did time in trendy Toronto eateries. It’s a description 
that could apply to many of the restaurants that regularly pop up (and back 
down) throughout Canada’s foodie capital. Except Paintbox Bistro has a twist: 
it is located in what used to be the city’s roughest neighbourhood, Regent Park.


A 69-acre housing project known for bedbugs and crime, Regent Park became 
especially notorious in 2005, when a member of the Point Blank Soulijahs gang – 
an offshoot of the Regent Park Crew –shot dead a 15-year-old bystander 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/posted-toronto/eaton-centre-shooting> near the 
Eaton Centre, the biggest mall in the downtown core. The killing shocked 
Toronto; several years later, in 2012, fighting between the gang’s descendants, 
the Sic Thugz, led to another weekend shootout.

Visit now, however, and the area is unrecognisable: a $1bn revitalisation 
project has transformed it into a mix of subsidised housing, condominium 
apartments, retail shops and community amenities. Paintbox itself, a certified 
social enterprise, trains and employs local people who face barriers to 
employment, many of whom live at or below the poverty line.

“It took us five years to refine the model,” says Chris Klugman from Paintbox 
Bistro. “Now we have about half our staff who fit our mission, working 
alongside experienced professionals attracted to Paintbox because they share 
our social conscience.”

Indeed, as Regent Park attempts to shrug off its violent reputation by 
integrating upmarket living with public housing, it has attracted global 
attention as a kind of socio-economic experiment in public-private 
gentrification. For better or worse, this one-time crime haven in Toronto has 
become a test: can you regenerate social housing without resorting to social 
cleansing?

The experiment
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fe46dca50fa281ddca9f86727a3228de8a98a2a%2F0_0_3721_2752%2F3721.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto's%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto%27s%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fe46dca50fa281ddca9f86727a3228de8a98a2a%2F0_0_3721_2752%2F3721.jpg>
 A policeman in Regent Park, Toronto, looks for two suspects in a shooting on 
12 June 1975. The area was notorious for crime. Photograph: Frank 
Lennon/Toronto Star via Getty Images 
Nobody doubts that this was a badly needed intervention in a troubled 
neighbourhood.


Although well-intentioned, the designers of Regent Park clearly didn’t realise 
that crime – gang-related robberies, drug deals and shootings – would flourish 
in the many dark, quiet corners, where it was difficult for police and city 
services to access.


Nor were gangs the area’s only problem. The old housing stock was crumbling, 
and Toronto Community Housing Corp (TCHC), the city-owned non-profit social 
housing provider, couldn’t afford to repair or replace it.


A community of nothing but social housing is not normal
Mitchell Cohen 
In other cities around the world, the pattern in such situations has become 
predictable: private developers are allowed to buy the public housing sites, 
evict low-income tenants, blow up the old buildings and build mostly new luxury 
apartments that the original tenants can’t possibly afford. In London, the most 
famous recent example is the Heygate Estate, in Elephant and Castle, where the 
council housing was demolished and low-income tenants were “decanted” to sites 
on the outskirts of the capital.

Similarly, in the US, legislation under the Clinton administration in the 
1990s led to the destruction of public housing complexes that displaced tens of 
thousands.

Regent Park aimed to be different. TCHC partnered with the Daniels 
Corporation, a developer of condos and rental buildings whose roots are in 
co-op housing. The old buildings are being torn down and replaced by towers and 
townhouses – a total of 7,500 units by 2020. As in other developments, there is 
a mix of subsidised and affordable housing, as well as condo apartments. Sales 
of the latter underwrite the former.

“Neighbourhoods in downtown Toronto would typically be mixed-income and made 
up of single-family homes, condos, rental apartment buildings and social 
housing,” says Mitchell Cohen, president of Daniels Corp, when asked about the 
split. “A community of nothing but social housing is not normal.”

So far, perhaps, so typical. But TCHC also insisted on a unique “right of 
return” policy. Every former tenant was given a contract which guarantees that, 
once the new TCHC buildings are completed, they can return to the same size of 
unit they’d vacated, with rent calculated the same way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcf3dc9e311c11eafc83de072e2ddf0c6f50b2e4%2F0_378_5672_3403%2F5672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto's%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto%27s%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcf3dc9e311c11eafc83de072e2ddf0c6f50b2e4%2F0_378_5672_3403%2F5672.jpg>
 Nejat Khalid, 18, on the Regent Park building site where she once played as a 
child. Photograph: Lucas Oleniuk/Toronto Star via Getty Images 
Furthermore, when consultants suggested renaming Regent Park to avoid the 
stigma, and locating the marketing suite for the new apartments off-site so 
that well-heeled condo buyers wouldn’t have to venture into a neighbourhood 
with so dangerous a reputation, Cohen, who felt the only way to succeed was to 
embrace the history of Regent Park, dismissed both ideas.


Instead, the presentation centre was located in the heart of Regent Park – and 
designed for double duty as a de facto community centre. There is a sprawling 
six-acre park, plus three acres of athletic grounds (hockey rink, basketball 
court, soccer/cricket pitch and running track) as well as the Regent Park 
Aquatic Centre, a modernist gem with screens so that, at designated times, 
Muslim women can swim privately from men.

There is also a multi-use arts and culture centre, and the Centre for 
Community Learning and Development, an educational partnership among Daniels, 
TCHC, the provincial government and three postsecondary institutions.

Another new tactic was to start the revitalisation along a major street, with 
the aim of attracting commercial tenants. Today there is a supermarket, bank, 
pharmacy, coffee shop and telecom provider, with more to come. All are 
amenities that are essential to a functioning community, yet are frequently 
overlooked in top-down developments.

 The whole project was a gamble on two fronts. Would people who could afford 
luxury apartments want to live next door to social housing? And would 
lower-income residents continue to feel included and welcome in what had been 
their home for decades?

The reaction
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F690e7191ee61be0fba66ac198c690564f7920f6f%2F0_332_4965_2979%2F4965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto's%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto%27s%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F690e7191ee61be0fba66ac198c690564f7920f6f%2F0_332_4965_2979%2F4965.jpg>
 Art in the lobby of the Paintbox condominium building in Regent Park, Toronto. 
Photograph: Carlos Osorio/Toronto Star via Getty Images 
Muhammad Muzharul Haque, Mary Henkelman and Marie-Lauren Gregoire are sitting 
at a table in Paintbox bistro. Each is a resident of Regent Park, but each also 
got here through a different route.

Gregoire, a communications professional, had been a renter before qualifying 
for a Daniels programme to increase her down payment through an interest-free, 
payment-free loan. She used it to buy a condo in Regent Park.


 “There’s a Neighbourhood Association that’s forming,” she says excitedly. 

 “That’s me,” says Henkelman, a retired university administrator who lives in 
a condo above Paintbox.

 “Ohhh, it’s you,” exclaims Gregoire, happy to have made the connection. 

 Haque, meanwhile, is an artist and father of two from Bangladesh who has 
lived in subsidised housing in Regent Park for 15 years. He tells Henkelman 
that his work is on display around the community, including outside the 
elevators in her condo.

 “Ohhh,” she replies. “I knew the art was by local artists but I didn’t know 
who did the ones in my building. I’m so pleased to meet you.”

This is a model that only works when there is a really hot market
Jennifer Keesmaat 
Together, we visit Henkelman’s 16th-floor condo, then cross the street to 
Haque’s apartment. It’s social housing, but from the outside looks virtually 
indistinguishable from the nearby condos, and inside he enjoys a brand-new 
three-bedroom unit with loft-like ceilings.

 All three mention a few problems, but nothing, they say, you might not 
encounter renting or buying elsewhere in any big city.

Still, the project hasn’t been without its challenges. Some long-time social 
housing residents were upset that a random draw for new units, which was 
pitched as the fairest system for everyone, didn’t give precedence to their 
history in the community.

And, although every resident of TCHC housing was guaranteed a right of return, 
in the early years most had to be relocated off-site until their new units were 
built. This often stretched on for years, especially when construction slowed 
after the 2008 global financial collapse. All moving expenses were covered by 
TCHC, but many residents were forced to move to unfamiliar, far-flung parts of 
the city. Not surprisingly, some chose not to suffer yet another move, and have 
stayed in their new neighbourhoods.

Nor are all of the replacement units on the Regent Park site proper. At the 
beginning of the regeneration, Daniels built three off-site buildings with a 
mix of TCHC and affordable renting units, located a roughly 20-minute walk away 
from Regent Park. It was only when tenants complained that TCHC announced the 
“right of return” to the Regent Park footprint. (Some of the tenants who were 
relocated to the three off-site buildings have chosen to stay there.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88261648d9d8c491864ae2a784bbc4d95f7a68a9%2F0_222_4287_2572%2F4287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto's%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto%27s%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88261648d9d8c491864ae2a784bbc4d95f7a68a9%2F0_222_4287_2572%2F4287.jpg>
 A view of the Toronto city skyline by night, as seen from the Regent Park 
neighbourhood. Photograph: Alamy 
 Martine August, an urban planner and post-doctoral fellow at Rutgers 
University, conducted interviews with Regent Park residents from 2008 to 2012, 
including those in the process of relocation and those who had moved into their 
new units. Although no one liked the crime or disrepair of the old Regent Park, 
she found, they valued their community.

“The narrative that Regent Park was physically isolated as a lower-income 
community and needed the social influence of middle-class neighbours was 
overblown,” says August. “A major theme in my research was people saying the 
strength of their community was huge.”

She points out that this seemed to be because of, not in spite of, nearly 60% 
of the original Regent Park population having been born outsideCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>.

Contrary to the premise that “socially mixed” redevelopment benefits 
low-income tenants – for example, by erasing the stigmatisation of living in a 
rough area like Regent Park – August says a review of nearly 200 international 
studies shows that’s not always the case.

“The stigmatisation moves from the broader scale of the neighbourhood to the 
more fine-grained scale of individual buildings and people,” she says. 
“Continuing to be poor, a person of colour, a public housing tenant, still 
creates stigma in Regent Park. Outsiders may not be able to tell which building 
is which, but people said to me that when they walked out of their buildings, 
those living in condos knew who they were.”

Adding richer residents to the mix has another effect, she argues: “The TCHC 
tenants also had a history of political organising that is often destabilised 
when people who have more political clout and more social power get involved in 
neighbourhood associations.”

The future
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d2f7f2a05928ac34ce1ebaa1af053a9d8eeb4f7%2F0_0_3776_1848%2F3776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto's%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Regent%20Park%3A%20Toronto%27s%20test%20case%20for%20public-private%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Finside-regent-park-torontos-test-case-for-public-private-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d2f7f2a05928ac34ce1ebaa1af053a9d8eeb4f7%2F0_0_3776_1848%2F3776.jpg>
 Regent Park in 1968, when hopes for the low-cost housing project had turned 
sour. Photograph: Bob Olsen/Toronto Star via Getty Images 
 At this point, it’s too early to tell if that bleak picture will hold. 
There’s a healthy anti-poverty movement in Toronto, and Regent Park’s 
politically savvy activists, who have agitated for their rights at City Hall, 
are not likely to be intimidated by middle-class condo owners.

Besides, in the absence of government funding for social housing, 
public-private partnerships seem like the only solution to regenerating areas 
like Regent Park that badly need it.

Jennifer Keesmaat, Toronto’s chief planner, says she is a supporter of the 
Regent Park regeneration but warns against glorifying it.

 “Positioning public-private partnerships as a kind of golden goose is 
misleading,” she says. “This is a model that only works when there is a really 
hot market and you have properties that are in desirable areas. You also can’t 
think that no public money will be required. The city provided funding for 
Regent Park, and by creatively identifying specific programmes, the developer 
was able to tap into some provincial and federal funding.

The art of gentrification: city data made beautiful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/nov/30/art-gentrification-patterns-data-visualisation-herwig-scherabon->
 “You will create a vibrant neighbourhood and build better housing for 
existing tenants, and those are important and worthy goals, but as a broader 
financial model it won’t always work.”

For now, as the redevelopment continues, things appear to be just about 
holding together. The first building quickly sold out, as have the others since.

“We thought it was a worthy experiment,” says Kate Sellar. A human rights 
lawyer who works for Legal Aid along with her husband, Sellar bought a condo in 
the first building that opened in Regent Park in 2010.

With their family growing, the Sellars sold their condo in 2013 and bought a 
three-bedroom townhouse, also in Regent Park, with a small backyard and a 
detached garage. Their young daughter goes to the local City of Toronto day 
care and their son is in one of the two elementary schools in the 
neighbourhood. In both cases, Sellar’s kids mix with children from a variety of 
cultural, social and economic backgrounds. For her, at least, it is an example 
of the best of Toronto: a mixed community in one of the most diverse cities in 
the world.

“We knew that if it was going to work you’d need people to buy the first 
condos, to take a leap of faith,” she says. “I haven’t regretted that decision 
for a second.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 