
Aditya Chakrabortty <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adityachakrabortty>: 
The earnings gap is both a political failure and an intellectual one

So now we know what Jeremy Corbyn’s new media strategy looks like 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/panel-jeremy-corbyn-brand-leftwing-populism-yanis-varoufakis>
. You keep schtum for ages, then go on TV and radio on the same morning and 
give out not one, not two but three stories at a go. That’s how many I counted 
in the 15 minutes or so he was with John Humphrys: a U-turn on freedom of 
movement for people, a declaration that he would be prepared to go on the 
picket lines with the striking staff of Southern rail and a call for a maximum 
wage. All that before he even does his turn in Peterborough this afternoon.

Of these, the first is a disappointing reminder that triangulation isn’t only 
a tool of Blairites, the second is commendable and the third raises a 
fascinating question. Why does the idea of a maximum wage seem so implausible? 
After all, it’s not a new concept. Reviewing public-sector wages for David 
Cameron, Will Hutton proposed that no council chief or health trust boss should 
earn over 20 times more than the lowest-paid employee – and the Conservatives 
applauded the proposal. At John Lewis, the ratio is set at 75 times. During the 
second world war, Franklin D Roosevelt proposed amaximum income of $25,000 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1992-04-08/local/me-457_1_maximum-wage> (about 
$365,000 in today’s money) with a 100% tax on all income above that. Aristotle 
argued that the richest Greek should have no more than five times the wealth of 
the poorest person.

Yet the earnings gap continues to grow. In America last year, the three 
highest paid CEOs took home between themnearly $300m 
<http://www.aflcio.org/Corporate-Watch/Paywatch-2016>. This is plainly 
ridiculous. The average FTSE boss is not 129 times more productive than their 
workers. Nor are they putting in magnificent performances – measured by sales 
or by return on capital.

Everyone from Cameron to Vince Cable to Theresa May accepts this system is 
wrong and needs reform – by someone else. They hope shareholders will do it – 
and the shareholder revolts never turn into a pay revolution. They pray 
publishing pay ratios will shame bosses into being more restrained – and zip 
happens. This is a political failure and an intellectual one. Over the past 40 
years, economists from Michael Jensen onwards have written entire libraries on 
how executives should be paid – how their incentives can be tweaked to align 
their interests with those of shareholders. So why hasn’t similar focus been 
turned to the question of how to incentivise pay restraint?

Polly Toynbee: <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee> People take 
what they can if there’s no one to stop them

He’s right, Jeremy Corbyn is absolutely right. Of course top pay should be 
capped. Look what’s happened in recent times: 20 years ago, FTSE 100 CEOs gave 
themselves an average of 45 times the median pay of their staff, says theHigh 
Pay Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/04/uk-bosses-will-make-more-by-midday-than-workers-will-earn-all-year-fat-cat-wednesday>
. Now it has shot up to over 130 times more, for absolutely no gain to anyone 
except themselves. Research fromLancaster University last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/negligible-link-between-executive-pay-and-firms-performance-says-study>
 showed that there was negligible connection between executive top pay and the 
return on investment capital in companies; less than 1%.

There are no reasons why top pay has shot through the roof since the 1980s, 
except that people tend to take what they can if there is no one to stop them. 
Companies are positively encouraged by the remuneration consultants who tell 
boards what everyone else is paying, urging them to pay in the top quartile if 
they want to be seen as top quartile companies. (Only top pay, of course.) It’s 
a battle for top talent is their evidence-free claim.

But what genius could pluck the right maximum pay number out of the air? 
Cameron’s random cap on public sector pay no higher than his own £142,000 was 
duplicitious and unjust, another way to diminish the public sector while 
letting private pay rip. A pay ratio would be the way to do it: start by 
setting it back at that 45:1 rate. JP Morgan, a century ago, said his bank 
would not invest in any company paying its CEO more than 20:1, as it would mean 
that leader was in it for himself, not the good of the company.

The mayor of Portland, Oregon proposes to tax companies paying their CEO above 
100:1 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/07/business/economy/portland-oregon-tax-executive-pay.html>
. A swingeing great penalty for companies with greedy boardrooms sounds a good 
idea, cash to be redirected to their lowest paid.

But to propose anything as radical as this, a political leader first needs a 
track record of economic authority and at least a measure of credibility with 
business. Sadly, without earning that trust first, Corbyn’s idea will bite the 
dust, and further drag down his chance of persuading people to entrust the 
country to him. Being right is never enough in politics.

Stefan Stern: <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stefan-stern> Companies 
should be forced to publish and justify their pay gaps

There’s no doubt the gap between what people at the top are getting paid and 
what the rest of the workforce receives has grown enormously over the past two 
decades. Most of the reasons offered to justify this are self-serving and 
unconvincing. Just how talented is this “talent”? The latest research from
Lancaster University Management School 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/negligible-link-between-executive-pay-and-firms-performance-says-study>
 suggests there is no link between grossly inflated CEO pay packages and the 
rather underwhelming performance of businesses over the past 10 years.

That said, trying to pick one number as a pay maximum is hard to do. Pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pay> is going to vary, and some people may 
genuinely be able to claim that they have helped create a lot of wealth and are 
entitled to a good share of it. In any case, if you set a rigid pay cap, 
well-paid advisers are going to find clever ways of getting round it. That is 
what has happened before.


The practical way to expose the growing gaps in pay is to require companies to 
publish their pay ratios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/pay-ratios-could-be-made-public-as-part-of-executive-salary-reform>
, between what the boss is getting and what the median employee receives in the 
first instance, although top-to-bottom ratios should also be explored. The 
publication of these ratios will put pressure on firms to explain and justify 
the pay gap. Shareholders will have the evidence they need to have a much more 
effective conversation with company boards. There may, of course, also be a 
role for higher income tax above a certain level.


It is quite hard to legislate effectively to force better behaviour from rich 
and powerful people. New rules can and do help, but ultimately a cultural shift 
is needed to make change stick. Business leaders and their shareholders need to 
recognise their shared responsibility to show restraint, and try to reverse the
increase in inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/08/global-inequality-may-be-much-worse-than-we-think>
 which has provoked so much anger and resentment in electorates around the 
world.

Joseph Harker: <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/josephharker> Why not 
close the gap in the traditional way: through tax?

There’s no doubt the sentiments behind Jeremy Corbyn’s proposals are right. 
Over the last couple of decades, pay for those at the top has spiralled, as 
they’ve outsourced employment to the cheapest parts of the world, automated 
much of the rest, and placed many workers into insecurezero-hours jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/zero-hours-contracts>, while at the same 
time they cream off the resulting increase in profits.

Backscratching remuneration committees are just one way in which the system 
has embedded itself into our biggest businesses, where the rewards for failure 
are just as high as for those who succeed. Something has to change, because 
across the world ordinary working people have twigged that the current system 
is not working for them.

Given that we live in a capitalist society, though, a crude pay cap – no 
matter what level it’s set at – would be almost unworkable and would cause a 
huge amount of turmoil within the business world, which would strongly resist 
it. Ideas have been touted for workers on boards, public shaming, or increased 
shareholder rights, but they merely tinker around the edges.

Jeremy Corbyn calls for maximum wage law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-calls-for-maximum-wage-law>
So given the key principle underlying all of this is inequality, why not close 
the gap in the traditional way:through tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/11/inequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax>
?

Theresa May said this week she believes in sharing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-tories-party-social-justice-speech>
. There’s no better way to do this than to have those who earn the most 
contribute the most. As their rewards skyrocket, our business chiefs should be 
made to pay higher rates. Why stop at 50% when 60% or even 70% could be imposed 
on the very highest earners?

Of course this would have to be accompanied by an increase in funding for 
HMRC, to clamp down on the billions already lost in tax dodging. But that’s a 
service that would benefit all of us, not just the 0.1%, who can no longer be 
allowed to grow fat on the pay cuts and insecurity they impose on the rest of 
us.

Poppy Noor: <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/poppy-noor> Wage inequality 
fertilises the ground from which real inequality grows

Being on minimum wage <https://www.theguardian.com/society/minimum-wage> is 
hard, but what’s harder is being on minimum wage in a city where people earn 10 
times your salary – and feel it’s warranted.

Minimum wage jobs are some of the hardest and most derided jobs in the 
country. You’re always on your feet, you don’t have time to go to the toilet, 
and yet you are the most integral part of an entire company. If the chefs or 
waiters didn’t come in for a day at a restaurant, the whole place would grind 
to a halt. But somehow our bosses justifystealing our tips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/waitress-work-tirelessly-tips-poverty>
 and sending us home an hour early to save the £7.20 that they wouldn’t notice 
fall out of their pockets, while we walk home in the cold to make up for it.

These things are a signal of how wage inequality fertilises the ground from 
which real inequality grows: the type that justifies the idea that for some, 
our basic needs are a luxury. Like being able to afford a place to live in, 
having three meals a day, or seeing our friends. Wealthy customers will remind 
us that we cannot exist without them – as they often would when commenting that 
I’d just lost my tip for not serving them on time, or when one once called me a 
servant to my face.

I’m not angry at people who earn a lot of money. But I am angry at a system 
where money equals human value. I am no less the person who graduated from a 
good university or writes for the Guardian when I am a waitress. I want to live 
in a society that recognises me as both of those things, and still equally as 
human.

If introducing a maximum wage cap helps people to recognise that, I’ll be 
happy.

Ellie Mae O’Hagan: <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ellie-mae-o-hagan> A 
maximum wage is a policy that responds to the current political moment

It’s fair to say Jeremy Corbyn’s relaunch as a populist leftwing leader has 
not gone smoothly. His response to thehumanitarian crisis in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/jeremy-hunt-denies-red-cross-claim-of-nhs-humanitarian-crisis>
 was somewhat slow, and his apparent reverse ferret on freedom of movement 
elicited mixed responses from his base of supporters.

But the announcement of a maximum wage is exactly the kind of move many on the 
left hoped for when the rebranding of Corbyn as a populist was first mooted (in 
fact, it was historically apet cause of Bernie Sanders 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2015/11/bernie-sanders-used-to-think-there-should-be-a-maximum-wage/416790/>
, who advocated a 100% tax rate on any earnings over $450,000). This is a 
policy that does not yet have the support of a majority of the public (39% in 
favour, 44% opposed in September 2015,according to YouGov 
<https://twitter.com/JoeTwyman/status/818745561570480128>) but then, the notion 
of leaving the EU was not backed by a majority of the public when the 
referendum was first announced either. As Dominic Cummings, campaign director 
of Vote Leave,wrote in a recent blog 
<https://dominiccummings.wordpress.com/2017/01/09/on-the-referendum-21-branching-histories-of-the-2016-referendum-and-the-frogs-before-the-storm-2/>
: “Vote Leave exploited the [political circumstances] imperfectly but 
effectively.”

Indeed, a maximum wage is a policy that responds to the current political 
moment: yawning inequality and resentment of “the Davos class”, asNaomi Klein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/rise-of-the-davos-class-sealed-americas-fate>
 puts it. And unlike ending freedom of movement, it does this by redirecting 
people’s anger towards society’s most powerful and away from marginalised 
groups. What Brexit taught us is that the British public are open to radical 
political change; the left should be taking advantage of that by putting 
forward socialist ideas that have hitherto seemed unpalatable. A maximum wage 
is part of that process.

As usual with Corbyn, presentation was a problem here. It’s a shame he 
announced such a provocative policy almost as an aside in a radio interview. A 
proper policy launch with a bit of fanfare would have been good – possibly in 
the run up to Fat Cat Wednesday, the first day of the year when top bosses’ 
earnings have already surpassed the annual salary of the average UK worker. But 
the fact that this debate has begun is exciting: people out there are angry at 
a broken and unfair economy. The left should be talking to them.



 