
Carbohydrates are causing an obesity epidemic and fats silt up your arteries. 
But protein? It provides the building blocks for essential stuff such as cells, 
muscles, bone, nails, hormones and enzymes. The word “protein” comes from the 
Greek and means first, as in most important. We can’t get enough of it. 
Bodybuilders take protein supplements in the form of milkshakes, energy drinks 
or bars to build up their muscle bulk. But even ordinary folk see protein as 
their new best dietary friend. The world market for protein supplements is now 
firmly mainstream and estimated to reach £8bn a year by 2017.

The solution

The UK government’s dietary guidelines 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/547050/government__dietary_recommendations.pdf>
 state that men need 55.5g and women 45g of protein a day. Achicken breast 
<http://www.howmuchprotein.com/foods/chicken/> has at least 23.5g while a 100g 
steak has 20.9g. In western Europe and the US, people are already eating twice 
as much protein as recommendedby the World Health Organisation 
<http://jn.nutrition.org/content/130/4/886.full?>. The most recent US dietary 
guidelines warn that teenage boys and adult men should “reduce overall intake 
of protein foods” and eat more vegetables. Teenage girls, who often have 
disturbed eating patterns, and elderly people, who are prone to lose muscle 
mass as well as appetite, were the only groups identified as being 
protein-deficient. The New York Times has an ongoing debate about the risks and 
benefits of protein. Last week, its print edition carried an article with the 
headline “Is protein a magic bullet?”, though the online version asked “Can you 
get too much protein? 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/06/well/eat/can-you-get-too-much-protein.html?_r=0>
”.

Alarm bells sounded after research published in the journal Cell Metabolism 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24606898> in 2014 (using data from more 
than 6,000 Americans) concluded that people aged between 50 and 65 who got 20% 
or more of their calories from protein were 74% more likely to die from cancer 
than those who ate less protein. The study has been criticised for taking 
dietary records for only 24 hours. It also surprisingly found that a 
high-protein diet actually reduced the risk of dying early in those aged over 
65. It’s not clear why the results should be so different for the two age 
groups.

The evidence on protein remains inconclusive. Some studies show that more 
protein – and fewer carbohydrates – 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16287956, 
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa055317> reduces blood pressure and 
protects against heart disease.What the evidence does suggest is that red or 
processed meat <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27106137> as a main source 
of protein is linked to an increase in colon cancer, while fish, chicken and 
plant sources of protein are healthier. You can only absorb 20g to 40g of 
protein in one sitting andI could find no robust evidence that guzzling it will 
increase muscle mass <http://jn.nutrition.org/content/130/4/886.full>. So, 
unless you are old, poorly and not eating, you are probably getting enough 
protein and are unlikely to benefit from supplements –whatever they promise you 
<http://www.livescience.com/8086-protein-supplement-myth-revealed-body-work.html>
.
 