
Five years ago, to take a walk along the embankment of the Moscow river, 
south-west of the Kremlin, would have been a miserable affair – through the 
depressing, weed-strewn expanse of Gorky Park, navigating pot-holed roads and 
dodging stray dogs.


Now, it is a very different experience. The waterfront has been redeveloped 
and the parktotally remodelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/26/gorky-park-soviet-moscow-russia> 
– it is now packed with families strolling in the summer sunshine or skating on 
its frozen paths, depending on the time of year. Along the way, all manner of 
eateries and coffee shops cater to newly acquired tastes; people on bikes speed 
past in the cycle lanes.

Unlike the jarring, ruthless, civilisational changes of the 1990s, the changes 
to Moscow over the past five years were almost imperceptible on a 
month-to-month basis. But taken cumulatively, they have resulted in the 
emergence of a very different city; one that is eminently more liveable.

“What we have seen in the past few years is a change of tone, of the substance 
of the city,” said Ilya Oskolkov-Tsentsiper, who founded the Moscow lifestyle 
magazine Afisha in 1999 and then theStrelka <http://www.strelka.com/?lang=> 
institute in central Moscow, which was set up in 2010 to be the vanguard of 
urban thinking in the Russian capital. “Suddenly Moscow is a city where taking 
a nice walk on a Sunday afternoon is a normal thing to do and something 
pleasurable.”

Suddenly Moscow is a city where taking a nice walk on a Sunday afternoon is a 
normal thing to do
Ilya Oskolkov-Tsentsiper  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433496981160%2F73c0e80c-7f7f-480f-ae71-7e8cdb3753cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20'Moscow%20experiment'%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20%27Moscow%20experiment%27%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433496981160%2F73c0e80c-7f7f-480f-ae71-7e8cdb3753cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Five years ago, Gorky Park was weed-strewn and full of pot-holed roads. 
Photograph: Wowhaus Archive 
Guardian Moscow Week / Московская неделя Guardian – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/live/2015/jun/08/guardian-moscow-week-live> 
These changes were most associated with city official Sergei Kapkov. A member 
of Vladimir Putin’s United Russia party and a long-term associate of oligarch 
Roman Abramovich, he became the unlikely champion of a new type of city that 
would answer the needs of the middle class that had sprung up in recent years. 
He oversaw the redevelopment of Gorky Park and then ran the city’s Culture 
Department, untilhe resigned earlier this year 
<http://calvertjournal.com/news/show/3737/sergei-kapkov-moscows-culture-minister-resigns>
.

Kapkov’s departure, apparently from frustration at having his initiatives 
blocked, comes in parallel with a changed political climate in the country, as 
western sanctions and falling oiling prices combined to strike a serious blow 
to the economy last December, and Russian counter-sanctions banned imports of 
cheeses, fruits and other products from the west.

Fewer Muscovites could afford to travel abroad, and fewer tourists arrived 
from the west, evidenced by a number of airlinescutting flights to the city 
<http://www.themoscowtimes.com/business/article/britain-s-easyjet-cuts-flights-to-russia-amid-aviation-downturn/518285.html>
 in recent months. Many here are now wondering whether Kapkov’s “Moscow 
experiment” is over, and how durable the changes he introduced will be.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433432115632%2F98dca34e-59d4-4499-84bc-12d21ac5f31f-2060x1418.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20'Moscow%20experiment'%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20%27Moscow%20experiment%27%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433432115632%2F98dca34e-59d4-4499-84bc-12d21ac5f31f-2060x1418.jpeg>
 City reformer Sergei Kapkov. Photograph: Getty 
“Kapkov’s reforms provided a whole generation of young creative types with a 
sense – perhaps somewhat illusory – that they could do things on a small scale; 
that there was a real fabric of life in a public city,” said Tsentsiper.

Under Yury Luzhkov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/sep/29/youri-luzhkov-russian-rebel>
, who was mayor of the city from 1992 to 2010, there was little time to think 
of quality of life or urban development, as Muscovites focused on getting rich, 
or simply surviving. Luzhkov’s legendary bad taste manifested itself in the 
overbearing statues by his buddy Zurab Tsereteli. During his tenure cheap, 
gaudy architecture was often built on sites previously occupied by historic 
buildings that had succumbed to fire with suspiciously convenient timing, thus 
avoiding hefty renovation costs.

Luzhkov was fired in 2010 and replaced with Sergei Sobyanin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/21/moscow-announces-new-mayor>, a 
transition that coincided with some in Moscow beginning to think seriously 
about how to make the city not just richer, but more liveable. In summer 2010, 
Tsentsiper’sStrelka institute opened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/aug/10/moscow-architecture-strelka>
 with the aim of developing architecture and urban planning in the city. There 
was a lot of catching up to do.

“During the Soviet period, all the finances for the city came from the state; 
there were no other ways of financing urban development,” said Evgeny Asse, a 
leading Moscow architect who worked in the city planning bureau in the 1980s 
and who took part in many projects during the Kapkov years, including work on 
parts of the Moscow river embankment. “Now you have the dilemma of how to 
combine three factors: the state, developers and society. All over the world 
there’s an issue of finding a compromise between these three players, but 
[elsewhere] they have decades of experience.”

Asse said the situation improved under Kapkov, but there is still a top-down 
management system in Moscow city politics – based on the old Soviet idea that 
the city offers “gifts” to its residents, rather than engaging in a symbiotic 
process with the population to find the ideal urban solutions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433495319227%2F6cc272a7-3157-463c-8ead-4a508ac84988-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20'Moscow%20experiment'%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20%27Moscow%20experiment%27%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433495319227%2F6cc272a7-3157-463c-8ead-4a508ac84988-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Kremlin embankment outside theTretyakov Gallery 
<http://www.tretyakovgallery.ru/en/> has also received a major makeover. 
Photograph: Mark Rice-Oxley 
“Take pedestrianisation: they said they would make 19 kilometres of streets 
pedestrian and that’s what happened,” Asse said. “But I never saw any research 
explaining why 19 kilometres, why the particular streets they chose, how to 
make these pedestrian streets the basis of life for real people. The rents get 
even more expensive when the streets are pedestrianised, meaning you end up 
with expensive boutiques that are of no use to ordinary people. The small cafes 
and retailers that should be the fabric of urban life can’t afford to be there.”

Sometimes it feels like expert consultation is there “merely to provide 
legitimisation for bad decisions”, according to Asse. He cited the example of a 
new hotel planned for Leningradsky Prospekt, one of the main city 
thoroughfares, for which one design plan envisages a mock-up of one of Stalin’s 
“Seven Sisters 
<http://www.moscow-russia-insiders-guide.com/seven-sisters-in-moscow.html>”, 
the neo-gothic skyscrapers that dot Moscow.

“A group of us said there is nothing wrong with that style, but it would be 
good to find a different architectural language, to avoid talking in 
stereotypes. But they told us the mayor had already made his decision. So then 
what was the point of having us in the role of experts?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F129772661&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F129772661>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F129772661&media=>
Watch other Muscovites discussing their city here 
<https://vimeo.com/user40782476/videos> 
As well as the top-down transformations, there have been more organic changes 
to the city as huge numbers of Muscovites began travelling regularly and 
bringing back ideas from their trips. Levels of customer service are still 
probably the worst of any European capital, but truly egregious rudeness and 
aggression are now the exception rather than the norm, as a whole generation of 
Muscovites who have travelled the world no longer find surly, Soviet-style 
service acceptable at home.

The brash, flash-the-cash hedonism of the early post-Soviet years has given 
way to a new, more mature eating-and-drinking scene. A plethora of cafes, bars 
and restaurants have been opened by people who are enthusiastic about food and 
drink, rather than just keen to make a quick profit. Tours to Brooklyn in New 
York were organised for Moscow restaurant owners to give them menu and design 
ideas, and some chefs have begun experimenting with updated versions of 
traditional Russian ingredients and recipes. Indeed, the gradual discovery of a 
collective Moscow foodie gene resembles the gastronomic changes in Britain of 
two decades ago.

Many link the increased “official” interest in urban thinking with an attempt 
to channel the energy of this new middle class: the Muscovites who have done 
well from the oil-boom years, travel frequently, and wanted to introduce some 
change at home. After the protest movement that swept the capital in 2011-12, 
extra thought was paid to the idea of what to do with the movement and its most 
charismatic leader,Alexei Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny>, a Muscovite who said he 
wanted to stand for mayor.

The Russian authorities have see-sawed over Navalny, with some elements keen 
to lock him up, and others believing he should be allowed to operate, then 
defeated politically. While he has faced frequent court cases and his brother 
has been jailed, he was also allowed to stand in mayoral elections in 2013 – 
the idea being that, with all the attention now lavished on the new urban 
middle class, they would not require opposition politics. Despite Sobyanin’s 
use of the “administrative resource” and skewed media coverage, however, 
Navalny got animpressive 27% of the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/09/alexei-navalny-recount-moscow-election>
 – not enough to force a second round, but enough to vindicate those in the 
Kremlin who felt he should never have been allowed to stand in the first place.

If you think falsifying elections is bad, no amount of bicycles are going to 
help you
Alexei Navalny  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433496001495%2Fa6c252c0-b682-4def-a64f-ecb1b10234eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20'Moscow%20experiment'%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20%27Moscow%20experiment%27%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433496001495%2Fa6c252c0-b682-4def-a64f-ecb1b10234eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alexei Navalny walks out of a Moscow detention centre on 6 March, 2015. 
Photograph: Maxim Shemetov/Reuters 
“The scheme of bringing hipsters to Sobyanin by giving them all this nice 
stuff didn’t work,” said Asse. “It became more and more clear that Kapkov’s 
policies were somehow in contradiction to the general trend in the country. He 
was never in opposition, but his heroes were not the heroes of the Kremlin.”

“Of course you can’t deny the improvements, they are there,” said Navalny 
himself, when asked about the city’s recent changes. “But basically, what has 
happened is there was a huge gap in quality of life between Moscow and most 
normal western cities, and we’ve closed that gap slightly. I don’t think 
there’s any correlation between bicycle lanes and political activity. If you 
think falsifying elections is bad, no amount of bicycles are going to help you.”

Navalny lives in a small apartment in the outlying region of Marino, a grey 
suburb where he says little has changed in the past few years. Given the amount 
of money Moscow authorities have at their disposal, he added, what is amazing 
is that much more has not been done.

“When I stood for mayor in 2013, we did the sums and only Shanghai and New 
York had bigger municipal budgets. It was the third biggest municipal budget in 
the world; if things were done more efficiently, you should be able to improve 
more than a couple of parks with this money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433497376732%2F0cbc5f66-0f82-4284-a867-ede0a2e37bc0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20'Moscow%20experiment'%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20%27Moscow%20experiment%27%20over%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fis-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433497376732%2F0cbc5f66-0f82-4284-a867-ede0a2e37bc0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A model shows off a Vladimir Putin ring during Moscow’s recent New Russian 
fashion contest. Photograph: Maxim Shemetov/Reuters 
Kapkov’s idea that the energy of creative, possibly opposition-minded 
Muscovites should be channelled into improving the fabric of the city had 
failed. He declined to be interviewed for this article, but in a Facebook post 
announcing his resignation, he wrote: “For those who come after me, I would ask 
you to remember that our bosses are the city’s residents, not its rulers. 
Muscovites are self-sufficient, they don’t need choices made for them and they 
don’t need to be taught. We need to respect them and their choices. The city is 
made up of people: diverse, difficult, different people. Listen to them, and 
you’ll be amazed how easy it is to make the right decisions.”

The big question, and the one to which nobody knows the answer, is what comes 
next for Moscow. The war in Ukraine, a more aggressive nationalism, and the 
atmosphere that led to the murder of Boris Nemtsov, have all pointed to the 
city becoming more introverted and withdrawn.

“When I see my young friends opening another food market or something similar, 
they seem to be strangely out of touch with this new zeitgeist,” said 
Tsentsiper. His consultancy company is now working on the revamping of VDNKh, a 
huge Soviet-era exhibition centre. It is also developing a startup which aims 
to provide an affordable, off-the-shelf renovation service for the 83% of 
Muscovites who live in standardised Soviet-era housing.

For all that Kapkov lost his battles, however, there remains a certain legacy, 
both for Moscow andRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> as a 
whole. Regional administrations across the country have suddenly become 
interested in the renovation of parks and the rejuvenation of public space. In 
Moscow, many of the positive changes to the fabric of the city are hard to 
undo, whatever happens. Many people worry there are changes in the air, but 
hope is far from lost – with some suggesting that if the Europeanisation of 
Moscow is over, the end of this copycat urban development may not be such a bad 
thing anyway.

How much do you know about Moscow? – quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/08/moscow-quiz-russia-test> 
“The history of Russian culture has always been a pendulum swinging between 
love with the west and a more introverted search for its true self,” Tsentsiper 
said. “In the last 10 years, there has been a lot of looking to the west and 
copying from it. There has been a lack of a narrative about who we are, what we 
are, and why we are here. Perhaps it won’t be the worst thing in the world if 
the pendulum now swings back to an interest in Russia and Russianness.”

 * How is Moscow changing for you? Tell us in the comments below

 * В рамках Московской недели Guardian (8-12 июня) мы подготовили несколько 
русскоязычных материалов. Присылайте ваши комментарии на русском языке к этим 
статьям, и мы опубликуем некоторые из них. Пишите на moscow.week@theguardian.com 