
A man suspected of shooting dead 39 people in a New Year’s Eve attack on a 
nightclub in Istanbul is an Uzbek national who trained inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, Turkish officials have said.

Istanbul nightclub attack caps off dreadful year for Turkey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/istanbul-nightclub-attack-dreadful-year-for-turkey>
Abdulkadir Masharipov was captured late on Monday in a raid by security forces 
on a house in Esenyurt, a residential district of Istanbul, 25 miles from where 
the attack took place.

In the last two weeks dozens of people across Turkey have been detained and 
questioned in connection with the assault at the Reina nightclub, which was
claimed by Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/isis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack>
 in revenge for Turkish military involvement in Syria.

Istanbul’s governor, Vasip Şahin, said Masharipov was well educated, spoke 
four languages and had operated under the alias Ebu Muhammed Horasani. He said 
the suspect had trained in Afghanistan, enteredTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> in January 2016 and clearly carried 
out the attack in the name of Isis.

On the night of the attack the gunman arrived by taxi at the nightclub in the 
Ortaköy district and shot dead a 21-year-old police officer, Burak Yıldız, and 
Ayhan Arık, a 47-year-old travel agent who had been walking past the entrance.

He then went inside and started spraying the club with bullets. The attacker 
repeatedly reloaded his weapon to shoot the wounded as they lay on the ground. 
Citizens of Israel, France, Tunisia, Lebanon, India, Belgium, Jordan and Saudi 
Arabia were among the victims, and 70 people were injured.

A Turkish counter-terrorism official told the Guardian the security officers 
who located Masharipov had worked on finding individuals connected with the 
suspect after identifying him and confirming who he was thanks to a foreign 
intelligence agency.

Officers then worked to trace his movements in recent days, deploying “all the 
resources” at the disposal of the security services. There were raids or checks 
on about 150 addresses associated with Masharipov, detentions of a few dozen 
individuals possibly linked with him, and a review of approximately 7,200 hours 
of surveillance footage. “They did a good job of connecting the dots,” the 
official said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fistanbul-nightclub-attack-suspected-gunman-abdulgadir-masharipov-had-training-in-afghanistan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85fea2b58590db8c44b1aadf294482db6d404de8%2F0_17_720_900%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Istanbul%20nightclub%20attack%3A%20suspected%20gunman%20'had%20training%20in%20Afghanistan'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fistanbul-nightclub-attack-suspected-gunman-abdulgadir-masharipov-had-training-in-afghanistan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Istanbul%20nightclub%20attack%3A%20suspected%20gunman%20%27had%20training%20in%20Afghanistan%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fistanbul-nightclub-attack-suspected-gunman-abdulgadir-masharipov-had-training-in-afghanistan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85fea2b58590db8c44b1aadf294482db6d404de8%2F0_17_720_900%2F720.jpg>
 Abdulgadir Masharipov photographed shortly after his arrest in Istanbul on 
Monday night. Photograph: Reuters 
The official said the investigation would now focus on Masharipov’s 
accomplices – who are other members of his cell, who gave him instructions and 
picked the target, who provided him with weapons, and are they are planning 
other attacks in the country.

“This is obviously a network of people, and they’re trying to establish what 
that network is about,” the official said, indicating that initial assessments 
favoured the theory that Masharipov had received instructions rather than acted 
alone. “We haven’t fully assessed the target selection. Was he advised by 
someone? Who did the target selection? He didn’t do it opportunistically.”

The official said the fact that Masharipov, born in Fergana, Uzbekistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uzbekistan>, was not on an Interpol 
watchlist and did not come from Syria highlighted the need for better 
intelligence sharing.

“When you think about how did it happen, it’s a classic soft-target attack and 
the best prevention is intelligence, particularly since he’s not a Turkish 
citizen,” the official said. “This guy, although he was known to have terrorist 
ties, wasn’t on Interpol, and anybody who knew him didn’t report him to us 
either.”

The militant group he trained with in Afghanistan has yet to be identified.


Few Isis militants who have carried out attacks in the Europe or the US have 
been interrogated in the aftermath, most engaging in a suicidal effort, and 
there have been fewer still whose interrogations could yield information on 
attacks in the planning stages.


The official said another piece of the puzzle in Masharipov’s case was 
identifying his motivation for staying alive. “He had money and family. He’s 
not a suicide fighter so there are questions about motivation and ideology,” 
the official said.

Şahin said Masharipov had confessed to carrying out the massacre and that his 
fingerprints matched those of the attacker. He can be held for up to 30 days 
under Turkey’s state of emergency, which was introduced after afailed coup 
attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/whats-happened-in-turkey-first-hours-of-the-coup>
 in July, before he is charged and formally arrested.

Four people were arrested with Masharipov, Şahin said. “An Iraqi man was 
detained as well as three women from various countries from Egypt and from 
Africa. There is a high chance that they may be connected [to Isis] because 
they were staying in the same house.”


After fleeing the scene of the massacre, it is believed the gunman initially 
hid in a safehouse, where he was joined by his wife and children.

The newspaper Hürriyet said on Tuesday that the suspect’s wife and 
one-year-old daughter were caught in a police operation in Zeytinburnu, a 
working-class district of Istanbul, on 12 January.

The Turkish television channel NTV said the suspect’s son had been taken into 
protective custody. It said police had established the gunman’s whereabouts 
four or five days ago but delayed the raid so they could monitor his movements 
and contacts.

The Turkish counter-terrorism official said Masharipov tried to resist his 
arrest during the raid, but didn’t have the chance to fetch the weapons he had 
stashed in the house when he was captured, so officers were able to subdue him 
without a gunfight.
 