
The new year has kicked off with heated debate over the government’s 
aggressive bid to claw back $2bn from some of Australia’s most vulnerable 
people.


While apparent flaws in the Centrelink welfare crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/even-thought-its-an-error-i-have-to-start-repaying-my-debt-centrelink-debt-victims-share-their-stories>
 have been a focus of public discussion, the controversy has rightly prompted 
indignation at a policy targeting members of our community who are struggling 
to make ends meet, while at the same time, more than one in three large 
corporations paid no Australian tax in the past financial year.

The debate provides a timely opportunity to look at the top end of town, where 
wealth is concentrated in Australia.

As the world’s political and business leaders come together in Switzerland  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/16/pound-falls-to-lowest-level-since-flash-crash-on-brexit-worries-business-live>
for the annual World Economic Forum, Oxfam has released a new report revealing 
the shocking scale of the global inequality crisis.

Eight men own more than 3.6 billion people do: our economics is broken | Mark 
Goldring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/eight-people-earn-more-billion-economics-broken>
Just eight billionaires are as wealthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/eight-people-earn-more-billion-economics-broken>
 as the poorest half of humanity.

The globe’s richest eight men have a staggering net wealth of $621bn – 
coexisting in a world of extreme poverty where one in 10 people are surviving 
on less than US$2 a day, and where one in nine people go to bed hungry every 
night.

While public attention will inevitably turn to the identity of the super-rich 
individuals, this is a distraction from the true crisis at hand: the current 
economic system is broken. It is one that serves the interests of multinational 
corporations and the super-rich, leaving the rest of us behind. The new 
statistics show that the global inequality crisis is more extreme than we had 
feared.

While there have been inroads in eradicating poverty, the stark truth is that 
the rich are becoming richer and dwarf the gains made by everyone else, leaving 
the poorest unable to lift themselves into better lives.

Oanh in Vietnam is just one of the billions of individual human faces of this 
great divide. She needs kidney dialysis three times a week. While Oanh’s 
dialysis is covered by insurance, the need for her to pay for medicine leaves 
her US$100 short every month.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fits-time-to-target-the-top-end-of-town-and-the-obscene-profits-of-the-super-rich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F418586115ae0e5623b6330255c5338b1ef3e5ad5%2F0_0_4096_2627%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20time%20to%20target%20the%20top%20end%20of%20town%20and%20the%20obscene%20profits%20of%20the%20super-rich%20%7C%20Helen%20Szoke&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fits-time-to-target-the-top-end-of-town-and-the-obscene-profits-of-the-super-rich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20time%20to%20target%20the%20top%20end%20of%20town%20and%20the%20obscene%20profits%20of%20the%20super-rich%20%7C%20Helen%20Szoke&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fits-time-to-target-the-top-end-of-town-and-the-obscene-profits-of-the-super-rich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F418586115ae0e5623b6330255c5338b1ef3e5ad5%2F0_0_4096_2627%2F4096.jpg>
 The eight richest people in the world: (top row L-R) Microsoft founder Bill 
Gates, Spanish Inditex fashion founder Amancio Ortega, US investor Warren 
Buffett, Telmex CEO Carlos Slim; (bottom row L-R) Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos, 
Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, Oracle founder Larry Ellison, and Bloomberg 
CEO Michael Bloomberg. According to a report released by Oxfam, these eight 
people own as much wealth as 3.6 billion people – about half of the world’s 
population. Photograph: DSK/EPA 
In a country where there are still 13 million people living in poverty and 
where women work for as little as $1 an hour to make clothes for some of the 
world’s biggest fashion brands, Oanh has no hope of raising the money she needs 
to pay for a kidney transplant.

Oanh and her partner cannot dream of a family as they fall deeply into debt.

Oanh’s plight may seem distant in Australia, but the nation so often referred 
to as the lucky country is not immune from the world’s inequality crisis.

Oxfam’s analysis shows that in Australia today, the richest 1% of the 
population own more wealth than the poorest 70% of our citizens combined.

Turning to the absolute extreme, the two wealthiest billionaires in Australia  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/16/gina-rinehart-and-harry-triguboff-own-more-than-australias-poorest-20-research-finds>
– between them worth US$16.1bn – have the same amount of wealth as the bottom 
20% of the country. That is, they have more wealth than 4.8 million of the 
poorest people in this country. Meanwhile, the people in the bottom half of the 
Australian population have just over 6% of national wealth between them.

But there are ways to bridge the divide and fix the broken system that is 
breeding discontent, destabilising political institutions, fracturing societies 
and risking further economic instability.

The inequality crisis is being fuelled around the world by immoral and 
unethical practices of big business – the use of tax havens to avoid paying a 
fair share of tax, which could be used for essential public services; the 
failure to pay workers a living wage and the expenditure of billions to lobby 
governments for rules in favour of the super-rich.

World's eight richest people have same wealth as poorest 50%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/16/worlds-eight-richest-people-have-same-wealth-as-poorest-50>
Previous Oxfam research has shown that tax dodging by Australian-based 
multinationals is costing our own coffers up to $6bn annually.

It is also depriving developing countries, where money is so desperately 
needed and services are stretched beyond breaking point, of an estimated $3bn a 
year.

The problem is undeniable and recognised across all sides of politics. This is 
not a left or right issue – it is one that is of concern for all of humanity.

The time has come for more than just tough talk.

Wayne Swan: Tax avoidance impoverishes us all. Fighting it requires 
challenging the powerful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/11/wayne-swan-tax-avoidance-impoverishes-us-all-fighting-it-requires-challenging-the-powerful>
Hardline action – such as an unapologetically harsh approach towards the 
nation’s welfare recipients – should instead target the large companies in 
Australia that are raking in obscene profits and shirking their responsibility 
to pay their fair share in tax.

As a first step, the Australian government must make it a priority to 
introduce full public tax transparency – it must force big multinationals to 
report publicly on their profits, revenue, employees and taxes paid for every 
country in which they operate. The government must also reverse the race to the 
bottom on corporate tax rates, and abandon the tax cut to big business which, 
as Treasury notes, will have no significant impact on the budget bottom line.

Until governments work towards a more human and fair economy, the inequality 
crisis will keep worsening, with dire consequences for the fabric of society, 
our institutions and the global economy.

The time to act is now, before it’s too late to tackle the deepening 
inequality that threatens to trap millions more people in poverty.
 