
Ivo Karlovic broke the record for the most number of aces in an Australian 
Open match after firing 75 past Horacio Zeballos in an exhausting five- set 
victory. Zeballos hit 33 as the pair slugged it out in a fifth set Karlovic won 
22-20, making it also the longest fifth set inAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> history.

Serena Williams safely through to Australian Open second round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/serena-williams-safely-through-to-australian-open-second-round>
The fifth set lasted two hours and 57 minutes, with the 37-year-old Karlovic 
settling the five hours and 15 minutes match to win 6-7, 3-6, 7-5, 6-2, 22-20. 
The previous record for aces in the competition was 51, achieved by Joachim 
Johansson against Andre Agassi in 2005.

Despite breaking the record for the most aces hit in the Australian Open and 
the longest fifth set, it is not the longest match: that was the 2012final won 
by Novak Djokovic against Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/29/australian-open-novak-djokovic-rafael-nadal>
 in five hours and 53 minutes.

Djokovic launched his bid for a record seventh Australian Open title with an 
impressive 6-1, 7-6 (7-4), 6-2 win over Fernando Verdasco. The Serb, who plays 
Ivan Dodig or Denis Istomin in the second round, said: “It feels like home. It 
feels like coming back to the place where I had an incredible amount of 
beautiful memories.”

Nadal cast aside the disappointments of last year to reach the second round of 
the Australian Open with a 6-3, 6-4, 6-4 victory over Florian Mayer.

Easily avoiding the embarrassment of a consecutive first-round exits at 
Melbourne Park, the 30-year-old needed a single break in each set to proceed 
after a little over two hours against the 33-year-old German.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Frafael-nadal-beats-florian-mayer-australian-open-second-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7a5385d852420dc34ea6c07f7eeec99fc612b9f%2F419_572_3312_1987%2F3312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ivo%20Karlovic%20hits%2075%20aces%20in%20epic%20as%20records%20tumble%20at%20Australian%20Open&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Frafael-nadal-beats-florian-mayer-australian-open-second-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ivo%20Karlovic%20hits%2075%20aces%20in%20epic%20as%20records%20tumble%20at%20Australian%20Open&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Frafael-nadal-beats-florian-mayer-australian-open-second-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7a5385d852420dc34ea6c07f7eeec99fc612b9f%2F419_572_3312_1987%2F3312.jpg>
 Ivo Karlovic celebrates his epic victory over Horacio Zeballos. Photograph: 
Lukas Coch/EPA 
The Spaniard sealed the victory with a 39th winner, the 25th off his forehand, 
and raised his arms to the skies to accept the salute of the crowd on the court 
where he won the title in 2009.

“It’s never easy in the first round,” Nadal said. “There are always a few more 
nerves at the beginning. The way that he plays is not conventional. It’s not 
easy to read his game.

“So I’m just happy with the way that I played. I played well in all the key 
points. That’s very important for me. For me it’s a great victory.”

Seeded ninth after a 2016 season which started with the five-set upset against 
Verdasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/19/rafael-nadal-crashes-out-australian-open-fernando-verdasco>
 and was seriously disrupted then curtailed by a wrist injury, Nadal next faces 
the Cypriot Marcos Baghdatis.

The wrist injury forced him to withdraw from last year’s French Open and miss 
Wimbledon, meaning he failed to reach the quarter-finals of any of the grand 
slams for the first time since 2004.

“Body’s good, and that’s the key, if the body is not good then everything is 
more and more difficult, I had to stop before the end of last season,” Nadal 
said.

“After Roland Garros, everything was so difficult. Too many problems with the 
wrist and that’s all in the past now. Happy to be healthy and happy to be on 
the tour again.”

Heather Watson dumps Samantha Stosur out of Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/heather-watson-dumps-samantha-stosur-out-of-australian-open>
Milos Raonic breezed through with a straight-sets victory over Dustin Brown. 
The Canadian third seed wasted little time in dispatching the German inside 93 
minutes on Margaret Court Arena, with a powerful service game.

Raonic, a semi-finalist at Melbourne Park last year, broke Brown once in each 
of the first two sets and then twice in the third. He also fired 18 aces and 
another 20 unreturned serves.

“It was what it needed to be,” Raonic said. “It’s obviously tough to have 
necessarily a solid performance all the way through, but I did what I needed 
to. I took care of my serve. I broke quite early in all the sets. I returned 
pretty solid when I had to. I stepped up, and I played well.”
 