
For the first time in the 25 seasons of the Premier League, the two league 
meetings between Manchester United and Liverpool both ended in a draw. This, 
however, was amuch more exciting contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 than thedreadful 0-0 in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
. Jürgen Klopp sprung a tactical surprise from the outset by deploying a 
diamond midfield, a considerably different shape to Liverpool’s regular 4-3-3. 
This involved Adam Lallana playing as a No10, allowing Roberto Firmino and 
Divock Origi to make dangerous runs across the opposition defence from out to 
in.

The main outcome was Liverpool making life very difficult for Michael Carrick, 
who has been excellent in recent weeks. Lallana marked him excellently in the 
opening stages, meaning Carrick was unable to put his foot on the ball and put 
United in charge. It was not entirely surprising whenJosé Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> substituted Carrick at 
half-time, introducing Wayne Rooney and switching to a 4-2-3-1 shape. Lallana’s 
discipline meant a holding midfielder was always unlikely to find time on the 
ball.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic strikes late for Manchester United in draw with Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Although Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> went into 
half‑time 1-0 ahead, Mourinho’s team had created the better chances. The away 
side’s narrow system allowed United space down the flanks, with Anthony Martial 
often tricking his way past young Trent Alexander‑Arnold down the left, and 
Antonio Valencia motoring forward on the overlap on the right. Liverpool’s 
diamond shuffled across the pitch laterally to shut down opponents on the 
wings, but this proved a tiring approach. The more the game continued, the more 
United’s switches of play looked threatening.

Liverpool’s free player was their holding midfielder Jordan Henderson. 
Liverpool’s captain has enjoyed an excellent campaign in that deep role, 
particularly when playing against 4-3-3 systems that allow him time in 
possession. Although his influence was not as great as in the 2-1 victory away 
at Chelsea earlier in the campaign, for example, the tactical situation was 
similar and Henderson was unhurried and intelligent with his distribution, in 
stark contrast to the struggles of Carrick. He transferred the ball efficiently 
into the final third.

Liverpool’s most promising route to goal, meanwhile, came from set‑pieces. 
From an early stage it was obvious Paul Pogba was struggling to track Dejan 
Lovren because of some clever blocking tactics from the away side, and the 
Frenchman’s problems in this respect partially explain his peculiar handball 
from James Milner’s deep, outswinging corner. Milner has been flawless from the 
penalty spot this season and converted yet again here, giving Liverpool a 1-0 
half-time lead.

Mourinho and Klopp proving right fit for Manchester United and Liverpool | 
Jamie Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp-manchester-united-liverpool>
Mourinho wasted no time in making changes, with Rooney on for Carrick, and 
United immediately started to enjoy spells of possession in more advanced 
positions. Henderson, meanwhile, had less freedom and more defensive 
responsibility, with Rooney showing flashes of imagination from between the 
lines.

Klopp introduced Philippe Coutinho in place of Origi after an hour, switching 
to Liverpool’s usual 4-3-3 system. Coutinho teed up Firmino for a fine chance 
with his first contribution, but this was nevertheless a surprising 
substitution which robbed Liverpool of their best source of speed in behind the 
opposition. Without Sadio Mané, away at the Africa Cup of Nations, and with 
Daniel Sturridge only a substitute, it felt like Liverpool did not offer enough 
genuine counter-attacking threat for long periods of the second half, and the 
away side only started attacking properly in the final minutes after Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic’s equaliser. That came, incidentally, after Mourinho had introduced 
Marouane Fellaini in place of the left‑back Matteo Darmian, with United 
unashamedly crossing regularly. Fellaini had nodded against the post just 
before Ibrahimovic’s header. Both sides threatened to snatch the victory in the 
closing stages, but a draw seemed a fair result.

In the top-six “mini-league” between these two teams plus Arsenal, Chelsea, 
Manchester City and Tottenham, every other side has lost at least two games – 
apart from Liverpool, who remain unbeaten. In the Premier League’s most 
exciting managerial lineup ever, it is Klopp who has established himself as the 
most astute tactician in these head‑to‑head contests.
 