
Fashion designer J.W.Anderson is set offer a rare glimpse into his artistic 
process, in a “provocative” new art exhibition.

Anderson, who has put ideas of gender subversion at the heart of his fashion 
shows, will oversee the Disobedient Bodies exhibition at The Hepworth gallery 
in Wakefield next spring. It will show the intersection between modern art, 
fashion and sexuality

In a statement, Anderson said: “I want the exhibition to mirror the speed and 
unexpected encounters that characterise the way in which we consume images 
today, as well as being a space in which to explore ideas of gender and 
identity that have been an going part of my creative practice.”

Different gallery spaces in The Hepworth will deal with different aspects of 
Anderson’s creative vision. One of the rooms will showcase the inspirations 
behind his iconic Autumn Winter 2013 men’s collection which featured leather 
dresses and Marigold-esque gloves. Another will feature works that have 
inspired the designers including the photographer of Jamie Hawkesworth. While 
the third will feature the artworks of Sarah Lucas, Barbara Hepworth and Louise 
Bourgeois alongside the clothes from Dior, Comme Des Garcon and more. The 
centre point of this gallery space will be an interactive instillation designed 
by Anderson.

It will be part of a continuum of the designer whose side projects have seen 
him expanding his creative output. As well as successfulmenswear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/12/jw-anderson-aaap-rocky-mens-collection>
 and womenswear shows, which were typically inventive and idea filled, Anderson 
designed amicro stamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/13/buy-of-the-day-jw-andersons-stamp>
 and collaborated with rapper A$AP Rocky drawing inspiration from 
Blaxploitation films.

Disobedient Bodies : J.W.Anderson is at The Hepworth, Wakefield from 18 March.
 