
The most iconic piece of first lady clothing in all of fashion history is no 
pretty sight. Too upsetting for public display, it is sealed in a 
climate-controlled vault of the National Archives near Washington DC, where it 
will be kept hidden until 2103, a purdah imposed, when it arrived with an 
unsigned note on the stationery ofJackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jackie> Kennedy’s mother, Janet Auchincloss, 
which read simply: “Jackie’s suit and bag – worn November 22, 1963.”

Natalie Portman's Jackie: JFK's widow finally gets her own movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/16/natalie-portman-as-jackie-onassis-in-pablo-larrain-biopic>
The pink suit that the first lady wore that fateful day in Dallas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/22/jfk-assassination-timeline> is 
still stained with the blood of a president, the dying husband she cradled in 
her lap in an open-top car, an image of lurid public horror. Famously, Jackie 
Kennedy refused to change into a new outfit in the aftermath of the 
assassination. “Let them see what they have done,” she is reported to have 
said, before exiting the plane in Washington hand-in-hand with her 
brother-in-law. Afterward, the suit, along with her navy shoes and bloodied 
stockings were folded and stored without cleaning. In this debased, violated 
state, the suit is the most visceral of relics.

The world awaits an inauguration on 20 January 2017 that feels more like a 
moment of political disruption than the smooth transfer of power. An 
inauguration ceremony is designed to oil the wheels of change, yet this one 
feels more like a revolution. The president-elect is fresh from a bruising, 
lurid run-in with the political establishment. In the absence of A-list talent, 
police marching bands are expected to be high profile, which will lend the 
event a militaristic tone. And rebellion is already planned, in the form of the 
Women’s March on Washington on Saturday 21 January 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/womens-march-on-washington-dc-guide>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fjackie-kennedy-pink-wool-suit-dark-side-first-lady-fashion-dallas-glamour-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9f9d64ab87f1f049e4cce0f13103e0db3c75087%2F0_188_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%20Kennedy%E2%80%99s%20pink%20wool%20suit%20and%20the%20dark%20side%20of%20first%20lady%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fjackie-kennedy-pink-wool-suit-dark-side-first-lady-fashion-dallas-glamour-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%20Kennedy%E2%80%99s%20pink%20wool%20suit%20and%20the%20dark%20side%20of%20first%20lady%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fjackie-kennedy-pink-wool-suit-dark-side-first-lady-fashion-dallas-glamour-power%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9f9d64ab87f1f049e4cce0f13103e0db3c75087%2F0_188_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Peter Sarsgaard as Bobby Kennedy and Natalie Portman in the title role in 
Jackie.
 Photograph: Allstar/Fox Searchlight Pictures 
On the day the United States welcomes a new first lady – with Trumpian 
unpredictability it is as yet unclear if this is to be Melania or Ivanka or 
some combination of the two –the spirit of the first among first ladies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/16/natalie-portman-as-jackie-onassis-in-pablo-larrain-biopic>
, Jackie Kennedy, arrives on our cinema screens in the form of Natalie Portman 
inJackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
, a film whose central action takes place with the protagonist wearing a 
bloodied pink skirt suit. The suit is a reminder thatfirst lady fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2017/jan/06/michelle-obama-best-fashion-moments-in-pictures>
, which is under a fierce spotlight right now with the departure ofMichelle 
Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> and the arrival of 
Melania and Ivanka Trump, can represent the dark side of politics as well as 
the sunlit uplands of Camelot, or the progressive dream of the Obama White 
House.

The Life magazine special issue of commemoration for JFK 
<http://campuspress.yale.edu/jdconnor/an-eternal-flame/> opened with a 
full-page photo of the couple arriving at the Dallas airfield, with the 
saturated pink of Jackie’s suit perfectly offset by the blue Texan sky. The art 
historianDavid Lubin <http://college.wfu.edu/art/lubin/> has described how “the 
Kennedys look tall and vibrant … they seem within our reach, giants among us,” 
and noted that the spray of red roses that Jackie clutches foreshadow the blood 
that will stain the suit a few hours later.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-trailer-natalie-portman-stars-intimate-portrait-jfk-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%20trailer%3A%20Natalie%20Portman%20stars%20in%20intimate%20portrait%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-trailer-natalie-portman-stars-intimate-portrait-jfk-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%20trailer%3A%20Natalie%20Portman%20stars%20in%20intimate%20portrait%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-trailer-natalie-portman-stars-intimate-portrait-jfk-video&media=>
Jackie trailer: Natalie Portman stars in intimate portrait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/07/jackie-trailer-natalie-portman-stars-intimate-portrait-jfk-video>
The pink suit, which returns to public life with Portman’s film, is doubly 
powerful because it represents both the image that Kennedy painstakingly 
constructed, and the shock of how her life, and political history, was derailed 
by violence. We are just now beginning to understand Kennedy as a woman at 
least a generation ahead of her time, in her innate understanding of visual 
messaging. In an essay that won her first prize in aprestigious Vogue writing 
competition 
<http://www.vogue.com/872437/jackie-kennedy-onassis-what-jackie-taught-us/> as 
a student, shespeculated about becoming 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=L2G4a6pLItIC&pg=PA44&lpg=PA44&dq=jackie+kennedy+a+sort+of+Overall+Art+Director+of+the+Twentieth+Century&source=bl&ots=O225rPY4Sf&sig=SDhundv7eWfij9gFb192zX3SrTQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiG98yFo8nRAhVWGsAKHZe7DtQQ6AEIIDAB#v=onepage&q=jackie%20kennedy%20a%20sort%20of%20Overall%20Art%20Director%20of%20the%20Twentieth%20Century&f=false>
 “a sort of Overall Art Director of the Twentieth Century”. In the film Jackie, 
we see her as the chain-smoker she was, an unladylike habit she successfully 
kept entirely hidden from the public. The colour choice of the pink suit – a 
favourite, which she had worn during a visit to London and to meet the Algerian 
prime minister – seems calibrated to amplify her feminine appeal, its shade 
drugstore-lipstick bright against her naturally cool colouring. The silhouette 
of the suit, like that of the bateau-necked red suit, which also stars in the 
Portman film, stands apart from her own body. The raised neckline is stiff as 
battlements, her own shape revealed only by abbreviated sleeves, which suggest, 
by those tiny wrists, the fragile body underneath. “Rather than follow the 
contours of her body, her formal clothes sit almost in conflict with them,” 
writesStella Bruzzi in her essay on the pink suit 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=T-NJAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT252&lpg=PT252&dq=Stella+Bruzzi+in+her+essay+on+the+pink+suit+jackie+kennedy&source=bl&ots=G7aiqs_LGB&sig=hewxylU0RIG89XBSrVWN4GjHig0&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwirx83lo8nRAhXlLcAKHapYBFYQ6AEIJjAC#v=onepage&q=Stella%20Bruzzi%20in%20her%20essay%20on%20the%20pink%20suit%20jackie%20kennedy&f=false>
.

The suit is often said to be Chanel, but the truth is that it was an 
authorised copy of a Chanel design, signed off in Paris butmade for her at the 
Park Avenue salon of Chez Ninon 
<http://fashionista.com/2012/03/karl-lagerfeld-says-oleg-cassini-knocked-off-that-pink-chanel-suit-jackie-kennedy-wore-the-day-jfk-was-assassinated>
. This was a strategy employed by Jackie Kennedy to circumvent public 
disapproval of her disloyal taste for European style, without compromising her 
own wardrobe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fjackie-kennedy-pink-wool-suit-dark-side-first-lady-fashion-dallas-glamour-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4d50c0970cc39c97a28bd08f969b350c9e8fc28%2F15_127_2855_4131%2F2855.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%20Kennedy%E2%80%99s%20pink%20wool%20suit%20and%20the%20dark%20side%20of%20first%20lady%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fjackie-kennedy-pink-wool-suit-dark-side-first-lady-fashion-dallas-glamour-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%20Kennedy%E2%80%99s%20pink%20wool%20suit%20and%20the%20dark%20side%20of%20first%20lady%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fjackie-kennedy-pink-wool-suit-dark-side-first-lady-fashion-dallas-glamour-power%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4d50c0970cc39c97a28bd08f969b350c9e8fc28%2F15_127_2855_4131%2F2855.jpg>
 Gigi Hadid on the Bottega Veneta catwalk, SS17, Milan fashion week, September 
2016. Photograph: Maestri/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
By the happenstance of taking place outdoors in Washington in January, 
inaugurations can look sombre. Almost funereal, in fact. Eight years ago,
Michelle Obama trumped this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/24/barack-obama-inauguration-speech-presidency-president-review-jonathan-raban>
 by virtue of her and her daughters’ brightly coloured coats, scarves and 
gloves, which brought festive cheer into bleak midwinter. Pink is, by 
coincidence, a headline trend to have emerged from the most recent catwalk 
shows. On the Bottega Veneta catwalk, current American sweetheartGigi Hadid 
wore a pink two-piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/24/bottega-veneta-and-jil-sander-go-against-the-grain-at-milan-fashion-week>
 with a diagonal row of outsize gold buttons, which had a touch of Kennedy’s 
formal glamour. (The bottom half was, for 2017, loose trousers rolled at the 
ankle, instead of a knee-length skirt.) Some participants in Saturday’s march 
plan to wear pink“pussy hats” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/casting-off-trump-the-women-who-cant-stop-knitting-pussy-hats>
 – knitted with pointed cat ears, a symbol of female defiance of Trump.Bruzzi 
<https://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/arts/film/staff/bruzzi/> quotes Norman Mailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/nov/10/culture.obituaries>, who thought 
JFK’s brilliance was to create a dazzling empty slate, on to which we projected 
what we wanted to see. JFK’s “magnetism is that he offers us a mirror of 
ourselves”,Mailer wrote 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=QXPhe922SWIC&pg=PA44&lpg=PA44&dq=magnetism+is+that+he+offers+us+a+mirror+of+ourselves+jfk+mailer&source=bl&ots=hjUujSbJZ-&sig=CYM53Jl8sJ5meuefnJwP-K_Amwg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiNtqaapcnRAhVsDcAKHQKbCCoQ6AEIGjAA#v=onepage&q=magnetism%20is%20that%20he%20offers%20us%20a%20mirror%20of%20ourselves%20jfk%20mailer&f=false>
. The pink suit will not be seen in our lifetimes. But its status as first 
among first lady images is alive and kicking.
 