
Artist Jake Chapman is not known for his sentimentalism. In their masterwork 
Hell <https://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/artpages/aipe_chapmans_hell1.htm>, 
he and his brother Dinos showed no pity for thousands of toy soldiers they 
tortured and eviscerated in a landscape of baroque psychosis.

They have also collected and exhibited paintings attributed to Adolf Hitler, 
and in interviews, Jake Chapman goes out of his way to defy liberal soppiness 
with provocative remarks such assaying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/04/jake-chapman-snob-children-galleries-gifts>
 children should be banned from art galleries. Yet it turns out that, like the 
apparently heartless Andy Warhol who secretly worked in soup kitchens, Chapman 
has a penchant for modest acts of kindness.It has come to light 
<https://news.artnet.com/art-world/jake-chapman-refugee-rescue-814736> that 
when he heard about Refugee Relief, a charity that works on Lesbos to save 
exhausted refugees from drowning, he bought them a lifeboat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjake-chapman-ai-weiwei-refugee-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70eba242a96dd3af84a9f9169a43be8a23cd1e20%2F2189_0_3427_3744%2F3427.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jake%20Chapman%20is%20right%20to%20criticise%20Ai%20Weiwei's%20drowned%20boy%20artwork&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjake-chapman-ai-weiwei-refugee-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jake%20Chapman%20is%20right%20to%20criticise%20Ai%20Weiwei%27s%20drowned%20boy%20artwork&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjake-chapman-ai-weiwei-refugee-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70eba242a96dd3af84a9f9169a43be8a23cd1e20%2F2189_0_3427_3744%2F3427.jpg>
 Jake Chapman, who has donated a lifeboat to a refugee charity. Photograph: Nic 
Serpell-Rand 
Now that news of his generosity has emerged, Chapman is of course being true 
to form and making provocative remarks about art and the refugee crisis. He has 
denounced artists who grandstand about it: “There’s something pathetic aboutAi 
Weiwei <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> going to lie down 
on the beach to aestheticise others people’s misery.”

Ai Weiwei was photographed last January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/01/ai-weiwei-poses-as-drowned-syrian-infant-refugee-in-haunting-photo>
 lying face down on a Lesbos beach, posing as the drowned child Alan Kurdi 
whose fate (all too briefly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/01/alan-kurdi-death-one-year-on-compassion-towards-refugees-fades>
) moved the world in 2015. He has also created astudio on Lesbos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/01/ai-weiwei-sets-up-studio-on-greek-island-of-lesbos-to-highlight-plight-of-refugees>
 and is making adocumentary about refugees 
<http://www.voanews.com/a/ai-weiwei-films-in-gaza-for-refugee-documentary/3326913.html>
.

I strongly agree with Chapman about a famous artist pretending to be a dead 
child. What the hell was he thinking? No one else would get away with such a 
thing. As art it is risible, as politics fatuous, as a human gesture 
grotesquely inept. Imagine if Tom Hiddleston had posed as a drowned refugee – 
the online mockery would never end. Yet such is the strange world of artistic 
fame that Ai Weiwei’s absurd image was acclaimed as a serious political artwork.

Nor is it the only feeble artwork about the refugee crisis. One artist even 
createdan underwater tribute 
<http://www.travelandleisure.com/articles/underwater-sculpture-museum-europe> 
to the drowned. How is such a work, accessible only to well-heeled scuba 
divers, going to help anyone? How do well-intentioned works for the Biennale 
elite change anything?

Public professions of virtue can be the most odious kind of cant. The Chapman 
brothers have instead always shunned any kind of moral claim for their art – 
and Chapman has said of his lifeboat: “I’m not being euphemistic when I say 
that buying the boat and sending it to Greece was the least I could do.” He 
might have proved that the most ethical artists are those who make no claim to 
do good in the gallery, and instead put their money where their mouth is.
 