
James McAvoy: five best moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/may/20/james-mcavoy-five-best-moments-x-men-apocalypse>
James McAvoy is extolling the virtues of insobriety. He was at the San Diego 
Comic-Con in July 2015 doing early promotion forX-Men: Apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/xmen-apocalypse-review-lots-to-marvel-at-oscar-isaac>
, his third round as mutant godfather Professor X, and it unexpectedly turned 
into a wild celebration. “There was a big party, you couldn’t turn around 
without bumping into somebody off the telly. My mate Jesse was playing 
miniature golf in the middle of it. We were getting particularly drunk, and 
then I sawM Night Shyamalan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mnightshyamalan>
.” They hadn’t met before. “He goes: ‘You’re James McAvoy!’ And I said: ‘You’re 
M Night Shyamalan! What do I call you?’ I was very drunk.”

The point, says McAvoy, animatedly, is that his agent had been on at him for 
ages to go to LA to shmooze the scene. He could never be bothered to do it. But 
there he was meeting Shyamalan,which led to him being cast in the director’s 
new film, Split 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/split-review-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-fantastic-fest-austin>
. “The minute I fuckin’ set foot in California I get a job that is one of the 
most interesting roles I’ve ever played,” he says, amused at his own good 
fortune. “The moral of the story is: when in California, get really hammered.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQsr6SgcKNiM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQsr6SgcKNiM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQsr6SgcKNiM&media=>
Split review – James McAvoy is 23 shades of creepy in M Night Shyamalan chiller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/split-review-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-fantastic-fest-austin>
“Interesting” is downplaying it somewhat. In Shyamalan’s psychological horror, 
ostensibly he’s Kevin. But Kevin has dissociative identity disorder (DID) and a 
total of 23 alternate personalities – also known as alters – who often struggle 
to co-exist harmoniously. It starts with him rather brutally abducting three 
young women and locking them in a basement but, this being twist-lover 
Shyamalan, there’s more to Kevin’s condition than meets the eye. Over the 
course of the film we meet nine of those 23, among them fashion designer Barry, 
his grounded dominant identity who has previously kept some of the more 
troublesome alters, such as abductor Dennis, at bay; Hedwig, a sensitive 
nine-year-old; and cross-dressing Patricia, chilling in her calculated calm.

It’s an agitated, creepy horror and McAvoy revels in it, an unnerving, 
threatening presence even as the supposedly more benign characters. When he 
started reading the script, not knowing of the psychological complexity to 
come, he was concerned it might be the sort of nasty genre exercise we’ve seen 
much of before. “That worried me,” he says, “but then as soon as Kevin came in 
the room as Patricia, I was like: ‘Ah, right! I’m gonna have fun with this.’ 
It’s not just sensational, but something that could be hopefully intriguing and 
compelling in a way that isn’t just edge-of-your-seat nerves.” Not to mention, 
for an actor’s ego is a film like this a dream gig? “Yeah, I guess so,” he 
laughs. “It is for me! There was the opportunity to flex many muscles and 
employ all the dexterity you can muster.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5968f1c6c97131cde0a600c054fb6d47a017a706%2F0_159_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20McAvoy%20on%20X-Men%2C%20Split%20and%20not%20playing%20'posh%20English%20dudes'%20anymore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20McAvoy%20on%20X-Men%2C%20Split%20and%20not%20playing%20%27posh%20English%20dudes%27%20anymore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5968f1c6c97131cde0a600c054fb6d47a017a706%2F0_159_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 James McAvoy as Kevin in Split. Photograph: Allstar/Universal 
Macbeth – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/feb/24/macbeth-review-michael-billington>
McAvoy is in good spirits today, powered by coffee, having motorbiked to our 
interview from his home in north London. He has lived there for years with his 
wifeAnne-Marie Duff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/oct/11/anne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded>
, whom he met on council-estate comedyShameless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/18/farewell-shameless-gallaghers-austerity-uk>
, the TV show that made both their names (although the pair are getting 
divorced, which is currently making him tabloid fodder). His sweary Scottish 
charm from those early days still shines through, and when it comes to work, he 
has apparently very little filter. He is open, in particular, about Shyamalan, 
who has never managed to claw back the cred of early successesThe Sixth Sense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/22/the-sixth-sense-film-frightened-me-most-sian-cain>
 and Unbreakable after big-budget sci-bombs The Last Airbender and After Earth. 
Could Split be the film to turn Shyamalan’s fortunes around?

“What he says about himself is: what makes it hard for him is that he’s 
committed to telling original stories,” says McAvoy, on why the director’s 
recent films haven’t resonated. “The Last Airbender wasn’t an original story, 
and After Earth wasn’t from him. But other than that, everything he’s done was 
an original story that he thought up. He sweats blood over everything.”

The director, says McAvoy, told him he thought many established actors would 
have turned down the Split script. It was, Shyamalan reasoned, a risk, doing 
multiple roles in one, with every chance of him only being able to nail some of 
them. But McAvoy’s approach to parts sounds more maverick. “Even though I’m 
established, even though I’ve got X-Men behind me and it’s helped me buy my 
house, I always feels like I need to take a challenge,” he says. “Sometimes you 
throw yourself in at the deep end and it just doesn’t work, and it’s a 
nightmare. But the great thing about being an actor is that even if it’s 
terrible it’s over in two or three months and you move on to the next thing. So 
what’s the harm in throwing yourself in there? It’s just your reputation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeb9279521be5aa0f81f50b255045825f7dc6405%2F0_182_3030_1818%2F3030.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20McAvoy%20on%20X-Men%2C%20Split%20and%20not%20playing%20'posh%20English%20dudes'%20anymore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20McAvoy%20on%20X-Men%2C%20Split%20and%20not%20playing%20%27posh%20English%20dudes%27%20anymore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeb9279521be5aa0f81f50b255045825f7dc6405%2F0_182_3030_1818%2F3030.jpg>
 McAvoy(left) with Forest Whitaker in The Last King of Scotland. Photograph: 
Neil Davidson/AP 
He certainly threw himself in this time: Joaquin Phoenix dropped out of the 
role at the 11th hour, McAvoy got the gig – thanks to that inebriated Comic-Con 
encounter – and in just a month he was on set. He did what research he could do 
in the time he had, finding most of what he needed on YouTube. “YouTube’s an 
amazing tool because so many people who live with DID are into keeping 
diaries,” he says, “because they can talk to each other and fully express their 
presence within the world. It’s an important thing for each alter, I think, to 
say: ‘I’m here, even if I only get to come out now and again. Even if I’m not 
the dominant alter, this is my time and I own it, and I’m projecting into the 
world.’ That was really helpful.”

The panoply of characters he plays in Split speaks to McAvoy’s own 
versatility. Growing up on a council estate in Glasgow’s Drumchapel, he bagged 
his first film role, 1995’sThe Near Room <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0113943/>
, when he was 15, after asking director David Hayman for work when he visited 
McAvoy’s school. By 2001 he was in HBO’s Band Of Brothers, then State Of Play 
and Shameless, and then the big-screen breakouts (and Bafta nominations) for 
The Last King Of Scotland and Atonement. Then for a long time he got stuck 
playing “posh English dudes”. He got bored.

“From my mid-20s up until my early 30s people were asking me to play 
middle-of-the-road characters a lot,” he says, explaining that in those roles 
he had to “steady the ship” while everyone around him had more fun. The turning 
point was when he was offered a film adapted from a book he loved (he doesn’t 
say which), but was dismayed to see how the character in the script, so intense 
and unpredictable in the book, had been diluted into a doe-eyed lover. When he 
questioned the director about it, he was told to let the audience imprint upon 
him. “I was like, ‘Dude, I don’t wanna just be a fuckin’ canvas for the 
audience. So that was a big moment.” He turned it down, deciding from then on 
to find things that truly excited him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75e35e73c40ba4a1cc6077b1c114a2fdb5e72644%2F0_101_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20McAvoy%20on%20X-Men%2C%20Split%20and%20not%20playing%20'posh%20English%20dudes'%20anymore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20McAvoy%20on%20X-Men%2C%20Split%20and%20not%20playing%20%27posh%20English%20dudes%27%20anymore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75e35e73c40ba4a1cc6077b1c114a2fdb5e72644%2F0_101_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 McAvoy with co-star Jamie Bell in Irvine Welsh adaptation Filth. Photograph: 
REX/Snap Stills 
This led to a triumvirate of parts in 2013 cementing his intention. First, a 
hypnotised art auctioneer in Danny Boyle’s wired thriller Trance; then, on 
stage in London, a very physical take on Macbeth, which found him repeatedly 
suffering cuts and bruises. But Jon S Baird’s unapologetic adaptation ofIrvine 
Welsh’s Filth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/22/james-mcavoy-filth-irvine-welsh> 
made the rebirth complete: McAvoy’s dirty cop directs bestiality porn, 
blackmails a 15-year-old schoolgirl into giving him a blowjob, and has phone 
sex with a colleague’s partner while pretending to be Frank Sidebottom and 
watching footage of his wife and kid while crying. He has called that scene one 
of his proudest moments on celluloid.

McAvoy did Filth because of the “artistic way 
<http://www.hungertv.com/feature/interview-james-mcavoy/>” it approached 
someone with a mental condition – stylised, rather than gritty social realism. 
Split, however, takes it even further out of the realm of reality, and McAvoy 
talks of the malevolent emerging alter in the film, dubbed the Beast, in genre 
terms. “He’s a badass, a really cool bad guy,” he says, likening him to 
supervillain origin stories. “It’s the crux of every single superhero and 
supervillain: something really bad happened to me when I was young and it 
turned me into Batman. Or the Joker. That’s all this film is. I think that’s 
cool. I hope nobody who lives with DID is offended by this film. I hope they 
wouldn’t be.”

Some might. There’s valid criticism that making violent villains out of people 
with such disorders, such as Psycho’s Norman Bates or Misery’s Annie Wilkes, is 
harmful and stigmatising. Undoubtedly, these depictions exploit a condition in 
the service of thrills and spills, though Split showcases a variety of 
identities across the board, and all of Kevin’s alters are multifaceted, even 
within themselves. Genre aside, Shyamalan pondered what could happen if someone 
with DID could unlock potential and possibly even change their body chemistry. 
He took psychology courses which discussed the condition when he was a student 
at New York University, and, he says, has been fascinated since.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F874e9f330525ec2895251fd8083b1cc4487d0023%2F147_258_3201_1922%2F3201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20McAvoy%20on%20X-Men%2C%20Split%20and%20not%20playing%20'posh%20English%20dudes'%20anymore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20McAvoy%20on%20X-Men%2C%20Split%20and%20not%20playing%20%27posh%20English%20dudes%27%20anymore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjames-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-horror-film-split%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F874e9f330525ec2895251fd8083b1cc4487d0023%2F147_258_3201_1922%2F3201.jpg>
 McAvoy with Nicholas Hoult and Hugh Jackman in X-Men: Days Of Future Past. 
Photograph: Allstar/20TH CENTURY FOX 
While writing Split he met with psychiatrists to inform the scenes involving 
Dr Fletcher, who tries to help Kevin keep the Beast at bay. In his director’s 
notes, he explains: “I’m taking something you believe and pushing it into the 
fantastic realm. I wondered what would happen if, in dissociative identity 
disorder, each individual personality believes they are who they are, 100 per 
cent. If one personality believes they have diabetes or high cholesterol, can 
their body chemically change to that belief system?”

Split also succeeds as a tonal callback to his early work. After the 
box-office success of his last low-budget horror, 2015’s The Visit, it could 
well add further grist to his comeback mill. As for McAvoy, after all of those 
years playing “posh English dudes”, it proves he can be a twisted, more 
leftfield leading man. He’s especially enjoying the divisive, even 
transgressive potential of these new roles.

“So what if people get a bit shocked by something edgy,” he says defiantly. 
“There’s just so much pacification in cinema, and I’ve been involved in it at 
times. I’ve done films that make people fall asleep. So I’m quite keen to push 
the envelope.” Even if it means playing 23 people in one.

Split is in UK cinemas from Friday 20 Jan
 