
James DeGale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> clattered to the 
canvas in the final round of Saturday’s super middleweight title unification 
fight, dropped by a counter right uppercut that Badou Jack had seemingly pulled 
from his back pocket. The Olympic champion, who had knocked Jack down in the 
opening round and raced to an early lead on the scorecards, was on the floor 
for the first time in his career and in serious danger with nearly two minutes 
until the bell.

It was the sort of white-knuckle drama only a championship fight can produce. 
And when the southpaw from London beat the count and somehow flailed out of the 
emergency to finish on his feet, the roars from the crowd of 10,128 at the 
Barclays Center confirmed the calibre of valour on display. When the scores 
were announced, DeGale and Jack were no closer to the unification of their 
super middleweight titles than before. One ringside judge tipped it 114-112 to 
DeGale while the other two scored it 113-113: a majority draw. (The Guardian 
had it 113-113.)

James DeGale and Badou Jack retain titles on majority draw – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/14/james-degale-badou-jack-fight-live>
It was an encounter that had it all: knockdowns both ways, a lost tooth, a 
stray punch that nearly knocked out the referee. But most importantly, round 
after round of fearless two-way action between the two best fighters in their 
weight class. It was as close as fight as you’ll see, one that is bound to 
appear on fight of the year lists in December.

But Floyd Mayweather <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> Jr, 
who promotes Jack, saw it differently. And in voicing his dissent did his 
fighter and the sport a disservice, casting undue controversy on an otherwise 
banner night for boxing. It started when he hijacked the mic after both 
fighters initially expressed desire for a rematch during a joint in-ring 
interview.

“James DeGale is a hell of a fighter, but tonight he didn’t win,” Mayweather 
said, prompting a crescendo of boos from the crowd. “Badou Jack was the better 
man tonight.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjames-degale-badou-jack-super-middleweight-unification-title-fight-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7b47507edf6e3e2a1f365b85dd2baf34244afbd%2F0_36_3916_2349%2F3916.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20DeGale%20and%20Badou%20Jack%20fight%20to%20majority%20draw%20in%20title%20unification%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjames-degale-badou-jack-super-middleweight-unification-title-fight-boxing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20DeGale%20and%20Badou%20Jack%20fight%20to%20majority%20draw%20in%20title%20unification%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjames-degale-badou-jack-super-middleweight-unification-title-fight-boxing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7b47507edf6e3e2a1f365b85dd2baf34244afbd%2F0_36_3916_2349%2F3916.jpg>
 Floyd Mayweather Jr, Jack’s promoter, believed his fighter won easily and 
sounded very pessimistic about the prospect of a rematch. Photograph: Andrew 
Couldridge/Reuters 
It was even worse when Jack was then asked if he would fight DeGale again – 
his response: “I’ll fight anybody” – but Mayweather stepped in again to make 
his fighter look like the bad guy.

“I’m the promoter,” Mayweather said. “This is my fighter. It’s all about being 
fair. At the end of the day, this is really bad for boxing.”

DeGale, who retained his IBF title that he won from Andre Dirrell in 2015, had 
used deft footwork and command of distance from the opening bell to stay out of 
mid-range and stymie Jack’s jab. But what appeared to be a standard feeling-out 
round suddenly escalated when DeGale lunged forward and split the jab with a 
straight left to catch Jack off balance, dumping the Swede to the canvas.

The flash knockdown didn’t hurt Jack, who retained his WBC strap, but it put 
him at an immediate disadvantage on the scorecards that only grew as DeGale 
continued to box masterfully in rounds two and three, scoring consistently with 
the straight left and using angles and lateral movement to frustrate his 
opponent. Jack continued to look flat-footed in the fourth and it seemed DeGale 
was in danger of running away with the piece.

“He was slapping a lot,” Jack insisted afterwards. “It looks good to the 
judges but they’re not clean punches.”

The Swede found his footing in the fifth, landing his best punches of the 
night to that point amid violent exchanges that enthralled the crowd. So 
completely was Jack swept up in the moment that he managed to clip referee 
Arthur Mercante Jr with an errant punch when the bell rang to end the round.

Jack continued to dig back in the sixth, trapping DeGale against the rope and 
unloading combinations upstairs. A devastating body shot visibly hurt the 
Englishman, who briefly appeared in trouble before making it to the bell. The 
action carried into the seventh as DeGale now stood in the pocket trading with 
Jack, at one point cracking the Stockholm native and Las Vegas transplant with 
a left uppercut that Jack seemed to walk right through.

DeGale was hurt again with a lunging overhand right in the eighth, losing a 
tooth when his mouthpiece was knocked to the canvas. He came back strong in the 
ninth, but Jack showed patience and poise as DeGale betrayed signs of fatigue. 
Then came the final round and the knockdown that nearly ended it inside the 
distance. Somehow DeGale mustered the bravery to make it to the finish line.

Sport picture of the day: an occupational hazard for a boxing referee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2017/jan/15/sport-picture-of-the-day-an-occupational-hazard-for-a-boxing-referee>
“I had to dig down deep and try to knock him out and finish strong,” said 
Jack. “I definitely finished strong. If it wasn’t for the flash knockdown, it’s 
a different result.”

Jack out-threw and out-landed his opponent, connecting with 231 of 745 punches 
(31%) compared to 172 of 617 (27.9%) for DeGale.

“He was doing a lot of running, he was throwing a lot of shit at my guard,” he 
said. “I thought I won the fight. I finished stronger. His knockdown was a 
flash knockdown. I won the fight.”

DeGale said: “I’ve got huge respect for this man, but I thought I won that. I 
landed the cleanest shots.”

Everyone, including the fighters, seemed to agree that a rematch makes sense, 
particularly given how entertaining the first instalment turned out. But when 
Jack was asked about it at the post-fight press conference, Mayweather again 
interrupted and assumed an even more obstructionist stance.

“The thing with boxing is, if they can’t get it right the first time, they’re 
not going to get it right the second time,” Mayweather said. “We don’t need the 
second time around.

“Me and Badou Jack, we already communicated. The goal was to fight this fight, 
then for him to move up to light heavyweight. He’s a big super middleweight.”

It didn’t stop there. He put forth aspersions regarding the judges, implying 
they take payments from promoters. He even threatened to take his business 
elsewhere. “How I’m feeling, I don’t really want to come back and fight on the 
east coast anymore,” he said.

Mayweather is settling comfortably into the role of promoter. He’s made 
demonstrable strides in his public speaking and knows how to sell an event. He 
said on Saturday night that he knows more about boxing, both in and out of the 
ring, than anyone and he’s probably right.

But on Saturday night, the former pound-for-pound king was wrong, even if it 
was clear Jack was coming on strong and might have finished the job in the days 
when championship fights extended 15 rounds. A draw was a fair decision. Could 
it be possible that boxing is so unaccustomed to high-quality matchups like 
Saturday’s fight, and Andre Ward’s narrow win over Sergey Kovalev in November, 
that it doesn’t know how to handle the razor-thin outcomes those meetings are 
prone to produce?

On perhaps the greatest night of Badou Jack’s life, Mayweather’s bluster made 
his fighter look like a chump. And if Mayweather does stand in the way of a 
rematch that everyone but himself appears on board for, we’ll know he is one.
 