
Jim Naughtie, the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> radio and TV 
presenter, is to deliver the 2017 Hugh Cudlipp lecture.

Having spent many weeks covering the US presidential election, the title of 
his talk - ’A world turned upside down’ - could not be more apt.

Naughtie says: “The year of changes wasn’t only a challenge to an established 
political class, but to a culture. How should our trade – in print, on the air, 
on line – respond?


“Moments of excitement and drama are also challenges. For journalists, the 
implications of 2016 may be as profound as the technological revolution.

“Who wouldn’t want to be a journalist today? But the old ways won’t do. Will 
our trade be able to change and still preserve the best of a culture that still 
makes us so proud?”

The lecture, hosted by the London Press Club and sponsored by the Daily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror>, will take place at the Museum 
of London on 29 March.


Established in 1999, the annual lecture was created and named in memory of the 
late Lord Cudlipp, the former editorial director of the Mirror group of 
newspapers and regarded as one of the great 20th century pioneers of popular 
tabloid journalism.


London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Press Club chairman Doug Wills 
said: “We are thrilled and grateful that Jim Naughtie has agreed to give this 
year’s Cudlipp Lecture. Jim’s vast knowledge of journalism across all media 
ensures that his lecture will be a ‘must’.

“Every journalist will want to hear Jim’s lecture following his first-hand 
experience of howDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
and Hillary Clinton handled the press and broadcasters.”

 The Hugh Cudlipp student award


 At the lecture, the winner of the £1,000 Hugh Cudlipp award for student 
journalism will be announced.

It is a prize is given to a student who has made an outstanding contribution 
to journalism for an article, or series of articles, or video, exploring an 
issue of public interest or concern which, in the Cudlipp tradition, 
exemplifies lucid and graphic communication to a wide audience.

 The full guidelines to enable people to make a submission can be found here 
<http://cudlipp.londonpressclub.co.uk/>.
 