
James Haskell has been passed fit for Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> and Dai Young has backed the 
flanker to be available for England. The Saracens coach Mark McCall, meanwhile, 
has suggested George Kruis will be fit to face France.

Haskell recovered from a foot injury to make his first appearance since 
playing for England against Australia in the summer in Wasps’ 22-16 victory 
over Leicester earlier this month.

He lasted 35 seconds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/england-james-haskell-head-injury-wasps-comeback>
 when, after coming on as a replacement, he seemed to be knocked out and missed 
Saturday’s 17-14 Champions Cup win over Toulouse.

Eddie Jones confident Dylan Hartley will lead England in Six Nations opener
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/dylan-hartley-england-eddie-jones-six-nations>
“He finished all his injury protocols so he’ll be available this week.” Young, 
the Wasps director of rugby, said. “We’ll definitely involve him, he’ll 
probably start – either at six or seven I’m not sure yet. He is just bursting 
to get out there. We have had a lot of players who have played a lot over the 
last six or seven weeks so for the likes of Has to come back means we’re 
starting to get into a better position.

“I really felt for him. He has taken a bit of stick over it and if you give it 
you’ve got to be prepared to take it. He’ll be the first one to rib someone if 
the shoe was on the other foot. He’s really eager to get out there now and 
hopefully get some big game time.”

Eddie Jones’ England squad for the Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> are named on Friday and Young 
expected Haskell to be fit for the tournament, despite spending seven months 
out injured before his aborted comeback.

“We were confident with his foot injury that he’d be back for the Six Nations. 
It’s typical really, he comes back, plays one game for us and goes and plays in 
the Six Nations,” Young said. “We were never going to push him or put him under 
pressure to come back. He has worked really hard and it would have been nice if 
he’d come off the bench and been involved this week and last week as it would 
have been a good lead in for him. He is extremely fit and he wants to get back 
out on the field. I’m sure he’ll play a big part in England’s campaign.”

“George will definitely be available for England, and there’s a chance he’ll 
be available this weekend,” said McCall of Kruis.

Kruis was due to see a specialist on Tuesday night, to determine whether he 
can return to action as soon as this weekend.

“He’ll go and see a consultant this evening, and hopefully we’ll find out 
then,” said McCall. “He’s not far away, so it’s going to be that conversation 
and we’ll be guided by the conversation. George is able to train now, it’s not 
an injury that’s preventing him from training, though obviously he’s not doing 
contact until he’s given the all-clear.”

Kruis suffered the cheekbone problem against Newcastle on Christmas Eve, but 
was quickly diagnosed with a relatively minor injury by Saracens. Now the 
26-year-old is aiming to return, that could yet boost England’s injury profile 
ahead of launching their Grand Slam defence.

Jones’ side will be without former captain Chris Robshaw for the entire Six 
Nations, after the Harlequins flanker underwent shoulder surgery. Billy 
Vunipola will miss at least the early rounds with knee trouble, while Wasps 
flanker Haskell has only just recovered from concussion. Props Joe Marler and 
Mako Vunipola are also injury doubts in further tests to England’s resources, 
so Kruis’ return would certainly ease the situation.
 