
Navigating the array of buttons on Japan’s high-tech toilets can be a 
disconcerting experience for the uninitiated, who, expecting to hear a familiar 
flushing sound, are instead subjected to a sudden, and unwanted, cleansing of 
the nether regions.

As Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> prepares for an influx of 
overseas visitors during the 2019 rugby World Cup and theTokyo Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games-2020> the following year, the 
country’s sanitation industry has agreed to standardise pictograms on toilets 
so users know for certain if they are about to receive a blast of warm air or a 
jet of water.

Nine manufacturers belonging to the Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> sanitary equipment industry 
association will soon start using the same eight symbols to explain the buttons 
found on their state-of-the-art WCs.

At a launch event this week, the firms said they had agreed to simplify the 
pictography in response to complaints from tourists that they are confused by 
symbols that differ depending on the make of toilet.

In a 2014 survey of 600 foreign visitors, a quarter said they could not 
understand some of the symbols that appear on the toilet buttons.

The eight new symbols show users how to flush (large and small), open and 
close the lid, activate the front and back cleanse and drying functions, and 
trigger the off switch.

The unified icons will appear on toilets sold in Japan from April, according 
to Jiji Press, which added that makers eventually hoped they would become 
standard for high-tech toilets sold around the world.

The confusion arose when manufacturers created their own symbols after the 
first toilet with washing and drying functions appeared in Japan in the 
mid-1960s.

The toilets, including Toto’s market-leading Washlet, have since become common 
fixtures in restaurants, hotels and other public places, occasionally to the 
consternation of visitors who are more accustomed to a simple flush and a lid 
they open and close manually.

“We are sure the new design of pictograms will help our products become more 
popular overseas, as well as offer hospitality to foreigners and show that 
Japan is a country that welcomes tourists,” Madoka Kitamura, head of the 
industry group and president of Toto, told reporters, according to the Asahi 
Shimbun.

The government is also considering a revamp of other symbols that some 
overseas visitors find confusing or offensive, including aswastika-like 
pictograph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/20/japan-to-drop-the-swastika-from-its-tourist-maps>
 used to indicate a Buddhist temple on maps.

The decision to standardise toilet pictography is the latest attempt to make 
Japan’s toilets more user friendly. Last month,“toilet paper” for germ-infested 
smartphone screens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/swipe-right-toilet-paper-for-smartphones-tested-out-in-japanese-airport-bathrooms>
 was installed in dozens of cubicles in the arrivals hall at Narita 
international airport.

 