
Australia’s federal environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, has criticised 
Japan followingthe release of photographs  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/15/photos-japanese-whalers-killing-minke-sanctuary-says-sea-shepherd>
allegedly showing the slaughtering of protected whales inside Australia’s 
Antarctic whale sanctuary.

Frydenberg’s statement came as conservationists called for tougher action from 
Australia.

“The Australian government is deeply disappointed that Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has decided to return to the Southern 
Ocean this summer to undertake so-called ‘scientific’ whaling,” Frydenberg said.


Photos show Japanese whalers killing minke in sanctuary, says Sea Shepherd
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/15/photos-japanese-whalers-killing-minke-sanctuary-says-sea-shepherd>
“Australia is opposed to all forms of commercial and so-called ‘scientific’ 
whaling,” he said. “It is not necessary to kill whales in order to study them.”

The photographs, taken by Sea Shepherd <https://www.seashepherd.org.au/> 
activists from a helicopter, appear to show a dead minke on the deck of the 
Japanese whaler Nisshin Maru at 11.34am on Sunday.

After the Japanese crew saw the Sea Shepherd helicopter, they covered the 
harpoons and attempted to hide the whale carcass with a tarpaulin, according to 
Sea Shepherd.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Ffrydenberg-criticises-japan-after-whale-slaughtered-in-australian-waters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a733bff3f279233fccf87bf8e9e128641d491f%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japan%20criticised%20after%20whale%20slaughtered%20in%20Australian%20waters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Ffrydenberg-criticises-japan-after-whale-slaughtered-in-australian-waters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japan%20criticised%20after%20whale%20slaughtered%20in%20Australian%20waters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Ffrydenberg-criticises-japan-after-whale-slaughtered-in-australian-waters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a733bff3f279233fccf87bf8e9e128641d491f%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
 The Japanese crew of Nisshin Maru attempted to hide the minke whale carcass 
with a tarpaulin, say Sea Shepherd. Photograph: Glenn Lockitch/Sea 
Shepherd/AFP/Getty Images 
The images emerged on Sunday afternoon while the Japanese prime minister, 
Shinzo Abe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, was in Australia on 
a state visit.

The slaughter was the first documented killing since the international court 
of justiceruled Japan’s Antarctic whaling illegal in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
. So far the Australian government has resisted calls to send official vessels 
to patrol its waters and intervene in illegal whaling.

But Frydenberg said no country has done more than Australia to try to end 
whaling.

“We will continue our efforts in the International Whaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> Commission to strongly oppose 
commercial whaling and so-called ‘scientific’ whaling, uphold the moratorium on 
commercial whaling, and to promote whale conservation.”

Jeff Hansen, the managing director of Sea Shepherd Australia, said a “lack of 
action by the Turnbull government” in response to the killing of whales in 
Australian waters on the tail of a state visit from Abe showed “the government 
has no spine when it comes to protecting the wishes of Australians to defend 
the Southern Ocean whale sanctuary”.

The Australian Marine Conservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society director, Darren 
Kindleysides, said the government must hold Japan to account for its actions.

Sea Shepherd will keep harassing Japanese whaling boats despite US court ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/23/sea-shepherd-will-keep-harassing-japanese-whaling-boats-despite-us-court-ruling>
“Rather than rolling out the red carpet for Japanese prime minister Abe, our 
government must take every legal and diplomatic avenue available to stop his 
government’s continued whaling, for example through the United Nations 
convention on the law of the sea,” he said.

“This year the Japanese whaling fleet is intending to kill 333 Antarctic minke 
whales under the guise of ‘scientific research’. This is despite the 2014 
International Court of Justice ruling that Japan’s Southern Ocean whaling 
program was illegal and must stop.


“Japan cannot be allowed to continue to thumb its nose at the international 
community and the international courts by killing hundreds of whales for the 
spurious purpose of ‘research’,” Kindleysides said.

Labor’s spokesperson for environment and water, Tony Burke, attacked the 
killing he said was done “under the guise of ‘scientific research”.

“Japanese whaling ships have been sighted with their harpoons uncovered in the 
Southern Ocean, where a moratorium on whaling in currently in effect,” he said.

“This is happening in areas Australia recognises as being protected.”
 