
Jody Cundy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jody-cundy> has called the UCI’s 
announcement that the 2017 Para-cycling Track World Championships will take 
place in Los Angeles in March, giving athletes only seven weeks to prepare, “a 
joke”.

The UCI confirmed on Monday the event would take place from 2-5 March in the 
Californian city, which will be hoping the event can boost its case to host the 
2024 Olympics and Paralympics.

Kadeena Cox has UK Sport funding suspended for taking part in The Jump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/kadeena-cox-uk-sport-funding-suspended-the-jump>
However, the timing of the announcement will not sit well with potential 
participants given the extremely short notice - coming when many have still not 
resumed intensive training following the Rio Paralympics.

Cundy, who won two para-cycling gold medals at Rio 2016, said on Twitter: “I’m 
all up for racing and new events, but a full blown world champs with 7weeks 
notice. Seriously what a joke UCI-cycling UCI-paracycling.”

He added <https://twitter.com/jodycundy/status/818538492686962691>: “Why do 
the @UCI_cycling think it’s acceptable to give 7 weeks official notice of a 
World Championships? They expecting any riders to turn up?”

Adam Duggleby, the sighted pilot for the visually impaired cyclist Stephen 
Bate, who won two golds and a bronze in Riotweeted 
<https://twitter.com/a_duggleby/status/818546660246687744>: “Me and 
@kiwistevebate aren’t going! That’s what Rio Gold medallists think.”

The event, which will take place at the Velo Sports Center in Carson, will be 
the first Para-cycling Track World Championships to come in the year after a 
Paralympic Games - a move which the UCI president, Brian Cookson, said 
signified progress even if there would be sacrifices in the short term.

“We are conscious that the award of this event comes late in the season for 
the athletes, teams and parties implicated in the organisation of the event,” 
Cookson said. “However, we believe that holding these UCI Para-cycling Track 
World Championships for the first time ever in a post-Paralympic year signifies 
notable progress and will enable our athletes to benefit from an enriched 
calendar as the discipline continues to develop. We would like to thank the US 
Olympic Committee for organising this important event in such a short time.”

In November, Dame Sarah Storey - the athletes’ representative on the UCI’s 
para-cycling commission - criticised the UCI for not including the Para-cycling 
Track World Championships in a long list of events which were announced in 
October.

“Without a doubt, I think we’re being treated like a different discipline at 
the moment,” said Storey, who added that the slow announcement meant that “very 
few people have had the opportunity to get back into training for a decent 
length of time”.
 