
John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> has warned that 
its annual bonus for staff will be significantly lower than last year as it 
prepares to take a hit from the post-Brexit slump in sterling.

Charlie Mayfield, chairman of the staff-owned group, which includes Waitrose, 
said he anticipated a “challenging” year ahead as retailers would have to 
absorb a big chunk of the rising cost of importing goods just as they are 
coping with shoppers’ shift to buying online.

“Sterling, I think, is the dog that hasn’t really barked,” said Mayfield. He 
said a near-20% drop in the value of the pound had yet to affect most 
businesses because they had bought currency six months to a year in advance.

M&S enjoys cracking Christmas as clothing sales rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/m-and-s-christmas-clothing-sales-rise-marks-spencer>
But he warned that would now begin to unwind: “My view is quite a lot of [the 
increased costs] will be absorbed by retailers as we are in an increasingly 
competitive market place with excess of retail space. Even if it is passed on 
to customers it is not necessarily a good thing as it will dampen demand 
especially if we see a swing in inflation versus wage growth.”

Mayfield said the devaluation of sterling was “one of the most significant 
factors overhanging the outlook for the year ahead.”

This will be the fourth consecutive year that the group, which is collectively 
owned by its staff, has reduced the payout, but it is highly unusual for it to 
cut the bonus when profits rise. Last year its 91,500 employees, known as 
partners, were awardedbonuses of 10% of salary, the lowest for 13 years, 
averaging just over £1,500 each 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/john-lewis-waitrose-staff-bonus-falls-again>
.

The bonus payout started in 1920. It was suspended during the second world war 
and the early 1950s recession, and peaked at 24% of salary in the 1980s. The 
highest payout in recent years was 18% in 2011.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjohn-lewis-cut-staff-bonus-market-waitrose-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a78bd2f8755f80aa708220994b9ac2b264c33b6%2F0_0_3234_1940%2F3234.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lewis%20to%20cut%20staff%20bonus%20after%20pound%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20slide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjohn-lewis-cut-staff-bonus-market-waitrose-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lewis%20to%20cut%20staff%20bonus%20after%20pound%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20slide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjohn-lewis-cut-staff-bonus-market-waitrose-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a78bd2f8755f80aa708220994b9ac2b264c33b6%2F0_0_3234_1940%2F3234.jpg>
 John Lewis staff cheer their 18% bonus in 2011; it is likely to be less than 
10% this year. Photograph: Andrew Winning/Reuters 
Its decision to cut the payout comes despite a strong Christmas and 
expectations of higher profits for the year to the end of January, thanks to 
lower pension costs.

Sales for the John Lewis department store business, including online, rose by 
2.7% in the six weeks to 31 December as the group enjoyed strong trading in 
fashion and homewares. Online sales soared nearly 12% while store sales rose 
0.8%, helped by the opening of two new outlets.


The Waitrose chain also had a strong Christmas with sales at established 
stores up by 2.8% over the period, partly thanks to strong trading at the 
group’s growing network of in-store cafes and restaurants. Sales of its premium 
Waitrose 1 range, which includes specialities such as Sicilian lemon meringue 
eclairs, rose more than 21%.

Mayfield said: “Although we expect to report profits up on last year, trading 
profit is under pressure. This reflects the greater changes taking place across 
the retail sector.”

The shift towards online sales hits profits because of the cost of home 
deliveries and returns. Nick Bubb, an independent retail analyst, said John 
Lewis’s never knowingly undersold price-matching scheme was also likely to have 
cost the company profit margin as discounting across the market increased ahead 
of Christmas.

Mayfield said the group would have to lift investment in product innovations, 
such as its premium Waitrose 1 food line or Modern Rarity fashion label, as 
well as developing infrastructure to cope with rising demand for online 
shopping. He said the group would also be investing more in its existing stores 
to ensure they could continue to attract shoppers.

About 40% of John Lewis’s sales were online over Christmas, up from 36% last 
year, and Mayfield said there was no sign of a slowdown in the pace of growth. 
He predicted that the department store, whosenew boss Paula Nickolds takes the 
helm this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/john-lewis-paula-nickolds-chief-executive-first-female>
, was likely to book half its sales via the internet ahead of the 2020 deadline 
previously expected.

Mayfield said that John Lewis’s board had a responsibility to look at the long 
term rather than maintain the bonus for staff.

“We have to strike a balance and we believe it is right to retain a bit more 
profit in order to invest in the future of the business,” he said.
 