
Vid is sitting in his winter living room among the large model boats he has 
carved from driftwood – everything from galleons to the Titanic. “This is not a 
job,” he tells me. “This is a lifestyle. I came here five years ago to escape 
the world of business and city life. There are only three rules: no politics, 
no assumption of status and no grumpiness.”

On this Croatian road trip we have reached, it seems, the furthest possible 
point from cities, politics and grumpiness. Vid is an avuncular presence, 
gently supervising his hostel-campsite-taverna on the island of Kornat, the 
largest in the Kornati archipelago, a chain of 140 limestone outcrops off the 
port of Zadar. Vid has forgotten to mention another rule, actually a necessity, 
of his kingdom: you cannot drive or walk to it. The only access is by boat or 
kayak.

“It’s like a filter,” he says. “Paddlers and sailors are more likely to be 
good people. They’re friendly and don’t look down on other people.”
Kornati map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/travel_croatia_week4/giv-31075A8UmdpHCV5NU/>
For us, that has meant paddling. The journey begins when we leave our vehicle 
in a car park in Zadar. (My question, “Will my laptop be safe inside?” prompts 
reassurance from a local: “There is very little crime here. But to be extra 
sure, lock the car.”) We then catch the passenger ferry to Sali on Dugi Otok – 
Long Island. This ferry is our first step towards Vid’s kind of normal: local 
people heading home from Zadar’s markets laden with fruit, veg and flowers. 
People who bring their own sandwiches, drink out of thermos flasks and never 
stop chatting.

In Sali, an unpretentious little port, we meet Marko, our guide and kayaking 
mentor. Over the next four days he’ll take us from our base on Kornat on 
kayaking day trips to explore the archipelago. Marko likes to talk, and in a 
jokey conversation held across the waves during a long paddle later on, we 
decided that if he were a dog, he might be Timmy, the endlessly enthusiastic 
hound of the Famous Five.

We stock up on snacks in Sali, then cycle for 20 minutes to a quiet little bay 
where we spend an hour packing everything in dry bags and inspecting the 
conditions out at sea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06866224308d23770bda447d8a0c477f77619765%2F0_154_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kayaking%20Croatia%E2%80%99s%20Kornati%20islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kayaking%20Croatia%E2%80%99s%20Kornati%20islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06866224308d23770bda447d8a0c477f77619765%2F0_154_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Maddy prepares for the kayak crossing 
“This wind is the bura,” Marko declares. “But this is the third day of it, and 
it will die down soon.”

Our tiny flotilla sets out, performing a nervous turn through choppy waves and 
heading south. My daughter Maddy (13) and I, however, are in a double sea kayak 
which is as steady as a rock, and when we turn, the wind is at our backs, 
propelling us quickly around a headland, then through a narrow strait into the 
necklace of small outer islands that hangs from the neck of Kornat.

It is already clear that August is not Kornati’s quietest month. In fact, 
Italian families with speedboats love to whizz across the Adriatic and then 
spend an idyllic week or two carving these tranquil waters into white slices. 
Another summer migrant to spot is the billionaire. You might spy his 
super-yacht lying sleek and supercilious in a lonely cove, but sighting an 
actual superhero of capitalism himself is unlikely. (Croatia’s ports are full 
of gossip about them. One relative of a crew member told me how the flowers, 
€5,000-worth, were changed every day, whether anyone was on board or not. As 
this yacht belonged to a very minor member of the species, I shudder to imagine 
what other pointless extravagances are perpetrated.)

It is also clear, however, that a kayak can take you places no speedboat or 
superyacht ever will. On our first day out from Vid’s little paradise, Marko 
leads us to a chain of rocky islets with tough, bleached faces of karstic 
limestone, anything between a few metres tall to epic edifices as high as St 
Paul’s cathedral.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6820d0c0540e5bc086e80e493128f983c4c463f4%2F0_0_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kayaking%20Croatia%E2%80%99s%20Kornati%20islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kayaking%20Croatia%E2%80%99s%20Kornati%20islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6820d0c0540e5bc086e80e493128f983c4c463f4%2F0_0_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
 Vid in his living room 
We have already had a lesson in how to exit a kayak at sea, and climb back 
aboard. Now it is time to practise. But the bura has been replaced by the 
mistral, a steady southerly that is rapping insistently on these cliffs. The 
reflections cause all kinds of wildness and into this we jump. Marko ties the 
kayaks together and steers away from the cliff. We swim into a mysterious and 
wonderful little cave, unseen from above the waves. The cliff is deeply 
undercut and so a theatrical blue light shines from below. After a few minutes 
we retrieve our boats and climb aboard – which is actually not as difficult as 
you might imagine.

Next day some of the group want to relax so Marko and I drop them at a lovely 
shingle beach with a restaurant and head for Mana. This island has truly 
magnificent cliffs set in a vast overhung amphitheatre, on top of which is a 
ruined castle. It is actually a film set, built before CGI for some lost epic 
about the new world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d66881506dfb66a9cc636f48e219082c7e9832a%2F0_50_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kayaking%20Croatia%E2%80%99s%20Kornati%20islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kayaking%20Croatia%E2%80%99s%20Kornati%20islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fcroatia-kornati-islands-kayaking-road-trip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d66881506dfb66a9cc636f48e219082c7e9832a%2F0_50_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
Below it, the snorkelling along the edge of a dark deep drop is stunning. Then 
we paddle over to Baluni island for some deepwater solo climbing. This is 
Marko’s first love, I feel. He rolls from the kayak, swims strongly to the 
cliff, and climbs barefoot up a vertical 10-metre crack before leaping off the 
top and doing it again. My own attempt is fun, but not half as elegant or 
successful.

The days roll by. The initial annoyance with speedboats fades as I realise 
they all go to the same spots – the ones we don’t visit. One morning I climb up 
the hill behind Vid’s place to watch a panorama of islands, ethereal and 
mysterious in the dawn mist.

When we have paddled back to Dugi Otok and cycled to Sali, we are getting down 
from our bikes when a man approaches and hands out cakes. Who is he? A Marko 
stooge? No, just a passerby, heading home from the bakery, who felt like 
handing out delicious buns. Well, if nowhere can ever be paradise, this is 
about as close as it gets.

Discovering Croatia: anyone for picigin?

Croatian beaches in August can be crowded, but don’t rule the popular spots 
out too readily. Split’s Bačvice beach, for example, is where the game picigin 
was invented, and braving the crowds to see it or, even better, take part, is 
fun. The idea is simply to keep the ball out of the water. Aficionados argue 
about rules: some say the ball must be a tennis ball with all the fur removed – 
handy for using up local hero Goran Ivanesovic’s cast-offs. Others argue that 
one team should be in the water, the other not. On Bačvice this is often 
unrealistic, since you won’t find an inch of space on land.

• Kayaking was provided by Malik Adventures <http://www.malikadventures.com/>, 
whose four-day trips in Kornati and Molat cost from €420pp, including 
equipment, accommodation, guiding and some meals. Transport from Portsmouth to 
Caen, from £79pp each way, was provided byBrittany Ferries 
<http://www.brittanyferries.com/>. More information from visit croatia.hr 
<http://www.croatia.hr/> and zadar.hr <http://www.zadar.hr/>
 