
Eddie Hearn said an agreement regarding a fight between Amir Khan and Kell 
Brook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kell-brook> has a “long way to go”. 
For the first time, however, he is adamant there is a “real desire from both 
fighters” to secure a date.

Matchroom’s Hearn is exploring a possible fight, which would be Britain’s 
biggest outside of the heavyweight division, for May next year.

Amir Khan’s wife accuses in-laws of bullying and abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/amir-khan-wife-faryal-makhdoom-accuses-in-laws-bullying-abuse>
After years of Brook aggressively pursuing his rival, Khan recently became the 
aggressor on Twitter when in a post referring to the IBF welterweight champion 
he wrote “Ready when you are 
<https://twitter.com/amirkingkhan/status/808841683915960321?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
”.

Hearn believes Brook’s recent fight with Gennady Golovkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/kell-brook-title-bid-ended-gennady-golovkin>
 has grown his profile to the extent Khan is finally tempted to face him but 
has also stressed previous negotiations have progressed further than the 
present ones without succeeding.

“Khan recognises the size of the fight, he’s up for the challenge,” Hearn 
said. “Kell’s value has increased considerably, and there seems to be a real 
desire from both sides to get it done, but we’ve been here before.

“We’ve held talks before but there’s never been the calling out from Amir that 
there is now, so that’s why I say there seems a real desire from both sides. 
Not just both sides but both fighters.

“There’s a very long way to go but we’ll work quietly behind close doors to 
try to finally get a fight over the line that I believe has to happen.

“It’s still early days. We’ve been further down the road than we are now and I 
was confident then. I’m hopeful rather than confident but when both fighters 
are calling each other out, it’s always a good sign.”

One possible reason Khan, 30, could be tempted is the likelihood Brook will 
struggle to return to the 147lb welterweight limit having challenged Golovkin 
at middleweight.

In Khan’s past fight he also fought at middleweight – like Brook also being 
stopped, by Mexico’s Saúl Alvarez – but unlike Brook he has no history of 
struggling to make 147lbs.

Hearn insists Brook, also 30, planned to return to welterweight regardless, 
perhaps to defend his title against America’s Errol Spence, and that both the 
fighter and those around him are confident he can still make the weight.

“When we had our meeting a couple of weeks ago the plan was very much ‘I don’t 
want to vacate my title’, therefore I’m staying at welterweight,” Hearn said.

“He’s spoken to a nutritionist, to his team: we feel like he can make 
welterweight. Can he be as effective as at 154lbs? We don’t know, but he can 
make welterweight.

“This was all so he could fight Errol Spence, before the Khan fight looked 
possible. Khan is a big name, has a high profile. There are other options for 
him as there are for Brook.”
 