
The hammer and sickle have made a stellar return to the fashion world in the 
form of a voluminous red hoodie, adorned with the Soviet symbol andworn by Kim 
Kardashian 
<http://uk.complex.com/style/2016/12/kim-kardashian-vetements-communist-sweatshirt-twitter-reacts>
.

Setting aside the irony that two weeks earlier her husband had cosied up to 
the US president-elect, Donald Trump – one of the world’s most staunch 
capitalists whose relationship with Russia has been underintense scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/kremlin-ridicules-claims-collected-material-donald-trump>
 this week –Kardashian 
<http://uk.complex.com/style/2016/12/kim-kardashian-vetements-communist-sweatshirt-twitter-reacts>
’s fashion choice raises some ethical questions about appropriating communist 
symbols.

Until recently the only communist souvenirs you would see in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> were cheap T-shirts in kiosks 
marketed at ignorant tourists. Now the Paris-based label Vetements sells its 
limited edition hoodies for $700 a piece.

Originally, the hammer was used to represent the industrial labourers of 
Soviet times; the sickle the peasant farmers – but not any more.
stuart (@jungleplatoon) 
Let's play a game.

If anyone finds something that's more ironic than Kim Kardashian wearing a 
$770 communist hoodie, they win the Internet.pic.twitter.com/r3tovwSFVE 
<https://t.co/r3tovwSFVE>
 <https://twitter.com/jungleplatoon/status/813588486552952832> December 27, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/jungleplatoon/status/813588486552952832> 
It’s not the first time communism has become a fashion obsession. In the 
mid-2000s Moscow-based fashion designer Denis Simachev gained notoriety for 
combining Soviet military badges with fur, gold flowers and Russian cartoon 
characters.


The man who made Russian fashion cool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/12/russian-fashion-gosha-rubchinskiy-post-soviet-designer-menswear>
It caused outrage among a generation of Russians who felt that at best their 
past was being mocked and depreciated and at worst, the dark legacy of the 
Soviet regime was being celebrated.

Ten years later we are here again, but this time the audience is different. 
Vetements, whose head designer,Demna Gvasalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/02/demna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect>
 (also the artistic director at Balenciaga), was born in Soviet Georgia, has 
been successful because it has tapped into a zeitgeist of a generation that 
grew up in the shadow of the Soviet era, but never experienced it directly 
themselves.

Russian designer Gosha Rubchinskiy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/12/russian-fashion-gosha-rubchinskiy-post-soviet-designer-menswear>
 has been another force in reintroducing Russian and Soviet symbols in to 
global visual culture

His spring/summer collection 2016, called 1984, also uses Soviet fonts and 
slogans, as well as the hammer and sickle.

For the generation, born in the early 2000s, the hammer and sickle is seen as 
a curious relic of the past, but to many it still represents a political and 
cultural struggle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fkim-kardashian-and-the-fashionistas-drop-the-hammer-and-sickle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6194f59e9230f2df5a7d3e6d650a5f08c0bce57f%2F0_27_697_871%2F697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20fashionistas%3A%20%20drop%20the%20hammer%20and%20sickle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fkim-kardashian-and-the-fashionistas-drop-the-hammer-and-sickle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20fashionistas%3A%20%20drop%20the%20hammer%20and%20sickle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fkim-kardashian-and-the-fashionistas-drop-the-hammer-and-sickle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6194f59e9230f2df5a7d3e6d650a5f08c0bce57f%2F0_27_697_871%2F697.jpg>
 Gosha Rubchinskiy’s 1984 collection. Photograph: Calvert Journal 
Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania and Ukraine have all banned symbols of 
“totalitarian and criminal ideology”, and the public display of the hammer and 
sickle, the red star and other communist symbols is a criminal offence.

Ukraine, whose struggle for identity and independence is particularly 
poignant, is going through the process of dismantling the legacies of the 
communist state, removing Soviet-era monuments and renaming public places.

When the decommunisation laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/20/ukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet>
 were approved in Ukraine in April 2015, 22 cities and 44 villages had to be 
renamed and gaping holes where monuments used to stand demonstrated the former 
ubiquity of communist symbols.

As a Russian, I am bored with people bringing up communism: it’s an old 
stereotype people are happy to advertise on their clothes without any real 
understanding of its history.

Even if you can spare $700 for a hammer and sickle hoodie, it’s worth thinking 
about the message it is sending.

A version of this article first appeared on the Calvert Journal 
<http://calvertjournal.com/comment/show/6759/clubbing-eastern-europe-techno-underground-music>
, a guide to the new east
 