
In 2016 koalas were sighted for the first time in decades at Mount Kembla, 
Wollongong and in Kosciuszko national park in New South Wales. Although these 
sightings are a source of hope, it’s important we don’t get lulled into a false 
sense of security about the extent to which nature, including koalas, is 
threatened in Australia. We have serious work to do to protect our unique 
plants and animals.


Most environment news these days focuses on climate change. In many ways this 
isn’t surprising.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> threatens to alter our 
entire environment as rainfall patterns change, temperatures rise and extremes 
become more common. Many species are already finding their habitats shrinking – 
just look at polar bears and the rapidly vanishing Arctic sea ice.

Koalas 'under siege' from policy changes set to destroy habitat, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/koalas-under-siege-from-policy-changes-set-to-destroy-habitat-report-finds>
Yet amid this climate emergency “mere” species extinctions have largely been 
pushed out of mind. Of course the issues are intertwined as climate change can 
cause extinctions: in July the Bramble Cay melomys (a rodent) wasreported as 
the first animal to have been made extinct primarily due to climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/14/first-case-emerges-of-mammal-species-wiped-out-by-human-induced-climate-change>
. In its case, its single-island habitat had been repeatedly inundated by 
rising sea levels destroying the native vegetation and ultimately the species 
itself. And of course climate change threatens to exacerbate and amplify other 
threats to species like bushfires and heatwaves.

But human destruction of habitat is, at least in the short term, a much 
greater threat 
<https://theconversation.com/hunting-fishing-and-farming-remain-the-biggest-threats-to-wildlife-63723>
 to species than climate change. In mid-December, scientists from the 
University of Queensland were part of a team thatfound 
<https://theconversation.com/half-the-worlds-ecosystems-at-risk-from-habitat-loss-and-australia-is-one-of-the-worst-64663>
, of all developed countries on Earth, Australia was performing worst in 
protecting its ecoregions (areas containing broadly similar habitat). The 
researchers identified “crisis ecoregions” where habitat loss is greatest. A 
crisis ecoregion in Australia? Temperate forests.

Enter the koala. Undoubtedly the most famous inhabitant of Australian 
temperate forest ecosystems, and arguably the world’s favourite species. But as 
you may expect from a species inhabiting a crisis ecoregion, it’s not faring so 
well.Historical accounts <http://www.publish.csiro.au/book/7418/> describe 
large numbers of koalas being seen regularly in the late 1800s in NSW. In 1921, 
200,000 koala pelts passed through Sydney and in 1924two million pelts were 
exported from eastern Australia.

Yet now all koala populations, bar a few in eastern Australia, are in decline 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2015.09.020>. Some sharply so. So whether 
or not you find, as we do, themost recent estimate 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12400> of 329,000 in Australia (36,000 koalas in 
NSW) to be optimistic one thing is clear: koala numbers are a fraction of what 
they once were and the species is slipping away.

In NSW, koalas are in the centre of a perfect storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/koalas-under-siege-from-policy-changes-set-to-destroy-habitat-report-finds>
 largely of the government’s own making: changes to land clearing laws have 
alreadydevastated bushland in Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/queensland-farmers-bulldoze-thousands-of-hectares-of-native-vegetation>
 andhistory threatens to repeat itself in NSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/farmers-able-to-clear-land-more-easily-as-new-laws-pass-in-nsw>
 with the Baird government recently passing its land-clearing legislation.

Much remaining high-quality koala habitat is either on private land, thus at 
risk of clearing, or in state forests and thus subject toever more intense 
state-sanctioned logging <http://www.epa.nsw.gov.au/soe/20150817soe-2015.htm>. 
Urban development is eating into koala habitat up and down the coast. And 
following this habitat destruction, koalas are vulnerable to dog attacks and 
vehicle strike as they spend more time on the ground.

'We have to stop the bulldozers': swaths of koala habitat lost, say activists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/17/we-have-to-stop-the-bulldozers-swaths-of-koala-habitat-lost-say-activists>
If this were happening to a snail, or even a frog, it would probably be ignored
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2016/oct/27/rabbs-fringe-limbed-treefrog-frog-amphibians-extinct-extinction-media>
. But koalas are one of the few animals whose plight the government finds it 
hard to ignore. That’s why the NSW government is currently beginning the 
development of awhole of government koala strategy 
<http://www.chiefscientist.nsw.gov.au/reports/independent-review-into-decline-of-koala-populations>
 and asking for community feedback on planning issues and itsSaving Our Species 
conservation strategy 
<http://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/resources/animals/iconic-koala-project-160644.pdf>
. At a federal level, theNational Koala Conservation and Management Strategy 
<https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/165139fc-3ab5-4c96-8b15-d11a1ad882ab/files/koala-strategy.pdf>
 expired in 2014. Word is that a new strategy is in the pipeline but at the 
moment we’re flying blind.

The best way to protect koalas is a tried and tested one. The scientists that 
identified the crisis ecoregion problem also identified the solution: large, 
well-connected protected areas. Only by protecting and connecting remaining 
koala habitat can the government enact meaningful conservation. Everything else 
is tinkering round the edges.

And only by demonstrating that it can effectively protect koalas can we have 
any confidence that the government can protect the rest of Australia’s 
extraordinary wildlife that doesn’t share the koala’s high profile.
 