
The buzz

Few films have raised expectations quite so headily as Damien Chazelle’s third 
feature. Right from its Oscars-launchpad premiere on the opening night of Venice
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/18/why-hollywood-musical-la-la-land-will-follow-argo-and-the-artist-to-the-oscars>
 (where Gravity and Birdman had both debuted in past years), this one was 
tipped for the top. Hollywood has predictably gone gaga over it; reviewers 
followed suit. On Sunday, it wonseven Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-moonlight-meryl-streep>
, more than any other film ever. Were you suitably swooning after you saw it? 
Or does such buildup inevitably lead to an anticlimax once you’re actually 
sitting in front of it?

The songs
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGTWqwSNQCcg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGTWqwSNQCcg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGTWqwSNQCcg&media=>
La La Land’s tunes seem to be real ear-worms, judging by the amount of 
incidental humming you can hear. But how classic are they? How whipcrack are 
the lyrics? And which are your favourites? City of Stars is being pushed for 
the best original song Oscar, but have the producers missed a trick by not 
backing, say, Another Day of Sun or Someone in the Crowd?

The dancing

Are Stone and Gosling the new Rogers and Astaire? Were they even intending to 
be? Which moves had you tripping and which fell on their feet?

The sizzling secrets of on-screen chemistry: from Dirty Dancing to La La Land
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/from-dirty-dancing-to-la-la-land-the-sizzling-secrets-of-on-screen-chemistry>
The chemistry

The chemistry of Gosling and Stone – now on their third run round the block 
together – has been compared to that of golden age greats. Did they fizz for 
you? Or was the alchemy diminished from the Dirty Dancing heights ofCrazy, 
Stupid, Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/crazy-stupid-love-film-review>? 

The single takes

There are some absolute splashy crackers in La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> – most notably the opening 
freeway number, complete with pan down to the meet cute, and the magic-hour tap 
banter after the party. Were you wowed or did you find the technique 
distracting?

The disappearing sister

The unhappy vanishing of Rosemarie DeWitt as Seb’s sister, who shares his 
opening scene but then never speaks again, has been the subject of some 
conspiracy theories. What happened? Did you spot vestiges of a larger 
performance that might have hit the cutting room floor? Did you miss her or 
were you pleased to see the back of her?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&media=>
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
The piano playing

Gosling spent three months intensively tickling the ivories in preparation for 
the shoot, leading to a lack of employment for hand doubles. Was it worth it?

#LaLaLandSoWhite? 

The movie has come in for some backlash for what some see as the narrative of 
a white hero fighting to defend African-American culture. Is this fair? There 
is ethnic diversity in supporting roles throughout the movie, John Legend takes 
the main supporting role, and there’s a mixed crowd in the clubs. But it is 
Seb’s club, ultimately: is that a problem?

Jazzsplaining

Do you have to love jazz to love La La Land? It can feel fairly 
non-negotiable, as per Seb’s lecture to Mia in the Lighthouse to cure her of 
her ignorance about the genre’s roots, brilliance and importance. How 
top-drawer is the improv jazz that he later plays? And how come his original 
compositions (City of Stars, for instance) aren’t actually that jazzy?

The final split

Did the reasons for Seb and Mia’s separation feel plausible? Some have taken 
issue with whether they really needed to break up when she left for Paris, 
especially given the lengths he went to not only to prove his commitment but 
save her career. And when she returned, might it have been possible for them to 
give things another go? Or at least for them to have kept in touch? After all, 
it was hardly a vicious split, and she might have been curious to know about 
him opening his jazz club. Or is it simply the case that some relationships are 
transient and enabling rather than built to last?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&media=>
La La Land trailer: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone star in musical movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
La La Land review – Gosling and Stone sparkle in a gorgeous musical romance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/12/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-musical-romance-movie>
The alternate ending

What to make of the medley extravaganza that shows how the relationship might 
have panned out had Seb reacted differently after being fired, rejected 
Legend’s overtures, shown up to the play, and come along to Paris? It would 
have unfolded, it seems, pretty much identically to Mia’s relationship with her 
new, bland-but-nice husband: house, superstardom, baby. What conclusion can we 
draw from that? That all relationships are predestined to end the same way? Or 
that Seb and Mia could – and should – have made it work?

The message

Both La La Land and Whiplash are films concerned with what single-minded 
creative ambition does to your capacity to succeed – and your romantic ties. 
They suggest grit and an uncompromising approach are compulsory (Miles Teller’s 
character bleeding over the sticks; Mia gritting her teeth and getting back on 
the audition treadmill) – they also imply there’s something incompatible about 
lasting relationships and creative drive. Is this specific to showbiz? It is 
easy for lay-people to relate to? Can it be overcome? And how appealing a 
conundrum is it to explore over two-and-a-bit hours?
 