
To be an Oscar frontrunner these days is to exist in two disparate worlds of 
opposing consensus: the nominally real one, where paying audiences and industry 
folk are united in their enthusiasm for a broadly acclaimed film, and the 
online one, where a large and previously quiet faction of critics, Twitterati 
and under-article commenters gather to tell us how lousy it really is.

La La Land: why this magical musical will transport you from Trump-World
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/why-musical-la-la-land-will-transport-you-from-trump-world>
Damien Chazelle’s La La Land is discovering that now. Even before its 
record-setting sweep of seven Golden Globes on Sunday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-moonlight-meryl-streep>
, about as unambiguous a declaration of devotion from one corner as you could 
ask for, you could hardly move for internet hot takes decrying everything 
that’s supposedly wrong with the Los Angeles-besotted musical, from thin female 
characterization to a white-saviour complex on jazz to an uneven sound mix. 
(Yes, no stone is left unturned in the argumentative heat of awards season.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&media=>
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
But in the immediate wake of that emphatic Globes triumph – the loudest 
bellwether to date of the film’s long-presumed Oscar dominance – another 
accusation came to the fore: that the film, or more specifically its popularity 
within the industry, is emblematic of a kind of Hollywood solipsism, one that 
sees artists rewarding reflections of their world, their work and their 
privileged problems over stories and crises that lie further from home.

“It was hard not to feel that Hollywood had fallen in love – and not just with 
a movie, but with yet another intoxicating vision of itself,” theLos Angeles 
Times critic Justin Chang wrote the next day 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/movies/la-et-mn-golden-globes-hollywood-falls-in-love-with-itself-20170109-story.html>
. That “yet another” pointedly alludes to the number of industry-focused films 
that have come out on top in recent awards seasons. Two years ago, after 
critics voted overwhelmingly in favor of Boyhood, Richard Linklater’s lovely 
long-game paean to middle-American ordinariness, Oscar voters brushed it aside 
for Alejandro González Iñárritu’s Birdman, a flashy backstage comedy revolving 
around an ageing Hollywood leading man’s crisis of self-worth. Glibly clever 
and artfully constructed, it nonetheless spoke to no audience quite as directly 
as the one in a position to hand it awards, and duly reaped the benefits.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&media=>
La La Land trailer: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone star in musical movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Two years before that, Ben Affleck took the top prize for Argo, a tense, 
roaringly entertaining fact-based thriller in which outer-world political drama 
– the Iran hostage crisis of 1979 to 1981 – was given a literal Hollywood 
rescue, as the film drolly mapped out the artificial American film production 
dreamed up by the CIA and studio insiders to bring the captives home. And that 
was only a year after Hollywood fell head over heels for the French film-maker 
Michel Hazanavicius’sThe Artist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-artist>, 
a delightful homage to American silent cinema and old-school silver-screen 
glamour that pre-empted much of what Birdman had to say about the insecurities 
of male stardom, albeit in a more winsome way. Taking five Oscars that same 
year? Martin Scorsese’s Hugo, a family fantasy in which a young Parisian orphan 
is enraptured by the innovations of the silent-cinema pioneer Georges Méliès.

Damien Chazelle on La La Land: 'Los Angeles is full of people chasing dreams'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/damien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride>
Citing all these examples the day after the Globes, the film writer Mark Harris
 <https://twitter.com/MarkHarrisNYC/status/818284930979524613> caustically 
implored awards voters to “stop ratifying yourselves”. He continued: “The 
history of the Oscars is going to be, ‘For decades, the Academy gave Best 
Picture to all kinds of things. Then they stopped.’”

Harris’s comments may not be entirely fair: alongside the aforementioned 
films, the Academy has also recently given their top honor to such stern, 
serious-minded films about subjects far outside the Tinseltown bubble as 
Spotlight, 12 Years a Slave and The Hurt Locker. Meanwhile, it would be 
reductive to suggest that films about the entertainment industry are inherently 
trivial or irrelevant to those outside it. La La Land’s bittersweet romance 
between a struggling actor and a struggling musician aims for a more 
universally poignant reflection on the pursuit of dreams, and the frequent 
incompatibility between personal ambition and romantic stability. The 
narrative, one pushed even by many of its admirers, that it’s a sunny escape 
outlet for audiences and awards voters alike from the troubled political 
present doesn’t quite account for what a melancholy, intimate reverie Chazelle 
has made; it’s not exactly Chekhovian in its human insight, but neither is it 
an alien property to many people who have been either in love or in career 
stasis.

Admittedly, it’s also not Moonlight, a film being presented by many critics as 
a neat corrective to the Hollywood insularity that benefitsLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land>. Widely seen as running second to 
Chazelle’s film in the Oscar race, despite a dominant run through the US 
critics’ awards, Barry Jenkins’s delicate work of lyrical realism, focused on 
identity conflict and burgeoning sexuality within Miami’s disenfranchised 
African American community, could hardly seem less familiar to most west coast 
voters. Jenkins and his team didn’t hide their surprise when the Hollywood 
Foreign Press Association handed the film its best drama film prize after 
denying it any other wins – a victory largely overshadowed by La La Land’s vast 
haul. Beneath producer Adele Romanski’s onstage admission that she “didn’t 
think this was going to happen” was a suggestion that Moonlight’s team isn’t 
expecting the Hollywood vote – that they have suspicions about the limits, or 
at least the preferential inclinations, of the in-crowd’s empathy.

‘It’s impossible to be vulnerable’: how Moonlight reflects being a black gay 
man in the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/its-impossible-to-be-vulnerable-how-moonlight-reflects-being-a-black-gay-man-in-the-us>
No film with a worldview quite like Moonlight’s has ever won best picture. And 
while it’s easy to argue for the formal daring, tonal novelty and accomplished 
high-wire execution of La La Land in many respects – only in the endlessly 
sniping atmosphere of awards season would a fully original contemporary musical 
be dismissed by detractors as “safe” or “formulaic” in 2017 – it’s harder to 
claim that its perspective on the world is one Academy types haven’t seen and 
endorsed before.

Hollywood’s fascination with its own image isn’t necessarily an artistically 
limiting one. If there were any journalists complaining about Oscar voters’ 
self-interested nature in 1950, when the race was led by two now-immortal black 
comedies on thespian self-interest (All About Eve and Sunset Boulevard), it’s 
safe to say the voters were right not to listen. And while Bob Fosse’s egotism 
was the butt of numerous media jokes in 1979, when his thrilling 
autobiographical backstage biopsy All That Jazz was up for best picture (it 
lost to the more tasteful and broadly relatable domestic drama of Kramer vs. 
Kramer), the film has outlasted them.

Meanwhile, it’s a misconception that Hollywood has always voted with one eye 
in the looking-glass; there have been eras of drably earnest Oscar voting when 
showbiz storytelling could hardly compete with more capital-I Important fare. 
Perhaps the Academy of today might have voted for Sydney Pollack’s wise, 
riotous TV-industry satire Tootsie over the laboriously noble Gandhi – a case 
of voters scrupulously attempting to recognize a world beyond their own, and 
getting it snoozily wrong in the process – and Hollywood history would be 
better for it. The mirror, quoth Barbra Streisand, has two faces, and sometimes 
seeing yourself isn’t quite the same as admiring the view. Which side of itself 
Los Angeles is collectively seeing in La La Land – a film that, in a single 
envelope, sends the City of Angels both a vibrantly painted valentine and a 
Dear John letter listing its crueler failings – is still open to question.
 