
UK retail sales continued to grow at the end of last year as Britons made a 
late dash for Christmas gifts and festive foods, according to industry figures 
that add tosigns the economy ended 2016 on a strong note 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/uk-services-sector-grows-fastest-pace>
.

The British Retail Consortium (BRC) pointed to challenges ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/02/shops-rising-costs-falling-consumer-spend-closures-retailers>
 from rising costs and political uncertainty but said its members went into the 
new year having enjoyed solid sales growth over the crucial Christmas period.

Sales rose 1% in December from the year earlier, on a like-for-like basis. 
That was an improvement on November and was boosted by last-minute gift-buying 
and strong food sales.

Consumer spending slowed over Christmas period, Visa figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/consumer-spending-slowed-over-christmas-period-visa-figures-show>
“Retailers were helped by the timing of Christmas, which fell on a Sunday, 
giving shoppers the chance to use the weekend for a final dash to the shops 
delivering a last-minute boost to sales,” said Paul Martin, UK head of retail 
at KPMG, which helps to compile the BRC report.

The BRC’s report chimed with figures from the discount supermarket Aldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> that showed total UK sales for 
December were up 15% on a year earlier, helped by strong demand for festive 
vegetables, prosecco and its premium products such as “specially selected” 
mince pies.

Separate figures from Barclaycard also suggested that the final three months 
of 2016 had seen the highest growth for four years in consumer spending, which 
encompasses leisure activities and petrol as well as spending in shops and 
online.


But there had been a slowdown at the very end of the year, according to 
Barclaycard, which processes about half the UK’s card transactions.Consumer 
spending <https://www.theguardian.com/business/consumerspending> grew 4% year 
on year in December, a change of pace from growth in excess of 5% in October 
and November.

Echoing other reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/consumer-spending-slowed-over-christmas-period-visa-figures-show>
, Barclaycard said online retailers enjoyed strong sales, as did pubs and 
restaurants buthigh street stores suffered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/brexit-worries-and-online-stores-hit-shopping-centre-sales>
. Spending on clothing was the hardest hit. It also noted some of the rise in 
spending was down to higher prices,including for petrol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/petrol-food-prices-uk-rising-2017>
, and not because people were buying more in volume terms.


Paul Lockstone, managing director at Barclaycard, said: “2016 saw consumer 
spending growth sign off with a very strong quarter, but the headline number 
masks a story of softening spend growth as the year came to an end.

“This could be an early indication of things to come as consumers seem to have 
entered 2017 with more caution, citing worries about inflation and the 
triggering of article 50. Looking ahead, all eyes will be on whether this year 
will see households begin to feel squeezed by rising prices, leading to a 
sustained fall in consumer spending on discretionary items in favour of their 
day-to-day essentials.”


Those concerns were echoed by BRC chief executive Helen Dickinson. She said 
retail sales growth in 2016 as a whole, at 1.2%, was already slower than in 
2015.

“The challenge for retailers in 2017 will be to create real growth against a 
backdrop of growing inflationary pressures and persisting economic and 
political uncertainty,” Dickinson added.


Inflation is expected to rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
 this year asthe pound’s weakness since the Brexit vote makes imports more 
expensive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/uk-firms-brace-for-further-brexit-price-rises-surveys-show>
.

The market researcher IGD, which compiled the BRC’s grocery figures, said 
shoppers were worrying about the possible return of food inflation. Its poll of 
1,707 people found that three-quarters anticipated higher prices in 2017. With 
the cost of imports and imminent Brexit talks in focus, it also noted another 
potential trend.

“A surge in patriotism could be another important factor, with 45% believing 
it’s more important to buy British-produced food now the UK has voted to leave 
the EU,” said IGD chief executive Joanne Denney-Finch.
 