
Leading scientists have asked the prime minister to urge president-elect 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> to acknowledge 
the risks of climate change and declare his support for international efforts 
to combat global warming.

One hundred researchers, including many of the most prominent climate 
scientists in Britain, have written to Theresa May to warn her of the potential 
threats posed by Donald Trump, who hasmade clear he does not accept the 
scientific consensus on warming driven by human activities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/trump-cabinet-climate-change-deniers>
.

The letter warns that Trump’s administration may severely weaken climate 
change research and the collection of data such as Earth temperature records, 
which are used by scientists and policymakers in the UK and around the world. 
If the world class climate science now performed in the US is wound down under 
Trump, the UK must be ready to respond decisively, the letter states. One 
response would be to rapidly expand British climate science by offering jobs to 
disaffected US researchers.

Trump has called global warming a hoax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/climate-change-a-chinese-plot-beijing-gives-donald-trump-a-history-lesson>
 and may scrap Nasa’s invaluable climate research program. Hethreatened to 
withdraw from the Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
, which aims to avoid the most dire consequences of climate change, though
recently he said he had an open mind on US involvement in the plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
. He appointed Scott Pruitt, a climate sceptic, to run the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), and Rex Tillerson, the CEO of Exxon, to be secretary 
of state.

“We don’t know how bad it will be, and it seems that Trump has slightly gone 
back on some of the rhetoric, but there are still worrying concerns,” said Prof 
Piers Forster, a signatory of the letter and director of the Priestley 
International Centre for Climate at Leeds University. “What concerns me is that 
if we don’t have good scientific data and observations coming from America, 
we’ll be flying blind.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fleading-scientists-urge-may-to-pressure-trump-over-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61b6b548054cecec2c6aa736261f8785d54b2636%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leading%20scientists%20urge%20May%20to%20pressure%20Trump%20over%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fleading-scientists-urge-may-to-pressure-trump-over-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leading%20scientists%20urge%20May%20to%20pressure%20Trump%20over%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fleading-scientists-urge-may-to-pressure-trump-over-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61b6b548054cecec2c6aa736261f8785d54b2636%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Scott Pruitt, who said the climate change debate was ‘far from settled’, has 
been chosen by Trump to run the EPA. Photograph: Aaron P. Bernstein/Reuters 
The letter urges the PM to press Donald Trump directly and through 
international forums such as the G7 and G20 to accept the reality of climate 
change and restate a commitment to the Paris agreement. In rejecting the 
scientific evidence around climate change, Trump is disregarding the findings 
and advice from expert bodies around the world, including the US National 
Academy of Sciences and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 
the letter states. It adds that the UK science community stands ready to back 
US researchers in “resisting any political attempts to prevent, hamper, or 
interfere with vital research on climate change.”

The scientists behind the letter, which was sent on Friday, want any weakening 
in US climate change to be met by an expansion of research in Britain. That 
could see the UK substantially bolster its expertise in the area by offering 
jobs to top US researchers whose work is shut down, or who simply become 
disillusioned under the Trump administration.

“There are opportunities for UK universities to make some fantastic 
appointments. I’m the director of a brand new institute and we are interested 
in giving these people jobs,” Forster said. Other signatories to the letter 
include Prof Phil Jones, director of the Climatic Research Unit at the 
University of East Anglia, Prof Corinne Le Quéré, director of the Tyndall 
Centre for Climate Change Research, and Prof Jim Hall, director of the 
Environmental Change Institute at Oxford University.

“We have to be prepared as a country because things could change quite 
rapidly,” Forster said. “If climate scientists in the US start to lose their 
jobs, we have to be ready to take up the slack.”

The last Republican president, George W Bush, was roundly criticised by 
climate scientists for interfering with research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jan/16/greenpolitics-georgebush> and 
public messages around global warming research. During his administration, a 
report from the EPA was edited by White House officials to reduce a long 
section on the risks of rising temperatures to a handful of vague paragraphs. In
one email exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2003/sep/21/usnews.georgewbush> that 
came to light, White House officials sought help from the conservative lobby 
group, the Competitive Enterprise Institute, which received more than $1m 
(£820,000) in donations from Exxon, to play down a report in which the US 
admitted for the first time that humans contributed to global warming.

Within days of President Bush’s inauguration, Randy Randol, an ExxonMobil 
lobbyist, sent a memo to the White House asking ifBob Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/robertwatson>, the former head of the 
World Bank’s environment department and then-chair of the IPCC, could be 
replaced at the request of the US. Watson, who was knighted in 2012 and had 
long warned about the impact of burning fossil fuels and the need to change to 
prevent environmental harm, was duly unseated and replaced.

The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, has told MPs that the UK will stress the 
importance of climate change to the Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/22/no-10-rejects-trumps-call-for-farage-to-beuk-ambassador-to-the-us-politics-live?page=with:block-5834349ae4b0e0ad2d75be68#block-5834349ae4b0e0ad2d75be68>
, but there is an acceptance among ministers that US climate policy is a matter 
for the US to decide.

A government spokesperson said the UK’s commitment to tackling climate change 
was “as strong as ever and we are clear that there will be no attempts to go 
back on what was agreed during negotiations in Paris and Marrakesh.”Theresa May 
closed the government’s dedicated climate change department last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/15/decc-abolition-major-setback-for-uk-climate-change-efforts>
. Work in the area now falls to the new Department for Business, Energy and 
Industrial Strategy.

“We know the UK and US face very similar energy challenges. We’ve had great 
experience working together on all kinds of energy and climate change issues 
and look forward to this collaboration continuing,” the spokesperson added.
 