
What’s going for it? Those wily French! No sooner had they stormed the Bastille
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/jul/15/archive-storming-bastille-france-1889>
 than they had designs on storming us. Again.The last invasion of Britain 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/wales/entries/002ee4af-c847-3da1-9112-fdb206618b86> 
took place on 22 February 1797, just outside Fishguard, though it seems more 
omnishambles than shock and awe. Two of the three prongs of attack were 
scuppered by bad weather; the third was marred by a right old shower. Many 
opted to get drunk and loot farmhouses; the rest were seen off after a couple 
of days by reservists and locals, including folk heroineJemima Nicholas 
<http://www.visitwales.com/explore/traditions-history/horrible-histories-wild-women>
 who, it’s reputed, rounded up a dozen Frenchies with nothing more than a 
pitchfork. That’s the spirit. After which Fishguard and its mini-me Newport 
returned to business as usual, catching herring and supping ale. Today, they’re 
rather idyllic, with their boats bobbing in the harbour, their wooded slopes 
and tranquil beaches, while tourists and downshifters hungry for the 
Pembrokeshire Experience invade Tenby and the south coast, armed with selfie 
sticks and demands for artisan ice-cream.

The case against They’re remote, but that kind of goes with the territory.

Well connected? There’s a station, but few trains: three a day to Carmarthen 
(50 mins), a couple of direct trains a day to Cardiff (2-3hrs). Driving: 
half-hour drives to Haverfordwest andSt David’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/jul/12/homes3>, an hour to 
Carmarthen, 90 mins to Swansea. Buses to Haverfordwest, Cardigan and St David’s.

Schools Primaries: Fishguard’s Glannau Gwaun 
<http://www.ysgolglannaugwaun.co.uk/> and Holy Name Catholic 
<https://www.pgfl.org.uk/schools/bgf/HolyName/default.aspx> are “adequate”, 
Newport’sBro Ingli <https://www.pgfl.org.uk/schools/bgf/BroIngli/default.aspx> 
is “good”, Estyn says. Secondaries: Fishguard’sBro Gwaun 
<https://www.pgfl.org.uk/schools/bgf/BroGwaun/site/default.aspx> is “adequate”.

Hang out at… Cnapan <http://www.cnapan.co.uk/> or the Golden Lion 
<http://www.goldenlionpembrokeshire.co.uk/>, both in Newport; the Fishguard Arms
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/jul/11/top-10-pubs-pembrokeshire-wales>
 or theRoyal Oak 
<https://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Restaurant_Review-g316015-d3431307-Reviews-The_Royal_Oak-Fishguard_Pembrokeshire_Wales.html>
 in Fishguard, where the Frenchies got drunk.

Where to buy Fishguard is a game of three halves: the pretty Lower Town down 
on the harbour, all wooded slopes, pebbledashed cottages, slipways and seaweed; 
the main town up the hill, with fine sea views, whitewashed or brightly painted 
town houses and terraces; and Goodwick, home to the ferry and train station, 
and a more humdrum affair. Newport, on the other side of Dinas Head, is smaller 
and quieter, straggly with old stone houses tumbling to the beach. Large 
detacheds and town houses, £300,000-£400,000. Detacheds and smaller town 
houses, £150,000-£300,000. Semis, £110,000-£250,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£80,000-£125,000. The rental market is teeny.

Bargain of the week Three-bed terrace 
<http://www.expressestateagency.co.uk/property_listing/property-details/4262381/hottipass-street-fishguard-pembrokeshire-sa65-9lj/?position=3&resultcount=3&search=Fishguard,%20Dyfed&streetname=&streetnamechk=&radius=0&type=town>
, £90,000.

From the streets

Phil Rowson “The Cambo pub, short for Cambrian: a proper local for young and 
old, families, regulars and drop-ins.”

Angela Griffiths “The Gourmet Pig deli <http://www.gourmetpig.co.uk/> for 
Welsh cheeses, wines and beer – they serve great coffee, too. The Royal Oak pub 
has a fantastic folk night every Tuesday.”

• Live in Fishguard and Newport, Pembrokeshire? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Newport, Isle of Wight? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet 
hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <> by Tuesday 20 December.
 