
When I first heard about the garden bridge, I thought it was a nice idea. A 
big pedestrian bridge with a park on it, joining up attractive areas of central
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. What’s not to like? It sounds a 
little bit magic: a garden on a bridge. Wow, there’s a whole tree growing on 
that bridge! Like an aquarium in a pillar, a hotel made of ice, or a firework 
on a hat.

It’s got a dash of hanging gardens of Babylon, a touch of rooftop pool, and a 
smidgen of the old London Bridge, whichhad shops on it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/may/05/shortcuts-architecture-boris-johnson-bridges>
 and one imagines as very picturesque, though probably didn’t look so to people 
at the time who didn’t have any ugly concrete or uPVC to compare it to and were 
fed up with everything being so damp and smelly. Not to mention the high infant 
mortality rate. And complete lack of democratic accountability. In fact, the 
more I think about it, the more I realise history must have been really 
difficult to enjoy if you were actually in it.

That’s what many of us are finding at the moment – so it’s comforting to 
reflect that any current issues will, in time, be no more troubling to people 
than the heads on spikes at medieval London Bridge are to us today. Trump, 
Isis, Putin, Syria, Brexit, the death of Prince – it all just adds to the 
ghoulish heritage detail that’ll enliven our history-buff descendants’ 
away-breaks in the boutique hotels of the future, complete with genuine 
early-21st-century double glazing and patchy wifi, and a building “which is, in 
places, still physically attached to the planet’s surface”.

It doesn’t feel like the right time for a blowout. Maybe a decade ago, when 
London was optimistic and self-confident

So it would be sacrilege to demolish the garden bridge. Leave it where it is, 
I say! OK, it’s a bit tatty now – most of the shrubs have withered and recent 
analysis of the soil found it to be 72% pigeon excrement, but it turns out 
bindweed absolutely thrives on the stuff, which provides lots of sheltered 
hiding places for junkies.

I do realise it hasn’t been built yet. I’m just trying to work out what I 
think about it and the conclusion that I wouldn’t demolish it is a start. But, 
on reflection, I don’t think it means I’m in favour of building it. It may mean 
I’m just in favour of doing nothing in general. Maybe I’m a radical 
ultra-status quo-ist: “We believe in leaving things as they are, regardless of 
how that is. Don’t build anything, don’t knock anything down. Don’t pass any 
laws, don’t repeal any laws. Don’t start a genocide, don’t stop a genocide. 
Just leave well alone, you’ll only make things worse, be it utopia or hell on 
Earth. We’re already worried about the unforeseen consequences of saying this.”

But I don’t think it’s that. I’ll never be totally convinced of the futility 
of human endeavour while there’s a functioning toaster in the world. I think 
I’ve gone cold on the garden bridge because I’ve been made too aware of what 
building it would involve. The initial implied casual question, “Do you fancy a 
garden bridge?”, to which my instinctive response was “Yeah, OK,” has been 
complicated by hearing too much about how it’s to be achieved. It’s like I’ve 
accepted someone’s offer of a biscuit and now, after eight minutes of them 
clanking around in the kitchen, they’re proposing to pop out to the shop.

Last week came news that the bridge’s estimated cost, which last year was 
revised upwards to £185m,may rise again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/london-garden-bridge-project-future-doubt-trustees>
 and that the Garden Bridge Trust is facing the possibility of “further delay 
to the project” and wondering “whether the project remains viable”. Apart from 
public grants, the trust only raised £13m over the last 17 months, has yet to 
secure landing sites on either river bank, has no commitment from the mayor of 
London to cover the bridge’s projected £3m annual running costs, and is £56m 
short of having enough money to build it even if the budget doesn’t go up which 
it probably will (see above).

“Oh, don’t bother then!” I want to say. “We don’t need it. We didn’t want to 
put you to so much trouble.” The budgetary struggle sits ill with the 
enterprise’s frivolous aim. They’re not building a hospital or a railway, it’s 
not a cure for cancer or a voyage of discovery, it’s a snazzy park, a neat 
trick: trees on a bridge. But like every magic trick, if you show the audience 
the massive hassle involved in creating the illusion, they lose their sense of 
wonder and think it’s not worth it. It’s too much for the prospect of a silly, 
jolly thing – this is why restaurants don’t charge till after pudding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Flets-not-be-led-up-the-garden-bridge-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a310e03c4bde4c19077f146e9f286d3dcb20697%2F0_0_1946_2267%2F1946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20not%20be%20led%20any%20further%20up%20the%20garden%20bridge%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Flets-not-be-led-up-the-garden-bridge-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20not%20be%20led%20any%20further%20up%20the%20garden%20bridge%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Flets-not-be-led-up-the-garden-bridge-david-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a310e03c4bde4c19077f146e9f286d3dcb20697%2F0_0_1946_2267%2F1946.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
It doesn’t feel like the right time for a blowout. Maybe a decade or so ago, 
when London was optimistic and self-confident. Today the city feels divided and 
hated. It’s racked with the evidence of increasing global wealth inequality – 
unaffordable property prices,iceberg houses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2013/mar/25/iceberg-homes-basements-rich-hell-neighbours>
, punishing rents, mansions left empty by foreign investors, millions enduring 
long, chaotic commutes on decrepit Victorian railway lines – just as its main 
industry, the financial services sector, propels that inequality. Meanwhile 
it’s viewed increasingly dimly by the rest of the country as out of touch with 
national reality and a sponge for government attention and investment. It’s a 
provocative moment to piss away £200m on a window box you can walk on.

Public libraries are closing. That’s the clincher for me. For others it might 
be the parlous state of the NHS, student tuition fees, or the ease of getting 
across the Thames with the currently available crossings. For me, it’s 
libraries. Probably because, like the bridge, they’re something some people 
argue are unnecessary: they say they’re used less, and that the internet 
renders them obsolete as a way of freely accessing knowledge.

There’s some truth to this (though the internet doesn’t render them obsolete 
as nice, free places to sit). But the pillars of civilisation don’t currently 
feel so secure that, when libraries start closing, we can assume it’s happening 
for sensible reasons rather than because our society is in terminal decline, 
because the people who need such places are poor and so don’t matter.

Libraries symbolise a commitment to learning, community and equality that can 
no longer be taken for granted. At this dark, divided time, we need those 
symbols to stand, not be converted into flats. The price of a magic tree bridge 
could keep hundreds of them open for years. That realisation would spoil my 
enjoyment of a new, slightly leafier view of London’s river and its gleaming 
banks.
 