
What’s going for it? Is it silly to move somewhere just because of one 
building? I think I could, you know. I’m an archi-geek, so perhaps more 
predisposed to being intoxicated by a smashing guildhall or a stately home. But 
still:Durham Cathedral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/durham-cathedral-opens-hidden-treasures-and-spaces-to-public>
, what a place. As buildings go, this is as good as it gets, equal to the 
Alhambra, the Pantheon or the Parthenon. Walk in and you’re beamed back to a 
time of monks and border raids, when Durham was the heart of a rather different 
northern powerhouse. I could move my bed, desk and a Baby Belling into the 
north aisle this second, though I doubt the bishop (or my wife, or my kids) 
would approve. The cathedral does dominate the city. Without it, Durham would 
be a pleasant, undemanding market town, albeit beautifully sited on a wooded 
loop of the river Wear and with a fine university attached. With it, though... 
Wow! But madness, right? Right?

The case against It’s a small city, constrained by its geography, so urbanites 
might get bored.

Well connected? Trains: Newcastle (15-20 minutes), York (45 minutes), 
Edinburgh (one hour 50), and London King’s Cross (three hours). Driving: half 
an hour to Newcastle, the Pennines or the coast.

Schools Primaries: St Oswald’s CofE <http://www.stoswaldsdurham.net>, St 
Margaret’s CofE <https://st-margarets.durham.sch.uk/durham/primary/st-margarets>
,St Godric’s RC <http://www.st-godricsrc.durham.sch.uk> and Framwellgate Moor 
<http://www.framprimary.durham.sch.uk> are “outstanding”, says Ofsted. 
Secondaries:Durham Sixth Form Centre <http://www.durhamsixthformcentre.org.uk>, 
St Leonard’s RC <http://www.st-leonards.durham.sch.uk> and Belmont Community 
<http://www.belmontschool.org.uk> are “good”, with Durham Johnston Comprehensive
 <http://www.durhamjohnston.org.uk> “outstanding”.

Hang out at… Restaurant DH1 and the Garden House Inn fly the flag for local 
gourmands, with the Victoria Inn the best of the boozers.

Let’s move to Rye, East Sussex: ‘You’d think its prettiness would be its 
undoing’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/02/lets-move-rye-east-sussex-tom-dyckhoff>
Where to buy The usual gamut of lovely period property you might expect from a 
cathedral city, especially on the old roads in and out of town, like Crossgate, 
Allergate, Gilesgate (anygate), Albert Street. Plummest for historic property 
are North and South Bailey by the cathedral. Farther out: North End for posh 
suburbans and Victorian town houses; south around Potters Bank, Neville’s Cross 
and the university (esp The Avenue); east, Gilesgate has a village green feel. 
Large detacheds and town houses, £400,000-£1.25m. Detacheds and smaller town 
houses, £125,000-£400,000. Semis, £75,000-£350,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£70,000-£350,000. Flats, £60,000-£300,000. Rentals: a one-bed flat, 
£400-£800pcm; a three-bed house, £450-£1,600pcm.

Bargain of the week Roomy, four-bedroom Victorian terrace, close to the 
centre, £240,000, withjww.co.uk <http://jww.co.uk/buy/view/3018>.

From the streets

Lesley Aers “A big stock of late Victorian terraces, but most of these have 
been bought by landlords to let to students. This means good family houses are 
occupied for only half the year.”

Jean Rogers “The city population is 50% students: party town one half of the 
year, ghost town the other.”

• Live in Durham? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Ashbourne, Derbyshire? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet 
hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> 
by Tuesday 10 January.
 