
What’s going for it? Britain’s gatehouse, thanks to Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, may be about to resume 
the role it has held for a millennium or two. The past few decades have not 
been kind to Dover: bombed to smithereens in the second world war, rebuilt – 
vigorously, if we’re being generous – in the 1960s and on its uppers since 
airports and the Channel tunnel snatched away its historic role. Maybe the 
future will be kinder. The hefty chunks of the past that have survived hint at 
a more prosperous incarnation:the castle 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/dover-castle/>, of course, 
none sturdier in the country, and the beautiful Regency terraces along the 
waterfront. Combined with its dramatic geography, squished into a cleft where 
the North Downs hammer into the sea, this should make for a spirited town, as 
impressive as its famous white cliffs,our “glittering breastplate”, as Carol 
Ann Duffy called them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/07/carol-ann-duffy-white-cliffs-dover>
. What it needs is attention, money and a new confidence.

The case against An air of despondency from years of being overlooked. How 
will Dover respond to Brexit? Customs strikes and14-hour queues this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/24/dover-port-delays-uk-home-office-reinforcements>
 are a worrying augury. The waterfront needs serious work. Will theSt James 
retail park <http://www.stjamesdover.co.uk/>, opening next year, liven things 
up?

Well connected? Very. Hourly trains to St Pancras (67 mins), hour/half-hourly 
to Charing Cross (2 hrs) and Victoria (2 hrs); half-hourly to Canterbury (25 
mins); three an hour to Folkestone (14 mins) and Ashford (30 mins). Driving: 30 
mins to Canterbury or Ashford, 20 to Folkestone and the M20.

Schools Primaries: among many good, says Ofsted, White Cliffs 
<http://www.whitecliffs-primarycollege.co.uk/> and River 
<http://www.lydden.kent.sch.uk/> are “outstanding”. Secondaries: selective; 
Dover Grammar for Boys <https://www.dovergramboys.kent.sch.uk/dgsbws/>, Duke of 
York’s Royal Military <http://www.doyrms.com/>, and Dover Grammar for Girls 
<http://dggs.kent.sch.uk/> “outstanding”.

Hang out at… The Allotment <http://www.theallotmentrestaurant.com/>, the local 
saviour for the past few years, is under new ownership.

Let’s move to… Worthing, West Sussex: don’t mention the B word
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/28/worthing-west-sussex-property-guide-lets-move-to>
Where to buy Castle Ward, on and off Maison Dieu Road. Pretty Castle Street 
hints at Dover’s civilised past, as do the amazing Regency town houses on much 
of the front. For suburbans, look to Temple Ewell, River and Kearsney. Large 
detacheds and town houses, £400,000-£900,000. Detacheds and smaller town 
houses, £250,000-£400,000. Semis, £130,000-£400,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£120,000-£250,000. Flats, £70,000-£200,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, 
£450-£550pcm; a three-bed house, £650-£850pcm.

Bargain of the week They’re all bargains here. Take this vast Regency town 
house on East Cliff, needing restoration, at £299,000, withThomas & Partners 
<http://www.tapestates.com/property/3-bedroom-house-for-sale-on-eastcliff-ct16/thoma-001674/1>
.

From the streets

Diederik Smet “It’s on the up, with lots of development. Wonderful green 
spaces nearby, including cycle and walking routes. Gorgeous architecture, if 
you look up.”


Justine Wingate “Follies <http://www.follies.info/>, a great new independent 
pizzeria, andCullins Yard <http://www.cullinsyard.co.uk/> in the marina for 
good food and live music.”

• Live in Dover? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Scarborough? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If 
so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by 
Tuesday 13 December.
 