
At the Tokyo headquarters of the Swiss bank UBS, in the middle of a deserted 
trading floor, Tom Hayes sat rapt before a bank of eight computer screens. 
Collar askew, pale features pinched, blond hair mussed from a habit of pulling 
at it when he was deep in thought, the British trader was even more dishevelled 
than usual. It was 15 September 2008, and it looked, in Hayes’s mind, like the 
end of the world.

Hayes had been woken up at dawn in his apartment by a call from his boss, 
telling him to get to the office immediately. In New York,Lehman Brothers was 
hurtling towards bankruptcy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/13/lehman-brothers-collapse-five-years-later-shiver-spine>
. At his desk, Hayes watched the world processing the news and panicking. As 
each market opened, it became a sea of flashing red as investors frantically 
dumped their holdings. In moments like this, Hayes entered an almost 
unconscious state, rapidly processing the tide of information before him and 
calculating the best escape route.

Hayes was a phenomenon at UBS, one of the best the bank had at trading 
derivatives. So far, the mounting financial crisis had actually been good for 
him. The chaos had let him buy cheaply from those desperate to get out, and 
sell high to the unlucky few who still needed to trade. While most dealers 
closed up shop in fear, Hayes, with a seemingly limitless appetite for risk, 
stayed in. He was 28, and he was up more than $70 million for the year.

Now that was under threat. Not only did Hayes have to extract himself from 
every deal he had done with Lehman, he had also made a series of enormous bets 
that in the coming days interest rates would remain stable. The collapse of 
Lehman Brothers, the fourth-largest investment bank in the US, would surely 
cause those rates, which were really just barometers of risk, to spike. As 
Hayes examined his trading book, one rate mattered more than any other: the 
London interbank offered rate, orLibor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor>, a benchmark that influences $350 
trillion of securities and loans around the world. For traders such as Hayes, 
this number was the Holy Grail. And two years earlier, he had discovered a way 
to rig it.

Libor was set by a self-selected, self-policing committee of the world’s 
largest banks. The rate measured how much it cost them to borrow from each 
other. Every morning, each bank submitted an estimate, an average was taken, 
and a number was published at midday. The process was repeated in different 
currencies, and for various amounts of time, ranging from overnight to a year. 
During his time as a junior trader in London, Hayes had got to know several of 
the 16 individuals responsible for making their bank’s daily submission for the 
Japanese yen. His flash of insight was realising that these men mostly relied 
on inter-dealer brokers, the fast-talking middlemen involved in every trade, 
for guidance on what to submit each day.

Brokers are the middlemen in the world of finance, facilitating deals between 
traders at different banks in everything from Treasury bonds to 
over-the-counter derivatives. If a trader wants to buy or sell, he could 
theoretically ring all the banks to get a price. Or he could go through a 
broker who is in touch with everyone and can find a counter-party in seconds. 
Hardly a dollar changes hands in the cash and derivatives markets without a 
broker matching the deal and taking his cut. In the opaque, over-the-counter 
derivatives market, where there is no centralised exchange, brokers are at the 
epicentre of information flow. That puts them in a powerful position. Only they 
can get a picture of what all the banks are doing. While brokers had no 
official role in setting Libor, the rate-setters at the banks relied on them 
for information on where cash was trading.

Because of Hayes’s intimacy with numbers, his co-workers reminded him he was 
not like them. They called him Rain Man

Most traders looked down on brokers as second-class citizens, too. Hayes 
recognised their worth. He saw what no one else did because he was different. 
His intimacy with numbers, his cold embrace of risk and his unusual habits were 
more than professional tics. Hayes would not be diagnosed with Asperger’s 
syndrome until 2015, when he was 35, but his co-workers, many of them savvy 
operators from fancy schools, often reminded Hayes that he wasn’t like them. 
They called him “Rain Man”.

By the time the market opened in London, Lehman’s demise was official. Hayes 
instant-messaged one of his trusted brokers in the City to tell him what 
direction he wanted Libor to move. Typically, he skipped any pleasantries. 
“Cash mate, really need it lower,” Hayes typed. “What’s the score?” The broker 
sent his assurances and, over the next few hours, followed a well-worn routine. 
Whenever one of the Libor-setting banks called and asked his opinion on what 
the benchmark would do, the broker said – incredibly, given the calamitous news 
– that the rate was likely to fall. Libor may have featured in hundreds of 
trillions of dollars of loans and derivatives, but this was how it was set: 
conversations among men who were, depending on the day, indifferent, optimistic 
or frightened. When Hayes checked the official figures later that night, he saw 
to his relief that yen Libor had fallen.

Hayes was not out of danger yet. Over the next three days, he barely left the 
office, surviving on three hours of sleep a night. As the market convulsed, his 
profit and loss jumped around from minus $20 million to plus $8 million in just 
hours, but Hayes had another ace up his sleeve. ICAP, the world’s biggest 
inter-dealer broker, sent out a “Libor prediction” email each day at around 7am 
to the individuals at the banks responsible for submitting Libor. Hayes 
messaged an insider at ICAP and instructed him to skew the predictions lower. 
Amid the chaos, Libor was the one thing Hayes believed he had some control 
over. He cranked his network to the max, offering his brokers extra payments 
for their cooperation and calling in favours at banks around the world.

By Thursday, 18 September, Hayes was exhausted. This was the moment he had 
been working towards all week. If Libor jumped today, all his puppeteering 
would have been for nothing. Libor moves in increments called basis points, 
equal to one one-hundredth of a percentage point, and every tick was worth 
roughly $750,000 to his bottom line.

For the umpteenth time since Lehman faltered, Hayes reached out to his brokers 
in London. “I need you to keep it as low as possible, all right?” he told one 
of them in a message. “I’ll pay you, you know, $50,000, $100,000, whatever. 
Whatever you want, all right?”

“All right,” the broker repeated.

“I’m a man of my word,” Hayes said.

“I know you are. No, that’s done, right, leave it to me,” the broker said.

Hayes was still in the Tokyo office at 8pm when that day’s Libors were 
published. The yen rate had fallen 1 basis point, while comparable money market 
rates in other currencies continued to soar. Hayes’s crisis had been averted. 
Using his network of brokers, he had personally sought to tilt part of the 
planet’s financial infrastructure. He pulled off his headset and headed home to 
bed. He had only recently upgraded from the superhero duvet he’d slept under 
since he was eight years old.

Hayes’s job was to make his employer as much money as possible by buying and 
selling derivatives. How exactly he did that – the special concoction of 
strategies, skills and tricks that make up a trader’s DNA – was largely left up 
to him. First and foremost he was a market-maker, providing liquidity to his 
clients, who were mostly traders at other banks. From the minute he logged on 
to his Bloomberg terminal each morning and the red light next to his name 
turned green, Hayes was on the phone quoting guaranteed bid and offer prices on 
the vast inventory of products he traded. Hayes prided himself on always being 
open for business no matter how choppy the markets. It was his calling card.

Hayes likened this part of his job to owning a fruit and vegetable stall. Buy 
low, sell high and pocket the difference. But rather than apples and pears, he 
dealt in complex financial securities worth hundreds of millions of dollars. 
His profit came from the spread between how much he paid for a security and how 
much he sold it for. In volatile times, the spread widened, reflecting the 
increased risk that the market might move against him before he had the chance 
to trade out of his position.

All of this offered a steady stream of income, but it wasn’t where the big 
money came from. The thing that really set Hayes apart was his ability to spot 
price anomalies and exploit them, a technique known as relative value trading. 
It appealed to his lifelong passion for seeking out patterns. During quiet 
spells, he spent his time scouring data, hunting for unseen opportunities. If 
he thought that the price of two similar securities had diverged unduly, he 
would buy one and short the other, betting that the spread between the two 
would shrink.

Everywhere he worked, Hayes set up his software to tell him exactly how much 
he stood to gain or lose from every fraction of a move in Libor in each 
currency. One of Hayes’s favourite trades involved betting that the gap between 
Libor in different durations would widen or narrow: what’s known in the 
industry as a basis trade. Each time Hayes made a trade, he would have to 
decide whether to lay off some of his risk by hedging his position using, for 
example, other derivatives.

Hayes’s dealing created a constantly changing trade book stretching years into 
the future, which was mapped out on a vast Excel spreadsheet. He liked to think 
of it as a living organism with thousands of interconnected moving parts. In a 
corner of one of his screens was a number he looked at more than any other: his 
rolling profit and loss. Ask any decent trader and he will be able to give it 
to you to the nearest $1,000. It was Hayes’s self-worth boiled down into a 
single indisputable number.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Flibor-scandal-the-bankers-who-fixed-the-worlds-most-important-number%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2511443fbb5befcab1ebab87e12cac0509b64f26%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Libor%20scandal%3A%20the%20bankers%20who%20fixed%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20important%20number%20%7C%20Liam%20Vaughan%20and%20Gavin%20Finch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Flibor-scandal-the-bankers-who-fixed-the-worlds-most-important-number%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Libor%20scandal%3A%20the%20bankers%20who%20fixed%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20important%20number%20%7C%20Liam%20Vaughan%20and%20Gavin%20Finch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Flibor-scandal-the-bankers-who-fixed-the-worlds-most-important-number%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2511443fbb5befcab1ebab87e12cac0509b64f26%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Tom Hayes was a phenomenon at UBS, one of the best the bank had at trading 
derivatives. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
By the summer of 2007, the mortgage crisis in the US caused banks and 
investment funds around the world to become skittish about lending to each 
other without collateral. Firms that relied on the so-called money markets to 
fund their businesses were paralysed by the ballooning cost of short-term 
credit. On 14 September,customers of Northern Rock queued for hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/sep/14/money2> to withdraw their 
savings after the bank announced it was relying on loans from the Bank of 
England to stay afloat.

After that, banks were only prepared to make unsecured loans to each other for 
a few days at a time, and interest rates on longer-term loans rocketed. Libor, 
as a barometer of stress in the system, reacted accordingly. In August 2007, 
the spread between three-month dollar Libor and the overnight indexed swap – a 
measure of banks’ overnight borrowing costs – jumped from 12 basis points to 73 
basis points. By December it had soared to 106 basis points. A similar pattern 
could be seen in sterling, euros and most of the 12 other currencies published 
on the website of the British Bankers’ Association each day at noon.

Everyone could see that Libor rates had shot up, but questions began to be 
asked about whether they had climbed enough to reflect the severity of the 
credit squeeze. By August 2007, there was almost no trading in cash for 
durations of longer than a month. In some of the smaller currencies there were 
no lenders for any time frame. Yet, with trillions of dollars tied to Libor, 
the banks had to keep the trains running. The individuals responsible for 
submitting Libor rates each day had no choice but to put their thumb and 
forefinger in the air and pluck out numbers. It was clear that their “best 
guesses” were unrealistically optimistic.

A game of brinkmanship had developed in which rate-setters tried to predict 
what their rivals would submit, and then come in slightly lower. If they 
guessed wrong and input rates higher than their peers, they would receive angry 
phone calls from their managers telling them to get back into the pack. On 
trading floors around the world, frantic conversations took place between 
traders and their brokers about expectations for Libor.

Nobody knew where Libor should be, and nobody wanted to be an outlier. Even 
where bankers tried to be honest, there was no way of knowing if their 
estimates were accurate because there was no underlying interbank borrowing on 
which to compare them. The machine had broken down.

Vince McGonagle, a small and wiry man with a hangdog expression, had been at 
the enforcement division of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) in 
Washington for 11 years, during which time his red hair had turned grey around 
the edges. A practising Catholic, McGonagle got his law degree from Pepperdine 
University, a Christian school in Malibu, California, where students are 
prepared for “lives of purpose, service and leadership”.

While his classmates took highly paid positions defending companies and 
individuals accused of corporate corruption, McGonagle opted to build a career 
bringing cases against them. He joined the agency as a trial attorney and was 
now, at 44, a manager overseeing teams of lawyers and investigators.

McGonagle closed the door to his office and settled down to read the daily 
news. It was 16 April, 2008, and the headline on page one of the Wall Street 
Journal read: “Bankers Cast Doubt on Key Rate Amid Crisis”. It began: “One of 
the most important barometers of the world’s financial health could be sending 
false signals. In a development that has implications for borrowers everywhere, 
from Russian oil producers to homeowners in Detroit, bankers and traders are 
expressing concerns that the London interbank offered rate, known as Libor, is 
becoming unreliable.”

The story <http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB120831164167818299>, written at the 
Journal’s London office near Fleet Street, went on to suggest that some of the 
world’s largest banks might have been providing deliberately low estimates of 
their borrowing costs to avoid tipping off the market “that they’re desperate 
for cash”. That was having the effect of distorting Libor, and therefore 
trillions of dollars of securities around the world.

The journalist’s sources told him that banks were paying much more for cash 
than they were letting on. They feared if they were honest they could go the 
same way asBear Stearns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/may/29/bear.stearns>, the 
85-year-old New York securities firm that had collapsed the previous month.

The big flaw in Libor was that it relied on banks to tell the truth but 
encouraged them to lie. When the 150 variants of the benchmark were released 
each day, the banks’ individual submissions were also published, giving the 
world a snapshot of their relative creditworthiness. Historically, the 
individuals responsible for making their firm’s Libor submissions were able to 
base their estimates on a vibrant interbank money market, in which banks 
borrowed cash from each other to fund their day-to-day operations. They were 
prevented from deviating too far from the truth because their fellow market 
participants knew what rates they were really being charged. Over the previous 
few months, that had changed. Banks had stopped lending to each other for 
periods of longer than a few days, preferring to stockpile their cash. After 
Bear Stearns there was no guarantee they would get it back.

With so much at stake, lenders had become fixated on what their rivals were 
inputting. Any outlier at the higher – that is, riskier – end was in danger of 
becoming a pariah, unable to access the liquidity it needed to fund its balance 
sheet. Soon banks began to submit rates they thought would place them in the 
middle of the pack rather than what they truly believed they could borrow 
unsecured cash for. The motivation for low-balling was not tied to profit – 
many banks actually stood to lose out from lower Libors. This was about 
survival.

Ironically, just as Libor’s accuracy faltered, its importance rocketed. As the 
financial crisis deepened, central bankers monitored Libor in different 
currencies to see how successful their latest policy announcements were in 
calming markets. Governments looked at individual firms’ submissions for clues 
as to who they might be forced to bail out next. If banks were lying about 
Libor, it was not just affecting interest rates and derivatives payments. It 
was skewing reality.

There was no inkling at this stage that traders such as Hayes were pushing 
Libor around to boost their profits, but here was a benchmark that relied on 
the honesty of traders who had a direct interest in where it was set. Libor was 
overseen by the British Bankers Association (BBA). In both cases, the body 
responsible for overseeing the rate had no punitive powers, so there was little 
to discourage firms from cheating.

When McGonagle finished reading the Wall Street Journal article, he emailed 
colleagues and asked them what they knew about Libor. His team put together a 
dossier, including some preliminary reports from within the financial 
community. In March, economists at the Bank for International Settlements, an 
umbrella group for central banks around the world, had published a paper that 
identified unusual patterns in Libor during the crisis, although it concluded 
these were “not caused by shortcomings in the design of the fixing mechanism”.

A month later, Scott Peng, an analyst at Citigroup in New York, sent his 
customers a research note that estimated the dollar Libor submissions of the 18 
firms that set the rate were 20 to 30 basis points lower than they should have 
been because of a “prevailing fear” among the banks of “being perceived as a 
weak hand in this fragile market environment”.

While there was no evidence of manipulation by specific firms, McGonagle was 
coming around to the idea of launching an investigation.

In 2009, Hayes was lured away from UBS to join Citigroup. The head of 
Citigroup’s team in Asia, the former Lehman banker Chris Cecere, a small, 
goateed American with a big reputation for finding new ways to make money, had 
been given millions of dollars to attract the best talent – and Hayes was his 
round-one pick.

It wasn’t just the $3m signing bonus that had won Hayes over. The promise of a 
fresh start at one of the world’s biggest banks, with him at centre stage in 
its aggressive expansion into the Asian interest-rate derivatives market, had 
proved too tempting to resist. After persuading him to join, Cecere boasted to 
colleagues that he’d found “a real fucking animal”, who “knows everybody on the 
street”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Flibor-scandal-the-bankers-who-fixed-the-worlds-most-important-number%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad43f83a9e3d635c8c44ae6717b4f83401fa35cf%2F0_0_5014_3009%2F5014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Libor%20scandal%3A%20the%20bankers%20who%20fixed%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20important%20number%20%7C%20Liam%20Vaughan%20and%20Gavin%20Finch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Flibor-scandal-the-bankers-who-fixed-the-worlds-most-important-number%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Libor%20scandal%3A%20the%20bankers%20who%20fixed%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20important%20number%20%7C%20Liam%20Vaughan%20and%20Gavin%20Finch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Flibor-scandal-the-bankers-who-fixed-the-worlds-most-important-number%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad43f83a9e3d635c8c44ae6717b4f83401fa35cf%2F0_0_5014_3009%2F5014.jpg>
 Citigroup in Canary Wharf, London Photograph: DBURKE / Alamy/Alamy 
Cecere set in motion plans for Citigroup to join the Tibor (Tokyo interbank 
offered rate) panel which, Hayes would crow, was even easier to influence than 
Libor because fewer banks contributed to it. Hayes wanted to hit the ground 
running when he started trading, and being able to influence the two benchmarks 
that helped determine the profitability of the bulk of his positions was an 
important step. Another was bringing Citigroup’s own London-based Libor-setters 
on board.

On the afternoon of 8 December, Cecere was at his desk on the Tokyo trading 
floor. He had an office but seldom used it, preferring to be amid the action. 
He believed that six-month yen Libor was too high. After checking the 
submissions from the previous day, he was surprised to see that Citigroup had 
input one of the highest figures.

Cecere contacted the head of the risk treasury team in Tokyo, Stantley Tan, 
and asked him to find out who the yen-setter was and request that he lower his 
input by several basis points. It turned out the risk treasury desk in Canary 
Wharf was responsible for the bank’s Libor submissions.

“I spoke to our point man in London,” Tan wrote back to Cecere that afternoon. 
“I have asked him to consider moving quotes [lower]”.

Cecere checked the Libors again later that night and was annoyed to see that 
Citigroup had only reduced its six-month rate by a quarter of a basis point.

He wrote to Tan, “Can you speak with him again?”

The following day, Tan went back to the treasury desk in London as requested. 
He also forwarded the message chain to Andrew Thursfield, Citigroup’s head of 
risk treasury in London. The response he got back from his UK counterpart left 
little room for misinterpretation: it was a thinly veiled warning to back off.

Hayes, who sat just behind his boss, was not on the email chain, but Cecere 
sent it to him.

Thursfield was a straitlaced man in his forties who had spent more than 20 
years in risk management at Citigroup after joining as a graduate trainee. He 
saw himself as the guardian of the firm’s balance sheet and didn’t take kindly 
to being told how to do his job by a pushy trader who knew nothing of the 
intricacies of bank funding.

Rather than lowering the inputs, Thursfield’s team increased its submission 
days later, pushing the published Libor rates higher. Hayes would have to try a 
different tack. On 14 December he sent an email to his London counterpart, 
asking him to approach the rate-setters directly.

“Do you talk to the cash desk and did we know in advance?” Hayes asked, 
referring to the bank’s decision to bump up its Libor submissions. “We need 
good dialogue with the cash desk. They can be invaluable to us. If we know 
ahead of time we can position and scalp the market.”

What Hayes didn’t realise was that no amount of schmoozing was going to get 
the rate-setters onside. Unlike some banks, Citigroup was taking the CFTC’s 
investigation into Libor seriously. In March 2009, Thursfield had personally 
delivered an 18-page presentation via video link to investigators on the 
rate-setting process. The cash traders weren’t about to risk their necks for 
someone they didn’t know who worked on the other side of the world.

It wasn’t just that they knew they were being watched. Thursfield was not only 
a stickler for the rules but had taken a personal dislike to Hayes when the 
pair had met three months earlier. It was October 2009, shortly after Hayes had 
accepted the job at Citigroup, and his boss had sent him to London to meet the 
bank’s key players.

“Good to meet you. You can help us out with Libors. I will let you know my 
axes,” Hayes said by way of an opening gambit when he was introduced to 
Thursfield.

Unshaven and dishevelled, Hayes told the Citigroup manager how the cash desk 
at UBS frequently skewed its submissions to suit his book. He boasted of his 
close relationships with rate-setters at other banks and how they would do 
favours for each other. Hayes was trying to charm Thursfield, but he had badly 
misjudged the man and the situation. The following day Thursfield called his 
manager, Steve Compton, and relayed his concerns.

“Once you stray on to talking about Libor fixings, I mean we just paid another 
$75,000 bill to the lawyer this week for the work they’re doing on the CFTC 
investigation,” Thursfield said. “Whoever is the desk head, or whatever, 
[should] have a close watch on just what he’s actually doing and how publicly. 
It’s all, you know, very much barrow-boy-type [behaviour].”

The knock on Hayes’s door came at 7am on a Tuesday, two weeks before Christmas 
2012. Hayes padded down the bespoke pine staircase of his newly renovated home 
in Woldingham, Surrey, to let in more than a dozen police officers and Serious 
Fraud Office investigators. A year before, he had been fired from Citigroup, 
and shortly afterwards returned to the UK, where he married his girlfriend 
Sarah Tighe.

Hayes stood at his wife’s side as the officers swept through the property, 
gathering computers and documents into boxes and loading them into vehicles 
parked at the end of the gravel driveway. The couple had only moved in a 
fortnight before. Their infant son was upstairs in bed. Traffic was heavy by 
the time the former trader was led to the back of a waiting car. The 20-mile 
crawl from Surrey to the City of London passed in silence.

Bishopsgate police station is a grey, concrete building on one of the 
financial district’s busiest thoroughfares. In a formal interview, Hayes was 
told he had been brought in to answer questions relating to allegations that 
between 2006 and 2009 he had conspired to manipulate yen Libor with two of his 
colleagues. Hayes responded that he planned to help but would need time to 
consider the 112 pages of evidence so would not be answering any questions that 
day. It was late when he arrived back in Surrey.

In June, Barclays had become the first bank to reach a settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/08/barclays-libor-100m-us-settlement>
 with authorities, admitting to rigging the rate and agreeing to pay a 
then-record £290 million in fines. From the moment Barclays had settled, 
sparking a political firestorm that burned for weeks, Hayes’s destiny had been 
leading to this point. The Serious Fraud Office (SFO), which had previously 
resisted launching a probe into Libor rigging, was forced to reverse its 
position and on 6 July issued a statement announcing it would be undertaking a 
criminal investigation. That week the government launched its own review into 
the scandal. The British public and its politicians were out for scalps.

On 19 December, eight days after his arrest, Hayes was at home on his computer 
when a news bulletin popped up with a link to a press conference in Washington. 
As cameras flashed, Attorney General Eric Holder and Lanny Breuer, head of the 
Justice Department’s criminal division, took turns outlining the $1.5bn 
settlement the authorities had reached with UBS over Libor. The Swiss bank, 
they explained, had pleaded guilty to wire fraud at its Japanese arm. Then came 
the sucker punch.

Hayes was the star attraction, the 'Jesse James of Libor', as he would later 
tell it

“In addition to UBS Japan’s agreement to plead guilty, two former UBS traders 
have been charged, in a criminal complaint unsealed today, with conspiracy to 
manipulate Libor,” said Breuer. “Tom Hayes has also been charged with wire 
fraud and an antitrust violation.” Neither Tan nor Cecere has ever been charged 
with wrongdoing.

At that moment the full horror of the situation hit Hayes for the first time. 
The two most powerful lawyers in the US planned to extradite him on three 
separate criminal charges, each carrying a 20–30 year sentence. Less than 24 
hours later, a member of Hayes’s legal team was on the phone to the SFO to 
discuss cutting a deal.

Fighting the charges seemed futile: the UBS settlement made reference to more 
than 2,000 attempts by Hayes and his colleagues to influence the rate over a 
four-year period. He was the star attraction, the “Jesse James of Libor”, as he 
would later tell it. The US authorities had yet to issue extradition papers, 
but it was only a matter of time.

RBS, Barclays and other banks fined in Swiss franc Libor case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/rbs-barclays-banks-fined-swiss-franc-libor>
So began a race to convince the SFO to take on Hayes as a sort of chief 
informant, who in return would receive leniency and, more importantly, an 
agreement that he would be dealt with in the UK.

To secure this arrangement Hayes had to agree to tell the SFO everything he 
knew and promise to testify against everybody involved. Crucially, he also had 
to plead guilty to dishonestly rigging Libor. It was not enough to admit trying 
to influence the rate. He had to confess that he knew it was wrong.

During two days of so-called scoping interviews to test his knowledge of the 
case, Hayes talked openly about his campaign to rig Libor, for the first time 
in his life. At the SFO’s offices near Trafalgar Square he admitted he had 
acted dishonestly and brought the investigators’ attention to aspects of the 
case they knew nothing about. The interviews covered everything from his entry 
into the industry and his trading strategies to how the Libor scheme began and 
the various individuals who helped him rig the rate. They barely had to prod to 
get him to talk. Hayes seemed to relish reliving moments from his past. His 
voice sped up when he talked about heady days piling into positions, squeezing 
the best prices from brokers and playing traders off against each other.

“The first thing you think is where’s the edge, where can I make a bit more 
money, how can I push, push the boundaries, maybe you know a bit of a grey 
area, push the edge of the envelope,” he said in one early interview. “But the 
point is, you are greedy, you want every little bit of money that you can 
possibly get because, like I say, that is how you are judged, that is your 
performance metric.”

Paper coffee cups piled up as Hayes went over the minutiae of the case. At one 
stage,Hayes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/tom-hayes-jailed-libor-criminal-cases-review-commission>
 was asked about how he viewed his attempts to move Libor around. The exchange 
would prove crucial.

“Well look, I mean, it’s a dishonest scheme, isn’t it?” Hayes said. “And I was 
part of the dishonest scheme, so obviously I was being dishonest.”

Main photograph: Tom Archer/Barcroft Media

• This article is adapted from The Fix: How Bankers Lied, Cheated and Colluded 
to Rig the World’s Most Important Number 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fix-485998.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Liam Vaughan and Gavin Finch (Wiley, £19.99). To order a copy for £16.99, 
go tobookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 
333 6846

 