
Last month I wrote about the huge exercise that has been underway this year of 
moving the whole of the Guardian's online operations over to the 'new 
generation' site that will integrate all the paper's output, wherever 
generated, into one system. This has been designed to present material in 
formats that are user-friendly on all the devices that people now use to access 
the paper, not just on desktops and laptops. The trend to the smaller mobile 
screen is accelerating all the time and the Guardian is, for obvious reasons, 
intent on keeping pace with the market.

In the past few months new formats for the crosswords have been beta-tested to 
see what problems they produce on the smaller screens. The development team is 
extremely grateful to all of you who have tried out and commented on these new 
formats, because online crosswords present a whole range of issues that are not 
shared with other parts of the operation. However, I fear that not everyone can 
be pleased all of the time. For example, there is an irreconcilable conflict 
between those who want the black squares to be as grey as possible so as to 
save on the horrendous cost of computer printer ink and those who want the 
black squares to be as black as possible so as to have a sharp contrast with 
the white squares.

We have now reached the point where the majority of you are by choice using 
the new formats and, in general, approving of them. Accordingly, in the next 
couple of weeks the old version will be switched off. To anticipate the 
question 'Is it not possible to keep both the old and the new sites running in 
tandem (as they have been during the period of beta-testing)?' the answer is 
'No'.

The reason is that the new site is based on completely updated architecture, 
which is more stable, better able to handle small-screen formats and is 
incompatible with the architecture of the old existing site. Continuing to 
support the old site alongside the new is not viable in terms of computer staff 
or money.

The development team's guiding principle has been that the new site should aim 
to be at least as good as the old in all respects. Given the range of devices 
and apps now available (to say nothing of the choice of browsers), this is a 
tall order. Some of you will inevitably experience difficulties and 
frustrations with the changeover. Some of these will be of the sort that 
adjusting to any new electronic device or program throws up, but some of them 
will doubless be caused by the way in which your particular browser or device 
works. Either way, you are urged to send a description of the difficulty, 
including the details of the browser, device or app that you may be using, to
crosswords.beta@theguardian.com <mailto:crosswords.beta@theguardian.com> 
(copied, if possible, to me atcrossword.editor@theguardian.com 
<mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>).

Similarly, the development team would welcome suggestions as to how the new 
site could be further improved.

Already, the team has taken on board many of the suggestions you have made. 
The clues and the grids have been made more legible and each puzzle should now 
print out on one page. Because of the variety of screen sizes that you use, it 
has been impossible to have the same system for viewing clues on all devices. 
With desktop and laptop machines you will be able to see all the clues at the 
same time, with the selected one highlighted on the right. With tablets (and 
the like) the full list of clues will scroll, with the grid remaining fixed. 
With mobiles, the selected clue will show at the top, to save you having to 
scroll up and down all the time.

If you post or read 'comments' under a puzzle, you will now be able to see the 
time at which they were posted. The archive search facility has been included 
and the anagram testing facility has been improved.

There are still some very desirable improvements to the site that it has not 
proved possible to make at this stage, such as the fact that the Saturday prize 
puzzle cannot be submitted online and that the present 'temporary' Genius 
submission form is very clumsy. But one day â€¦

_____

The September Genius (No 147 set by Paul) got 332 entries by the deadline. 
There were 16 on the first Monday. First to the finishing line was M1f at 
02:46. Then came a New Zealander (DR) at 03:48 and an Australian regular (PSC) 
at 08:19. The next Brit home was NM at 08:19.

Congratulations to Dr Michael Ewart from North Berwick, East Lothian, who is 
the winner of the September Genius competition.

_____

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 