
London has breached its annual air pollution limits 
<http://www.londonair.org.uk/london/asp/basicgraphs.asp?region=0&site=LB4&sitename=Lambeth_-_Brixton_Road&period=Seven_day&graphdate=05/01/2017>
 just five days into 2017, a “shameful reminder of the severity of London’s air 
pollution”, according to campaigners.


By law, hourly levels of toxic nitrogen dioxide must not be more than 200 
micrograms per cubic metre (µg/m3) more than 18 times in a whole year, but late 
on Thursday this limit was broken on Brixton Road in Lambeth.

Many other sites across the capital will go on to break the annual limit and 
Putney High Street exceeded the hourly limit over 1,200 times in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/08/london-takes-just-one-week-to-breach-annual-air-pollution-limits>
. Oxford Street, Kings Road in Chelsea and the Strand are other known pollution 
hotspots.

NO2 pollution, which is produced largely by diesel vehicles, causes 5,900 
early deaths 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/environment/pollution-and-air-quality/air-quality-and-health>
 every year in London. Most air quality zones across the country break legal 
limits and the crisis was called a “public health emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/27/uk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars>
” by MPs in April. This week scientists said that one in 10 cases of 
Alzheimer’s in people living near busy roadscould be linked to air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/04/living-near-heavy-traffic-increases-dementia-risk-say-scientists>
.

Diesel cars are 10 times more toxic than trucks and buses, data shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/06/diesel-cars-are-10-times-more-toxic-than-trucks-and-buses-data-shows>
The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has pledged new measures and to double 
funding to £875m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/07/london-mayor-double-funding-tackle-air-pollution>
 over five years to tackle the problem. But the UK government’s national plans 
havetwice been ruled illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/high-court-rules-uk-government-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution-are-illegal>
 in the past two years and it has been sent back to the drawing board to 
develop a third strategy.

Alan Andrews, a lawyer at ClientEarth – the group that successfully sued the 
government – said: “This is another shameful reminder of the severity of 
London’s air pollution and shows why the mayor has rightly made tackling it a 
top priority. It is absolutely essential that he now delivers on his promises 
and that the national government back him to the hilt.”

Andrews, who lives in Brixton, said Khan had promised an expanded ultra-low 
emission zone in 2019, which limits polluting vehicles, and to deploy the 
cleanest buses on the most polluted roads.

“While these are vital steps in the right direction, we can’t wait another 
three years for action,” Andrews said. “We need immediate action to cut 
pollution in the short-term and protect Londoners’ health during these 
pollution spikes.” In December, Khanissued air pollution alerts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/london-mayor-issues-pollution-warnings-at-bus-stops-and-tube-stations>
 at bus stops, tube stations and roadsides due to high levels.

A spokesman for the mayor said: “The Brixton Road [breach] underscores why 
urgent action is needed to improve air quality acrossLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.” He said Khan would shortly be 
announcing 10 new low emission bus zones, including one for Brixton Road.

“But this is not enough,” said the spokesman. “The government needs to match 
the Mayor’s commitment to improving air quality as quickly as possible.”
Air pollution in London 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-06T11:31:48/embed.html>
Penny Woods, chief executive of the British Lung Foundation, said the early 
breach in Brixton was shocking: “This shows the extent of the public health 
crisis we are facing. The mix of these toxic air pollution levels with freezing 
temperatures pose a serious risk to people with lung conditions and can affect 
all of our health.”

Over 60% of the 97 air pollution monitoring sites in London broke legal annual 
limits in 2016, according to preliminary data from Kings College London seen by 
the Guardian. Putney High Street, where high buildings trap pollution, was the 
worst.

Its annual average for last year was 125 micrograms of NO2 per cubic metre, 
over three times the limit of 40µg/m3. Brixton Road recorded 117µg/m3 and 
Marylebone Road was more than double the limit.

The Kings College data <http://www.londonair.org.uk/LondonAir/Default.aspx> 
also shows Putney High Street broke hourly limits 1,221 times in 2016, vastly 
exceeding the permitted 18 breaches. Brixton Road broke the hourly limit 502 
times.

Across the UK, 169 local authorities - 40% - suffered illegally high NO2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/22/four-in-10-uk-councils-exceed-air-pollution-limits-figures-show>
 air pollution in 2015. This wasdown from 194 in 2013 
<http://www.airqualitynews.com/2015/09/10/nearly-200-councils-breached-no2-limits-in-2013/>
, but illegal levels of the toxic gas remain a serious issue, with the 
government estimating itcauses 23,500 early deaths a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/13/government-passing-the-buck-air-pollution-campaigners>
.

In November, data from the European Environment Agency revealed the UK is 
second only to Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/23/uk-has-second-highest-number-of-deaths-from-no2-pollution-in-europe>
 in Europe for the highest number of annual deaths from NO2. It also ranked 
London’s Marylebone High Street as the most polluted site in Europe.

The government must produce a new draft national plan by April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/21/high-court-ministers-deadline-air-quality-pollution-plan>
 and ClientEarth said this must include clean air zones in many areas to stop 
the dirtiest diesel cars entering pollution hotspots. ClientEarth also said the 
“peverse” financial incentives that encourage people to buy diesel cars rather 
than cleaner ones must be ended.


Both a national network of clean air zones and tax changes were proposed 
within government as part of its last plan, but wererejected by the Treasury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/18/treasury-blocked-moves-to-charge-diesel-cars-to-enter-polluted-uk-cities>
.

A government spokesperson said: “We are firmly committed to improving the UK’s 
air quality and cutting harmful emissions. We will update our air quality plans 
in the spring to further improve the nation’s air quality.” He said the 
government had committed more than £2bn since 2011 to support ultra-low 
emissions vehicles and greener transport schemes.

In December, Paris, Madrid, Athens and Mexico City pledged to ban polluting 
diesel cars from their centres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/four-of-worlds-biggest-cities-to-ban-diesel-cars-from-their-centres?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 by 2025 and a number of cities outside the UK have already taken action such 
as banning cars on specific days or making public transport free.

Jenny Bates, at Friends of the Earth, said: “Air pollution is a major health 
threat, particularly to children and other vulnerable people. Road traffic is 
the biggest culprit – and diesel is the worst. This is why the government must 
take much bolder and quicker action including planning to phase out diesel by 
2025.”

This week new data also revealed that modern diesel cars produce 10 times more 
NO2 pollution than heavy trucks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/06/diesel-cars-are-10-times-more-toxic-than-trucks-and-buses-data-shows>
 and buses per litre of fuel, which experts say is due to the much tougher 
testing faced by heavy vehicles.
NO2 pollution in London 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1QM6MaJVCX8zTeHR8aO9o-3HVpjfijuKGfkjCOEFKWiE>
 How UK cities compare on nitrogen dioxide exceedance  