
London mayor Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> is 
to launch the UK’s most comprehensive inquiry into the impact of foreign 
investment flooding London’s housing market, amid growing fears about the scale 
of gentrification and rising housing costs in the capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/sep/15/sadiq-khans-planning-incentives-for-more-london-affordable-homes>
.


Khan said there are “real concerns” about the surge in the number of homes 
being bought by overseas investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/25/john-prescott-foreign-ownership-london-tower-skyscraper>
, adding that the inquiry would map the scale of the problem for the first time.

“It’s clear we need to better understand the different roles that overseas 
money plays in London’s housing market, the scale of what’s going on, and what 
action we can take to support development and help Londoners find a home,” Khan 
told the Guardian.

“That’s why we are commissioning the most thorough research on this matter 
ever undertaken in Britain – the biggest look of its kind at this issue – so we 
can figure out exactly what can be done.”

Earlier this year, the Guardian revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/revealed-foreign-buyers-own-two-thirds-of-tower-st-george-wharf-london>
 how a 50-storey block of 214 luxury apartments by the river Thames in Vauxhall 
was more than 60% owned by foreign buyers. In one of the starkest examples of 
the impact of foreign investment, it found that a quarter of the flats were 
held by companies in secretive offshore tax havens, and many were unoccupied.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-inquiry-foreign-property-ownership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6774e24fb5884a0691099ab74adbdfb42edbccb2%2F0_154_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20mayor%20launches%20unprecedented%20inquiry%20into%20foreign%20property%20ownership&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-inquiry-foreign-property-ownership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20mayor%20launches%20unprecedented%20inquiry%20into%20foreign%20property%20ownership&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-inquiry-foreign-property-ownership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6774e24fb5884a0691099ab74adbdfb42edbccb2%2F0_154_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
 The Tower, a 50-storey apartment complex in Vauxhall, is more than 60% 
foreign-owned. Photograph: Alamy 
In China, experts predict the current scale of global investment in UK 
property could rise significantly over the next decade, with a “new wave” of 
middle-class investors from mainland China quadrupling the amount of money 
flowing annually into foreign real estate – including the UK – to $200bn 
(£150bn) in the next 10 years.

Charles Pittar, chief executive of Juwai.com <http://www.juwai.com/>, a 
website that aims to pair Chinese investors with property developers overseas, 
said he expected a major jump in investors looking for a return in Britain, 
adding: “The UK market,particularly post-Brexit 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/london-property-house-prices-brexit-overseas-buyers-first-time-eu-referendum-housing-market-a7108026.html>
, is really picking up.

“Our thesis – and this is supported by quite a lot of evidence – is that in 
many ways the international Chinese investment journey is probably just 
starting … The exciting thing about China is that there are 168 cities with 
more than a million people. So this is just such a huge market.”

A breakdown of who owns London's prime property. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-29T12:29:45/embed.html>
That view is supported by Victor Li, a director of international project 
marketing for the US real estate giantCBRE <http://www.cbre.co.uk/uk-en>, who 
also predicts a spike in investment in British homes over the next decade.

“I think it is just beginning,” said Li, predicting that only 3% of the 
potential investors in overseas property had so far been located across 
mainland China: “It is a big market, and they are getting wealthier and 
wealthier.”

Critics say the influx of foreign investors is contributing to a spiralling 
housing crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/25/sadiq-khan-condemns-foreign-investors-london-homes-gold-bricks-housing-policy>
in the capital. Earlier this week, it emerged that thenumber of 
thirtysomethings leaving London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/26/rising-london-house-prices-spark-departure-30-somethings>
 has leapt in recent years, as high housing costs have forced people to move 
out.

Overseas buyers are also increasingly focusing on towns and cities outside the 
UK capital – with Manchester, Liverpool and Birmingham all identified as 
“hotspots” as buyers try to getmore for their money while avoiding new stamp 
duty rules 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/foreign-investors-buying-up-flats-in-suburbs-after-stamp-duty-hike-a3336676.htmlhttp://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/foreign-investors-buying-up-flats-in-suburbs-after-stamp-duty-hike-a3336676.htmlhttp://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/foreign-investors-buying-up-flats-in-suburbs-after-stamp-duty-hike-a3336676.htmlhttp://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/foreign-investors-buying-up-flats-in-suburbs-after-stamp-duty-hike-a3336676.html>
. Property in London’s outer suburbs and evensatellite towns such as Slough 
<http://fraser.hk.com/en/about-us/news-and-media/2016-07-06/mercury-house-perfect-for-investors/>
 is being marketed in Hong Kong to potential Chinese buyers.

Foreign investment has helped drive a fresh property building boom around the 
UK. Liverpool has received millions of pounds of overseas investment in housing 
and property in the past five years, including a£200m New Chinatown development 
<http://http//www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/work-begins-new-chinatown-development-11252428>
 that is under construction and is being heavily marketed in China. Earlier 
this year,Sheffield announced a multibillion pound deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/21/sheffield-lands-billion-pound-china-deal-to-create-hundreds-of-jobs>
 with a Chinese construction firm that would generate four or five city-centre 
projects over the next three years and create “hundreds if not thousands” of 
jobs in south Yorkshire.


The Chinese are the biggest buyers of new-build residential accommodation 
globally, with the Singaporeans second and the British fourth, according to 
internationalproperty agents Knight Frank 
<http://www.knightfrank.com/resources/global-cities/2016/all/global-cities-the-2016-report.pdf>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-inquiry-foreign-property-ownership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1bcb41a3ebd8c22e426aac2a52f8901b9be00ea%2F0_107_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20mayor%20launches%20unprecedented%20inquiry%20into%20foreign%20property%20ownership&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-inquiry-foreign-property-ownership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20mayor%20launches%20unprecedented%20inquiry%20into%20foreign%20property%20ownership&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Flondon-mayor-sadiq-khan-inquiry-foreign-property-ownership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1bcb41a3ebd8c22e426aac2a52f8901b9be00ea%2F0_107_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 An artist’s impression of the £200m New Chinatown development in Liverpool. 
Illustration: BLOK Architecture 
Khan’s inquiry will focus on the scale and impact of different types of 
overseas investment in London. It will examine how foreign cash has changed the 
housing market – from exclusive high-cost accommodation to middle- and low-cost 
homes – in different parts ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, 
and explore how other international cities are tackling the problem.


Khan said: “We welcome investment from around the world in building new homes, 
including those for first-time buyers. At the same time, as more and more 
Londoners struggle to get on the property ladder, there are real concerns about 
the prospect of a surge in the number of homes being bought by overseas 
investors.”

One key aim of the research will be shining a light on who is investing and 
where the money originates from.

Khan said: “We urgently need more transparency around overseas money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/02/sadiq-khan-make-london-property-ownership-transparent>
 invested in London property. Londoners need reassuring that dirty money isn’t 
flooding into our property market, and ministers must now make all property 
ownership in London transparent so we can see exactly who owns what.”


But some housing market commentators warn it would be a mistake to focus only 
on foreign investment when tackling London’s housing crisis. Yolande Barnes, 
director ofSavills’ world research department 
<http://www.savills.co.uk/research/world.aspx>, said foreign buyers accounted 
for only 7% of property purchased across Greater London 
<http://www.savills.co.uk/_news/article/55328/177606-0/7/2014/london-s-overseas-buyers-have-been-overstated--says-savills>
, although that figure is likely to be higher in inner-London hotspots. And she 
said that investment had helped bring forward nearly all the “affordable homes” 
built in London since the 2008 financial downturn.

“Foreign buyers are often the focus in discussions about the housing crisis, 
but really they are only one element in an incredibly complicated picture. 
Without them investing in properties at the top end, we would not have been 
able to fund very much social or affordable housing since the financial crash.”


Barnes said the real issue was the price and scarcity of land available for 
development in the capital.

“Like any major world city, the issue in London centres around the fact that 
there is not enough of the most popular bits of the city to go around. Inner 
London land rarely comes on to the market, and it only makes sense for people 
to release land and turn it into residential units if they are going to get a 
suitable return – which normally means high-end luxury developments.”

Gentrification is a global problem. It's time we found a better solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/gentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright>
However, a recent study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/31/londons-elite-pushed-out-of-exclusive-postcodes-by-super-rich>
 by academics at London’s Goldsmiths University found that the influx of cash 
into the capital’s luxury housing market from the global super-rich was having 
a wider impact on gentrification across the city.

It discovered that foreign investment at the top end had pushed London’s 
“traditional elite” residents from their wealthy enclaves in places such as 
Mayfair, Chelsea and Hampstead, and created a “trickle down” effect – raising 
prices beyond the reach of most people in previously cheaper London 
neighbourhoods.

Are you experiencing or resisting gentrification in your city? Share your 
stories in the comments below, through ourdedicated callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/19/city-resist-gentrification-displacement>
, or on Twitter using #GlobalGentrification.

Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is difficult and 
expensive – but supporting us isn’t. If you value the the Guardian’s coverage 
of the global housing crisis,please help to fund our journalism by becoming a 
supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_mayorgentrification_footer>



 