
Serving communities in both busy urban areas and beautiful rural locations, 
and dealing with a variety of physical and mental health needs, there is 
something to satisfy anyone seeking a rewarding career in nursing.

Here are 10 of the jobs on offer.

1: Registered nurses (Band 5)

Based in 12 community hospitals across Dorset, our nurses form the backbone of 
local healthcare services. Covering everything from day surgery and outpatients 
to rehabilitation and end of life care, they combine clinical expertise with a 
personal touch, which makes them valued and loved by the communities they 
serve. An excellentpreceptorship programme 
<http://www.nhsemployers.org/your-workforce/plan/education-and-training/preceptorships-for-newly-qualified-staff>
 supports newly qualified nurses, and there are career development 
opportunities across the board.

2: Registered mental health nurses (RMNs)

Providing both acute inpatient and community-based mental health care, our 
RMNs treat and support people through a wide gamut of mental health problems, 
including post-natal depression, personality disorders, post-traumatic stress 
and eating disorders. Our inpatient services are rated outstanding by the Care 
Quality Commission, and are based in a number of units around the county. These 
include St Ann’s Hospital at Sandbanks, Poole, which recently underwent a £4m 
refurbishment programme, including a new-look women’s ward and inpatient 
clinic. A new psychiatric intensive care unit is also under development.

3: District nurses

Managing a caseload of house-bound patients, they play a vital role in helping 
deliver care as close to home as possible and prevent unnecessary hospital 
admissions – a central plank in the development of NHS services. Working 
closely with GPs and other agencies, they care for people with long-term 
conditions and help educate patients and carers to promote greater independence 
and self-care. Their “patch” may cover rural communities in the heart of Dorset 
or bustling seaside towns like Weymouth and Poole.

4: School nurses

A specialist public health role that provides care and support for young 
people from the age of 5-19 in schools across the county. School nurses deliver 
health promotion, vaccinations and growth measurement, alongside crucial advice 
and support for children experiencing a growing range of physical and mental 
health issues. Working in tandem with nursery nurses, education staff and 
social care workers, they also play a key role in safeguarding and ensuring 
children and young people have the best possible start in life.

5: Minor injuries unit (MIU) practitioners

An ideal role for anyone who enjoys working at the reactive, sharp end of 
hospital care. Dorset has eight MIUs, each one attended by up to 50 people 
every day. They may need treatment for burns, cuts or broken bones, or could be 
suffering severe mental health problems. With no more than a couple of people 
on duty at a time, the role requires multi-skilled nurses who thrive on making 
quick decisions under pressure – it’s the kind of job that often appeals to 
people with experience of working in A&E.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdorset-healthcare-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Flove-nursing-here-are-10-different-roles-at-dorset-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff432ad4d619f980dab04763a8ebf1bdba82bdb63%2F0_72_6048_3629%2F6048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%20nursing%3F%20Here%20are%2010%20different%20roles%20at%20Dorset%20HealthCare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdorset-healthcare-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Flove-nursing-here-are-10-different-roles-at-dorset-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%20nursing%3F%20Here%20are%2010%20different%20roles%20at%20Dorset%20HealthCare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdorset-healthcare-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Flove-nursing-here-are-10-different-roles-at-dorset-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff432ad4d619f980dab04763a8ebf1bdba82bdb63%2F0_72_6048_3629%2F6048.jpg>
 A nurse tends to an elderly lady. Photograph: Philip Hartley/Dorset HealthCare 
6: Community nurses

These nurses have a caseload of patients with long-term conditions, and play a 
vital role in helping them live comfortably at home. They are medical 
prescribers, give advice and guidance, and have the ability to make complex 
assessments of people’s needs – as well as the social skills to make people 
feel at ease. People can also specialise as learning disabilities nurses, 
supporting people with complex needs and their families or carers.

7: Intermediate care nurses

An advanced practice role working as part of a team, these nurses will play a 
crucial role as healthcare in Dorset is reshaped to care for more people closer 
to home. They manage the risk of looking after acutely unwell patients in their 
own homes, preventing admission to hospital and arranging complex discharges 
from hospital.

8: Health visitors

Playing a key role in supporting young families, they offer a range of care 
and advice to support the development of children aged under five. Covering 
everything from child protection and physical health assessments through to 
helping mums deal with post-natal depression, health visitors in Dorset meet 
the needs of a diverse population. A structured preceptorship programme is in 
place for newly qualified staff.

9: Sexual health nurses

Sexual health services are not just for young people. Our nurses are kept busy 
helping residents of all ages with advice and practical help with 
contraception, pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, smear tests and more. 
There are nine clinics across the county, where trained nurses work with 
doctors to provide sensitive, confidential help to people with a wide range of 
needs.

10: Camhs nurses

We provide Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (Camhs) across the 
county, offering a range of individual, family, group and pharmacological 
interventions. Dorset’s image as a retirement area masks the needs of tens of 
thousands of young people, and we have roles ranging from mental health nurses 
working within the young adults drug and alcohol service through to crisis 
management nurses.

Apply to join Dorset HealthCare

Dorset HealthCare is the biggest NHS employer in Dorset, with 5,500 staff 
running community hospitals, specialist inpatient mental health units and a 
host of community-based health services.

Allied to Bournemouth University, we provide a wide range of learning, 
research and development opportunities to support career progression for all 
kinds of registered nurses and allied health professionals.

Find out more <http://www.joindhc.co.uk/Dorset> about working for Dorset 
HealthCare and look at the vacancies on offer.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Dorset HealthCare Trust
 