
The case of the 18th-century man of letters John Hawkesworth is not often 
invoked, perhaps because no one has heard of him. Books of notable Georgians in 
England go straight from Hawke to Haydon. In Boswell’sLife of Samuel Johnson he 
hardly appears, despite having been a great friend of Johnson’s in the 1740s, 
as well as his colleague at the Gentleman’s Magazine. Even his only biographer 
says that Hawkesworth “did not leave a mark visible across the centuries”. But 
you will notice I said “the case of” John Hawkesworth, the point being that his 
literary career closely resembles a cautionary tale. His story is one of 
ambition and pride; overreaching and disaster. Students of writing are 
doubtless told that a bad review won’t kill you. They are probably also taught 
that vindictive, envious trolling is a spanking new phenomenon. The 
extraordinary case of John Hawkesworth disproves both these little platitudes.

So what did he do? Most notably, he was commissioned by the Admiralty to write 
up James Cook’s 1769-1771 voyageaboard the Endeavour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/04/captain-cook-endeavour-ship-found-rhode-island-revolutionary-war>
. The expedition had the scientific goal of observing the transit of Venus from 
Tahiti, but Cook also carried sealed orders to continue from Tahiti and search 
for the great southern continent. With astonishing skill, he mapped the entire 
coast of New Zealand, and then the eastward limit of New Holland (or 
Australia). On board the ship was the aristocratic botanistJoseph Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/25/featuresreviews.guardianreview8>
, along with other scientists and artists, many of whom kept their own sea 
journals. On their return there was considerable public interest in Cook’s 
discoveries. What was needed was a collation of the journals, and as the 
nominated author of the proposed work (full title:An Account of the Voyages 
Undertaken by the Order of His Present Majesty for Making Discoveries in the 
Southern Hemisphere), Hawkesworth was fully aware he had hit pay dirt. He 
promptly sold the rights for £6,000 – an absolutely vast amount of money.

Hawkesworth’s rise in the world is fascinating. Starting out with no classical 
education, his great talent seems to have been in befriending Johnson and 
emulating him. Contemporaries would declare that they could not tell the two 
writers apart (oddly, this is always said as a compliment to Hawkesworth rather 
than the reverse). Not content with imitating Johnson’s style, Hawkesworth also 
had a bash at nearly every genre attempted by him – usually with more gainful 
results. He succeeded Johnson at the Gentleman’s Magazine as compiler of 
parliamentary debates; he wrote a well-received “Eastern Tale”; he wrote dramas 
for David Garrick. Everything went well for him; he was the man with all the 
luck. His periodical, The Adventurer (succeeding Johnson’s Rambler), was 
considered so morally edifying that the Archbishop of Canterbury conferred on 
him an honorary doctorate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flynne-truss-bad-book-review-john-hawkesworth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd4dc64202875bb86e98f57c264d346c6690176d%2F0_0_5976_3586%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lynne%20Truss%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20bad%20book%20review%20can%20kill%20you%20%E2%80%93%20look%20at%20the%20case%20of%20John%20Hawkesworth%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flynne-truss-bad-book-review-john-hawkesworth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lynne%20Truss%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20bad%20book%20review%20can%20kill%20you%20%E2%80%93%20look%20at%20the%20case%20of%20John%20Hawkesworth%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flynne-truss-bad-book-review-john-hawkesworth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd4dc64202875bb86e98f57c264d346c6690176d%2F0_0_5976_3586%2F5976.jpg>
 Detail of a portrait of Samuel Johnson by Joshua Reynolds. Photograph: World 
History Archive/Alamy 
Why was he considered the right man for the Admiralty commission, though? This 
will always be a mystery. But one can imagine how popular it made him among his 
fellow hacks, and what a high opinion of his own talents Hawkesworth possessed. 
True, in the 18th century, a lack of specialist maritime knowledge (or travel 
experience of any kind) would be seen as no hindrance to writing up a world 
voyage as if you’d been there yourself. But Hawkesworth had form. Victoria 
Glendinning, in her 1998 biography of Jonathan Swift, tells us that when 
Hawkesworth edited Swift’s letters in 1755, he “did not publish them as they 
stood. He edited them heavily.” Any editor arrogant enough to think that Swift 
needed help to express himself would look at a bunch of crude sea journals and 
think “Field day!”.

And so we come to the great work. What Cook himself famously disliked in the 
finished product – in a conversation recorded by Boswell in 1776 – was 
Hawkesworth’s moralising; his habit of drawing “a general conclusion from a 
particular fact”. Boswell agreed: “He has used your narrative as a London 
tavern keeper does wine. He has brewed it.” In Hawkesworth’s defence, it was 
hard to find common ground between the journals of Cook and Banks. But this is 
where his hubris comes in, because his conceited editorial solution was 
sometimes not to choose between Cook and Banks, but to override both and insert 
his own stuff – which, after all, had been more than good enough for the 
Archbishop of Canterbury.

No one knows how proud Hawkesworth felt on publication day. We do know, 
however, how crushed he was by the reception of theVoyages in 1773. It was a 
spectacular downfall, and it actually killed him. As Hawkesworth’sDictionary of 
National Biography entry tells us, “Fanny Burney’s conviction that his health 
was destroyed by the vilification he suffered seems well founded. He died at 
Lime Street, London, of a ‘slow fever’ on 17 November 1773”; “his £6,000 was 
dearly purchased at the price of his character and peace”.

If the work had been attacked only for inaccuracy, things might have been all 
right. But the three-volume work was variously condemned as lewd, boring, 
pompous, bad value (at three guineas), and above all, irreligious. This last 
accusation was the most serious, and on this count Hawkesworth had no one to 
blame but himself. He had chosen, in his preface, to challenge Cook on 
theological grounds for his naming a passage of water (off the coast of 
modern-day Queensland) “The Providential Channel”. He might as well have cut 
his own throat.

Hawkesworth’s argument about providence looks unobjectionable today. He 
basically says you can’t thank God for saving you from peril, because God was 
responsible for the peril as well. But this was heresy. Anonymous critics 
joined together in a vicious and universal condemnation that feels very much 
like trolling. “You are lawful game, and ought to be hunted by every friend of 
virtue,” writes someone in the Public Advertiser in July 1773, who calls 
himself “A Believer in the Particular as well as the General Providence of 
God”. He goes on: “You have verified the maxim that those who are destitute of 
the fundamental principles of religion and morality will grasp at gold with 
avidity, though it cannot be seized without injustice.”

In a few months Hawkesworth was not only defamed and diminished, but dead. 
Johnson had already said of his former friend, “Hawkesworth is grown a coxcomb, 
and I have done with him”. The literary canon dropped him in much the same 
fashion, and for the same reason. When he overreached himself, he plummeted not 
only into ignominy but profound and mystifying obscurity. Did his precious 
£6,000 have much to do with how rapidly he was inked out of history? I rather 
think it did.

• The Lunar Cats by Lynne Truss is published by Century. To order a copy for 
£8.49 (RRP £9.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lunar-cats.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 