
Soaring gin and sparkling wine sales helped Majestic Wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/majestic-wine> outperform City 
expectations to deliver its “biggest ever” Christmas.

Majestic said gin sales were up 55% on last year, with upmarket products such 
as Warner Edwards rhubarb gin and Sipsmith sloe gin performing particularly 
well. Sparkling wine sales rose 12%, with sales of prosecco increasing three 
times faster than champagne.


The retailer, which also owns the Naked Wines website, said sales at 
established Majestic Wine stores were up 7.5% in the 10 weeks to 2 January. 
Sales rose nearly 30% at Naked and 62.3% at the fine wine specialist Lay & 
Wheeler, putting overall group sales up 12.4%.

Analysts had feared Majestic would not achieve its expected sales growth of 6% 
after the company issued a profit warning in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/majestic-wine-share-price-plunges-25-after-profit-warning>
 because of a failed marketing campaign in the US and weak sales to business 
customers.

Shares rose by more than 6% to 345.5p on the strong sales figures.

Rowan Gormley, the founder of Naked Wines who became Majestic’s chief 
executive after the two companies merged in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/10/naked-wines-founder-takes-charge-of-majestic-after-70m-deal>
, said the retailer’s transformation plan was working, adding that it was on 
track to achieve its goal of £500m in annual sales by 2019.


The pace of growth over Christmas was an acceleration from the 5.7% reported 
for the six months to 26 September and came on top of a strong performance last 
Christmas when sales rose by 7%.


The success was partly bought at the expense of a 1% cut in gross profit 
margins against last year as the company said it had recognised the need to 
“remain competitive in a heavily discounted UK market”.

David Jeary, an analyst at Canaccord Genuity, said the statement was bit of a 
“curate’s egg.”

“It worries us that the group in aggregate, given its superior delivery of 
customer services in general, cannot extract any pricing premium with 
consumers,” he added. “Indeed, it has to bear the higher costs of superior 
service while competing head-on in price terms with supermarket competitors, 
which see wine [and spirits] primarily as promotional footfall drivers in peak 
trading periods.”

Sarah Johns, an analyst at Verdict Retail, said Majestic had been right to 
take on the discounters such as Aldi and Lidl, which have been making heavy 
gains in alcohol retail. She said value-for-money drinks offers, voucher 
marketing to encourage spend and free standard delivery for just six bottles 
had worked.

“With Christmas trading making up almost a third of the retailer’s annual 
sales, it was important that Majestic performed well,” she said. “The 
retailer’s decision to compete with discounters on price resulted in a marginal 
fall in gross margins. However, this move was ultimately the right one as savvy 
consumers looked for the best deals on drinks and Majestic’s offers proved 
alluring.”
 