
Re your article on Labour’s pay cap proposals (Why now and would it work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/maximum-wage-cap-how-might-it-work>
, 11 January), can I suggest an approach in line with today’s reality TV 
obsession? If a company boss or government department head decides that he, or 
she, is worth 20/50/500 times the average company or departmental wage, then 
the high earner should be given the opportunity to meet 20/50/500 of the said 
employees (for some businesses, such as City finance, it might be best for them 
to meet truly average earners such as nurses or teachers or refuse disposers), 
and then, after brief summaries of the participants’ working lives, the high 
earner would be invited to explain why he or she is worth 20/50/500 of the 
audience members. Questions could then follow from the audience. Anyone 
refusing to participate shouldn’t be paid more than, say, 15 times the average 
wage. The process would be repeated every year. It should make for edifying 
viewing.
David Robson
Otley, West Yorkshire

Jeremy Corbyn is on the right track – we have a pay ratio at Reprieve, and it 
works | Clive Stafford Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-pay-ratio-wage-equality-reprieve>
• Instead of trying to enforce a top pay cap or a lower high/low pay ratio, 
high pay should be linked to quality contracts for all employees and the 
protection of the company pension fund. This would mean no zero-hours 
contracts, no false self-employment contracts, a limited number of agency 
contracts of short-term fixed periods with automatic transfer to full 
contracts, and a good ratio of pension contribution. All these should be 
enforced if the top salaries are above 45:1 ratio. A balanced gender and ethnic 
minority ratio should also be included as a factor, and the company’s pay 
policies should be applied to all part-time employees and contracted-out 
services. Higher scrutiny of companies with no top pay limits is essential to 
make sure benefits accrue to all employees.
Marion Hine
Framlingham, Suffolk

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 