
Australia’s transport minister has said cost was not a factor in the 
suspension of the search for the missingMalaysia Airlines flight MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> and any 
decision to renew an underwater effort rests primarily with the Malaysian 
government.

Darren Chester and his counterparts in Malaysia and China announced the 
decision to suspend efforts to find the plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off>
 in a tripartite announcement on Tuesday afternoon, after the completion of the 
search of a 120,000 sq km area in the southern Indian Ocean.

The Australian Transport Safety Bureau had been searching that area – a remote 
expanse of ocean west of Perth, with waves sometimes between 15 and 20 metres 
and depths of up to 6km – for nearly two and a half years.

'Life is worth more than money': MH370 families despair as search ends
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/life-is-worth-more-than-money-mh370-families-despair-as-search-ends>
At a press conference in Melbourne on Wednesday morning, Chester said the 
ATSB’s mission was at the “cutting edge of science and technology, and tested 
the limit of human endeavour in a very inhospitable part of the world”.

The decision to suspend the search had not been taken lightly by the 
governments involved, Chester said, but was consistent with the tripartite 
resolution in July last year that any extension would depend on “credible new 
evidence” pointing to the “specific location” of the plane.

In December the ATSB identified the next 25,000 sq km area of “highest 
probability” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/mh370-new-report-proposes-shifting-plane-search-to-unexplored-area>
, should the search prove unsuccessful.

Chester said he characterised that recommendation as “If you were going to 
search somewhere else, that would be where you’d look” and reiterated the 
“credible” and “specific” phrasing of the tripartite agreement.

“No one is coming to me as the minister and saying, ‘We know where MH370 is.’ 
The information put forward by the experts is that if you were going to extend 
the search, this is the area you would target next.”

He said he did not rule out a future underwater search effort but that 
decision would be a matter for “the Malaysian government, primarily”, as 
Australia had delivered on its commitment to search 120,000 sq km.

Tony Abbott, who was the prime minister when the plane was lost from the radar 
in Australia’s search and rescue zone on 8 March 2014, tweeted on Tuesday night 
that he was “disappointed” the search had been called off, “especially if some 
experts think there are better places to look”.

Tony Abbott (@TonyAbbottMHR) 
Disappointed that the search for MH370 has been called off. Especially if some 
experts think there are better places to look.
 <https://twitter.com/TonyAbbottMHR/status/821290646937841664> January 17, 2017
 <https://twitter.com/TonyAbbottMHR/status/821290646937841664> 
Abbott’s criticism was echoed by Voice 370, the group representing families of 
passengers of the plane, who said in a joint statement the ATSB’s determining a 
next area of highest probability was “a wasted exercise”.

“Expecting to determine the ‘precise location of the aircraft’ before 
continuing the search was, at best, an erroneous expectation and, at worst, a 
clever formulation to bury the search … Stopping short at this stage is nothing 
short of irresponsible and betrays a shocking lack of faith in the data, tools 
and recommendations of an array of official experts assembled by the 
authorities themselves.”

Cost had not been a deciding factor in the tripartite decision, Chester 
insisted. The underwater search had cost $200m, including $60m from the 
Australian government, andMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> 
had contributed “more than anyone else”.

MH370 pilot's sister: 'My brother loved life'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/mh370-pilot-sister-my-brother-loved-life-zaharie-ahmad-shah>
“It has been a costly exercise but it hasn’t been a factor in the decision to 
suspend the search,” he said. “We’re in a position where we don’t want to be 
providing false hope to the family and friends.”

He said the 120,000 sq km area had been “defined on the limited data 
available” at the time. “The aircraft is in not that area, quite obviously, but 
we’ve confidence in the technology. They had very little data to work with and 
they’ve done an extraordinary job.”

Greg Hood, the ATSB’s chief commissioner, said he was confident the aircraft 
was not in the area that had been searched and praised the professionalism, 
dedication and optimism of his team despite challenging conditions. “The 
suspension of the search after two and a half years will be felt very deeply by 
us.”

Further analysis of debris and satellite imagery would be carried out by the 
ATSB and was due to conclude by the end of February 2017. Hood said the ATSB 
would also continue to support the Malaysian government’s requests for debris 
analysis.

Chester is to meet the crew of the Fugro Equator, the last search vessel to 
depart the search area, when it arrives in Perth next Monday. He said 
Australian authorities remained open to further analysis and evidence.

 “We need to prepare ourselves for the eventuality that for the foreseeable 
future we may not find MH370 but that doesn’t rule out future endeavours.”


Asked what would constitute “credible new evidence” that would warrant a new 
search effort, Chester said: “It means ‘we’ll know it when we see it’.

“It’s not a closed book by any stretch … It’s reasonable to expect that more 
debris may be recovered in the weeks and months ahead, which may lead to 
further information to solve this puzzle.”
 