
The underwater search for missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> has come to 
an end, with passengers’ families informed that the effort to find the plane 
has been suspended.

Next of kin were told in an emailed statement on Tuesday that Australian 
authorities’ underwater search of 120,000 sq km in the southern Indian ocean 
had concluded without success after more than two years.

'Good Night, Malaysian Three Seven Zero': unraveling an aviation mystery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/good-night-malaysian-three-seven-zero-unraveling-an-aviation-mystery-mh370>
The MH370 Tripartite Joint Communiqué was co-signed by the transport ministers 
of Malaysia, China and Australia, representing the three countries involved in 
the search. It was made public at 2pmMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> time.

“Today the last search vessel has left the underwater search area. Malaysia 
Airlines flight MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> has not been 
located in the 120,000 square-kilometre underwater search area in the southern 
Indian Ocean,” it read.

“Despite every effort using the best science available, cutting edge 
technology, as well as modelling and advice from highly skilled professionals 
who are the best in their field, unfortunately, the search has not been able to 
locate the aircraft.

“The decision to suspend the underwater search has not been taken lightly nor 
without sadness.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ae54ebcbfc602c2949c4332594866f590c6d94b%2F0_0_696_876%2F696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malaysia%20Airlines%20flight%20MH370%3A%20underwater%20search%20called%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malaysia%20Airlines%20flight%20MH370%3A%20underwater%20search%20called%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ae54ebcbfc602c2949c4332594866f590c6d94b%2F0_0_696_876%2F696.jpg>
 Statement on the suspension of the search for MH370 Photograph: Handout 
Flight MH370 disappeared on 8 March 2014, vanishing from radar shortly after 
take-off from Kuala Lumpar en route to Beijing. The plane is believed to have 
crashed in the Indian Ocean, claiming the lives of all 239 crew and passengers 
on board.


The announcement to suspend the search comes six weeks out from the third 
anniversary of the plane’s disappearance, with the unsuccessful conclusion of 
the Australian Transport Safety Bureau’s search of the so-called “seventh arc”.

At a tripartite meeting in July 2016, the three transport ministers had 
acknowledged the “diminishing” likelihood of finding the plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/missing-flight-mh370-hunt-for-debris-will-not-be-extended>
. If the full 120,000 sq km area was searched without success, the effort was 
to “not end, but be suspended” indefinitely, they said – reiterating their 
earlier resolution made in April 2015.

In December, the ATSB said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/mh370-new-report-proposes-shifting-plane-search-to-unexplored-area>
 it had a “high degree of confidence” that the wreck would not be found in the 
seventh arc – the first time it had publicly lost confidence in the search 
zone. Instead, it highlighted a new area of approximately 25,000 sq km – 
between latitudes 33 degrees south and 36 degrees south – as “the area with the 
highest probability of containing the wreckage of the aircraft”.

The tripartite statement said Tuesday’s announcement was consistent with its 
decision made in July 2016.


“Whilst combined scientific studies have continued to refine areas of 
probability, to date no new information has been discovered to determine the 
specific location of the aircraft.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5c6ec03f2e8f48cf3152e25869c3025ca42d76%2F0_0_2800_2100%2Fmaster%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malaysia%20Airlines%20flight%20MH370%3A%20underwater%20search%20called%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malaysia%20Airlines%20flight%20MH370%3A%20underwater%20search%20called%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5c6ec03f2e8f48cf3152e25869c3025ca42d76%2F0_0_2800_2100%2Fmaster%2F2800.jpg>
 A 2m-long wing flap from MH370, found off Tanzania, was identified by experts 
in Canberra in September 2016. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
The flight was carrying 152 Chinese nationals and 50 from Malaysia, as well as 
passengers from Australia, Canada, France, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Iran, 
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Russia, Taiwan, Ukraine and the United States.


Chandrika Sharma, of Chennai in India, was among the 239 people on board MH370.

“This decision appears premeditated and a betrayal of the commitment to the 
families and the public that the governments are committed to the search,” K S 
Narendran, her husband of 25 years, told the Guardian.

“It must also come as a blow to all this who have worked tirelessly to find 
answers and find the plane.”

Voice370, a group representing passengers’ next of kin, accused the 
governments of being closed to the possibility of extending the search.

“Expecting to determine ‘the precise location of the aircraft’ before 
continuing the search was at best an erroneous expectation and at worst a 
clever formulation to bury the search. Why would you need to search if you 
already knew the precise location of the aircraft?

“In our view, extending the search to the new area defined by the experts is 
an inescapable duty owed to the flying public in the interest of aviation 
safety. Commercial planes cannot just be allowed to disappear without a trace.”

The decision not to extend the search to the smaller area pinpointed by the 
ATSB suggested to Voice370 that officials had lost confidence in the data used 
to determine the search area.

The statement ended with an appeal to the governments to reconsider their 
decision.

The search for MH370 has been a multimillion-dollar effort on the parts of 
Australia, Malaysia and China. The operation is believed to have cost around 
AU$180m, paid for by Australia and Malaysia.China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> donated AU$20m in funding and 
equipment.


Progress was frustrated by difficulties in reaching the search zone and the 
largely uncharted part of the Indian Ocean it was believed to have crashed in. 
The final 20,000 sq km in particular were delayed by poor weather conditions 
throughout 2016.


But investigators remained optimistic, with Martin Dolan, the head of the ATSB,
expressing confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/mh370-head-of-search-says-very-likely-plane-will-be-found-by>
 in March 2016, the two-year anniversary of its disappearance, that the plane 
would be found within that 120,000 sq km area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677e2ac3d35b5264fd8d273d651726aa70635951%2F0_0_2705_1836%2F2705.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malaysia%20Airlines%20flight%20MH370%3A%20underwater%20search%20called%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malaysia%20Airlines%20flight%20MH370%3A%20underwater%20search%20called%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fmalaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677e2ac3d35b5264fd8d273d651726aa70635951%2F0_0_2705_1836%2F2705.jpg>
 The Rolls-Royce stencilling helped identify this part, washed up on Mossel 
Bay, South Africa in March 2016, as a segment from a 777 engine cowling. 
Photograph: Neels Kruger/AFP/Getty Images 
In July 2015 authorities had a breakthrough, when they found debris on the 
island of Réunion that waslater confirmed to be a flaperon from the flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/reunion-debris-flaperon-malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-confirmed>
.

Several more pieces of debris were confirmed to have come from MH370, 
including a wing flap found on an island off the coast of Tanzania in June and 
sent to Canberra for analysisthat was found to be from a Boeing 777 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/malaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane>
.

Investigators say the failure to find the wreckage does not mean all search 
efforts will end. But those seeking answers for the disappearance of the plane 
– and those on board – now face the prospect that the fate of MH370 might never 
be known.
 