
2017 Golden Globes: full list of nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/2017-golden-globes-full-list-of-nominations>
Kenneth Lonergan’s Manchester by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/manchester-by-the-sea> is certainly not the 
cheeriest start to the new year but it will make you want to hug people 
afterwards. A quiet, delicate portrayal of grief and survival, the story 
follows Lee Chandler (Casey Affleck), a testy, troubled handyman who returns to 
his self-exiled Massachusetts home town after his brother (Kyle Chandler) dies. 
In his will, his brother has asked for Lee to become guardian of his teenage 
son Patrick (Lucas Hedges), a relationship that catches them both off guard.

But there’s more grief to come and, in time, we learn why Lee has become such 
an obstructive loner. Returning to his past means confronting a horrific family 
tragedy and its unravelling – too spoilery to detail here – packs the biggest 
emotional punch. Director and screenplay writer Lonergan, however, isn’t 
concerned that he’s just made the most harrowing film you’re likely to see all 
year. “You can’t get through life without something happening to you that you 
can’t stand, and there’s nothing wrong with putting that in a story,” he says, 
confidently.

His confidence is justified. Manchester by the Sea is up for five Golden 
Globes this week – all the big ones, including best director and best 
screenplay, as well as topping the 2017 Oscar predictions. Lonergan is no 
stranger to success. In his 20s he made a brief living writing commercials, 
then wrote a celebrated 1996 play, This Is Our Youth, about directionless young 
adults, and penned a couple of screenplays (Analyze This and The Adventures Of 
Rocky & Bullwinkle). His directorial debut, meanwhile, 2000’s You Can Count On 
Me, was a small-town drama with big feelings, and got two Oscar nominations, 
including one for Lonergan’s screenplay.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Williams%20on%20Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%3A%20'Closure%20only%20comes%20when%20we%20die'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Williams%20on%20Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%3A%20%27Closure%20only%20comes%20when%20we%20die%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview&media=>
Michelle Williams on Manchester by the Sea: ‘Closure only comes when we die’ – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/06/michelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview>
Manchester by the Sea review: Kenneth Lonergan's morose echo of Margaret
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
His knack for wry observation and unshowy naturalism won endless plaudits but 
then, in 2005, it got ugly. His next film, Margaret, was a gloriously talky 
endeavour about a teenager navigating a complex adult world of messy morals, 
determined to find some judicial balance after she indirectly causes a bus 
driver to kill a pedestrian. A producer demanded it come in at under 150 
minutes; Lonergan wanted it longer. Legal wranglings and re-edits saw it 
delayed for years with Lonergan’s preferred cut finally arriving on DVD in 2012.

“I lost all my money and got into serious debt,” he says now. “I had always 
bet on myself and it had always turned out all right in the end, and this for a 
long time didn’t look like it was gonna turn out well at all. There was 
definitely a victory to be gathered from the ashes, but there were a lot of 
ashes first.”

In 2011, however, came a lifeline. Actor and film-maker John Krasinski (best 
known as Jim in the The Office’s US version) and his friend Matt Damon came up 
with the germ of the idea for Manchester by the Sea and went to Lonergan to 
help write the script. Damon intended to direct and star but scheduling 
conflicts got in the way; eventually Damon told Lonergan he should direct it 
himself. The actor has since said that one of the reasons he did so was because 
he and others were worried about Lonergan, and wanted to get him writing and 
earning money again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fkenneth-lonergan-golden-globes-nominee-manchester-by-the-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b1d67332d0684e153e7237931a8c4aac7a25290%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%3A%20how%20Matt%20Damon%20and%20brutal%20honesty%20helped%20make%202017's%20most%20affecting%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fkenneth-lonergan-golden-globes-nominee-manchester-by-the-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%3A%20how%20Matt%20Damon%20and%20brutal%20honesty%20helped%20make%202017%27s%20most%20affecting%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fkenneth-lonergan-golden-globes-nominee-manchester-by-the-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b1d67332d0684e153e7237931a8c4aac7a25290%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Kenneth Lonergan (right) directs Casey Affleck during the filming of 
Manchester By The Sea. Photograph: Claire Folger/AP 
Margaret – review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/01/margaret-film-review>
“Yeah, well,” says Lonergan, not entirely on board with that perspective. “I 
know he was worried about me, and I was glad, I had had a hard time. But I also 
wrote a play in 2009 [The Starry Messenger] and I wrote and directed a play in 
2011/12 [Medieval Play]. I did need money because I was pretty badly in debt at 
the time. This was not a hugely high-paying job,” he says of Manchester by the 
Sea, “but I really liked the idea for the story and I wouldn’t have done it 
otherwise.”

With Damon unable to star in the film, Lonergan cast Affleck, whose 
performance as Lee is a searing portrait of a man who’s willingly closed 
himself off. His relationship with Patrick is a tender, twisting one, a unique 
bond that pushes against Lee’s determination to keep the world at bay. Yet 
Lonergan keeps it grounded: there’s no Hollywood ending here, no easy tidying 
up of life’s mess. His stories offer not easy resolutions but they do offer 
catharsis. Michelle Williams, who plays Lee’s ex-wife Randi, has said that 
Lonergan himself was crying on set after some of the heavier scenes. At 
screenings of the film, people have told him it has given them relief.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fkenneth-lonergan-golden-globes-nominee-manchester-by-the-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f20e4646704f9edf04271e8a870a01789fb2ab0%2F0_170_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%3A%20how%20Matt%20Damon%20and%20brutal%20honesty%20helped%20make%202017's%20most%20affecting%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fkenneth-lonergan-golden-globes-nominee-manchester-by-the-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%3A%20how%20Matt%20Damon%20and%20brutal%20honesty%20helped%20make%202017%27s%20most%20affecting%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fkenneth-lonergan-golden-globes-nominee-manchester-by-the-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f20e4646704f9edf04271e8a870a01789fb2ab0%2F0_170_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 Casey Affleck and Lucas Hedges in Manchester by the Sea. Photograph: 
Allstar/Studiocanal 
“They’ll say, ‘This is very similar to what happened to my father,’ or, ‘We 
went through this,’” says Lonergan. “I approached the subject with a certain 
amount of trepidation because it is so much more serious than anything I’ve had 
to live through, and I wanted to be respectful of the material; even though 
it’s imaginary, it’s not imaginary to some people. So I’ve been very gratified 
when people who have endured something like this have felt good about the film.”

Why does he think it’s reached out to them? “Without being immodest, what I 
think works for people is it is at least an attempt at being truthful. It 
doesn’t pretend that you can get over something like this [tragedy]. It’s not 
riddled with lies, like so much of the sentimental crap that you see in films 
and television. There’s a vast experience of people that really suffer and 
don’t know what to do with it. There’s something refreshing and sustaining 
about [seeing that reflected in film] because you don’t feel like you’re alone.”

For all its misery, though, Manchester by the Sea isn’t merely a gloom-watch. 
It’s raw and real and at points almost unbearable; some of the moments between 
Affleck and Michelle Williams are likely to give you a minor breakdown. But the 
film is also uplifting. As we wrap up our interview, Lonergan says he wants to 
emphasise that the film’s not “just a dirge, because nobody needs to watch 
that. Lee’s having a hard time getting through his life but he’s still very 
funny.” Really, the film is about the endurance of the human spirit, the 
pleasure of other people’s company and, crucially, moving forward.

“The idea, I hope, is we’re all in this together,” says Lonergan of Lee and 
Patrick’s bond and how they navigate their way through loss. “It’s one thing to 
stay in a hole by yourself, but once someone else gets in the hole with you, 
you have to deal with them and it’s a good thing.”

He sighs, mocking himself from getting heavy again, and laughs: “Well, I’m 
glad we solved all that!”

Manchester By The Sea is released in the UK on 13 January
 