
A venue for the much-anticipated fight between Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> and Jeff Horn – which is 
being billed as the biggest bout in Australian boxing history – is yet to be 
confirmed, but if it goes ahead at Suncorp Stadium as expected, or any other 
location in Australia, it runs a very real risk of sending the wrong message to 
young sports fans and setting back significant efforts to stamp out homophobia 
in the country’s sporting landscape.


Jeff Horn v Manny Pacquaio set to be confirmed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/jeff-horn-v-manny-pacquaio-australia>
The fight pits local favourite Horn, 28, who has won 17 professional fights 
after last month knocking out South African veteran Ali Funeka, against the 
38-year-old Pacquiao, a true great of the sport who captured the WBO 
welterweight title for the third time in a long boxing career after defeating 
Jessie Vargas in Las Vegas in November.

But Pacquiao comes with baggage. Plenty of it. In February 2016, Pacquiao was 
on the verge of victory as a conservative Christian senator in the Filipino 
Senate and was being touted by some as a future presidential candidate in 2022 
whenhe caused outrage with his comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/16/manny-pacquiao-gay-people-worse-than-animals>
 that people in same-sex relationships were “worse than animals”. He also 
demonstrated to the world an astounding ignorance when asking, “Do you see 
animals mating with the same sex?”

Putting aside the fact that his comments are demonstrably and scientifically 
wrong, they inflicted hurt and ridicule to the LGBTI community but increased 
support for him among a conservative electorate in thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>.

Pacquiao later attempted to backtrack on the comments saying that he “was just 
stating the truth, what the Bible says”. He apologised on social media and 
claimed he was not “condemning LGBT people”, butstood by his anti-gay marriage 
position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/18/manny-pacquiao-says-people-alarmed-by-the-truth-about-gay-marriage>
.

But clearly the damage was already done and his stance was met with global 
condemnation. Sportswear manufacturers Nike abruptly ended its commercial 
relationship with him and described the comments as “abhorrent”.


Pacquiao later appeared to underline his earlier position by putting a picture 
on his Instagram account witha Bible quote that read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/19/manny-pacquiao-boxing-gay-people-instagram-nike>
: “If a man has sexual relations with a man as one does with a woman, both of 
them have done what is detestable. They are to be put to death; their blood 
will be on their own heads.”

The comments are likely to propel his political career in a country where 
conservative values are in the ascendency and acceptance of same-sex marriage 
lags far behind many other parts of the world.

But political posturing locally can have knock-on effects on a global scale – 
especially when, like with Pacquiao, we’re talking about a renowned sports star 
and role model to many young fans.

In recent years, many Australian sports codes have made serious efforts to 
stamp out homophobia; look no further than the AFL’s Pride game that took place 
last August or the Rainbow round for all sports coming up in April this year.

Brave individuals such as Ian Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/18/the-courageous-journey-of-ian-roberts-rugby-leagues-first-openly-gay-player>
 and Jason Ball have blazed a trail that should make it easier for high profile 
LGBTI sportspeople in Australia to be open about their sexuality. They have 
done so with the support and encouragement of straight Australian athletes such 
asDavid Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/mar/24/brave-david-pocock-should-be-commended>
 and Tyson Goldsack who have proactively voiced their personal commitment to 
creating a non-discriminatory sports field.

Such efforts are to be applauded for bringing about genuine and much needed 
culture change.

We’ve already come a long way in Australia towards opening up the beauty and 
excitement of sport to all – players and spectators alike – regardless of their 
sexual preference and without imposing the ugly spectacle of prejudice and 
bigotry on the sports field anew.

But the sight of spectators cheering on a boxer who holds such views would 
create a tension that will only set back the efforts of meaningfully tackling 
homophobia in sport – right at a moment when long-overdue progress is finally 
being made.


If we are serious about stamping out homophobia in Australian sport once and 
for all, we should be thinking very carefully about rolling out the welcome mat 
for Pacquiao at an Australian sporting arena.
 