
Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> used to be a byword for 
inconsistency but this decade they have established themselves as the hardest 
team to beat in Europe.

Victory over the Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> in 
Llanelli on Sunday would make it a record 14 successive victories in the 
Champions Cup, a tournament they had only a passing interest in until 2010. But 
the visitors are in no doubt that the tie will be demanding, with Saracens’ 
director of rugby, Mark McCall, billing the match as the most important of 
the season.

Sale face concussion management investigation over TJ Ioane treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/sale-concussion-management-investigation-tj-ioane>
Up to 2010-11, Saracens had played 32 matches in the 15 seasons of the 
European Cup and won 18. Since McCall’s first full season in his current role, 
they have been involved in 45 European ties, winning 35, and are unbeaten in 
the tournament since the 2015 semi-final when theylost 13-9 to Clermont Auvergne
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/18/clermont-auvergne-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-report>
 in Saint-Étienne.

Last season, Saracens became the first team to win the cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/14/saracens-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-final-match-report>
 and not lose a match; this season they are the only undefeated side. Beating 
the Scarlets would mean they have qualified for the knockout stage for the 
sixth successive campaign, having done so once previously. Like Leinster at the 
start of the decade and then Toulon, they have become the dominant force in the 
Champions Cup.

Leinster and Munster have rekindled Ireland’s passion for the tournament in 
recent months and Clermont Auvergne are top of their pool as well as the 
Top 14, fresh from a 30-6 victory over Toulon last Sunday. Yet Saracens remain 
the unstoppable force, as they showed in their opening tie when they went to 
Toulon andeviscerated the team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 that in 2015 became the first to win the Champions Cup in three successive 
years in a devastating first half, when they surprised their hosts byplaying 
with width <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/saracens-toulon->.

The default position of Saracens remains defence: they have conceded a meagre 
10 tries in 13 Premiership matches this season and five in their four European 
fixtures, 15 in 17 in total. No team have scored more than two tries against 
them and in 2016 they coughed up two bonus points, both during the Six Nations, 
against Wasps and Sale, when they were adjusting to the loss of their defence 
coach, Paul Gustard, to England.

“We enjoy defending together as a team and it was amazing what we achieved 
defensively against Exeter last weekend when we played for 70 minutes with 14 
men,” says the centre Marcelo Bosch. “We will have to be at our best in the 
next two weeks against the Scarlets and Toulon, sides who are blessed with good 
players, and it is about being constantly switched on.

“We know it is going to be tough on Sunday because the Scarlets can play from 
deep and they have to win to stay in the competition. Mark McCall has described 
it as the most important game of the season for us because if we win, we have 
qualified for the next stage.”

Glasgow’s Tommy Seymour seeks to puncture pumped-up Munster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/glasgow-warriors-tommy-seymour-munster-european-rugby-champions-cup>
Scarlets may certainly prove a tough nut to crack. Since losing to Munster in 
the Pro 12 on the opening weekend of the season, the Welsh side have won all 
their home matches, six in the league, with their victims including Leinster, 
Glasgow and Ulster, and two in Europe, notably Toulon in the last round, a 
result that leaves the French club probably needing to win at Allianz Park next 
Saturday to make it to the last eight.

What is more, Saracens are missing a number of their internationals because of 
injury. The Vunipola brothers, George Kruis, Brad Barritt, Alex Goode and 
Duncan Taylor will not travel to Llanelli because of injury. Owen Farrell 
captains the side from fly-half and Alex Lozowski will play out of position at 
full-back, a position occupied in the Scarlets by Liam Williams, who will be
joining Sarries in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/wales-rugby-union-international-liam-williams-three-year-deal-saracens>
. “We understand the significance of this game in terms of getting what we 
want, which is a home quarter-final,” says McCall. “If 22 points is not enough 
for that, the Toulon game becomes all the more important.

“We are aware of the Scarlets’ home record and that it is a tough old place to 
go. They have Liam Williams, who is everything you want in a winger and an 
exciting signing for us, and we have got a very big job to do. We have had a 
lot of disruption all season and it has been a test of our resources, but I 
always think about who is playing, not who is missing.”
 