
There was a time when the very sight of Peter Robinson in public could cause 
uproar. “I used to walk along Oxford Street on the way to the Embassy Club on 
an afternoon, because they used to do a cocktail thing there at four o’clock,” 
he says. “I’d have on an Anthony Price dress, fox fur, diamantes, the hair, the 
five-inch stilettos, fishnets, all of that. And the whole of fucking Oxford 
Street … cars would stop, people would crash into each other, guys would lean 
out of windows going, ‘All right, darlin!’”, builders on building sites would 
go fucking nuts and drop things, that kind of vibe. People didn’t look like me 
then; they just didn’t.Women didn’t look like that, let alone a man, a boy 
dressed up like that. People went fucking nuts.”

That was the best part of 40 years ago, when Robinson had already changed his 
name to Marilyn – turning a homophobic insult from his troubled youth into what 
would these days be called his brand – but some time before his brief brush 
with pop fame. If he doesn’t provoke quite such a stir today, he’s still adept 
at making a striking entrance. I’m sitting with my back to the door when he 
walks into the north London restaurant where the interview is taking place. He 
introduces himself by walking up behind me, covering my eyes and shouting: 
“Guess who?” (I’ve never met him before.)

He is wearing a torn tartan shirt, a clashing tartan kilt, boots, a bit of 
makeup around the eyes but “no underwear”, as he cheerfully informs me. He 
looks, it has to be said, fantastic: better than anyone who spent most of the 
last two decades secreted away taking heroin and crack has any right to; even 
someone who, by their own account, was “bloody gorgeous” to start off with.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5130edf8a64f2397c50e843509358e052a83329d%2F0_28_2826_1695%2F2826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marilyn%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20sat%20in%20a%20room%20for%2020%20years%2C%20taking%20crack%20and%20watching%20the%20Alien%20films%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marilyn%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20sat%20in%20a%20room%20for%2020%20years%2C%20taking%20crack%20and%20watching%20the%20Alien%20films%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5130edf8a64f2397c50e843509358e052a83329d%2F0_28_2826_1695%2F2826.jpg>
 Boy George and Marilyn out clubbing in London in 1982. Photograph: Dave 
Hogan/Getty Images 
He last had a hit single in 1984, the same year he appeared on Band Aid’s Do 
They Know It’s Christmas? – you can see him in a yellow top pouting away 
between Bananarama and the drummer from Duran Duran in the famous photo, but he 
doesn’t exactly give off the aura of someone tentatively re-entering public 
life after decades of obscurity, addiction and penury. He has a new single out, 
and an album forthcoming, both produced by his old friend and sparring partner
Boy George <https://www.theguardian.com/music/boy-george>. “Nervous?” he frowns 
incredulously: you’d think I’d just asked him if he could levitate or perform 
neurosurgery. “Nah. I can sing. I can perform. I can stand in front of a band. 
And I want to let people know that it doesn’t matter what happens, if you 
decide to change it, it’s changeable.”

He is, by his own account, a tough cookie: “I’ve been trained for personal 
abuse since I was a young boy, so it’s kind of like water off a duck’s back.” 
The abuse started when he and his mother arrived in England from Jamaica, where 
he was born: his father had been working there as a yacht salesman, but his 
parents’ marriage broke up when he was five. He moved from school to school in 
Hertfordshire and was relentlessly bullied: on one occasion, he claims, people 
started shouting “poof” and “queer” at him before he’d even reached the 
classroom on his first day – he hadn’t even opened his mouth. “I just think I 
was different. I’d lived in Jamaica until I was five and I think the rhythms of 
life there had kind of seeped into me, subconsciously. I was a different 
species, a different breed.”

By 15, he’d abandoned school altogether, lured by London’s nightlife. He 
started wearing makeup and visiting the Sombrero, the celebrated gay club on 
Kensington High Street, in west London, where he found himself feted rather 
than mocked. “It was full of freaks. Rent boys and drag queens and old rich 
guys that wanted to pick up little young pretty boys. It was like a melange of 
oddness, so I liked that.”

By the time he discovered Billy’s and the Blitz, the groundbreaking clubs run 
by Steve Strange that gave birth to the new romantic movement, he’d transformed 
himself into Marilyn, with his mother’s inadvertent help. “My mum was 
stunningly beautiful, and she still had all her old clothes. I was going 
through her wardrobe, trying to get her to wear them: these pencil skirts and 
stilettos and low-cut dresses: ‘Mum, put your red dress on, you’re beautiful, 
you’re still young.’ But she’d be in a cardigan: ‘I’m not wearing that stuff to 
go to the bingo.’ So I was sort of doing it on behalf of my mum because she 
wouldn’t, and then it evolved into getting back at my dad, because I always 
felt he’d left me and I couldn’t understand why. I used to make up stories that 
he’d died in a fire when people asked about him. So I’d dress up and all these 
straight guys would want to fuck me. I’d let them think they could, let them 
buy me drinks all night, and then when they said: ‘We’re going home now.’ I’d 
go: ‘Me and you? Go home? How did you work that out? Have you seen me? Now, 
look at you. I’m not going home with you.’ It wasn’t really about them; it was 
about paying back my dad for leaving us.”

You can see why he attracted attention. In photos from the time, Marilyn looks 
extraordinary, even by the standards of the Blitz or the Embassy, a hedonistic 
gay disco that was “kind of like what the Blitz wanted to be but wasn’t”. He 
quickly achieved a kind of fame – being photographed by the burgeoning new 
style press that centred around iD and the Face – without really knowing what 
he wanted to be famous for. There was some vague talk of a cabaret act with his 
new pal, Boy George – their friendship flourished despite a deeply unpromising 
first meeting, at which George informed him that he looked less like Marilyn 
Monroe than he did a pig – and an offer to make music, which he turned down in 
favour of visiting America with his then boyfriend. “Um, no,” he concedes, when 
I ask him if he was driven to become a singer. “I just wanted to be wonderful. 
That was it. Very naive, but that’s the way it was.”

With his minor-but-blossoming celebrity came a certain notoriety. At one 
point, he says, he was banned from virtually every gay club in London. “We’d 
get in the car on a Saturday night and try to decide where we were going, and 
everywhere someone suggested, it was, ‘No, we can’t go there because Marilyn 
can’t get in.’ I never felt like the gay scene was my tribe, because they 
didn’t fucking accept me. It was like, ‘We hate you, you’re not coming our 
club, you look too good and you haven’t got a checked shirt and a moustache.’ I 
was even banned from the Black Cap, and that was a fucking drag club. You know, 
are you taking the piss? There was never any reason, it was just: ‘You’re 
banned.’ I can only put it down to … jealousy, it’s got to be.”

It’s hard to escape the feeling that it might have had something to do with 
the fact that Marilyn was, by his own admission, “vile”. Indeed, his reputation 
for withering bitchiness – “an absolute monster”, as Boy George once put it, 
“who would say all the things you never dared say” – is a bit hard to square 
with the man sitting across the table. He is about as delightful a lunch 
companion as you could wish for: funny and charismatic and self-aware.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3772e1506c9190a0bb2b7e4253aa2c69001e0f7f%2F94_0_3357_2014%2F3357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marilyn%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20sat%20in%20a%20room%20for%2020%20years%2C%20taking%20crack%20and%20watching%20the%20Alien%20films%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marilyn%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20sat%20in%20a%20room%20for%2020%20years%2C%20taking%20crack%20and%20watching%20the%20Alien%20films%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3772e1506c9190a0bb2b7e4253aa2c69001e0f7f%2F94_0_3357_2014%2F3357.jpg>
 Marylin (yellow top) in the famous Band Aid photograph. Photograph: BBC / 
REDFERNS 
“Oh, I was just … horrific,” he laughs. “Unbelievable. People would come up to 
me and go: ‘’Scuse me, can I just tell you, you look amazing?’ And I’d go: 
‘Yes, I know, now fuck off.’ The clothes, the Marilyn thing, it was like a suit 
of armour, I would never drrrrr-eam of being like that ordinarily. Plus there 
was the whole getting back at Dad, doing it for Mum sub-plot, but the poor 
unfortunate who came into contact with this maelstrom of childhood tics and 
quirks would really get the treatment. I still get people saying to me, ‘I met 
you in 1979, do you remember when you said …’ And I think: oh God, what’s 
coming now? What did I do?”

He did some modelling, appeared in the video for Eurythmics’ Who’s That Girl? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-5iDKWV6Chg> and eventually signed a record 
deal in 1983, by which time Boy George was the biggest pop star in the country. 
He had one hit, a great bit of ersatz Motown bubblegum calledCalling Your Name 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bMw_iosf5QI>, and a gospel-ish followup called 
Cry and Be Free <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3uRu83GNEk8>, but apparently 
things went wrong from the start. “The record company wanted me to be the 
beautiful new Boy George. It was like, first off, the old one’s still alive, 
not exactly ugly, and doing quite well. And on top of that, it’s actually my 
best friend and you’re trying to play us off against each other. And my whole 
thing was different to George’s anyway. George was cute and cuddly, and 
grannies liked him and said he preferred a cup of tea to sex. Whereas, I was 
kind of like: ‘No, what is that? Is it a man? A woman? I dunno, but whatever it 
is, I wanna fuck it.’” He laughs. “At least that’s my interpretation.”

Whatever the reason, his pop stardom was fleeting. He made attempts to keep it 
going – heading to America, working with big-name producers such as Don Was, 
being photographed with Madonna and Diana Ross – but nothing quite worked. A 
few months after the Band Aid single, he appeared in Smash Hits. He was 
supposed to be launching a new single with an appearance at a star-filled 
nightclub in New York. Instead, there were technical problems, he fled the 
stage without singing a note, and in the accompanying interview, sounded 
remarkably like a man in the throes of some kind of breakdown. He protested 
that he was “only famous for being someone’s friend”, talked about killing 
himself, announced he’d lost all his money as a result of bad business deals 
and alluded to drug use. “Oh, everything went tits-up, I basically think I did 
have a nervous breakdown and instead of dealing with it in a healthy way, I 
just decided to get high all the time, which really put the cat among the 
pigeons. But at least I was keeping it real,” he smiles. “In Smash Hits.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1ef7a3be8644031ff8e9ecae4da4b200fe465b0%2F100_319_2185_2730%2F2185.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marilyn%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20sat%20in%20a%20room%20for%2020%20years%2C%20taking%20crack%20and%20watching%20the%20Alien%20films%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marilyn%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20sat%20in%20a%20room%20for%2020%20years%2C%20taking%20crack%20and%20watching%20the%20Alien%20films%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmarilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1ef7a3be8644031ff8e9ecae4da4b200fe465b0%2F100_319_2185_2730%2F2185.jpg>
 Marilyn in 1984. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The following year, at the height of the tabloid frenzy around Boy George’s 
drug use, he was arrested for heroin possession, although the charge was later 
dismissed. He broke up with his boyfriend – a young Gavin Rossdale – which he 
now says was “the final straw”: “I just thought, ‘Fuck off, leave me alone, I’m 
not doing anything.’”

He retreated to his mother’s house in Hertfordshire and stayed there for 20 
years, “without going out, unless it was to the hospital or a dealer, or a 
doctor. But in general I just sat in a room for 20 years. I didn’t want contact 
with people. The phone would ring and I just wouldn’t pick it up. The curtains 
were always drawn, I didn’t know whether it was night or day.”

What did he do all day? “You know the Alien movies? I had the box set of that. 
I had my laptop and my drug paraphernalia was all set up around me. And I’d 
watch the first Alien film, then the second, then the third, fourth, fifth. And 
when it got to the end of the fifth one, I’d put the first one back on again. 
So that was it. Over and over again. It was, like, my life has gone out of 
control, but I can control this, this tiny little bubble of behaviour: that was 
my safety, sitting in front of this computer screen with what I’m watching, and 
I know all the dialogue and I know what’s going to happen. I could control how 
I felt. ‘Oh, I’m bit tired, let me have some crack. Oh, I’m a bit depressed, 
let’s have some heroin. I need to go to sleep, I’ll take a downer.’ I just 
wanted to die, but I couldn’t do that, I think because I was brought up a 
Catholic, with that idea that if you kill yourself you go to purgatory. I kept 
thinking, ‘Well, it’ll be just my fucking luck, I’ll kill myself and wake up in 
exactly the situation I’m trying to get away from and it’ll be for eternity.’ 
At least I know this is going to end at some point.”

How did his mum cope? “It was hideous. You know mums, they live in hope, don’t 
they? That one day it will change.”

It ended when he contracted pneumonia. A doctor told him his system was so 
weak, he had only a 30% chance of survival. He spent so long in intensive care 
that he says it took him a year to learn to walk again. “I was fucked. Constant 
hospital visits with one thing or another, crying all the time. I just thought, 
well, there’s nowhere else to take this, except death, and I couldn’t do death. 
The drugs didn’t work the way I wanted them to work any more anyway. It was 
like, I was at the end of the line, there was nowhere else to go. So I had to 
back up.”

He spent five years in and out of rehab. He moved to Suffolk – a most 
un-Marilyn-ish location, but that’s where the clinic was. He finally got clean, 
returned to London and started making music again. “I played what I was doing 
to George and, because he’s a control freak, he kept going, ‘I think it should 
be this way, you should do it like this.’ I said: ‘Well, if you’ve got a better 
fucking idea, let’s have it.’”

An album is nearly finished and there is talk of touring, something he has 
never done before. I ask him if he worries about entering the spotlight again, 
given how it ended up last time, and he gives me another incredulous look. “Are 
you fucking nuts?” he snorts. “I’ve had the most amazing life! I’m not a 
victim! I had a great time! Of course! I mean, I didn’t have a great time sat 
in a room taking drugs …” Then he reconsiders. “I mean, a lot of the time I was 
sitting in the room I had a great time. Oh yeah, the drugs were fucking amazing 
at first – if they hadn’t been, I wouldn’t have stayed there. Oh, I’ve had me a 
good time, missy. Don’t worry about that.”

Marilyn’s new single Love or Money is out now; mistermarilyn.com 
<http://mistermarilyn.com/love-or-money/>
 