
It is one of the most basic of political lessons to interpret events so that 
they support your argument.Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has taken this workaday truth 
and developed it into an overarching narrative for her Brexit strategy. She is 
well on her way to pulling off an act of national self-harm, and in the total 
absence of a counter-strategy she is running away with the ball.

It was there again in her Lancaster House speech yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
, this misconstruction of the leave vote: “The message from the public before 
and during the referendum campaign was clear,”she told the ambassadors and hacks
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-in-full-audio>
 gathered in surroundings of gilded imperial glory: “Brexit must mean control 
of the number of people who come to Britain from Europe.”

That is not true. As many of the Vote Leave campaigners were anxious to argue 
(and theBritish Election Study (BES) confirms 
<http://www.britishelectionstudy.com/bes-resources/brexit-britain-british-election-study-insights-from-the-post-eu-referendum-wave-of-the-bes-internet-panel/#.WH8327aLQyn>
), the Brexit vote was not about immigration. Immigration was never top of the 
list of concerns of leave voters, and it has only very rarely been top of the 
concerns of voters in national elections. The leave vote was abouta complex web 
of issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/07/north-poor-brexit-myths> 
to do with a sense of powerlessness, nostalgia, and a mistrust of people in 
general and experts in particular.

It is not, however, an accident that immigration has come to stand as 
shorthand for all of the above.

In the years of Labour dominance, the idea that immigration was the source of 
many of voters’ grievances, and that controlling it would be a magic bullet, 
was deliberately fostered by a Conservative party that couldn’t think of 
anything better to say to rival new Labour’s appeal.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Key%20points%20from%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video%20analysis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Key%20points%20from%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video%20analysis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis&media=>
Key points from Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
From William Hague’s asylum clampdown pledge in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/may/19/uk.immigration> to Michael 
Howard’s 2005 cap on asylum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2005/jan/24/asylum.immigrationasylumandrefugees>
 toDavid Cameron’s 2010 catastrophic decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/jan/11/david-cameron-immigration-cap>
 to compromise his moderniser message with a promise to reduce net migration to 
the tens of thousands, immigration controls have become the default escape 
route of the desperate politician fleeing electoral firestorm.

Conservative policy moved from being casual about nurturing positive public 
attitudes to immigration to deliberately legitimising hostility. From the early 
decision tocut the migration impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/aug/06/fund-impact-immigration-scrapped> 
funds that Tony Blair had proposed in 2005 in order to tackle the sense of 
exclusion that was growing in poorer communities, tothe “go home” vans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/22/go-home-vans-scrapped-failure>
, it is scarcely surprising that the BES analysis of the Brexit vote finds a 
lethal correlation between hostility to immigration and a sense of 
disempowerment.

Modernising Tories call their traditional policy strengths on crime and 
immigration the “old ladies”. When it seemed Gordon Brown might call a snap 
election in 2007, Cameron dusted them down and sent them out, and they’ve been 
on active duty ever since.

Yet May’s conspicuous focus on the net migration target as home secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/03/theresa-may-tory-manifesto-migration-target>
 clearly has more to it than mere loyalty to the party line. Here was a pledge 
that could not be achieved while Britain was in the EU, a pledge that if it was 
achieved would severely constrict economic growth, that would unavoidably sour 
relations with the fastest growing regions of the world, and cripple higher 
education along the way.

Our panel’s verdict on Theresa May’s Brexit speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-prime-minister-britain>
She turned the pledge that Cameron had resorted to into her own. She fought 
epic and angry battles with economic ministers in cabinet to protect it. She 
sent out her junior ministers to fight for it. As a result, the stubbornly 
rising figure fornet migration, now three times higher than the original pledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/01/labour-condemns-may-for-floating-plan-to-make-schools-deprioritise-illegal-migrant-pupils-politics-live?page=with:block-583fee27e4b049350cc94a88#block-583fee27e4b049350cc94a88>
, is a quarterly rebuke to the government, a knife turned in the open wound of 
failure. Always in the public eye, never far from the front pages of the 
tabloids, it has acted like a fuel propellant on popular alienation from 
Westminster and Brussels.

There is something attractively novel in a prime minister with a sense of 
obligation to the promises made in manifestos, in the strict terms in which 
they are made. There is a good case to make for the claim that such loyalty to 
the idea of democracy is a necessary precondition to restoring confidence in 
Westminster. But there is something dangerously perverse in it too.

May’s determination to interpret the leave vote as a vote about immigration is 
a misframing that will have catastrophic consequences. Out of the single 
market, out of the EU: like politicians who refused to rearm in the 1930s 
because they hesitated to warn the country it would have to fight another war, 
May is squandering all the things that her speeches suggest she went into 
politics to achieve. Her promises to share prosperity more equally and to 
protect against the bad times more fairly are likely to be the first casualties 
of this false interpretation of her duty to democracy.
 