
Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, the mayor of 
London, will warn on Wednesday that the Brexit plan outlined in Theresa May’s
speech on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 could “rip Britain apart”, striking a markedly different tone to the Labour 
frontbench.

Khan, a former Tooting MP, will tell an audience at the World Economic Forum in
Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> that “hard Brexit would be a 
lose-lose situation”. On May’s speech, he says: “A hardline approach to Brexit 
may hold the Conservative party together, but it could rip Britain apart.

“And if we continue on this path – towards a hard Brexit – we risk having to 
explain to future generations why we knowingly put their economy, their 
prosperity and their place on the world stage in such peril.”

He will say that privileged access to the single market is “critical for 
London” – that nothing else will do.

Sadiq Khan warns hard Brexit will cost millions of jobs across UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/sadiq-khan-to-warn-hard-brexit-will-cost-millions-of-jobs-across-uk>
Khan’s tough approach comes amid growing disquiet among Labour MPs, including 
some frontbenchers, about whetherJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, and the shadow Brexit 
secretary,Keir Starmer <https://www.theguardian.com/law/keir-starmer>, were too 
generous to the prime minister after her Brexit speech.

May’s “plan for Britain”, involves leaving the EU single market, and dropping 
key aspects of the customs union – but seeking a wide-ranging trade deal with 
the rest of the EU.

Corbyn offered strong resistance to May’s threat to turn Britain into what he 
characterised as a “bargain basement” on the shores ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, but both he and Starmer 
welcomed her decision to seek “access” to the single market, instead of trying 
to retain membership.

Khan is sometimes touted as a potential future Labour leader, and his party 
conference speech in September, with its repeated references to “Labour in power
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/sadiq-khan-greatest-prize-labour-back-power-conference>
”, was widely regarded as a dig at Corbyn and hislow poll ratings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/jeremy-corbyn-blames-leadership-contest-for-low-poll-ratings>
.

Labour is in an awkward position, seeking to square the circle between its 
pro-remain members and voters, and the profound concerns of some of its 
traditional supporters in former industrial areas aboutimmigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/immigration>.

Moderate MPs, including former shadow chancellor Chris Leslie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leslie-chris> and Progress chair Alison 
McGovern <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alison-mcgovern>, have warned 
that their party must offer what McGovern, in an article forLabour List 
<http://labourlist.org/>, called, “real opposition to what May announced 
yesterday”.
 