
As if the prospect of Soulja Boy fighting Chris Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2017/jan/12/chris-brown-soulja-boy-taking-the-beef-to-boxing-ring>
 on pay-per-view television were not enough, Meek Mill has now suggestedhe and 
Drake should 
<http://www.xxlmag.com/news/2017/01/meek-mill-fight-drake-5-million/> join the 
ranks of R&B stars and rappers settling their beefs in the boxing ring.

During a livestream, the rapper said: “I’d beat Drizzy the fuck up for five 
mil. Of course I would. We gonna let Nicki [Minaj] be the ring girl. Y’all 
would come to see that fight, wouldn’t y’all? Y’all’d spend $100 a ticket for 
that.”

The bad blood between the pair stems from July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/28/drake-meek-mill-hip-hop-ghostwriter>
, when Meek Mill suggested Drake used ghostwriters, notably on the track 
R.I.C.O., a collaboration between the pair.Drake responded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/29/drake-responds-meek-mill-second-diss-track>
 with two diss tracks aimed at his rival. The feud rumbled on, with producer
Quentin Miller claiming he was attacked by Mill 
<http://www.inquisitr.com/2928788/meek-mill-versus-drake-beef-explodes-into-violence/>
 and his associates after denying he had ghostwritten for Drake, an allegation 
denied by Mill.

However, any fight is unlikely to happen. For one thing, Drake would be crazy 
to accept the challenge. Mill is 6ft2ins, whileDrake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> is 5ft11in, suggesting the former 
would have a significant advantage in weight and reach. As the boxing adage 
goes: a good big ’un will always beat a good little ’un.

More to the point, as Soulja Boy and Chris Brown look likely to find out, it 
may simply be logistically impossible to stage such a fight. Asthe New York 
Post points out 
<http://pagesix.com/2017/01/12/why-chris-brown-soulja-boy-boxing-match-is-unlikely-to-happen/>
 of the Boy-Brown bout, plans to host the showdown in Las Vegas would almost 
certainly be scuppered by the regulations insisted upon by the Nevada Boxing 
Board of Control.

Even suggestions to move the fight to Dubai, or elsewhere in the United Arab 
Emirates, seem unlikely to help it come to pass. “The Money Team’s [Mayweather 
Promotions] accountants will realise that this is an event that no one – 
including their fans – will pay to watch on PPV, and that it’s just a 
money-losing proposition,” Jim Murphy of sportsbettingexperts.com told the 
Post. “Don’t be surprised if talk of this fight quietly disappears over the 
next few weeks. It’s significantly more likely that the principals will record 
an album or go on tour together than it is they’ll ever meet in a boxing ring.”
 