
OK, I know you talked about the Trumps in your past two columns, but one last 
question: what to make of Melania?

Michael, by email 

“One last question”? Oh, I think we’ll return to this subject plenty over the 
next few years. But I agree, I’ll try to give it a rest after this, at least 
until the inauguration. Although I am the person who reassured their best 
friend on 7 November, “I promise Hillary Clinton will be president,” so don’t 
set too much store by my promises.

Yes, indeedy, what to make of Melania? Before this campaign, I assumed she was 
yet another Manhattan trophy wife. Goodness, she looked happy tostrike absurd 
poses 
<http://hbz.h-cdn.co/assets/16/01/980x490/landscape-1451924379-hbz-melania-trump-00-index.jpg>
 inabsurd clothes 
<http://s3.r29static.com//bin/entry/baf/700x/106037/opener.jpg> in magazine 
shoots in which she and her husband showed off theirrevoltingly ostentatious 
Manhattan penthouse 
<https://peopledotcom.files.wordpress.com/2016/08/melania-trump-01-1024.jpg>, 
which isdecorated in a style 
<http://www.idesignarch.com/inside-donald-and-melania-trumps-manhattan-apartment-mansion/>
 best described as Dictator Chic (really, we should all have been more on our 
guard all this time). Honestly, ifSaddam Hussein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saddam-hussein> and Robert Mugabe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/robert-mugabe> ever saw this penthouse, they 
would exchange glances and be immediate converts to minimalism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmelania-trump-betty-ford-first-lady-feminist-liberal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F385ce778ec08a5d6b21ea37e3bd39b821e2d7029%2F169_0_1725_3600%2F1725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melania%20Trump%20wants%20to%20be%20a%20'traditional'%20first%20lady%20like%20Betty%20Ford.%20Good%20luck%20with%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmelania-trump-betty-ford-first-lady-feminist-liberal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melania%20Trump%20wants%20to%20be%20a%20%27traditional%27%20first%20lady%20like%20Betty%20Ford.%20Good%20luck%20with%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmelania-trump-betty-ford-first-lady-feminist-liberal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F385ce778ec08a5d6b21ea37e3bd39b821e2d7029%2F169_0_1725_3600%2F1725.jpg>
 I can’t say Melania has yet proven herself to be Mother Teresa, but there’s 
time. Photograph: Callahan/REX/Shutterstock 
And Melania seemed very happy with this life. She reassured journalists that 
Donald is, actually, despite his long history of infidelities, aperfect husband 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/more-trump-tapes-surface-with-crude-sex-remarks/2016/10/08/7129cea2-8d92-11e6-bff0-d53f592f176e_story.html>
: “If I say, ‘I need an hour, I’m going to take a bath,’ or ‘I’m having a 
massage,’ he doesn’t have anything against it. He’s very understanding that 
way.” As for the perfect husband himself, he was once asked by Howard Stern 
what he would do if Melania were disfigured in a car accident – would he stay 
with her?

“How do the breasts look?” asked Mr Perfect.

Sadly, we have no time to talk about the time Donald’s first wife, Ivana, said 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/24/documenting-trumps-abuse-of-women?mbid=social_twitter>
 during her sworn divorce deposition in 1990 that, after this perfect husband 
had a “scalp reduction” operation to reduce a bald spot – which he found more 
painful than he liked – he raped her in retribution. Trump has denied the 
allegation and, hey,surely he would never resort to rehashing old and denied 
accusations from the past 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/10/donald-trump-holds-extraordinary-press-conference-with-bill-clin/>
, so let’s follow his lead.

Back to Melania. Well, it’s hard to make the transition from Park Avenue 
princess to American angel, and I can’t say Melania has yet proven herself to 
be Mother Teresa, but there’s time. In 2000, Melania told the New York Times 
that – ha ha! – if her husband were ever elected president – ha ha! – she would 
be “very traditional – likeBetty Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/10/betty-ford-obituary> or Jackie 
Kennedy <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jackie-onassis>”. I don’t want to 
cast aspersions on Melania’s grasp of first-lady history, but neither Ford nor 
Kennedy were, by any stretch of the imagination, “traditional”. I think she may 
be confusing “traditional” with “famous”. Jackie was seen as a breath of 
attention-grabbing modernity in her time and Betty ... shall we have a little 
chat about Betty, Melania? Because I’d just love it if you were like Betty 
Ford, given that she was a leading figure in the feminist movement and 
passionately pro-choice and pro-equal pay. Let us take a moment, shall we, to 
imagine how Ford would have got along with Trump’s chosen chief strategist,
Steve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/steve-bannon-profile-breitbart-trump-campaign-manager>
, whose website has published articles with headlines such as “Birth control 
makes women unattractive and crazy” and “There’s no hiring bias against women 
in tech, they just suck at interviews”. Ah, we all need a laugh in these 
strange days, don’t we?

Most famously, Ford spoke openly about her breast cancer, mastectomy and her 
struggles with addiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/10/betty-ford-tributes-us> and, 
when her husband’s presidency ended, she established theBetty Ford Center 
<http://www.hazeldenbettyford.org/treatment/locations/betty-ford-center-west-los-angeles>
, forever linking her name to those who need help and receive it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmelania-trump-betty-ford-first-lady-feminist-liberal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27c83334835c65f415dbd669090cdd2cd9f51f46%2F201_527_1453_872%2F1453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melania%20Trump%20wants%20to%20be%20a%20'traditional'%20first%20lady%20like%20Betty%20Ford.%20Good%20luck%20with%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmelania-trump-betty-ford-first-lady-feminist-liberal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melania%20Trump%20wants%20to%20be%20a%20%27traditional%27%20first%20lady%20like%20Betty%20Ford.%20Good%20luck%20with%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmelania-trump-betty-ford-first-lady-feminist-liberal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27c83334835c65f415dbd669090cdd2cd9f51f46%2F201_527_1453_872%2F1453.jpg>
 Jackie Kennedy, 1962. Photograph: NBC NewsWire via Getty Images 
Now, let’s look at what Melania is up to. Well, last time we heard from her is 
when she announced that, as first lady, shewould make it her business to focus 
on cyberbullying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/melania-trump-cyberbullying-campaign-speech>
, because she has noticed there is too much meanness in the world. And how 
right Melania is! Why, that very day,one well-known cyberbully was singling out 
a female journalist 
<http://mashable.com/2016/11/02/donald-trump-calls-out-katy-tur/#DIHCz2a.qmqo>, 
encouraging his millions of his fans to harangue her. And since this same 
cyberbully won a little election earlier this month, he seems to have spent 
most of his timeharanguing the New York Times on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-twitter-new-york-times>. 
Did you get what I did there? Geddit?Geddit??

Well, Melania doesn’t, because unless Gerald Ford was personally turning the 
whole of America into alcoholics, the comparison between Melania and Betty 
doesn’t quite stand. If Melania is looking for a first lady analogy, I guess 
she could look towardsNancy Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/06/nancy-reagan>, who dutifully 
parroted her husband’s conservative lines and gazed at him adoringly. But, 
honestly, this feels like an insult to the Reagans who – as thelate president’s 
son Michael Reagan Jr has made clear 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/ronald-reagans-son-trump_us_57560a7ce4b0b60682deb7e5>
 – would have loathed Trump.

But I am intrigued by Melania. She has, of late, tried to tone down her usual 
fembot style – all bodycon dresses and pointed shoulders – with more 
interesting looks: a jumpsuit here, a pussybow there, a fluted sleeve there. 
So, perhaps Melania will yet break away from her husband’s mould and do 
something more interesting as first lady. Of course, if she did that, Trump 
might well then make swift moves to make her the ex-first lady. But then, I 
hadn’t realised how supportive Donald is of his aspiring Betty Ford. So as long 
as Melania’s breasts don’t change, he’d be fine with her doing her thing. He’s 
that kind of supportive guy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Flaura-benanti-melania-trump-late-show-stephen-colbertvideo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Laura%20Benanti%20parodies%20Melania%20Trump%20on%20Colbert%20show%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Flaura-benanti-melania-trump-late-show-stephen-colbertvideo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Laura%20Benanti%20parodies%20Melania%20Trump%20on%20Colbert%20show%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Flaura-benanti-melania-trump-late-show-stephen-colbertvideo&media=>
Laura Benanti parodies Melania Trump on Colbert show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/19/laura-benanti-melania-trump-late-show-stephen-colbertvideo> 