
Marching with a boisterous but peaceful crowd through central Mexico City, 
Héctor Pérez, a sales manager with an insurance company, rattled off a list of 
grievances to explaina wave of furious protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/gasolinazo-mexico-gasoline-price-hike-protests-petrol>
 which erupted after a rise in the country’s government-set petrol price.

“It’s not because we all have cars. When gasoline prices go up, everything 
else goes up: tortillas, public transportation, everything,” said Pérez.


Mexico gasoline protests: president insists there's no alternative to price 
hike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/mexico-gasoline-protests-four-dead-and-hundreds-arrested-during-mass-looting>
Pressed a little harder, he voiced another set of reasons for his discontent: 
President Enrique Peña Nieto and his Institutional Revolutionary party (PRI) 
justified an agenda of structural reforms with the promise of growth for all – 
but have instead presided over a stagnating economy.

Meanwhile, a string of high-profile corruption scandals has heightened the 
perception that the while ordinary Mexicans have seen a gradual decline in 
spending power, the country’s politicians have grown rich.

“PRI governors in the states have robbed a lot of money and the president is 
not able to stop them,” said Pérez, referring to cases such as that of the 
former governor of Veracruz state Javier Duarte, who iscurrently on the run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/veracruz-mexico-ex-governor-javier-duarte-missing>
 after being accused of pilfering the public purse.

Angry protests over the 20% hike in gasoline prices – known as the gasolinazo 
– have plunged parts ofMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> into 
chaos as citizens protest in the streets and block highways, petrol stations 
and installations of the state-run oil giant Pemex. More than 250 stores have 
been looted, amid allegations that paid agitators infiltrated the protests.


The gasolinazo provided the spark for the protests, but analysts say social 
unrest has been quietly building for months. The Mexican peso has been steadily 
dropping in value whilethreats from the US president-elect, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/mexico-auto-industry-jobs-donald-trump-manufacturing-cars>
, have sowed disarray in the country’s economy.

To Mexicans, public positions are seen as a system of accumulating private 
riches
Ilán Semo, historian 
Mexico’s minimum wage is just $4 a day and people are so sensitive to price 
increases that hikes in the cost of public transportation are one of the 
principal reasons high school students abandon school, according to the public 
education secretariat. On Monday, the state statistics institute announced that 
inflation had hit a two-year high of 3.36% – a figure economists expect to 
climb even higher in 2017.


Even after a decade-long drug war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/dec/08/mexico-war-on-drugs-cost-achievements-us-billions>
 in which an estimated 200,000 have died and a string of horrific human rights 
abuses such as the kidnapping and presumed murder of 43 teacher trainees in 
2014, thegasolinazo appears too much for Mexicans to accept.


“This is an affront to people,” said Ilán Semo, historian at the Iberoamerican 
University. “There are policy errors [and] corruption. But normally it’s not 
something that hits people’s pocketbooks.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmexico-gasoline-price-protest-gasolinazo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5893a2e2472f5fa82f2961d9afc75dccc9aaf67%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mexico%20protests%3A%20how%20gas%20prices%20lit%20the%20flame%20under%20a%20quietly%20smoldering%20rage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmexico-gasoline-price-protest-gasolinazo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mexico%20protests%3A%20how%20gas%20prices%20lit%20the%20flame%20under%20a%20quietly%20smoldering%20rage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmexico-gasoline-price-protest-gasolinazo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5893a2e2472f5fa82f2961d9afc75dccc9aaf67%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A man walks past a board displaying the exchange rate of the Mexican peso 
against the US dollar in Mexico City on Monday. Photograph: Carlos Jasso/Reuters
The government’s sense of timing did not help: the announcement of the 
gasolinazo coincided with the Mexican media’s traditional end-of-year stories 
on politicians’ scandalous Christmas bonuses: roughly $11,000 for each senator.

It was later reported that lawmakers and judges also claim gasoline vouchers 
as part of their benefits packages.


The link between public officials’ generosity to themselves and the increasing 
prices for government-provided products such as gasoline and electricity is an 
easy one for everyday Mexicans to make, said Semo.

“To Mexicans, politics represents the best business of your life. They see 
public positions as a system of accumulating private riches,” he said.


Even before the increase in petrol prices was announced, long lines had formed 
at fuel pumps around the country, due to shortages attributed to theft from 
pipelines, poor distribution and alleged hoarding by petrol stations.


'Just the beginning': Trump may disrupt 20-year boom for Mexico auto industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/mexico-auto-industry-jobs-donald-trump-manufacturing-cars>
There are also the perpetual problems in the state-run Pemex Refining, which 
has lost “12m pesos per hour” over the entirety of the last decade, Juan 
Pardinas, director of the Mexican Institute for Competitiveness, wrote in the 
newspaper Reforma.


“At the same time it’s increasing petrol prices, the government has not given 
any public explanation of the measure it will take to stop this monumental 
waste of public resources.”


Addressing the nation last week, Peña Nieto pleaded for understanding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/mexico-gasoline-protests-four-dead-and-hundreds-arrested-during-mass-looting>
. The president argued that subsidies only benefited the rich and reduced 
available funds for social programs for the poorest Mexicans.


“What would you have done?” he asked, setting off a social media firestorm in 
which Mexicans used the hashtag#QuéHubieranHechosUstedes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Qu%C3%A9HubieranHechosUstedes?src=hash> to suggest 
alternative course of action, such as cutting subsidies for political parties – 
or simply resigning.
 