
Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> must be ready to respond 
immediately with its own tax measures if the incoming administration of 
President-electDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
imposes a border tax, the country’s economy minister has said, warning such 
protectionism may trigger a global recession.

 Trump, who takes office on 20 January, has promised a “major border tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/toyota-trump-border-tax-mexico-corolla>
” on companies that shift jobs outside the United States, and such a measure 
could hobble Mexico’s exports to its top trading partner.

 “It is clear we need to be prepared to immediately neutralise the impact of 
such a measure,” the economy minister, Ildefonso Guajardo, said in an interview 
on Mexican television.

 “And it is very clear how – take a fiscal action that clearly neutralises 
it,” he said.

'Just the beginning': Trump may disrupt 20-year boom for Mexico auto industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/mexico-auto-industry-jobs-donald-trump-manufacturing-cars>
Trump has repeatedly attacked Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>
 over trade, jobs and immigration since he first launched his run for the White 
House in 2015, driving the peso currency to historic lows and unnerving 
investors, especially in the auto sector.

 Guajardo said Trump’s proposed tax “was a problem for the entire world” and 
that it “would have a wave of impacts that could take us into a global 
recession”.

 Nonetheless, the minister said he expected foreign direct investment in 
Mexico this year to total about $25bn, with investment in the energy and 
telecommunications sectors expected to more than make up for the loss of a 
planned $1.6bn Ford Motor Co factory that the company said this month it is 
cancelling. Trump had strongly criticised the plan, but Ford said its decision 
was not the result of pressure from Trump.

 Guajardo also praised the government of Japan and Toyota Motor Corp for their 
“reasonable” response toTrump’s threat to impose a significant border tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/toyota-trump-border-tax-mexico-corolla>
 if the company does not stop making its Corolla model in Mexico for the US 
market. Toyota said last week the automaker has no immediate plans to curb 
production in Mexico.

 “Toyota has 10 plants in the United States … and employs more than 130,000 
Americans. If I were Mr Trump, I’d treat them with more respect,” Guajardo said.

 He added that he expected total foreign direct investment during the six-year 
term of President Enrique Peña Nieto, which ends in late 2018, to average $30bn 
annually.

 Guajardo has previously warned that US corporate tax cuts proposed by Trump, 
as well as the border tax, could undermine foreign investment in Latin 
America’s No 2 economy.

 Mexico slapped a tax on US high-fructose corn syrup in the early 2000s after 
the United States refused to allow free trade in Mexican sugar.

 