
Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> has appointed its third 
ambassador to the United States in less than a year just days before the 
inauguration of President-elect Donald Trump, who has unleashed widespread 
concern in Mexico with his aggressive rhetoric on trade and jobs.

 The government said in a statement on Friday that the new envoy to Washington 
would be Gerónimo Gutiérrez, who held senior posts in two previous Mexican 
administrations headed by the opposition center-right National Action party 
(PAN).

The nomination of Gutiérrez, which must be ratified by the senate, suggested 
that PresidentEnrique Peña Nieto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enrique-pena-nieto> of the Institutional 
Revolutionary Party (PRI) hopes to shore up cross-party political support as he 
faces Trump.

'Against our dignity': Mexico vows never to pay for Trump's wall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/against-our-dignity-mexico-vows-never-to-pay-for-trumps-wall>
 “It’s a message of national unity,” said Juan Carlos Romero Hicks, a PAN 
senator and member of the upper chamber’s foreign relations committee. He 
applauded the nomination of Gutiérrez, currently head of the North American 
Development Bank.

 The bank was set up under the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), 
which Trump has threatened to tear up if he cannot renegotiate it in favor of 
the US.

 Trump, who has also threatened to slap hefty tariffs or taxes on Mexican-made 
goods, is due to take office on 20 January.

Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> is particularly exposed to 
any economic shock because it sends about 80% of its exports to the US and has 
long depended on its neighbor for about half of its foreign direct investment.

Mexico appoints ex-minister behind Trump's visit as new foreign minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/mexico-foreign-minister-luis-videgaray-donald-trump>
 The country’s economy minister said on Friday that Mexico must be ready to 
respond immediately with its own tax measures if the Trump administration 
imposes a border tax.

 Gutiérrez will replace Carlos Sada, who switches to the role of deputy 
foreign minister responsible for North American relations, a move the PAN’s 
Romero Hicks described as a “great designation” given his experience in 
US-Mexican relations.

 Peña Nieto earlier this week sketched out his plans for dealing with Trump, 
saying that “all the issues” defining bilateral relations would be on the 
table, including security, migration and trade when the two sides met for talks.

 Among posts Gutiérrez previously held were deputy foreign minister for North 
America and deputy interior minister.

 Peña Nieto’s poll ratings have been in the doldrums for months and a hike in 
fuel prices at the start of the year has unleashed fresh discontent and 
protests across much of Mexico.

 