
Michael Kors knows how to put on a show. For the designer’s Wednesday morning 
presentation atNew York fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/new-york-fashion-week>, he brought out the 
big guns – or a big band anyway. The models showcasing the designer’s 
collection walked to Rufus Wainwright singing renditions of Judy Garland songs 
Zing Went the Strings of My Heart and Come Rain or Come Shine, accompanied by a 
live band. The finale song was that original earworm, Come On Get Happy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbece7993b06a8c9ba6bf982f7c1fadc0a182dfc1%2F0_0_4795_3248%2F4795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Kors%20finds%20inspiration%20in%20old%20Hollywood%20for%20new%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Kors%20finds%20inspiration%20in%20old%20Hollywood%20for%20new%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbece7993b06a8c9ba6bf982f7c1fadc0a182dfc1%2F0_0_4795_3248%2F4795.jpg>
 Rufus Wainwright performs at the Michael Kors show. Photograph: Swan 
Gallet/WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
If some of the inspiration, then, was 40s Hollywood – see wrap dresses in 
South Pacific prints with strong shoulders, platform wedges and oversized 
Bacall-like trenches – this collection was also rooted in the now. Kors has 
jumped on the industry trend for “see now, buy now”, a shift that sees clothes 
on the catwalk available in stores immediately after the show, as opposed to 
the traditional wait of around four months. As with his February show, some 
pieces were already available. Some 12 items shown on Wednesday were instore 
and online that day. They included bags – a strong category for Kors – such as 
the splendidly named Stanwyck ruffled clutch as well a slipdress and cardigan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F593973906fd4e33f770339b8a3b2e95c08d49129%2F0_0_2166_3416%2F2166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Kors%20finds%20inspiration%20in%20old%20Hollywood%20for%20new%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Kors%20finds%20inspiration%20in%20old%20Hollywood%20for%20new%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F593973906fd4e33f770339b8a3b2e95c08d49129%2F0_0_2166_3416%2F2166.jpg>
 Michael Kors’ spring summer show. Photograph: Amy Sussman/WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
Taken as a whole, the collection worked around how women dress now, partly 
through Kors studying the demands and habits of his customers at recent instore 
events. Versatility was the underlying message. Most dresses came with sleeves, 
and the collection had a lot of separates that could be worn whatever the 
weather forecast. An argyle sleeveless sweater was worn over a blouse, with a 
printed skirt, or a slouchy cardigan was slung over a beaded dress. There was 
very little evening-only wear – suggesting the concept of clothes that can be 
worn day to night has reached uptown, where the Kors customer typically lives.

DKNY confirms the future of fashion: the boilersuit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/13/dkny-confirms-the-future-of-fashion-the-boilersuit>
At a preview press conference on Tuesday, Kors said the collection, with its 
upbeat colour palatte and foot-tapping soundtrack, was a response to a modern 
world where the news cycle can make the world seem “like a complicated place”. 
For Kors, fashion is the answer. “No matter what, I am an optimist,” he said. 
“I like joy, I like things spirited and I still think fashion can change that 
spirit, after 35 years of doing this.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b492689b7a4d510cbee5403c494042b1a05eb35%2F0_0_3341_4629%2F3341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Kors%20finds%20inspiration%20in%20old%20Hollywood%20for%20new%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Kors%20finds%20inspiration%20in%20old%20Hollywood%20for%20new%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmichael-kors-finds-inspiration-in-old-hollywood-for-new-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b492689b7a4d510cbee5403c494042b1a05eb35%2F0_0_3341_4629%2F3341.jpg>
 Michael Kors’ spring summer show. Photograph: Angela Weiss/AFP/Getty Images 
The designer may be a veteran but he knows how to keep his ear to the ground. 
He emphasised the collection’s seasonless nature. He said his customers “don’t 
care what name the season has; they mix everything up”. As for that 
see-now-buy-now customer, February’s show saw a high-school student stay home, 
watch the show and come in the to Madison Avenue store to buy the same day. 
There are more, one imagines, where she came from.

Kors’ reach to teenagers comes, in part, from his mid-range handbags – the 
most popular are all under £310, which sounds like a lot until it is compared 
with most designer handbags, which tend to come in at four figures. They have 
become the ubiquitous companion of young professional women globally. Such 
popularity has seen the Kors brand valued at £6.83bn, with revenue up 8% in the 
last year – but there are rumblings that there can be too much of a good thing. 
2016’s result have been slightly less golden – with wholesale business 
declining 7% in the first quarter. A focus on the luxury end of the brand with 
this show, rather than the entry-level business of those bags, is another smart 
move.
 