
The head of the International Monetary Fund, Christine Lagarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde>, has called for urgent 
action to tackle a middle-class crisis as she warned that inequality, distrust 
and a lack of hope were fuelling growing populism.

Speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos-2017>, Lagarde said she had first 
highlighted the dangers of rising inequality four years ago but had been 
ignored. “I hope people will listen now,” she said.

Lagarde said the gulf between rich and poor was evident from an Oxfam report 
showing that eight billionaires own the same amount of wealth as the poorest 
half of the world’s population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/16/worlds-eight-richest-people-have-same-wealth-as-poorest-50>
 – 3.6 billion people.

Davos 2017: Joe Biden calls on richest 1% to pull their weight, and criticises 
Russia - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/18/davos-2017-global-elite-angry-middle-classes-climate-change-joe-biden-day-2-live>
“With lower growth, more inequality and much more transparency, you have the 
good ingredients for a crisis of the middle classes in the advanced economies,” 
she said.

Lagarde added that the answer was not for countries to turn their back on 
globalisation but a mix of policies designed to stimulate activity and ensure 
the fruits of growth were more evenly spread.

“Policymakers need to get the signal now, and really think about how to 
address the public discontent. It [the policy response] needs to be granular, 
it needs to be regional, it needs to be focused on what will people get out of 
it. It probably includes more redistribution than we have in place at the 
moment.”

Lagarde’s view that the middle class (the term used to describe working people 
in the US) was in crisis was shared by the outgoing US vice-president.

Joe Biden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/joebiden> said globalisation 
and new technology were in effect “hollowing out the middle class, the 
traditional engine of economic growth and social stability in western nations”.

He added: “We cannot undo the changes that technology has wrought in our 
world, nor should we try. But we can and we must take action to mitigate the 
economic trends that are stoking unrest in so many advanced economies and 
undermining people’s basic sense of dignity.”

Addressing his audience directly, Biden said the top 1% was not “pulling its 
weight” and urged that income tax be made more progressive.

Larry Summers <https://www.theguardian.com/business/larry-summers>, the 
Harvard professor and former US Treasury secretary under Bill Clinton, 
questioned whether concern over income inequality really explained the crisis 
in the middle classes. “The US has just elected the world’s biggest example of 
conspicuous consumption. That is a bizarre manifestation of a concern over 
inequality.”

This year’s Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> has been 
dominated so far by concerns that the results of referendums in the UK and 
Italy together with the election of Donald Trump as US president represent a 
retreat from globalisation into nationalism and protectionism.

Summers said many voters thought “too much is being done for the poor, rather 
than that too little is being done for the poor”, and suggested that the surge 
of populism was due to issues such as “national unity and strength”, not just 
envy over wealth.

Middle-class voters, he added, felt governments weren’t working for them. 
“They feel the governments are fighting for people in developing countries, for 
people who have recently come into their countries, for minority groups who 
used to suffer discrimination, but not the people “in the centre of the 
country”.

He added: “They feel they are not being heard, and they’ve expressed that in 
the Brexit vote, the Italian referendum and in the US election.”

Summers was dismissive of the policies proposed by Trump, saying that the 
lesson of history was that populism ended up harming the people it was supposed 
to help. He said tax cuts would benefit the already super-rich and the small 
number of jobs relocated to the US by presidential strong-arming of 
corporations would be dwarfed by the jobs losses caused by the rise in the 
value of the dollar.

“The people who will be the victims of populist policies are the lower-income 
and middle-class people in whose name the policy is offered,” Summers said.

The Italian finance minister, Pier Carlo Padoan, said there was no “silver 
bullet” that would solve the crisis but it was important to take populists 
seriously.

“Policymakers must deliver a vision of a better future – something that is 
lacking in Europe right now,” he said.
 