
Mike Ashley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley> has criticised 
Sports Direct shareholders who refused to back the re-election of Keith 
Hellawell as chairman and publicly questioned the company’s corporate 
governance.

The founder and chief executive of Sports Direct said supportive comments 
about the retailer and Hellawell from the hedge fund manager Crispin Odey were 
“highly significant at a time when others have been less forthcoming”.

Odey, whose fund owns about 5% of Sports Direct, has said Ashley is a “natural 
winner” and he is “very happy with him”.

Sports Direct chairman should keep his pledge and save some dignity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2017/jan/05/sports-direct-chairman-should-keep-his-pledge-and-save-some-dignity>
He was speaking in an interview with the Times last week after Sports Direct’s 
independent shareholdersagain voted against the re-election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/sports-direct-chairman-keith-hellawell-rejected-shareholders-for-second-time>
 of the former police chief constable Hellawell.

In an unusual stock market statement on Monday, Ashley welcomed Odey’s support 
for the company.


“I am grateful for Crispin’s recent comments about Sports Direct and I’m glad 
that we will no doubt continue to have an interesting ride together,” he said. 
“I consider his backing to be highly significant at a time when others have 
been less forthcoming.

“I’m particularly pleased that we are in agreement over the fact that Keith 
Hellawell is the right man to help deliver further progress. We now intend to 
concentrate on our medium and long-term goals in order to deliver shareholder 
value through becoming the ‘Selfridges of sport’.”

But Odey has criticised the billionaire tycoon in the past, saying Ashley 
could not be “house trained” and his failure to appoint a permanent finance 
director was a “big concern”, and meant there was “too much power in one 
person’s hands”. Sports Direct has not had a permanent finance directorfor more 
than three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/03/sports-direct-investors-question-and-answer-at-annual-meeting>
.

While Odey voted in favour of Hellawell remaining chairman, a string of other 
major shareholders and City institutions, including Standard Life, Royal 
London, Hermes and Aberdeen Asset Management, opposed his re-election.

Shareholders forced the vote at an extraordinary general meeting last week by 
rejecting Hellawell at Sports Direct’s annual meeting last September.

A total of 54% of votes from Sport Direct’s outside shareholders were against 
Hellawell’s re-election at the latest meeting. However, he was re-elected to 
the board after winning 81% of the total vote thanks to the support of Ashley, 
who owns 55% of the company. Ashley’s majority stake did not count towards the 
independent vote on Hellawell’s re-election at the first meeting.

Hellawell has said he will step down at Sports Direct’s next annual meeting if 
he does not win the support of the majority of independent shareholders again.

However, Ashley said last week that he wants Hellawell to reconsider his 
position, which inflamed relations with some investors further. Sports Direct 
also appeared to row back on acommitment to conduct an independent review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/sports-direct-bows-to-pressure-and-agrees-to-independent-review>
 of working conditions and corporate governance. “In view of continuing 
frustrations, the board will meet in the near future to reconsider all options 
in relation to its review of corporate governance,” it said.

The company’s reaction to the vote prompted swift criticism. Paul Lee, the 
head of corporate governance at Aberdeen Asset Management, said: “The board 
should focus on delivering the significant governance change that is expected 
over the next eight months.”

Hellawell criticised MPs, trades unions and the media last month for waging a 
campaign against Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
 as it reported a 57% fall in first-half profits.

It was the latest disappointing financial statement after the company’s share 
price halved during 2016. The group wasrelegated from the FTSE 100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/sport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions>
 in March.

The crisis at Sports Direct was triggered by a Guardian investigation in 2015, 
which revealed that workers at its Derbyshire warehouse werepaid less than the 
minimum wage. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>


The scandal prompted a parliamentary inquiry last year, in which MPs likened 
the depot to a Victorian workhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
, reigniting long-held concerns about the level of control Ashley has at the 
company.
 