
The government is exploring whether its ban on tiny pieces of plastic in 
cosmetics should be extended to other household products, to protect fish and 
other marine life.

Ministers promised earlier this year to ban microbeads in personal care 
products such as toothpaste and face scrubs by the end of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/02/uk-government-to-ban-microbeads-from-cosmetics-by-end-of-2017>
, but stopped short of pledging to ban them in other products.


Now, officials have called for more evidence on the environmental impact of 
other sources of microbeads, such as washing powder and householder cleaners. 
Campaigners said any ban should apply to all products washed down the drain.

In a consultation published on Tuesday 
<https://consult.defra.gov.uk/marine/microbead-ban-proposals/>, the government 
said microbeads from personal care products account for less than 4.1% of all 
microplastics entering the ocean, so a ban solely on those would “have only a 
small impact.”

Microplastics killing fish before they reach reproductive age, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/02/microplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds>
“We are therefore taking this opportunity to ask for evidence on the extent of 
the environmental impacts of microbeads found in other products, to inform 
future UK actions to protect the marine environment,” officials wrote. Although 
a wider ban is not explicitly mentioned, the document says the evidence will 
inform “targeted, proportionate measures”.

A coalition of environmental groups – the Environmental Investigation Agency, 
Fauna & Flora International, Greenpeace UK and the Marine Conservation Society 
– welcomed the cosmetics ban but said it needed to be broader.

“It must cover all microplastics as marine life doesn’t distinguish between 
plastic from a face wash and plastic from a washing detergent, so the 
microbeads ban must cover all plastics in all household and industrial products 
that can go down our drains,” the groups said in a statement.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fhow-microbead-ban-could-help-solve-massive-problem-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20microbead%20ban%20could%20help%20solve%20a%20massive%20problem%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fhow-microbead-ban-could-help-solve-massive-problem-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20microbead%20ban%20could%20help%20solve%20a%20massive%20problem%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fhow-microbead-ban-could-help-solve-massive-problem-video&media=>
How the microbead ban could help solve a massive problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/sep/02/how-microbead-ban-could-help-solve-massive-problem-video>
Microbeads have been shown to stunt fish growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/02/microplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds>
 and increase their mortality rates when ingested during their development. It 
is not yet clear whether they pose a threat to human health through the food 
chain, but the UK’s chief medical officeris investigating that risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/uk-to-investigate-human-health-impact-of-microplastics>
.

More than 378,000 people have signed a petition 
<https://secure.greenpeace.org.uk/page/s/ban-microbeads> calling for a ban on 
microbeads in products, which many retailers and companies arealready on the 
verge of phasing out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/tesco-to-phase-out-microbeads-from-its-products>
. Nearly three quarters of major cosmetic companies will have ceased to include 
them in cosmetic products by 2017, well ahead of the ban at the year’s end.

Andrea Leadsom, the environment secretary, said microbeads were “incredibly 
damaging to our sea life” and urged shoppers to eschew products containing 
microbeads today, ahead of the ban. “Whether you’re shopping for a loved one, 
or picking up a bargain in the sales, I urge shoppers to check any rinse-off 
cosmetics they are buying are microbead free,” she said.

To protect oceans from microplastics the UK must work with Europe | Mary Creagh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/08/to-protect-oceans-from-microplastics-the-uk-must-work-with-europe>
Italy and France are in the process of implementing microbead bans in 
products, and other countries considering a ban include Ireland, South Korea, 
Taiwan, India and Australia. TheUS has already imposed  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/08/us-to-ban-soaps-other-products-containing-microbeads>
a ban, though campaigners have criticised some of its loopholes.

“Theresa May’s government has stepped up on this issue and now they need to 
see it through. We can’t allow microbeads to pour through those loopholes and 
into our oceans,” said Elisabeth Whitebread, oceans campaigner at Greenpeace.
 