
The deadline for Ucas applications is 6pm on Sunday 15 January. But if you 
miss it – be it due to indecision, delayed references or technological problems 
– don’t worry: there’s still time to land a place. Here are your other options:

Submit a late application

University league tables 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-league-tables-2017>
Ucas will process late applications received after 6pm on Sunday 15 January – 
up until the end of June, in fact. But there are no guarantees universities 
will give equal consideration to your application.


So while you’ll probably lose out on a place on a competitive course which 
receives more applications than places available, other courses may still 
consider you. Waste no time in contacting universities directly to find out if 
they will accept you.

There’s always Clearing

Ucas Clearing <https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing>, mainly used by 
those who miss out on places on exam results day, is also a route to university 
for those who missed the January deadline.

From July to September, universities across the UK will be taking applications 
to courses with leftover vacancies. Places are awarded on a first come, first 
served basis, and you can get in early if you’re not waiting on your results. 
14,900 students applied directly to Clearing and found a place last year.

No offers?

The Ucas Extra 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/apply-and-track/track-your-application/extra-choices>
 scheme opens in February for applicants who have either received no offers 
after applying, or have turned them all down. You can apply for as many courses 
as you like via Ucas Extra – but only one at a time, so prioritise your 
choices. According to Ucas,around 7,500 applicants 
<https://www.ucas.com/corporate/data-and-analysis/ucas-undergraduate-releases/ucas-undergraduate-analysis-reports/ucas-undergraduate-end-cycle-reports>
 were successfully accepted onto a course this way last year.

More on university admissions...

 * University admissions: ‘Good students are being love-bombed with offers’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/27/university-admissions-good-students-offers-a-levels>

 * Clearing is a gamble for worried students – and I lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/22/clearing-is-a-gamble-for-worried-students-and-i-lost>
 * The Guardian University guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityguide> 
Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 