
As a new year dawns, it is hard not to be dazzled by the current pace of 
technological change in food and agriculture. Only last month, news emerged of a
crop spray 
<http://naturalsciencenews.com/2016/12/15/researchers-develop-a-method-for-increasing-crop-yields-without-genetic-modification/>
 with the potential to increase the starch content in wheat grains, allowing 
for yield gains of up to 20%. This development comes hot on the heels of major
breakthroughs in gene-editing technologies 
<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/12/161205113217.htm> – using a 
powerful tool known asCrispr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/10/crispr-genome-editing-dna-upgrade-technology-genetic-disease>
 – over the course of 2016.


A future of continually increasing food supplies and ever more sophisticated 
manipulation of agro-ecosystems seems to be upon us.


'I was so hungry I ate water lilies': southern Africa's food crisis in a dozen 
dishes | John Vidal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/17/hungry-ate-water-lilies-southern-africa-food-crisis-dozen-dishes-crop-failure-drought-john-vidal>
However, there is a risk that these technologies blind us to the very real 
problems facing modern agriculture – problems that are rapidly undermining the 
previous round of technological advances.


While global crop yields rose rapidly in the early decades of the “green 
revolution”, productivity is now plateauing in many regions of the world. A2012 
meta-study <http://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms2296> found that in 24%-39% of 
areas growing maize, rice, wheat and soybean, yields either failed to improve, 
stagnated after initial gains, or collapsed.


Only slightly more than half of all global rice and wheat areas (57% and 56% 
respectively) are still experiencing yield increases. The areas where yields 
have stagnated include some of the wealthiest, most industrialised and most 
hi-tech production systems: more than one-third of the wheat crop in the US 
(mostly in the Great Plains) is affected, along with more than a third of the 
Argentine wheat crop, and harvests all across Europe.


Meanwhile, rice yields are plateauing in California and most European 
rice-growing areas. This trend is also evident in some 80% of rice crops in 
China and Indonesia – two of the world’s major rice producers. Worryingly, this 
may only be the tip of the iceberg.

The reason the productivity of industrial agriculture is now under threat is 
because it has been systematically degrading the human and natural capital on 
which it relies. Pests, viruses, fungi, bacteria and weeds are adapting to 
chemical pest management faster than ever:210 species of herbicide-resistant 
weeds <http://www.springer.com/la/book/9789400777958> have been identified 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/286056270_Herbicide_Resistant_Weeds>. 
Meanwhile, synthetic fertilisers are fast destroying the soil biota and its 
nutrient-recycling potential. This creates a dangerous treadmill effect: 
increasing resistance leads to increasing pesticide use, generating mounting 
costs for farmers and further environmental degradation. This in turn requires 
additional doses of nutrient application to keep squeezing productivity out of 
the soils.


Meanwhile, food systems are responsible for up to 29% of global greenhouse gas 
emissions 
<http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-environ-020411-130608> – 
and are therefore driving the climate instability that is itself the greatest 
threat to future agricultural productivity. A major chunk of these emissions 
come from large-scale monocultures and industrial animal feedlots in the global 
north, and from the loss of carbon sinks in the global south as land is cleared 
– often to make way for maize and soybean monocultures to export as animal feed.


Recent crop-breeding innovations may be impressive, but they do not hold 
answers to the most pressing question: namely, how to move away from industrial 
monocultures and the inevitable damage and vulnerability they bring. Onenew 
study <http://phys.org/news/2016-12-bowl-devastate-today-crops.html> suggests 
that a repeat of the Dust Bowl conditions of the 1930s – increasingly likely in 
a context of climate change – would wipe out 40% of US maize and soy crops, and 
30% of wheat. What matters most is resilience. And resilience cannot be 
delivered without rethinking the fundamental principles of our food and farming 
systems.


The risk is that new technologies simply give industrial agriculture a new 
lease of life and delay the inevitable shift to a fundamentally different model 
of agriculture.


A viable alternative exists in the shape of diversified agro-ecological 
systems. In other words, diversifying farms and farming landscapes – replacing 
synthetic chemical inputs, optimising biodiversity and stimulating interactions 
between different species, as part of holistic and regenerative strategies to 
build long-term soil fertility, healthy agro-ecosystems and secure livelihoods.


Southern Africa cries for help as El Niño and climate change savage maize 
harvest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/27/southern-africa-climate-change-drought-crop-failure>
Too often, these arguments are dismissed as technophobia. We are told that the 
opponents of industrial agriculture want to eschew technological advance and 
keep developing regions mired in non-mechanised, subsistence-style agriculture. 
However, this is a false dichotomy.

A transition to diversified agro-ecological systems is needed, whether the 
starting point is industrial agriculture or subsistence-style farming. 
Moreover, the agro-ecological alternative is hi-tech and knowledge intensive – 
it requires complex synergies to be built and sustained between different crop 
varieties and species, and between different farming systems (mixed 
crop-livestock systems, for instance).


The growing body of evidence reviewed by the International Panel of Experts on 
Sustainable Food Systems 
<http://www.ipes-food.org/images/Reports/UniformityToDiversity_FullReport.pdf> 
(iPES-Food) shows the huge potential of these systems to succeed where 
industrial systems are failing – namely in reconciling concerns such as food 
security, environmental and livelihood resilience, nutritional adequacy and 
social equity.

Crucially, where diversified systems raise productivity and improve 
livelihoods, they do so durably, performing particularly well under 
environmental stress and delivering production increases in the places where 
additional food is desperately needed. For example, the agro-ecologicalsystem 
of rise intensification <http://sri.ciifad.cornell.edu/> approach is securing 
and increasing rice yields around the world, while “push-pull” systems 
<http://push-pull.net> – controlling pests by pushing them away with repellent 
plants or pulling them towards decoy crops – are doubling and trebling maize 
production in Africa.


The social change that so often accompanies this shift paves the way for 
revaluing local farming within new and often shorter supply chains, providing 
vulnerable populations with a viable alternative to the high and volatile 
production costs of industrial commodity agriculture and the uncertainties of 
global markets.


The picture is far from complete. To date these systems have seen only minimal 
investment and support. Either way, the burden of proof is on the proponents of 
industrial agriculture to show how it can ever be productive and sustainable, 
with or without miracle breakthroughs. In the meantime, a less dazzling but 
highly compelling agro-ecological alternative is taking shape and transforming 
food systems around the world. It deserves our urgent attention.


• Olivier De Schutter is the former UN special rapporteur on the right to 
food, and co-chair ofiPES-Food. Emile Frison is the former director general of 
Bioversity International and the lead author of thefirst major report 
<http://www.ipes-food.org/images/Reports/UniformityToDiversity_FullReport.pdf> 
fromiPES-Food
 