
The cost of rescuing Monte dei Paschi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/22/monte-dei-paschi-the-history-of-the-worlds-oldest-bank>
 has escalated after the European Central Bank told the struggling Italian 
lender that it required €8.8bn (£7.5bn) to mend its finances.

The lender, Italy’s third-largest bank, has tried in vain to arrange a €5bn 
rescue package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/11/monte-dei-paschi-siena-emergency-cash-injection-european-central-bank>
 with private investors but the ECB said the sum would not have been enough.

Monte dei Paschi, whose history can be traced back to 1472, said it had asked 
the ECB to approve a “precautionary recapitalisation”, a type of state 
intervention that allows the institution receiving it to stay solvent.

The government is now expected to inject €6.5bn into the bank, according to 
reports 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/27/italy-set-to-put-in-around-65-bn-euros-to-salvage-monte-paschi-report.html>
, taking its stake in to about 70%. The remainder will come from institutional 
investors seeing their bonds converted into shares, ridding the bank of about 
€2bn in debt.

In a statement, Monte dei Paschi said the ECB had written to the Italian 
finance ministry warning that the bank’s liquidity position – its ability to 
turn assets into hard cash – had suffered a “rapid deterioration”.

This was partly down to a large number of loans made to people who cannot pay 
them back, among the factors that saw Monte dei Paschi come last out of 51 
banks in stress tests to check lenders’ resilience to economic shocks.


“The bank has quickly started talks with the competent authorities to 
understand the methodologies underlying the ECB’s calculations and introduce 
the measures for a precautionary recapitalisation,” it said in a statement.

Monte dei Paschi said the ECB had told it that the €8.8bn bailout figure was 
determined by theresults of stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/30/eu-bank-stress-tests-vulnerability-of-barclays-and-rbs-under-scrutiny>
 that the bank failed this summer. It also noted that the bank’s liquidity 
position had worsened between the end of November and 21 December.

The European commission said on Friday it would work with Rome to establish 
conditions for a bailout of Monte dei Paschi, likely to involvetapping a €20bn 
rescue pot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/italys-20bn-bailout-fund-to-rescue-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena>
 approved by the Italian government last week.

But the proposals have not met with support from more hawkish official in the 
ECB. Jens Weidmann, the president of Germany’s Bundesbank and a member of the 
ECB’s governing council, said the Italian government ought toconsider whether 
it should rescue the bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/monte-dei-paschi-bailout-shouldnt-be-seen-as-a-done-deal-says-ecb-member>
 if it was in a bad financial state.

“For the measures planned by the Italian government the bank has to be 
financially healthy at its core,” he said in an article published in the German 
newspaper Bild. “The money cannot be used to cover losses that are already 
expected. All this must be carefully examined.”

Monte dei Paschi has struggled to recover from the 2008 banking crisis, when 
it paid Santander €9bn (£7.6bn) for Banca Antonveneta. The deal doubled the 
size of the lender, transforming it into Italy’s third largest behind UniCredit 
and Intesa Sanpaolo.

Three years ago, Monte dei Paschi’s problems worsened and it was forced to ask 
the government for €4bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/feb/01/mps-bank-siena-scandal> amid 
a scandal over loss-making derivatives contracts and alleged fraud. It will now 
go back to the government for funds after talks with private investors failed, 
with Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund thought to have scuppered the plan by 
refusing to take part. The Italian government already has a4% stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/monte-dei-paschi-bailout-worlds-oldest-bank-eu>
 in Monte dei Paschi.
 