
Like its Adriatic neighbour Croatia, Montenegro is a rapidly-growing travel 
destination: in 2016 there were nearly 1.5 million visits from international 
tourists – up 6.9% on 2015. But although the country is known for eco-tourism 
and as a “soft adventure <http://montenegro-eco.com/us/soft-adventure/>” 
hotspot, tourism development hasn’t been without controversy.

Despite local concern and protests, many concrete resorts have sprung up. In 
coastal Budva, for example, international developers were recently given 
permission to convert asecond world war concentration camp on Mamula island 
into a luxury resort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/17/montenegro-defends-decision-to-turn-ex-concentration-camp-into-resort>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa372d85fff7eb1cebfdb62256856ba154c7311e2%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Montenegro%E2%80%99s%20pristine%20Lake%20Skadar%20threatened%20by%20new%20resort&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Montenegro%E2%80%99s%20pristine%20Lake%20Skadar%20threatened%20by%20new%20resort&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa372d85fff7eb1cebfdb62256856ba154c7311e2%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Pelicans in the Skadar Lake national park Photograph: Sevaljevic/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
The latest controversy involves Lake Skadar national park 
<http://www.visit-montenegro.com/tourism/national-parks/lake-skadar/>, a 
protected wilderness area and southern Europe’s largest lake. According toa 
report in New Scientist 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/2116873-largest-lake-in-southern-europe-under-threat-from-eco-resort/>
, “more than 280 bird species are found at this largely pristine lake, as well 
as nearly 50 fish species, 18 of which are found nowhere else, earning it a 
place on the Ramsar Convention list of Wetlands of International Importance”. 
It is under threat after the government gave the go-ahead for the building of a 
luxury resort, Porto Skadar Lake. Theresort will sleep 600 guests in 30 villas 
and feature a marina 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/2116873-largest-lake-in-southern-europe-under-threat-from-eco-resort/>
. Several hydropower projects are also planned, on the lake’s major tributary, 
further endangering biodiversity.

At present, the only thing that disturbs the waters on the shores of the lake 
is wildlife (including the rare Dalmatian pelican and endangered otters) and 
the odd monk in a boat from the 14th-century Kom monastery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffea56ce0926bad6ce2b2246fa1a8343941973b9b%2F0_397_6113_3669%2F6113.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Montenegro%E2%80%99s%20pristine%20Lake%20Skadar%20threatened%20by%20new%20resort&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Montenegro%E2%80%99s%20pristine%20Lake%20Skadar%20threatened%20by%20new%20resort&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffea56ce0926bad6ce2b2246fa1a8343941973b9b%2F0_397_6113_3669%2F6113.jpg>
 The Kom monastery on a hillside above Skadar lake. Photograph: Konstantin 
Voronov/Getty Images 
Local conservationists know that it will take more than a monk’s prayers to 
stop the hotel development, especially as the bulldozers are now in place and 
preliminary digging started last month, with a completion date in 2019. 
Conservationists consider this to be a slippery slope towards destruction of 
the park.

“The government said it had a public discussion about the plans and no one 
turned up, but it was only advertised a week in advance, and in a newspaper no 
one reads,” said activist Milan Knezevic, who has set up theSave Skadar Lake 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/saveskadarlake/> page, as well as a Twitter 
site <https://twitter.com/SaveSkadarLake> and a petition on change.org 
<https://www.change.org/p/government-of-montenegro-save-skadar-lake-last-european-wilderness>
. Supporters protested on 20 December and gained signatures committing to a 
moratorium on the construction from nearly half of the country’s government 
ministers. Yet the digging still began eight days later.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F564bb429665b0701208a02cb50f6423dbd5922c0%2F0_0_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Montenegro%E2%80%99s%20pristine%20Lake%20Skadar%20threatened%20by%20new%20resort&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Montenegro%E2%80%99s%20pristine%20Lake%20Skadar%20threatened%20by%20new%20resort&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmontenegro-lake-skadar-threatened-by-new-resort-tourism-boom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F564bb429665b0701208a02cb50f6423dbd5922c0%2F0_0_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Ruin of an Ottoman fortress on Grmozur Island, Skadar Lake national park. 
Photograph: Egmont Strigl/Getty Images/Westend61 RM 
Montenegro’s tourism ministry claims all procedures “were in accordance with 
the law and good practice”, something Knezevic contests. “There is no control 
of illegal activities in the national park and any claim by the government that 
the resort will be closely monitored is a fantasy. There are already more than 
100,000 illegal buildings in Montenegro. The government is planning to 
privatise all five national parks inMontenegro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/montenegro>. I don’t want to speak about my 
country’s beauty in the past tense, as we’re already doing about parts of the 
Montenegrin coast.”

In the UN’s International Year of Sustainable Tourism for Development 
<http://www2.unwto.org/tourism4development2017>, plans for these resort aren’t 
ticking any environmentally responsible tourism boxes says Justin Francis, 
founder of Responsible Travel: “I hope the Montenegrin government will 
recognise the long-term ecological and economic value of protecting Lake Skadar 
from destructive, large-scale tourism developments.”

As one can assume the monks who live on the lake would say, amen to that. 

• For more details see skadarlake.org 
<http://skadarlake.org/#saveskadarlakechange.org/p/government-of-montenegro-save-skadar-lake-last-european-wilderness>
 