
Bombs were falling in the distance, shaking the house like a hurricane. We 
were in the basement, hiding. “Don’t worry,” a father next to me told his 
daughter. “It’s just a giant walking through our city.” Suddenly, a flash of 
blinding light tore through the ceiling and I raised my hands protectively over 
my head and let out an involuntary little shriek.
Park City, Utah 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/nov/2016-11-17T16:47:21.html> 
Yes, virtual reality stole the show at this year’s Sundance Film Festival, 
Robert Redford’s annual shindig of snowy mountains and independent movies in 
Park City, Utah. At the New Frontiers exhibition, goggled people were tiptoeing 
gingerly across flat floors like they were on a tight rope, and a woman covered 
in sensors endlessly circled a blacked out room. Everyone seemed to be wired up 
– pointing and ducking at absolutely nothing. It felt like an asylum for the 
chronically entertained.

But one thing VR can’t yet imitate is the rush of the real outdoors. Luckily, 
there’s plenty of that nearby, which was the other reason I was here: to 
combine mountains and movies, popcorn and pistes. For a snow-loving film buff, 
a trip to Park City during Sundance was the ultimate winter treat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F755fa3ada6a333cf9ebb6e6d2c4ad40230260dc0%2F0_17_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Movies%20and%20mountains%3A%20mixing%20film%20and%20skiing%20at%20the%20Sundance%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Movies%20and%20mountains%3A%20mixing%20film%20and%20skiing%20at%20the%20Sundance%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F755fa3ada6a333cf9ebb6e6d2c4ad40230260dc0%2F0_17_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Visitors try out virtual reality kit at the Sundance Film Festival. 
Photograph: Alamy 
This year it got a little better too. After a $50m investment, Park City Ski 
Resort, home of the US Ski Team and the 2002 Winter Olympics, expanded into 
neighbouring Canyons, built a new gondola to link the two resorts and created 
the largest ski area in the US: 17 peaks and 7,300 acres of skiable terrain. 
Hitting the slopes here isn’t so much an outing as it is a full-on expedition, 
albeit one fuelled by hot chocolate and whisky toddies at the bottom of every 
run.

The festival itself is a strange mix of ski bum and movie mogul. But it works. 
“You see a few actresses in five-inch heels,” one local told me, with a wicked 
glint in her eye. “But they soon fall on their ass in the snow.”

That’s not to say there’s no glamour. I narrowly missed Steve Carell’s bum as 
he jumped into a taxi, and I shared a ski lift with Olympic Gold freestyle 
mogulist Hannah Kearney, who had just given Adrian Grenier (Vince from 
Entourage) a lesson – which was cool on two counts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9774b6695f0e5988720b73c6338e834744726ae%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Movies%20and%20mountains%3A%20mixing%20film%20and%20skiing%20at%20the%20Sundance%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Movies%20and%20mountains%3A%20mixing%20film%20and%20skiing%20at%20the%20Sundance%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9774b6695f0e5988720b73c6338e834744726ae%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
 The Egyptian Theatre on Main Street in Park City. Photograph: Arthur 
Mola/Invision/AP 
There might have been more – celeb-spotting is quite tricky in a blizzard – 
but the St Regis, where I stayed in neighbouring Deer Valley, was all the 
A-list I needed: outdoor hot tubs right on the slopes, a funicular railway just 
for getting to the lobby and a bloke who sabres bottles of champagne (as in 
cuts the cork off with an actual sword) every night. Eat your heart out, Vinny.

But it was the skiing that really stood out. Starting at the far western end 
of Park City, it took me a whole day to ski to its eastern edge, seven miles 
away, without ever repeating a run. I raced through steep pine forests pillowed 
with heavy snow and frozen aspens, the Wasatch mountains rolling by in swirls 
of purple and brilliant white. The runs were long and varied, the snow light as 
air.

And because Sundance was on, the slopes felt empty. “It’s the best time to 
ski,” one local winked. On my last day, after a storm, I had my first taste of 
Utah’s legendary powder, dropping into a steep bowl and gliding through the 
trees in mesmeric silence. It felt like flying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57e350fa229add7e6cf9e434f075d5ff1cb51ab2%2F0_129_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Movies%20and%20mountains%3A%20mixing%20film%20and%20skiing%20at%20the%20Sundance%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Movies%20and%20mountains%3A%20mixing%20film%20and%20skiing%20at%20the%20Sundance%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fskiing-sundance-film-festival-park-city-utah-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57e350fa229add7e6cf9e434f075d5ff1cb51ab2%2F0_129_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 On the slopes near the Deer Valley resort. Photograph: Alamy 
I saw great films too, from weird to genuinely moving. I flipped from a 
bizarre number about a woman falling way too in love with a wolf to a 
documentary about competitive endurance tickling. One minute I was wiping my 
eyes at the incredibly powerful Jim: The James Foley Story, and immediately 
afterwards I was trying to keep my dinner down at a gross-out midnight 
screening of Antibirth. It was like falling down a rabbit-hole of kaleidoscopic 
sensations. That’s what makes Sundance special – it’s a pic’n’mix for the eyes. 
Screenings were packed, people cheered, and directors spoke. It was about as 
raucous as going to the movies gets, but not pretentious. Before I arrived I 
thought the town might become Hollywood, but I was pleased to see Hollywood 
become the town.

It’s also beautiful: a western-style main street on the mountain’s edge, lit 
with fairy lights and packed with bars, restaurants and galleries. But, during 
Sundance, you need to plan ahead. Everything sells out, accommodation is at a 
premium and cinema tickets packages are eye-wateringly expensive and must be 
booked well in advance or it’s fastest finger first (the real Sundance wouldn’t 
have had a problem with this) on thefestival app waiting list 
<https://ewaitlist.sundance.org/>. There’s also a tangible difference between 
the industry-led first half of the festival and the film-fan second.
 Main Street in Park City during the Sundance Film Festival. Photograph: Fred 
Hayes/Getty Images 
In the end, it was the New Frontiers programming, celebrating its 10th 
anniversary this year, that really caught my eye. There were more than 30 VR 
experiences on display, from seeing the forest through the eyes of insects and 
owls to living with sea gypsies and Maasai warriors. I watched my body 
transform into a dark angel and flapped my arms to fly away, I travelled from 
the blue icebergs of Iceland to a motorbike shop in Japan and then, in the
Guardian’s own project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/6x9--a-virtual-experience-of-solitary-confinement>
, I spent six agonising minutes in a solitary confinement cell. These were more 
than just films, I realised; these were tools for creating genuine empathy. The 
more I saw, the more I felt on a cusp of a brave new world – like witnessing 
the switch from radio to TV. Why watch someone else’s story when you can be the 
star of your own?

• The trip was provided by Visit Utah <https://www.visitutah.com/uk>, Visit 
Park City <https://www.visitparkcity.com/> and Deer Valley 
<http://www.deervalley.com/>. Accommodation was provided by St Regis Deer Valley
 <http://www.stregisdeervalley.com/> (doubles from $313). America As You Like It
 
<http://www.americaasyoulikeit.com/tailor-made-itineraries/west/south-west/utah/utah.aspx>
has a seven-night holiday to Park City departing 19 January 2017, from 
£1,842pp, including flights, transfers and accommodation at the St Regis Deer 
Valley but excluding festival tickets.Sundance 2017 
<http://www.sundance.org/festivals/sundance-film-festival/get-tickets> runs 
from 19-29 January, 10-ticket packages cost $500-$600, off-peak pass sold out, 
more expensive packages still available
 