
The year’s biggest music release is surely a 200-CD box set 
<http://www.mozart225.com/> containing everything – or as near as possible – 
Mozart wrote, released 225 years after the composer’s death on 5 December 1791. 
We asked a handful of the 600 stars who feature on the recordings to pick their 
desert-island pieces.

Renée Fleming  <http://www.reneefleming.com/>(soprano)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJJn4e2DtoPg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJJn4e2DtoPg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJJn4e2DtoPg&media=>
Listen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JJn4e2DtoPg> to Anthony Rolfe Johnson 
sing Idomeneo 
I could never choose just one Mozart piece, but Idomeneo would be near the 
top. I remember snagging a standing room ticket to hearAnthony Rolfe Johnson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JJn4e2DtoPg> in this opera. I heard humanity 
incarnate in that music: leadership, goodness, and the meaning and use of 
power; all wrought by Mozart aged only 24. As a Juilliard student theDa Ponte 
trilogy 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/news/look-ahead-to-a-trio-of-classic-operas-from-mozart-and-da-ponte>
 at the Metropolitan Opera with the great singers of the day left an indelible 
impression on me. Those works showed me what opera could be – encompassing the 
full spectrum of human existence, most especially the things that do not 
change. Who has matched Mozart’s brilliance in the Act II finale of Figaro, the 
soulful distress of the Countess, and the bursting boyhood of Cherubino? Or, in 
Cosi fan Tutte, the distinct musical portrayal of the loves of two different 
couples?

Alfred Brendel <http://www.alfredbrendel.com/> (pianist, writer, poet)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqYC5FwwO9x8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqYC5FwwO9x8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqYC5FwwO9x8&media=>
Listen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qYC5FwwO9x8> to Alfred Brendel play 
Mozart’s Piano Concerto No 9 
The “Jeunehomme” piano concerto K271 is Mozart’s first great masterpiece. He 
was 21 when he composed it, and he was not a teenage genius like Mendelssohn. 
It is as if his earlier concertos are by another composer. Here, though, 
suddenly there is a structure and the most wonderful ideas, formal ideas, and a 
vision of everything the classical piano concerto could become, in subtlety and 
richness. For me, it is a perfect work, with that special freshness of 
something done for the first time and succeeding at the same time. I even find 
that he did not surpass this piece in the later piano concertos.


Francesco Piemontesi <http://francescopiemontesi.com/> (pianist)

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuL3xZ8Qlhro&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuL3xZ8Qlhro>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuL3xZ8Qlhro&media=>
Listen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uL3xZ8Qlhro> to the Sinfonia Concertante
I got to know the Sinfonia Concertante K364 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uL3xZ8Qlhro> by chance – at the end of the 
Peter Greenaway film Drowning by Numbers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oTLfuOQRiEI> one hears the whole second 
movement accompanying the final sequence. I was transfixed by the sonority 
Mozart brings out of the two solo instruments, by the construction and the 
interplay of the musical phrases, the daring harmonies and the orchestration, 
and the way these elements are combined to create such a unique atmosphere. I 
can’t think of another composition of Mozart that moves me more deeply. Like 
the smile of the Mona Lisa one never knows if the dark side of the piece 
actually grins at you, and if the grief is at the same time a consolation. 
Great masterworks often suggest many meanings but this one keeps on telling me 
a different story every time I listen to it.

Anne Sofie von Otter <http://www.annesofievonotter.com/> (mezzo soprano)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxkEl0KBtLcs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxkEl0KBtLcs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxkEl0KBtLcs&media=>
Listen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xkEl0KBtLcs> to Harnoncourt conduct 
Symphonies 39, 40 and 41. 
For me, the Mozart eye- (and ear-)opener was Nikolaus Harnoncourt’s recordings 
of Idomeneo andthe symphonies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xkEl0KBtLcs>. 
What layers of drama, passion, sensuality and wonder lie there waiting to be 
discovered! Singing-wise, it was the role of Sesto inLa Clemenza di Tito 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hL_afWlsWb0> that made me a Mozart fan. It’s 
such a rich role musically speaking, chunks of meaty recitative, with two of 
the most wonderful arias ever written and plenty of ensembles. But ultimately 
my top prize goes to Idomeneo with its orchestral colours and daring 
through-composition, a beautiful, moving and very suitable drama to take to a 
desert island.

Dame Mitsuko Uchida <http://www.mitsukouchida.com/> (pianist)

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPftH8FVzIRY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPftH8FVzIRY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPftH8FVzIRY&media=>
Listen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PftH8FVzIRY> to Mitsuko Uchida perform 
the Piano Concerto No 24 
The Piano Concerto in C Minor, K491 no 24 has a mysterious, bleakly dark 
grandeur. To me, it’s clear he wrote the opening by twisting around the opening 
of theFantasy in C minor K475 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6suSHZkW70c> – 
it is so haunting and shocking. Mozart uses the different emotional colours of 
the winds very cleverly. That bleakness of the flute in the first movement 
gives me shivers every time I hear it, while there are those wonderful, almost 
warm-sounding clarinet sections in A flat major in the slow movement, and then 
– the most amazing moment after all the darkness – the way the C major 
variations begin in the oboe in the Finale. The whole piece is so inspired.

Trevor Pinnock <http://www.trevorpinnock.com/> (conductor)

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUkO-k6Zn47Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUkO-k6Zn47Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUkO-k6Zn47Y&media=>
Listen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UkO-k6Zn47Y> to Mozart’s Symphony No 26 
I was about 16 when I was transported to a new world by a recording of Bruno 
Walter conducting three very contrasted symphonies by Mozart: in G minor K183 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xT_MqJmG5Xs>, A major K201 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CpW_B00F6Vk> and C major K200 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=181Ed8wbgRs>. I now know most of Mozart’s 
symphonies so well that I would be happy to carry them to a desert island in my 
memory, but for a musical postcard to slip in my pocket I would take Mozart’s 
Symphony in E flat K184. Eight minutes of pure delight.

Robert Levin <http://www.rayfieldallied.com/artists/robert-levin/> 
(fortepianist)

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmf711o8jAQA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmf711o8jAQA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmf711o8jAQA&media=>
Listen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mf711o8jAQA> to the Piano Concerto No 23
There are so many Mozart desert-island pieces (the terzettino from Così fan 
tutte <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Wi7UsXW1As>, the slow movement of the G 
major violin concerto <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LjmMdQaQkHM>, Martern 
aller Arten <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ruM8d4vcGec> from Die Entführung 
aus dem Serail, the slow movement from the String Quintet K593 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tISO7C4LX0U> for starters) that the choice of 
a single one is a cruel task. A different day, a different choice. Today’s is 
themiddle movement of the A major concerto K488 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mf711o8jAQA> – the only piece Mozart ever 
wrote in the desolate key of F sharp minor. A more heartbreaking musical 
utterance is inconceivable, although Beethoven rendered it full homage in the 
slow movement of his “Hammerklavier” Sonata.

Sir Neville Marriner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/04/neville-marriner-1924-2016-he-was-one-of-us-academy-st-martin-fields-appreciation>
 (the late conductor gave us his thoughts earlier this year)

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DturpKltUvfk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DturpKltUvfk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DturpKltUvfk&media=>
Listen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=turpKltUvfk> to Die Schuldigkeit des 
ersten Gebots 
I’d name the rarely performed work, his sacred drama Die Schuldigkeit des 
ersten Gebots <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=turpKltUvfk> K35, which embraces 
all the youthful charm of the 11-year old Mozart; but my favourite work: the
Requiem <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=neDnpgZPPvY>. That Mozart left it 
incomplete makes it all the more affecting. While the day of judgment and hope 
for salvation are expressed in quite austere idioms, it is music of such 
dynamism that you can understand its place in the heart of most Mozart lovers, 
and forgive those composers and editors who have tried to become part of this 
work with their additions and subtractions. The fabric of the work is the 
essence of Mozart – the composer who ultimately provides the most sophisticated 
human emotional experience of all.

 * Mozart 225: the New Complete Edition <http://www.mozart225.com/> is out now 
on Decca and Deutsche Grammophon
 