
Theresa May has been urged to stop the Green Investment Bank 
<http://www.greeninvestmentbank.com/> being “killed off” by a sale to private 
firm Macquarie, amid fears the assets will be stripped and its environmental 
purpose abandoned.

MPs from across the parties raised concerns about the proposed sale in the 
House of Commons, afterCaroline Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/britain-theresa-may-build-unstable-trident-heathrow-hinkley-point>
, co-leader of the Green party, called a debate arguing the whole process 
should be stopped.

Selling off the bank I founded could be the final nail for green Conservatism 
| Vince Cable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/selling-off-green-investment-bank-final-nail-green-conservatism>
Nick Hurd, an energy minister, refused even to confirm that Macquarie was the 
preferred bidder, citing commercial sensitivity.

But Lucas launched into an attack on the Australian investment bank, saying it 
had a “very, very worrying and dubious track record”. She said: “This preferred 
bidder, Macquarie, not only has a dismal and terrible environmental record, it 
also has an appalling track record of asset-stripping. So why has the 
government given preferred bidder status to this company?”

She added: “Will the minister admit that this selling off could lead to the 
bank being fatally undermined as an enduring institution? Will he stop the 
killing off of theGreen Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank>? Will he halt 
the sale process with immediate effect?”


The Green Investment Bank was set up under the coalition with £3.8bn of 
government money, with the aim of “greening the economy”, but George Osborne, 
the former chancellor, took the decision tosell off a majority share 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/25/green-investment-bank-tories-14bn-sell-pay-down-deficit>
.

Hurd insisted independent trustees would have a special share to safeguard the 
environmental purpose of the bank under its new ownership. He also did not 
appear opposed to the sale of some of the Green Investment Bank’s assets after 
privatisation, saying: “Let’s not get into a position where we say holding on 
to assets is good in itself.”

Hurd said: “Potential bidders are interested in the Green Investment Bank 
precisely because of its green specialism. We are asking potential investors to 
confirm their commitment to Green Investment Bank’s green values and investment 
principles and how they propose to protect them, as part of their bids for the 
company.

“In addition, the government has approved the creation of a special share, 
held by independent trustees to protect Green Investment Bank’s green purposes 
in future. The sale is commercially sensitive, so I cannot comment on the 
identity of any bidders or the discussions taking place between the government 
and potential bidders.”

Hurd added: “It is precisely because we want the Green Investment Bank to be 
able to do more, unfettered from the constraints of the state, that we are 
seeking to put it into the private sector.”

However, Lucas’s concerns were echoed by a number of Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>. Peter Aldous, MP for 
Waveney, said the bank was a tremendous success story and catalyst for 
investment in the green economy. “There is a concern that it won’t be able to 
perform that role in future. Will my honourable friend consider a pause to the 
process?” he said.

Greg Barker, a Tory peer and former climate change minister, has also written 
to the prime minister urging her to reconsider over fears the state-owned green 
bank isnot sufficiently protected against the risk of being broken up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2017/jan/09/green-investment-bank-sale-theresa-may-macquarie>
.


Clive Lewis, Labour’s shadow business secretary, called on the government to 
stop the sale entirely. “The Tories are reportedly preparing to sell it off to 
a well-known asset stripper, with no guarantees that its green purpose, or any 
kind of public influence, will be maintained,” he said.

“The government should stop the sale of the green investment bank today. 
Failure to do so will confirm that, however much they try to steal our clothes, 
underneath it’s still the same old Tories.“

Vince Cable, the Lib Dem former business secretary, has also written to the 
government arguing that the special share would not prevent a breakup.

A Macquarie spokeswoman declined to comment on the debate or reports about the 
future of the Green Investment Bank but pointed towards a statement about its 
record. The statement said: “Macquarie – and its managed funds – is one of the 
world’s largest investors in renewable energy, having invested or arranged more 
than £8.5bn of investment into renewable energy projects since 2010.”
 