
The committee of MPs which questioned Sir Dave Brailsford, Shane Sutton and 
the British Cycling president, Bob Howden, over the Jiffy bag delivered toSir 
Bradley Wiggins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> at the 2011 
Dauphiné Libéré is unlikely to hear more witnesses until UK Anti-Doping has 
published its inquiry into possible wrongdoing at the governing body and Team 
Sky.

“The Ukad report is the next step, then we will decide whether to take further 
evidence from witnesses,” Damian Collins MP, chair of the culture, media and 
sport committee, told the Guardian. The MP added that his concern would be that 
otherwise he and his colleagues could replicate the work of Ukad, which began 
looking intoBritish Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> 
and Sky after the Jiffy bag story emerged in September.

Bradley Wiggins announces retirement from professional cycling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/28/bradley-wiggins-announces-retirement-from-cycling>
The content of the Jiffy bag is now the core issue in the story. Collins added 
that Ukad’s findings on this could trigger further hearings if they were 
“inconclusive” and these might involve Simon Cope, the BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> coach who delivered the package to 
Sky, and Dr Richard Freeman, the doctor who administered its contents – stated 
by Brailsford in front of the MPs to be the decongestant Fluimucil – to 
Wiggins. Fluimucil is a freely available medicine that does not figure on the 
banned list. All parties deny any wrongdoing.

Collins also confirmed that British Cycling had been unable to supply his 
committee with documentation to back up Brailsford’s assertion that the package 
contained Fluimucil, something that the MP clearly found surprising. “What 
they’ve given us is a letter saying they understand it was Fluimucil, but they 
could have said they had checked the evidence [for that]. No assurance could be 
given.”

The information supplied by British Cycling to the MPs included Cope’s travel 
details through his expense claim, which came to almost £600, reimbursed to 
British Cycling byTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky>.

Asked about Collins’s concerns regarding the lack of information over the 
package’s contents, Howden told the BBC Today programme on Thursday morning: 
“We forwarded the details around the transmittal of the package to the select 
committee. Ukad have the access to the records, they have the gateway, they 
have the keys to our medical room and all our records, so it would be for Ukad 
to confirm that, not British Cycling at this stage.”
 