
Shares in Premier Foods <https://www.theguardian.com/business/premierfoods>, 
the maker of Mr Kipling cakes, Ambrosia rice pudding and Oxo stock cubes, have 
fallen sharply after it warned profits would be hit by rising costs linked to 
the fall in the pound since the Brexit vote.

Following a tough quarter in the run-up to Christmas, Premier said annual 
trading profits would be 10% lower than previously expected. City analysts had 
pencilled in trading profits of £130m and adjusted pre-tax profits of £86m.

The food producer blamed rises in commodity prices in the past 12 months. This 
was exacerbated by the slide in sterling since the June referendum, which had 
further driven up the cost of key ingredients such as sugar, cocoa, butter, 
wheat and palm oil, many of which are imported from abroad.

Premier shares crashed more than 16% to 40.18p.

The company, which rejected a £1.5bn takeover offer from US food group 
McCormick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/17/premier-foods-mr-kipling-says-sales-rises-sign-thrive-independently>
, worth 65p a share, last April, reiterated it would have to pass on some of 
the cost increases to retailers by pushing through “limited price increases 
where these cannot be avoided”.It has been haggling with big supermarket groups 
such as Tesco and Sainsbury’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/prices-oxo-bisto-mr-kipling-pound-brexit-premier-foods>
 about price hikes of 5-6% on some ranges and this is taking longer than 
expected.

Premier’s sales have taken a hit because shoppers have been switching to 
cheaper, non-branded products and because supermarkets are running fewer 
multi-buy offers. The firm’s non-branded grocery sales rose 13% while branded 
sales dropped 3.8% in the 13 weeks to 31 December.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmr-kipling-makers-shares-in-exceedingly-sharp-fall-as-profits-sliced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed1200385fb33b6401e150a7c8f1a6c9e34b9577%2F0_281_6090_3654%2F6090.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Kipling%20maker's%20shares%20in%20exceedingly%20sharp%20fall%20as%20profits%20sliced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmr-kipling-makers-shares-in-exceedingly-sharp-fall-as-profits-sliced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Kipling%20maker%27s%20shares%20in%20exceedingly%20sharp%20fall%20as%20profits%20sliced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmr-kipling-makers-shares-in-exceedingly-sharp-fall-as-profits-sliced%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed1200385fb33b6401e150a7c8f1a6c9e34b9577%2F0_281_6090_3654%2F6090.jpg>
 Phil Bentley, CEO of Mitie, is holding crisis meetings over Brexit-related 
issues. Photograph: Mint Photography/Alamy 
Outsourcing firm Mitie also blamed Brexit-related issues on Wednesday as it 
issued its third profit warning since September. Mitie shares were the biggest 
faller on the FTSE-250, with a near-7% drop to 191.7p.

The company now expects to make an underlying profit of £60m to £70m in the 
year to 31 March. It said clients were deferring decisions on new contracts and 
delaying investment plans in the wake of the Brexit vote, in particular in its 
property management and technical facilities management divisions. Mitie’s 
cleaning division is also struggling.

Pound soars but FTSE falls after Theresa May's Brexit speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/pound-ftse-theresa-may-brexit-speech-sterling-dollar>
The firm brought in a new chief executive last October, Phil Bentley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/mitie-outsourcing-chief-executive-ruby-mcgregor-smith-steps-down>
, who used to run British Gas and Cable & Wireless Communications. He has held 
crisis meetings over the last two days to discuss strategy and reshuffle 
Mitie’s senior management.

In November, Mitie said it would pull out of its healthcare business, which 
provides home care for the elderly. The £128m cost of writing off the business
plunged Mitie into a £100m pre-tax loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/mitie-withdraws-healthcare-second-profit-warning-shares>
 for the first half of the year.

Brexit has been partly blamed for the threat to 280 jobs at the Pizza Factory 
in Nottingham, owned by food giant 2 Sisters. It has a workforce of 781. The 
Unite union is holding crunch talks with the company on Wednesday, before 
planned industrial action next week.

The union said the company’s new year message to employees was: “As (I) am 
sure you all know, we are in an extremely challenging economic environment 
following Brexit. We are facing very significant commodity and utility 
inflation on top of the national living wage increases. At the same time, 
retailer competition is intensifying, with growth harder to come by and value a 
key theme.”
 