
Some homes are charmingly eccentric; others seem more like dumps – and the 
change from one to the other can be sudden, as with my own. Often, the arrival 
of visitors can trigger this change. In they come, and then somehow I can see 
clearly that my home is a pigsty. Look at the globs of dirt clogging up the 
bottom of the radiators. The drips and blobs on the paintwork, the little 
blankets of dust along the top of the skirting boards, the trails of dog 
prints. Shame. I bet the visitors have all seen it and pretended not to notice.

As well as the public shame when this dirt shows up, there’s the private inner 
turmoil when it peaks – a feeling of self-loathing and complete loss of 
control, an end of desire to do anything at all because the clean-up job seems 
insurmountable. How has it got to this? What is wrong with me? Why do I not 
wipe, sweep and scrub surfaces regularly, like normal people?

Last week, Rosemary and I visited Olivia, whose home seemed to us beautiful in 
every way. Full but not cluttered, every item attractive and clean, but not 
poncy, as if she had chosen everything rather than just somehow ended up with 
it. How did she do it? It gave me a sort of kick-start, and I returned to my 
hovel and began the fight back to life. One radiator bottom, several yards of 
skirting and the tortoise’s house are now spotless. It’s a start.

At least I am not alone. Mavis’s downstairs neighbour – whose flat is 
spotless, tasteful and minimalist – came asking if she might have a bath 
because her boiler had broken down. But as Mavis ushered the neighbour into her 
bathroom, she spotted the coating of filth and grime. Deeply ashamed, Mavis 
pretended she was about to have the bathroom decorated. What a shock, because 
she’s always thought herself anything but bourgeois.

Even Fielding puts the toothpaste lids on for visitors. “You’ve got to, 
haven’t you?” says he. “We’re all bourgeois. Except you. You’re genuinely a bit 
odd.” Is that a compliment?
 