
Natalie Portman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman> is 
disarmingly self-effacing for an Oscar winner with a good chance to net a 
second golden statue next month. “I usually see a movie once when it comes out 
at the premiere and then never see it again,” she told theGuardian last summer. 
“Usually I cringe through the premiere and hate everything I do. The less I’m 
in a movie, the more I like it.”

If ever Portman is in need of a confidence boost, she’d do well to glance over 
the ecstatic reviews lavished uponJackie, her latest film. For taking on 
arguably the biggest challenge of her career by playing Jacqueline Kennedy 
Onassis, one of the most enigmatic and beloved women in American history, 
Portman has received plaudits so complimentary they rival those she got for her 
Oscar-winning performance as a doomed ballerina inBlack Swan.

Variety praised Portman’s portrayal as “complex” and “meticulously shaded”. 
“To watch Portman’s every move is to not only watch history being recreated, 
but to also witness history being made,” wrote Barry Hertz of theGlobe and Mail
. “No one will ever be able to touch this role again. Or, at least, no one 
should.”

Portman doesn’t much resemble the former First Lady; she does however nail her 
breathy and docile-sounding voice, without letting the affectations get the 
better of her. Tom Hanks, speaking at the Palm Springs film festival last week, 
reckons it’s Portman’s “unknowable mystery” that made her “the only actor” to 
star in director Pablo Larraín’s intimate portrait.

Hanks is right. As written by Noah Oppenheim, Kennedy Onassis is presented as 
a fascinating blend of contradictions: testy with press, vulnerable when 
prodded, fiery when challenged and timid when faced with the decorum of the 
White House.

Likewise, Portman is something of an enigma. In profiles, she can come across 
as guarded and wary. During aninterview with the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/natalie-portman-sounds-israel-netanyahu-793425>
, timed to coincide with the Cannes film festival premiere of her directorial 
debut,A Tale of Love and Darkness, Portman allegedly recorded the entire 
conversation on her phone to “make sure that everyone’s accurate”, a rare move 
by celebrities. Yet in the same feature, herBlack Swan director Darren 
Aronofsky described Portman as “very sincere and fun”. “She really enjoys 
life,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnatalie-portman-jackie-onassis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec77c619adffbfca02a21eced92fb58bb7375ca1%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natalie%20Portman%3A%20bringing%20Jackie%20Onassis%20back%20to%20life%20%7C%20Nigel%20M%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnatalie-portman-jackie-onassis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natalie%20Portman%3A%20bringing%20Jackie%20Onassis%20back%20to%20life%20%7C%20Nigel%20M%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnatalie-portman-jackie-onassis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec77c619adffbfca02a21eced92fb58bb7375ca1%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Natalie Portman in her Oscar-winning role as an ill-fated ballerina in Black 
Swan. Photograph: Niko Tavernise/AP 
Survey Portman’s career and life story, however, and one certain quality 
emerges: she’s a remarkably tenacious figure. Born in Israel in 1981 to an 
Israeli father and an American mother, Portman moved with her family to the US 
when she was three. At the age of 10, a Revlon scout spotted her at a pizza 
place near her home in Jericho, Long Island, and asked if she was interested in 
becoming a model. At such a young age, she was already headstrong and told the 
stranger she would rather try acting.

“I was definitely different from the other kids,” she said in 2005. “I was 
more ambitious, I knew what I liked and what I wanted, and I worked really 
hard. I was a very serious kid.” Two years later, she auditioned for the role 
of Mathilda, the street-smart orphan who befriends a middle-aged hitman in Luc 
Besson’sLéon: The Professional, and secured the part, making her feature film 
debut.

For the next several years, Portman stuck to similarly mature fare, playing a 
smitten youngster pining for a grown man in Ted Demme’sBeautiful Girls, going 
up against Al Pacino as his troubled daughter inHeat and charming her way 
through Woody Allen’s musical romanceEveryone Says I Love You. On Broadway, she 
made her debut in the title role ofThe Diary of Anne Frank, a performance that 
is said to have taken a toll on the young performer, whose great-grandparents 
were killed in Auschwitz.

It wasn’t until signing on to George Lucas’s Star Wars prequel trilogy in 1999 
that Portman appeared in projects skewed more closely to her own age group. 
Embarking on the role of Padmé Amidala, the mother of Luke Skywalker and 
Princess Leia, gave Portman her biggest audience yet, a factor that would go to 
the head of most young actors. Portman appeared unfazed, famously missing the 
New York premiere ofStar Wars: Episode 1 – The Phantom Menace to revise for her 
high-school finals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnatalie-portman-jackie-onassis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe903f780db5877db3652e58f6f39d8edcd4c5bee%2F70_0_1908_1145%2F1908.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natalie%20Portman%3A%20bringing%20Jackie%20Onassis%20back%20to%20life%20%7C%20Nigel%20M%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnatalie-portman-jackie-onassis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natalie%20Portman%3A%20bringing%20Jackie%20Onassis%20back%20to%20life%20%7C%20Nigel%20M%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fnatalie-portman-jackie-onassis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe903f780db5877db3652e58f6f39d8edcd4c5bee%2F70_0_1908_1145%2F1908.jpg>
 Natalia Portman in her role as Padmé Amidala in Star Wars Episode II – Attack 
of the Clones. Photograph: HO/REUTERS 
When the negative reviews for her first stab at a major blockbuster hit, 
Portman left Hollywood for the world of academia (she told theNew York Post: “I 
don’t care if [college] ruins my career, I’d rather be smart than a movie 
star”), completing a degree in psychology at Harvard and co-writing two 
research papers published in scientific journals.

Portman largely took a break from acting to focus on her studies, only 
appearing on screen in the Star Wars sequels during her four years at Harvard 
and on stage in aNew York Public Theater production of Chekhov’s The Seagull 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/08/13/theater/theater-review-streep-meets-chekhov-up-in-central-park.html>
alongside Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline and Philip Seymour Hoffman, directed by 
Mike Nichols.

She credits Nichols, who has since died, for giving her a lift following the 
critical bashing she received for her stiff contributions toStar Wars. (Her 
co-stars Liam Neeson, Samuel L Jackson and Ewan McGregor didn’t fare much 
better with the critics, but they were more established than Portman at the 
time.)

“Star Wars had come out… and everyone thought I was a horrible actress,” 
Portman toldNew York Magazine 
<http://nymag.com/news/articles/reasonstoloveny/2014/mike-nichols/> in 2014. “I 
was in the biggest-grossing movie of the decade and no director wanted to work 
with me. Mike wrote a letter to Anthony Minghella and said, ‘Put her inCold 
Mountain, I vouch for her.’”

His encouragement did the job. After playing a small but pivotal part in 
Minghella’s Civil War drama, Portman returned to the demanding roles with which 
she first made her name, shaving her head to embody a freedom fighter in V for 
Vendetta, going full-blown arthouse for Wong Kar Wai’s English language debut 
My Blueberry Nights and earning her first Oscar nomination for playing a 
stripper in Nichols’s ensemble dramaCloser.

Then came Black Swan, which not only cemented Portman’s status as one of the 
most acclaimed performers of her generation, but also one of the most bankable 
after the low-budget thriller took nearly $330m (£270m) worldwide. It also 
introduced Portman to her husband, choreographer Benjamin Millepied, who was 
working on the film. The two have a son together named Aleph (after the first 
letter of the Hebrew alphabet). And the family relocated to Paris for a short 
while after Millepied secured the post ofdirector of dance at the Paris Opera 
Ballet; 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/04/benjamin-millepied-paris-opera-ballet>
 they returned to Los Angeles last summer.

A Tale of Love and Darkness, her Hebrew-language adaptation of Israeli writer 
Amos Oz’s autobiographical novel of the same name, earned mixed reviews. But 
following herStar Wars experience, Portman has learned to brush off rebukes by 
simply avoiding all reviews that cite her name.

“It’s inhibiting to hear bad things about yourself,” she explained. “It makes 
you afraid and you can’t be afraid when you work. As an artist you have to be 
very emotionally ready, emotionally connected to everything but then, as a 
public figure, you have to have such a thick skin. People will say such harsh 
things. You need to be vulnerable for your work, but you also need to be tough 
as nails just to keep up, and that combination is really hard to maintain.”

THE PORTMAN FILE

Born Natalie Hershlag, 9 June 1981, in Jerusalem, to Avner Hershlag, an 
Israeli doctor, and Shelley Stevens, an American artist from Cincinnati, Ohio.

Best of times She gave birth to her son, Aleph Portman-Millepied, on 14 June 
2011, shortly after winning her Oscar forBlack Swan. Her son’s father, husband 
Benjamin Millepied, worked as a choreographer on the film.

Worst of times Portman struggled with being sexualised as a child after 
appearing in Léon: The Professional. “I had a bad experience when Léon first 
came out,” she told theIndependent. “In hindsight, I’m really proud of that 
film though at the time it was unnerving to find myself being suddenly looked 
upon as a sexual object when I was still only 12.”

What they say Kenneth Branagh gushed to the Hollywood Reporter of Portman’s 
“formidable and occasionally forbidding kind of concentration”. “She certainly 
has a ticklish sense of humour,” he added.

What she says “It’s always fun getting to visit a movie set as a tourist. When 
you go and it’s your job and you go every day, you get a little immune to how 
magical it is. To experience it as a tourist just makes it magic again.”
 