
The spirit of Graham Taylor loomed large at Sincil Bank but Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> City honoured their former 
manager by producing a stunning display of which he would surely have been 
proud.

Having frustrated Ipswich Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown> of the Championship at 
Portman Road 10 days earlier, the Red Imps of the National League dominated 
their loftier opponents on home turf and claimed a famous victory thanks to 
Nathan Arnold’s superb winner in stoppage time.

Lincoln City manager Danny Cowley proud of FA Cup ‘win for the people’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/18/lincoln-city-manager-danny-cowley-hails-victory-against-ipswich>
The night began with a minute’s applause for the former England manager, who 
launched his career in coaching with Lincoln, and ended with his former club in 
round four for the first time since he was at the helm. They host Brighton next.

Taylor, who died on 12 January, was honoured again as fans lit up the stadium 
in the second half, but the current players of his former club lit up the tie 
throughout.

They won it thanks to a moment of fabulous composure from Arnold, whose 
signing in July was funded in part by a crowd-funding website backed by 
Lincoln’s fans.

Arnold, 29, said: “My missus had a dream we won 1-0 and I scored the goal. My 
experience allowed me to keep a cool head for the goal. Before the game, we 
backed ourselves. They made five changes which is not good for team continuity 
and we wanted to take advantage of that. I am proud of the boys.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Flincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ceca8c954463770cfa18e7c1522550bc983833c%2F0_0_4650_3250%2F4650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nathan%20Arnold%E2%80%99s%20stoppage%20time%20winner%20sends%20ecstatic%20Lincoln%20City%20into%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Flincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nathan%20Arnold%E2%80%99s%20stoppage%20time%20winner%20sends%20ecstatic%20Lincoln%20City%20into%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Flincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ceca8c954463770cfa18e7c1522550bc983833c%2F0_0_4650_3250%2F4650.jpg>
 Players, fans and officials take part in a minute of applause for Graham 
Taylor. Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images 
Lincoln had the better of the chances throughout to give Mick McCarthy, the 
under-pressure Ipswich manager, another uncomfortable evening in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>.

Before this third-round replay, McCarthy was without a win in eight games in 
charge of the Suffolk club in the FA Cup and he admitted he was “embarrassed” 
as the dismal run continued.

“Of course I’m disappointed,” he said. “I’d be a fool if I said anything else. 
But I still congratulate Lincoln because they played better than us and 
deserved it.”

The home side made a confident start and Arnold dragged a shot wide from 25 
yards after nine minutes.

Yet they had a reminder of Ipswich’s threat moments later when the hosts were 
caught out for pace and visiting striker Tom Lawrence connected with a shot 
from the edge of the area that drew a routine save from Paul Farman in the 
Lincoln goal.

There was no inferiority complex from the hosts, however, and the 8,000 home 
supporters in a capacity crowd roared them on to another half chance in the 
16th minute. The winger Terry Hawkridge checked inside on to his right foot and 
floated a cross on to the head of the giant striker Matt Rhead, who sent a 
far-post effort narrowly wide.

The threat of the non-league side was clear and, after the midfielder Alan 
Power had had a firm shot charged down on the edge of the penalty area, Theo 
Robinson went even closer after collecting a cross from the left. The forward’s 
strength allowed him to turn towards goal and unleash a low, powerful effort 
which was blocked crucially by the defender Luke Chambers.

An even clearer chance arrived 16 minutes before half-time when Robinson 
drifted out wide to turn provider for Alex Woodyard. The forward’s cross was 
perfect for the late run of the midfielder, but he failed to hit the target 
with his head from 10 yards and an excellent opportunity was missed.

Sutton’s Maxime Biamou and Dan Fitchett strike late to stun Wimbledon in FA Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/17/afc-wimbledon-sutton-united-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report>
It was a similar story a couple of minutes later when Hawkridge moved from 
left to right to bend a teasing cross to the far post, with a stooping Rhead 
heading narrowly off target.

The first half ended with Danny Cowley’s men still on top and they ought to 
have taken the lead in the dying seconds when captain Luke Waterfall met a 
free-kick and turned it towards goal. The defender, though, saw his effort 
saved superbly by the visiting goalkeeper Dean Gerken. McCarthy looked a 
picture of agitation as the opening period came to a close.

Lincoln began the second half with a teasing free-kick from Sam Habergham 
forcing the visitors into a hurried clearance. Rhead angered the Ipswich 
defender Christophe Berra when he floored the Scot with a flailing arm, 
although referee Ben Toner let the Lincoln forward off with no more than a 
booking.

The home goalkeeper Paul Farman had been a virtual spectator but he had to 
make a confident catch just before the hour to claim a flick-on by Berra from a 
long throw. Then he was forced into a smart save when Ipswich finally 
registered their second effort on goal through Josh Emmanuel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Flincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4447a4b560b685700c8962b38a93c3978dbba504%2F0_174_4658_2795%2F4658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nathan%20Arnold%E2%80%99s%20stoppage%20time%20winner%20sends%20ecstatic%20Lincoln%20City%20into%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Flincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nathan%20Arnold%E2%80%99s%20stoppage%20time%20winner%20sends%20ecstatic%20Lincoln%20City%20into%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Flincoln-city-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4447a4b560b685700c8962b38a93c3978dbba504%2F0_174_4658_2795%2F4658.jpg>
 The Lincoln team and staff celebrate their victory in the changing room. 
Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images 
However, that was a rare moment of promise from the Championship side, who 
remained second best as the game entered its closing stages. Arnold then tried 
his luck for Lincoln from long range with a curling effort that flew just wide 
as the home side showed few signs of nerves infiltrating their psyche.

The atmosphere was enhanced still further in the 76th minute when home 
supporters lit up the stadium with mobile phone torches in Taylor’s honour to 
remember the Fourth Division title he led them to in 1976.

The game began to lose its momentum as both sides guarded against a late, 
heartbreaking goal, but Ipswich showed few signs of their Championship 
superiority. That was until one late scare for the hosts, who saw Jonas Knudsen 
drill a long-range effort just wide.

But Arnold raised the roof in stoppage time, collecting a pass from substitute 
Adam Marriott and rounding Gerken before producing a cool finish to give his 
superb side their just rewards.
 