
As Michael Rosen’s poem 
<http://michaelrosenblog.blogspot.co.uk/2014/05/fascism-i-sometimes-fear.html> 
insists, fascism doesn’t come in fancy dress. It doesn’t show up in jackboots 
and swastika tattoos. It makes itself presentable: puts on a suit, borrows a 
tie. It comes kissing babies and handing out hats. It goes by new names: 
alt-this, freedom-that.

In Roland Schimmelpfennig’s play Winter Solstice 
<https://www.orangetreetheatre.co.uk/whats-on/winter-solstice>, it arrives in 
the form of a kindly old man one Christmas Eve. Rudolph Mayer rings the 
doorbell of a smart family home and finds himself invited in. His hosts are 
well-to-do liberals: a social historian and his artist wife, 
university-educated, cultured and polite. Their bookshelves are lined with 
studies of the Third Reich. You’d think they’d be inoculated against nazism, 
primed not only to identify it, but to denounce its logic and resist its 
rhetoric. And yet, they aren’t and they can’t. Rudolph Mayer runs rings around 
them.

“How is it possible that someone could turn up and be such a blatant Nazi and 
yet, one by one, everyone waves it through?” asksRamin Gray 
<http://www.atctheatre.com/about>, who is directing the play at the Orange 
Tree, Richmond, in a co-production with hisActors Touring Company 
<http://www.atctheatre.com/>. “I mean, it’s totally obvious from the get-go who 
this man is. It’s not like there’s some big reveal … It’s so obvious, and yet 
no one says a thing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76d89526dba95ab0bc0f1874c20568be55621f56%2F0_100_1667_2038%2F1667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nazism%20comes%20knocking%3A%20German%20playwright%20probes%20the%20lure%20of%20fascism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nazism%20comes%20knocking%3A%20German%20playwright%20probes%20the%20lure%20of%20fascism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76d89526dba95ab0bc0f1874c20568be55621f56%2F0_100_1667_2038%2F1667.jpg>
 Zombie fascism … Nicholas Le Prevost, who plays Rudolph Mayer in Winter 
Solstice. Photograph: Stephen Cummiskey 
Schimmelpfennig – his name translates as “mouldy coin” – is one of Germany’s 
most prolific playwrights. At 49, he’s had more than 30 plays produced at home, 
many of which have been staged in translation elsewhere. Britain has seen only 
a select few, but those that have played here have been both sharp and 
idiosyncratic.Push Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/feb/12/artsfeatures3>, at the Royal 
Court in 2002, presented a corporate culture where cut-throat employees oust 
their cut-throat bosses to get to the top.Arabian Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/apr/30/theatre.artsfeatures> (Soho 
theatre, 2002) unpicked the psyche of modern, multicultural cities, where myths 
intermingle and identities entangle.The Golden Dragon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/12/golden-dragon-edinburgh-review>
 (Traverse, 2011), set in a Chinese takeaway, continued the theme.

Still Winter Solstice might be his most pertinent play yet. It is a portrait 
of zombie fascism, nazism back from the dead, and yet, on its German premiere 
two years ago, critics tended not to take it entirely seriously – much to 
Schimmelpfennig’s alarm. “They felt it was more a portrayal of a neurotic, 
well-living leftwing intellectual,” he recalls. “My focus was always on the 
method of the ‘fascist’ seduction.”

That’s almost exactly the problem the play diagnoses. Seeing Winter Solstice 
as a satire essentially rejects the possibility, let alone the reality, of 
fascism’s return – much as Schimmelpfennig’s historian does. They treated 
Rudolph as a literary cipher, not a credible threat. “The anti-Europeansuccess 
of the AfD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/mecklenburg-vorpommern-german-anti-immigrant-party-strong-regional-election-exit-polls-merkel>
 [Germany’s far-right party, currently polling at 15%] seemed to many 
unthinkable, just as Brexit and Donald Trump were unthinkable,” Schimmelpfennig 
explains. “Things have changed a lot.”

The playwright has long insisted otherwise. For him, it was enough that 
rightwing populism had gained a foothold: “Its presence was already more than 
clear. It just didn’t have a face.” Winter Solstice was a warning against 
allowing its advance. “The play was triggered by the nightmare that this way of 
thinking would becomesalonfähig – meaning that it would successfully enter into 
the living rooms and dining tables of polite society.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ab7763c70f5ccae9180ae9e066c8d46be42903d%2F0_96_2153_1291%2F2153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nazism%20comes%20knocking%3A%20German%20playwright%20probes%20the%20lure%20of%20fascism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nazism%20comes%20knocking%3A%20German%20playwright%20probes%20the%20lure%20of%20fascism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ab7763c70f5ccae9180ae9e066c8d46be42903d%2F0_96_2153_1291%2F2153.jpg>
 David Tennant and Jacqueline Cinque in Schimmelpfennig’s Push Up at the Royal 
Court Upstairs, 2002. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Once it’s allowed in, the play argues, such thinking takes hold. Allow it to 
become acceptable and it will be accepted. One by one, Albert’s family come 
round to Rudolph’s ideas.

Schimmelpfennig’s point is that they’re nothing if not persuasive. “He talks 
about unity and the need to come together,” explains Gray, “but he doesn’t say 
for what. He says the world is fractured and falling apart.” Most of all, 
Rudolph mixes art and culture with nationalism and xenophobia. “It’s not new,” 
Schimmelpfennig points out. “It works every time – and it’s horrible.”

However, it only works if left unchecked. Though not the satire it was taken 
for, Winter Solstice warns against the weakness of the liberal position. Albert 
can’t bring himself to stand up to Rudolph. He’s too polite to challenge him; 
too forbearing to kick back. To do so, says Gray, “you have to start labelling 
people. You have to deny them the right to define themselves as they wish, 
which isn’t at all liberal.”

“How do you tolerate intolerance?” he wonders. “Sometimes you have to step up 
and say, ‘No, I’m sorry …’” Gray stops himself and laughs. “You see. I said, 
‘I’m sorry.’ It has to be: ‘No. Fuck off.’ Those are the muscles that are weak.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b894ffd4bad3a3097db83753e8100fb10550a0%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nazism%20comes%20knocking%3A%20German%20playwright%20probes%20the%20lure%20of%20fascism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nazism%20comes%20knocking%3A%20German%20playwright%20probes%20the%20lure%20of%20fascism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnazism-play-fascism-roland-schimmelpfennig-winter-solstice-orange-tree-richmond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b894ffd4bad3a3097db83753e8100fb10550a0%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 The Golden Dragon by Ronald Schimmelpfennig at the Traverse, Edinburgh, in 
2011. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Gray likens theatre to a gym. He sees it as an art form that activates 
audiences <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ct8l9wqGMO0>. It’s easy to see why 
he admires Schimmelpfennig. The German makes his audiences work. Having started 
out in journalism, he came to theatre late: “I wasn’t able to capture the 
truth, so maybe that’s why I started to invent my own stories.”

Those stories are often self-aware. They stress their status as stories, and 
Gray believes Schimmelpfennig’s stints as a dramaturg, first at the Munich 
Kammerspiele, then theSchaubühne <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/schaubuhne>
, are reflected in his writing. “He knows plays inside out; how rehearsal rooms 
work, how actors work, how processes work. Some of his writing feels just like 
being in a rehearsal room.”

There is, in other words, a sense of discovery, as if actors are finding their 
footing as they go. They seem to argue with one another, disputing one 
another’s accounts and pulling a story this way and that. Winter Solstice 
splices dialogue with narration; either fact, testimony or a film script spoken 
aloud.Idomeneus <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/24/idomeneus-review>
, seen at the Gate two years ago, had a chorus contradict one another. The myth 
mutated as it was told.

It’s Brechtian, yes, but more than that, it opens up narratives into 
multiplicity and uncertainty. It turns one play into many. “When people gather 
to follow a play, they share a story,” Schimmelpfennig says. “In a way, theatre 
opens up a dialogue.” Having recently started writing novels, he compares 
“rooms full of spectators” with a reader, singular and alone.

Out of ambiguity, his plays demand attention and interpretation. They’re laced 
with magic realism: teeth that travel the world, indoor deserts. Time often 
loops back on itself. He makes us watch things again and again, from one 
perspective then another. As in Winter Solstice, the past seeps into the 
present.

“Time is our master,” Schimmelpfennig stresses. “So playing with time is like 
a luxury and an act of anarchy.Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> bends time all the time, theatre 
dominates time. It’s a human privilege to be able to do so. It’s a moment of 
ultimate freedom – till the curtain falls and everybody rushes to the 
underground.”

 * Winter Solstice 
<https://www.orangetreetheatre.co.uk/whats-on/winter-solstice> runs at the 
Orange Tree, Richmond, from 12 January to 11 February.
 