
President-elect Donald Trump’s nominee for Secretary of State – and until 
recently the CEO of ExxonMobil –Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rex-tillerson> was given a confirmation 
hearing by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee last week. In his testimony, 
Tillerson accepted the reality of human-caused global warming and that “The 
risk of climate change does exist and the consequences of it could be serious 
enough that action should be taken.”

While he accepted the problem exists, Tillerson nevertheless proceeded to 
downplay its risks, saying:

The increase in the greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere are having 
an effect, our ability to predict that effect is very limited.

Many climate scientists took issue with that statement 
<http://mashable.com/2017/01/11/tillerson-climate-change-misleads-senate/?utm_cid=hp-h-1#rdbExSopxkqD>
, and for good reason.Climate models have been very accurate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/27/facts-matter-and-on-climate-change-trumps-picks-get-them-wrong>
 in their projections about many consequences of human carbon pollution. It’s 
true that there’s uncertainty in just how quickly some of those consequences 
will be triggered. The bad news is that recent studies have shown that many of 
those consequences are happening more quickly than climate scientists 
anticipated. Greater climate uncertainty translates intomore urgency to tackle 
the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/apr/04/climate-change-uncertainty-stronger-tackling-case>
, not less.

The Gulf Stream could shut down sooner than anticipated

The Gulf Stream – which keeps the UK and surrounding area significantly warmer 
than it would otherwise be – is part of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning 
Circulation (AMOC). Research has shownit could shut down as a result of global 
warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2001/jun/21/globalwarming.physicalsciences>
:

In 1997, the oceanographer Wallace Broecker, of Columbia University in New 
York, suggested that if the Gulf stream turned off, winter temperatures in the 
British Isles could fall by an average of 11°C - plunging Blackpool or Berwick 
to the same temperatures as Spitsbergen, inside theArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> circle. Any dramatic drop in 
temperature could have devastating implications for agriculture - and for 
Europe’s ability to feed itself.

Just how quickly such a shutdown could happen has been a subject of debate and 
research among climate scientists.A study published in Science Advances 
<http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/1/e1601666> in early January 
corrected for a bias recently identified in climate models that acted to keep 
the AMOC and Gulf Streammore stable than it appears to be in reality 
<http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2017/01/the-underestimated-danger-of-a-breakdown-of-the-gulf-stream-system/>
:

Freshwater continually flows into the northern Atlantic through precipitation, 
rivers and ice-melting. But supply of salty waters from the south, through the 
Gulf Stream System, balances this. If however the current slows, there is less 
salt supply, and the surface ocean gets less salty. This fresher water is 
lighter than saltier water and therefore cannot sink into the depths so easily. 
Since this sinking – the so-called deep water formation – drives the Gulf 
Stream System, the current continues to weaken. There is a critical point when 
this becomes an unstoppable vicious circle. This is one of the classictipping 
points in the climate system 
<http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2017/01/the-underestimated-danger-of-a-breakdown-of-the-gulf-stream-system/#ITEM-19900-2>
.

In most climate models, the AMOC imports fresh water, which would make the 
circulation more stable. According to recent observational data, the AMOC is 
actually exporting fresh water. The authors of the study corrected for this 
bias, and ran the models in a scenario of an abrupt doubling of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide levels from about 350 to 700 ppm.


This is a more extreme scenario than a more gradual ramping up of carbon 
levels, but importantly, the study did not account for meltwater flowing into 
the Atlantic from the melting Greenland ice sheet. Recent research has shown 
thatGreenland meltwater may significantly weaken the AMOC 
<http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2017/01/the-underestimated-danger-of-a-breakdown-of-the-gulf-stream-system/>
 in the coming decades.

Under the study’s scenario, the AMOC lost a third of its strength after 100 
years, and broke down within about 300 years. As a result, average winter 
temperatures over parts of northern and western Europe would become 7°C colder 
than today.

Arctic and Antarctic ice is melting fast

Global sea ice has also been tracking at record-shattering low levels 
<http://nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/files/2017/01/Figure6b.png>. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fnew-studies-show-rex-tillerson-is-wrong-about-climate-risks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe043f2483fdda516c5e9e2aca90ddbfd40efe402%2F0_0_1200_900%2Fmaster%2F1200.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20studies%20show%20Rex%20Tillerson%20is%20wrong%20about%20climate%20risks%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fnew-studies-show-rex-tillerson-is-wrong-about-climate-risks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20studies%20show%20Rex%20Tillerson%20is%20wrong%20about%20climate%20risks%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fnew-studies-show-rex-tillerson-is-wrong-about-climate-risks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe043f2483fdda516c5e9e2aca90ddbfd40efe402%2F0_0_1200_900%2Fmaster%2F1200.png>
 Global sea ice extent data from the National Snow and Ice Data Center. The 
2016-2017 records lows are shown in red. 
Climate scientists have known for about a decade that Arctic sea ice is 
declining faster 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2007GL029703/abstract> than climate 
models anticipated. In 2016, Antarctic sea ice also hit an extreme record low, 
but until recently, had been stable and even expanding slightly. 
Counter-intuitively, global warming is one of the causes of that Antarctic sea 
ice expansion, as climate scientistsAndreas Schmittner and Peter Clark explained
 <https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/12/161212115840.htm>:

When the ocean temperatures warm, it causes more direct melting of the ice 
sheet below the surface, and it increases the number of icebergs that calve off 
the ice sheet … The cold, fresh water freezes more easily, creating additional 
sea ice despite warmer temperatures that are down hundreds of meters below the 
surface.

In December, they published a study in Nature 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v541/n7635/full/nature20582.html> finding 
that not only would the collapse of the Antarctic ice sheet cause large-scale 
sea level rise, but that it would also increase global climate variability, 
which translates into greater risks.

Another study published in Science Advances 
<http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/2/12/e1601610.full> in December found 
that Totten glacier in East Antarctica is melting from below due to warming 
ocean waters. During the Pliocene epoch 3 million years ago, global 
temperatures were about 2 to 3°C hotter than today, butsea levels were a 
whopping 25 meters (80 feet) higher 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch6s6-3-2.html>. The 
melting of East Antarctic icemay help explain 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/12/16/warm-ocean-water-is-slamming-into-and-melting-the-biggest-glacier-in-east-antarctica/?utm_term=.2f3a9a1bd163>
 that tremendous sea level rise.

Meanwhile, a massive iceberg the size of Delaware is poised to break off the 
Larsen C ice shelf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/giant-iceberg-poised-to-break-off-from-antarctic-shelf-larsen-c>
 on the Antarctic Peninsula, much as the Larsen B ice shelf did starting in 
2002:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dej1XG3aSyqY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dej1XG3aSyqY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dej1XG3aSyqY&media=>
 Collapse of the Larsen B ice shelf in Antarctica. 
 Scientists have also concluded that the collapse of the West Antarctic ice 
sheet is already underway andis likely unstoppable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/may/12/western-antarctic-ice-sheet-collapse-has-already-begun-scientists-warn>
. The loss of the entire ice sheet would eventually cause up to a 4-meter 
(13-foot) sea level rise over several centuries.

These are some of the consequences that led the Department of Defense – unlike 
Tillerson – to consider climate change an imminent threat.
Rebecca Leber (@rebleber) 
Tillerson: "I don’t see [climate change] as an imminent national security 
threat but perhaps others do"
The others: https://t.co/CjMX4MDRkY <https://t.co/CjMX4MDRkY>
 <https://twitter.com/rebleber/status/819299847022972928> January 11, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/rebleber/status/819299847022972928> 
Tillerson might undermine international climate negotiations

Senator Jeff Merkley’s (D-OR) questioning 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/1/12/14248484/merkley-tillerson-climate-change-skeptic>
 in the hearing revealed that Tillerson is not very concerned about climate 
change and doesn’t think America should be a leader on the issue. He wouldn’t 
pull the US out of international climate negotiations, buthe might very well 
undermine them 
<http://www.vox.com/energy-and-environment/2017/1/13/14250076/trump-tillerson-paris-climate-deal>
.

That should normally be enough to disqualify Tillerson from being Secretary of 
State and in charge of America’s role in those negotiations. The problem is 
that if the Senate rejects Tillerson, Trump might very well nominate an 
outright science denier to the position. However, Tillerson would likely 
support lifting sanctions against Russia, which wouldallow ExxonMobil to 
extract tremendous reserves of oil 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/world/europe/rex-tillersons-company-exxon-has-billions-at-stake-over-russia-sanctions.html?_r=0>
 from the country.


In neither case would the US take the needed action to curb the climate risks 
that Trump and his picks deny. While Tillerson does accept the reality of 
climate change and that it poses some risks, he denies that those risks are 
serious. Functionally he might not be very different than a Secretary of State 
who outright denies climate change. Such are the choices we face under a 
President Trump.

 