
The NHS budget will need to increase by £88bn over the next 50 years, meaning 
governments could have to raise taxes or cut spending in other areas to fund 
it, the Office forBudget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility 
(OBR) has said.

The soaring costs threaten to render public finances generally 
“unsustainable”, according to the OBR’s latest fiscal sustainability report. It 
says the government could find it hard to deliver on its pledge to balance the 
budget during the next parliament.

The NHS no longer has the resources to care for our sick population | Zara Aziz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/17/nhs-no-longer-resources-care-for-sick-population>
The NHS’s budget will need to increase from £140bn in 2020-21 to about £228bn 
by 2066-67 in order to keep pace with the rising demand for healthcare, 
according to the OBR’s projections.

It says the budget will need to rise by an average of 2% each year over that 
period – much more than the 1% annual rises theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> has had since the coalition took 
office in 2010, but barely half the 3.8% annual real-term rises it has seen 
since 1978-79.


The rising costs of providing healthcare in coming decades could force 
ministers to increase the proportion of GDP going into health from the 6.9% 
expected in 2020-21 to 12.6% by 2066-67. That 12.6% would equate to about 
£228bn in today’s prices, the OBR confirmed.

Norman Lamb, the Liberal Democrats’ health spokesman, said: “This analysis 
confirms that spending on the NHS and on care services will either have to rise 
significantly or the system will collapse. We will see an end to the NHS as we 
know it.

“Current levels of care cannot be sustained with the fall in real-terms 
spending per person which is currently envisaged.”


The NHS England chief executive, Simon Stevens, has said that under the 
government’s current spending plans, per capita health funding will fall in 
real terms in 2018-19, the year the NHS will turn 70.

Last September the OBR set out how the growing number of older people in 
coming decades would oblige governments to spend more on healthcare, though it 
did not say how much more.

Its latest figures detail how much will be needed in light of three factors it 
did not analyse then: the emergence of new technology that will boost patient 
care, the development of new drugs and a rise in the number of people with 
chronic long-term conditions, such as diabetes and cancer.

Private health insurance sales surge amid NHS crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/16/private-medical-insurance-sales-surge-health-nhs>
Prof John Appleby, the chief economist at the Nuffield Trust health thinktank, 
said that although the OBR’s projected £88bn rise sounded huge, “we shouldn’t 
get too carried away. In reality, the increase in health spending it projects 
would be very gradual – at today’s GDP, an increase of less than 2% of the NHS 
budget each year.

“These are projections, not forecasts. We will have many opportunities to 
choose a path of more controlled spending or somewhat higher taxation over the 
coming decades,” he added.

Richard Murray, director of policy at the King’s Fund, said: “The OBR’s 
acceptance of the need for a larger long-term increase in the proportion of GDP 
we spend on health is a welcome dose of realism, but also highlights the 
current pressures on the NHS.

“Given that plans for the rest of this parliament will see health spending 
fall as a proportion of GDP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/nhs-head-disputes-theresa-may-claims-over-health-funding>
, it is another reminder that it is unrealistic to expect the NHS to continue 
to operate within spending plans at the same time as continuing to offer the 
same level of service.”

A government spokesman said it had made “significant progress in repairing the 
public finances – reducing the deficit from 10% of GDP to 4% over the last six 
years. At the same time, we are committed to the sustainable funding of our 
health service which is why we are giving the NHS an extra £10bn per year by 
2020/21, including almost including almost £4bn this year to transform services 
and improve standards of care for patients.”
 