
Someone carried a giant inflatable kangaroo into Hisense Arena before Nick 
Kyrgios <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> squared off against 
Andreas Seppi on Wednesday, but the Australian punctured his own first grand 
slam campaign of the year with a quite astonishing display of self-destruction 
in Melbourne.

Having been two sets up and perfectly comfortable in this match against the 
Italian journeyman, Kyrgios dissolved into mess of code violations and unforced 
errors and in doing so, turned a straightforward match-up into a five-set 
horror show of scarcely believable proportions.

Andreas Seppi beats Nick Kyrgios in five sets: Australian Open second round – 
as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/18/andreas-seppi-v-nick-kyrgios-australian-open-second-round-live>
Seppi took the match 1-6, 6-7 (7-1), 6-4, 6-2, 10-8 in a touch over three 
hours to turf Australia’s best hope from the tournament, and to say it was a 
regrettable loss for Kyrgios would be significantly underselling the scale of 
human drama the 21-year-old produced.

Seppi, on the other hand, showed the virtue of adhering to the game’s 
fundamentals in one of the great party-pooping acts inAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> history. By the end of the 
match the Italian had committed a telling 32 fewer unforced errors and covered 
300 metres more ground than Kyrgios. In a figurative sense he’d gone the extra 
mile.

In the lead-up to this match Nill Kyrgios – mother of the great local hope – 
claimed a more settled routine and greater understanding of fame’s fickle 
embrace had helped both son and family deal better with his three-ringed circus 
life on tour; more time in hotel rooms near family and his calming Playstation, 
less time out and about as the centre of attention.

Cut to tonight, and the world No13 self-sabotaging his campaign before it had 
even begun. Kyrgios’ pre-match routine must have been a quick game of Grand 
Theft Auto. The problems here, you’d have to conclude, extended beyond the 
court. If Sam Stosur would perform better in a stadium entirely cleared of 
spectators, Kyrgios might do a hell of a lot better with the elimination of 
just the front row.

What the general public make of all this will be achingly predictable, because 
the fifth set was a public trial Kyrgios could never win. But when you pay for 
a ticket to watch him you’re signing up for one of two equally fascinating 
sights; a fully-fledged, flame-throwing tennis talent or sporting 
self-immolation. If you want the gap in between, head to the outside courts.

 On Wednesday Melburnians were presented with a fascinating live-action 
timeline of three distinct stages of tennis fame; 17-year old Alex De Minaur’s 
nervous arrival in a straight sets round two defeat to American Sam Querry, 
Kyrgios visibly battling to handle outright superstardom and later, in a 
four-set win over Victor Estrella Burgos on Margaret Court Arena, Bernard Tomic 
attempting to prove he’s not a man crossing to the downslope of a career that 
promised much but so far amounts to talent squandered – precious innocence, 
precocious insouciance and premature indolence.

Wedged in the middle, Kyrgios’ encounter was in prospect the furthest from a 
mismatch and so it proved. Seppi is a bit like beetroot dip – very unlikely to 
make your night but a reliable performer. Twice he has reached the fourth round 
at Melbourne Park, which Kyrgios knew well from enduring another five-set 
nightmare against him in the round of 16 two years back.

In the early stages the Italian battled grimly, rarely finding himself in the 
same postcode as the ball in Kyrgios’ opening service game, then hamfistedly 
losing his own as the favourite sprinted out of the blocks. Kyrgios broke for a 
second time and wrapped up the opening set in 28 minutes of frenetic but not 
entirely flawless tennis.

The second set stayed on serve for its duration, though Seppi found the task 
of holding a little more straightforward than his opponent and had the better 
of him for much of it. Kyrgios was by contrast a bit sloppy, often getting too 
inventive when the fundamentals would have done the job.

“You’re so shit,” the Australian upbraided himself at one point, but even 
playing well within his capabilities he strung it out to a tiebreak and then 
pounced, elevating his game at the critical moment and conceding only a single 
point as Seppi took his turn at muttering a scathing self-assessment. He’d won 
nearly every statistical category for the set, though not the one that mattered.

The third set bore remarkable similarities to the third to start with, Kyrgios 
playing as though on power-saving mode for much of the time and acquitting 
himself like an altar boy. Then it all went irrevocably Kyrgios-shaped: shortly 
before Seppi held to make it 3-3 the Australian entered into prolonged tirade – 
directed mostly at his courtside entourage but also, as always, himself.

Already the outbursts had earned Kyrgios censure from the chair umpire, now 
they entirely broke what had seemed a quite unrealistically long spell of calm, 
and sent him into a spiral whose immediate result was the concession of a break 
and one smashed racquet. What followed was far worse for his chances of an 
early night: Seppi pinched the third set 6-4 in 31 minutes.


Australian Open 2017: Andy Murray v Andrey Rublev and Bernard Tomic in action 
– live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/18/australian-open-2017-andy-murray-bernard-tomic-and-evans-v-cilic-live>
Kyrgios was now as bug-eyed and volatile as ever. Seppi lives in Caldero, a 
northern Italian town with a population smaller than the crowd that watched him 
tonight, and where the main attraction is a placid lake at the foot of 
picturesque mountains. Standing 25 feet away from Nick Kyrgios tonight it must 
have been impossible to even imagine such serenity.

All of a sudden every bad line call seemed a conspiracy, each unforced error 
some divine intervention Kyrgios couldn’t counter, so he dropped his serve in 
the opening game of the fourth set and then again to lose it 6-2 in 25 minutes 
amid a flurry of unforced errors, all the while sustaining the rather one-sided 
argument with his entourage.

In the fifth set the Australian finally cooled his jets, relatively speaking, 
and it remained on serve. At 4-3, after winning a 26-shot rally, Kyrgios smiled 
smugly at the chorus of cheering from his home crowd. He knows their fragile 
equilibrium as well as his own. Moments later he had three break points and a 
significant opening but botched it. “What do you want me to say?” he screamed. 
Far less, was the general consensus.

The sense of pandemonium simply refused to fade in the decider. Seppi broke, 
and the masses groaned in agony at Kyrgios’ casual indifference. Then the 
favourite broke straight back to make it 6-6, so they shrieked at his 
unpredictable genius. Up 8-7 on Seppi’s serve, Kyrgios steeled himself and 
conjured a match point, but the Italian cracked a nerveless forehand winner 
down the line and served it out impeccably to save himself.

At that point another of Kyrgios’ racquets gave up the ghost, but from being 
overworked in the conventional sense. The final disaster struck in the form of 
the Australian’s eighth double fault, which handed Seppi the break he needed to 
serve it out for a remarkable 10-8 win. If the people of Caldaro ever erect a 
statue in his honour, it should be made of granite, not bronze. Kyrgios will be 
lucky if he gets out of town unscathed.
 