
Professional athletes lead a crazily short and often lucrative working life, 
over within a decade or so of its beginning, wreathed in success or 
disappointment. Memories of glory, often embellished, are revived in middle age 
for nostalgia or for reheating in ill-advised comebacks.

It is unlikely the 31-year-old Nico Rosberg will be returning to his dangerous 
sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/nico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion>
. Nor will the 26-year-old Nick Blackwell – but for wholly different reasons.
Blackwell, the middleweight boxer who nearly died eight months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-in-coma-title-fight-defeat-chris-eubank-jr>
, was still recovering in hospital on Friday frominjuries sustained in a recent 
sparring session 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/nick-blackwell-hospital-ill-sparring-session>
 his father, John, described as silly when Rosberg, newly crowned as Formula 
One champion, announced he was looking forward to a quieter life with his 
family.

Nico Rosberg drew the best from himself before bowing out as a F1 champion | 
Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/nico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion>
Blackwell got into his sport through unlicensed boxing at 16, rather than the 
traditional amateur route, and even coming close to death after his fight with 
Chris Eubank Jr in March did not seem to quell his spirit. It is rumoured he 
thought about applying for an Irish boxing licence. His father told the
Wiltshire Timeson Friday: “It’s like an addiction for him. Professional 
athletes like Nick find it impossible to stop doing what they love.”

Unlike the rest of us, these unique human beings define their sense of 
self-worth by their athletic talent and hunger for victory. Few experience the 
grind of mundane living. Every moment promises – but does not always deliver – 
the applause and the thrills that ordinary life cannot provide.

When Roger Federer is asked why he still plays tennis at 35, having won 17 
majors, he cites his love of the game, but it is the flickering desire to claim 
another big title that really drives him on. Like Blackwell, he is addicted. 
Unlike Blackwell, he does not risk death when taking part.

Nor does the extraordinary Stanislaw Kowalski, the 106-year-old Polish athlete 
who can still throw a discus more than 24 feet but has nobody his age to 
compete against. Kowalksi is an innocent aberration.Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> and motor racing, however, are 
sports that require participants to wilfully disregard notions of safety. They 
stir primal instincts that few other sports can match.

Boxing is a sweet science but Nick Blackwell was too brave for his own good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/mar/27/boxing-is-a-sweet-science-but-nick-blackwell-was-too-brave-for-his-own-good>
Keke Rosberg was 29 when he began his Formula One career, two years younger 
than when Nico retired from the sport.The father’s story is as revealing as the 
son’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/nico-rosberg-keke-f1-world-title-family-double>
. It took Keke two years to get on the podium and another two to win the 
championship, in 1982, the year Gilles Villeneuve died at Zolder. By the time 
he retired in 1986, aged 37, Rosberg had won five races from 114 starts, 
compared with Nico’s 23 from 206 races, but victories were spread more thinly 
across the starting grid in the 80s, an era of less certainty in many ways.

While Nico walked away from the sport with a free heart, his father left in 
markedly different circumstances and mood. One of his closest friends inFormula 
One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, Elio de Angelis, crashed 
and died during testing in France in the summer of 1986 and the Finn decided he 
could not carry on, although it is said he later considered a comeback.

The spectre of death haunted motor racing far more frequently then and drivers 
handled the danger with a mixture of trepidation, bloody-mindedness and bravado 
that had become part of their shield. When Roland Ratzenberger died in practice 
at the San Marino Grand Prix at Imola in 1994, Ayrton Senna left the scene of 
the crash in tears but, when the F1 neurologist Professor Sid Watkins suggested 
he should leave the sport having already won three titles and go fishing 
instead the Brazilian said: “There are certain things over which we have no 
control. I cannot quit [racing], I have to go on.”

However, Maurice Hamilton, The Observer’s former motor racing correspondent, 
revealed in his excellent biography of Senna that the driver had that Saturday 
night told his boss, Frank Williams, he did not want to race again. Within 24 
hours, Senna was dead, after crashing on lap seven, with Michael Schumacher on 
his tail. The German won the championship and dedicated it to Senna. “Nobody 
remembers Roland,” Schumacher told me years later. In the 21 years since Imola,
Jules Bianchi in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/23/jules-bianchi-f1-suzuka-japanese-grand-prix>
 has been the only other F1 fatality.

Blackwell was not the only boxer in a hospital bed this week. It is two weeks 
since the 34-year-old GermanEduard Gutknecht collapsed in the changing room at 
Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/eduard-gutknecht-undergoes-surgery-after-george-groves-fight>
 after losing over 12 rounds to George Groves. On Friday, his team said: “Our 
team captain Eddy is still in London at the hospital. His condition is referred 
to by doctors as stable and his organs are working normally.”

For Blackwell and Gutknecht, retirement is not an option. It is a fait accompli
.
 