
When she first saw the script for Lion, Nicole Kidman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolekidman> did not know she was reading a 
true story. It is easy to see why she didn’t guess. The plot, for a start, is 
too fantastically outlandish for real life, and her part such a perfect fit 
that she probably imagined it had been written specifically for her. Even after 
the producer had enlightened her: “I still couldn’t quite believe it. Then I 
thought, maybe they’d fudged some of it. But no. It really is all true.”

Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/lion-review-dev-patel-and-nicole-kidman-hunt-oscars-in-moving-adoption-drama>
 tells the story of a boy called Saroo, who was born into an impoverished but 
close family in rural India. His mother laboured in a quarry carrying rocks, 
and at night his older brother would catch a train to a nearby town to earn a 
few rupees lifting bales. One night, the five-year-old Saroo begged to come 
with him, but was already asleep when they got off the train, so his brother 
left him to sleep on a platform bench while he went to work. Waking in the 
night, Saroo found a comfier berth in an empty, stationary train carriage, but 
awoke in the morning to find himself trapped in a hurtling train that didn’t 
stop until it reached Kolkata, 1,000 km from home. Unable to speak Bengali, 
Saroo survived on the streets, narrowly escaping the clutches of predatory 
abusers before winding up in a chillingly brutal orphanage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGKkk-hDigTk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGKkk-hDigTk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGKkk-hDigTk&media=>
On the other side of the world were Sue and John Brierley 
<http://media.gettyimages.com/photos/sue-brierley-saroo-brierley-and-john-brierley-attend-the-lion-new-picture-id623737206?s=594x594>
, a childless Australian couple who wanted to adopt from India. One day, Saroo 
was put on a plane, and dispatched to a new life with them in Hobart, Tasmania. 
He was deeply loved, and grew up to be an ostensibly typical young carefree 
Australian, played in the film by Dev Patel, until a random event triggered 
fragments of memory and a sudden urgent longing to find his old family. By 
calculating the distance that fateful train must have travelled from his home, 
Saroo painstakingly searched thousands of square miles of India using Google 
Earth, until finally he spotted a landmark he recognised from his old home. 
With the support and blessing of Sue, he returned to India, tracked down the 
derelict shack that had once been his home, and there he found his birth 
mother, who had been waiting and hoping all along that one day her son would 
return. I watched the film at a press screening and, when the lights came up at 
the end, most people in auditorium were in tears.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F724b501e8f0b09746ea0f20084113553eb37ebd2%2F0_50_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Lion%20and%20adoption%3A%20'It's%20about%20the%20simplicity%20of%20love'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Lion%20and%20adoption%3A%20%27It%27s%20about%20the%20simplicity%20of%20love%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F724b501e8f0b09746ea0f20084113553eb37ebd2%2F0_50_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Nicole Kidman and Sunny Pawar as Sue Brierley and the young Saroo in Lion. 
Photograph: Allstar/Screen Australia 
Actors are contractually obliged to promote their movies, but when I meet 
Kidman, I get the impression that she would want to for Lion even if she 
weren’t. She seems to have spent most of the past month on red carpets at Lion 
premiers all over the world, and stops off in London for 24 hours – en route 
from Los Angeles to Sydney for Christmas, her two young daughters in tow – to 
talk about the film. Everyone always goes on about Kidman’s statuesque beauty, 
so I wasn’t expecting it to floor me, but when she stands to shake hands she 
looks more like an alabaster mannequin than a member of our species. When she 
speaks, however, she becomes more human than any A-list actor I have met. 
Kidman hasdescribed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/films/2016/11/29/nicole-kidman-interview-mynew-movie-love-letter-adopted-children/>
 Lion as “a love letter” to the two children she adopted herself in her 20s 
when married to Tom Cruise, and weeps so easily throughout the interview that 
by the end she is asking me how I can stop myself crying, as if this were a 
rare and mysterious trick.

It is always nerve-racking to play a real person, she says, but her 
responsibility to Sue Brierley feels especially onerous because the two women 
have become close friends. “Sue has become very much a part of my life. Yeah, I 
love her.” Kidman’s tone is dreamily affectionate. “The minute we met, just the 
two of us in my apartment in Sydney, we just clicked. She told me so much about 
herself, and I told her. And she’s very tactile, Sue. So she’ll hold your hand 
and stroke you. She’s very warm, and loyal. And she’s very maternal.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01bb36eeacbbf8d9ec21af038bb18a8a2e346736%2F0_57_3144_2028%2F3144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Lion%20and%20adoption%3A%20'It's%20about%20the%20simplicity%20of%20love'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Lion%20and%20adoption%3A%20%27It%27s%20about%20the%20simplicity%20of%20love%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01bb36eeacbbf8d9ec21af038bb18a8a2e346736%2F0_57_3144_2028%2F3144.jpg>
 ‘She’s very warm, and loyal’: Kidman with Sue Brierley. Photograph: 
Curtis/Starpix/Rex 
Kidman’s performance is not a dramatic interpretation of her character but a 
closely observed study. Even the clothes she wears are copied from old family 
photographs of Sue. “And I wanted to capture, I suppose, just the goodness in a 
way,” she says. Kidman’s performance conveys Sue’s limitlessly patient love for 
Saroo, and is sublimely moving, but some viewers may be uneasy with the 
uplifting portrayal of transracial, transnational adoption. Does Kidman share 
any misgivings about rich white people “rescuing” brown-skinned children from 
exotic poverty – or is it, for her, an uncomplicatedly virtuous act?

“I don’t think virtue comes into it. I mean, I think it’s just as Sue says in 
the movie. She had the vision, and she followed her vision, and we’re all on 
our own paths making our own decisions and our own choices, for whatever 
reason. So commenting on other people’s reasons – I don’t know, I’m always 
reluctant to do that. People always say, ‘What’s a happy marriage?’ or ‘Tell us 
what the secret is’, and I’m always reticent to say ‘Well this is how it should 
be’, or ‘This is what it is’, because we’re all different.”

Sue has become very much a part of my life. Yeah, I love her.

We see Sue tell Saroo in the film that, as a girl, she had pictured her future 
self mothering a brown child. She had adopted him not out of necessity, but 
choice. “I’m very similar to Sue,” Kidman says, “in the sense of having a 
vision, and feeling that it was just part of my path. Something, for whatever 
reason, I was going to do.” Kidman and Cruise have never made public their 
reasons for adopting, but when I ask, she means it was because she had shared a 
similar vision to Sue’s, she agrees: “I believe, yeah.” From what age? “When I 
was little. So it’s what I relate to in Sue, probably.”

The film, I suggest, must have made Kidman wonder about her two eldest 
children’s own birth-family history, and she smiles. “From the minute I held 
them, I wondered about that. Of course. Because you’re all intertwined. Your 
destinies somehow all come together.” Can she describe her feelings for the 
birth parents who inhabit her imagination? “Love. Exactly what Sue felt, which 
is why I wanted to play Sue. The simplicity of that love. The gift of a child. 
And again, Sue has that absolutely simple, loving feeling.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a17530c17a3aeaf015e06b01dca0b1768d020b1%2F0_10_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Lion%20and%20adoption%3A%20'It's%20about%20the%20simplicity%20of%20love'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Lion%20and%20adoption%3A%20%27It%27s%20about%20the%20simplicity%20of%20love%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a17530c17a3aeaf015e06b01dca0b1768d020b1%2F0_10_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Left to right: Sue Brierley, Nicole Kidman, Priyanka Bose, Sunny Pawar, Saroo 
Brierley and Dev Patel attend the Lion New York premiere. Photograph: D 
Dipasupil/Getty Images 
In the film, before Saroo sets off to find his birth mother, Sue tells him: “I 
can’t wait for her to see how beautiful you are.”


“That, to me, is the most gorgeous line in the film,” says Kidman. “Because 
that’s the truth of it. For me. Because Saroo has two mothers. He has his 
adopted mother, and his biological mother. But there are two of them. One made 
him, one raised him.” She seems almost lost in a reverie, but when I ask if 
this is how she and her two eldest make sense of their own maternal histories, 
she collects herself. “I’m getting into too personal things now. Their own 
lives, their choices. But their love is profound.”

Mystery has surrounded Kidman’s relationship with her adopted daughter and son 
ever since her marriage to Cruise ended, and they chose to grow up with their 
father in the scientology church. Most reports allege that they shunned their 
mother and remain estranged to this day, but this has never been confirmed by 
either child or parent, and it would feel both intrusive and pointless to ask 
Kidman to break decades of silence.

Another legacy of Kidman’s marriage to Cruise is her stratospheric fame. A 
bride at just 23, and divorced by 34, nothing she has done since then could 
explain why, at 49, she is worth so much more to the celebrity gossip industry 
than, say, Julianne Moore or Meryl Streep. Her 33-year career features a string 
of art-house films and theatrical productions, but just one commercial 
blockbuster –Batman Forever  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2FxpNCvBV_s>– and 
Kidman won her Oscar forplaying Virginia Woolf in a prosthetic nose 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O1Dj-v7L7RI>. I wouldn’t be surprised if half 
the fans who will buy any mag with Kidman on the cover have never even seen her 
act. I ask if she is happiest playing unglamorous characters such as Sue, and 
her face lights up.

Lion review: Dev Patel and Nicole Kidman hunt Oscars in moving adoption drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/lion-review-dev-patel-and-nicole-kidman-hunt-oscars-in-moving-adoption-drama>
“I love it. I’m a character actor, that’s what I see myself as. That’s who I 
am. I mean, I had a director say to me the other night: ‘Oh my gosh, your 
art-house choices are so brave,’ and I’m like, ‘I don’t even see it like that.’ 
They’re literally just what I’m drawn to.”

Kidman has chosen to live a long way from Hollywood, in Nashville, Tennessee, 
where she claims that no one ever bothers her or her family. This sounds 
implausible, but she swears it’s true. “The town is so protective of us. It’s 
amazing. I find people very, very generous to us. Very kind. And we’re also a 
very private family. Do you know what my kids look like?” I do not. “Right,” 
she laughs, with some satisfaction. Her husband is an Australian country and 
western singer, Keith Urban, and it occurs to me that living in the capital of 
his industry and not hers helps to correct the power and status imbalance 
between the couple.


“Yeah,” she agrees emphatically. “I love that.” Because he can be the famous 
one and she can take the back seat? “Yes! I’m very happy to do that.” She says 
she’s happiest being “grungy – you know, no makeup, hair pulled back” – and 
when she took the family cats into her daughter’s classroom for pet day 
recently, her daughter’s “main concern was that I would show up with my hair 
wet, pulled back in a bun with no makeup and wearing my gym gear”.

This sets her off crying. Urban, she says tenderly, is “a very stable energy” 
in the family – “He’s a rock,” but her role is “very much the glue. I mean, I 
hate to say but, yeah, you’re the heartbeat of the family. Keith says it. The 
girls say it. They just like it when I’m home. There’s just that female energy 
in the house, which is powerful. And I’d love to say that Keith could create it 
in the same way, but I don’t think that he does. The girls don’t say that he 
does. It’s all about the details, right? Which I remember from my own mum and 
dad. My dad would forget to cut our sandwiches in the middle – just little 
things, but when you’re little it all counts, right?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7866fd4e7ffa1a69a2a0f448f18b4dff900d8b89%2F264_73_3487_2092%2F3487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Lion%20and%20adoption%3A%20'It's%20about%20the%20simplicity%20of%20love'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Lion%20and%20adoption%3A%20%27It%27s%20about%20the%20simplicity%20of%20love%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fnicole-kidman-lion-adoption-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7866fd4e7ffa1a69a2a0f448f18b4dff900d8b89%2F264_73_3487_2092%2F3487.jpg>
 ‘He’s a very stable energy’: Kidman joins her husband Keith Urban on stage. 
Photograph: Terry Wyatt/Getty Images 
Kidman adored both her parents, and the memory of her father’s death in 2014 
from a heart attack 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2753136/Nicole-Kidman-s-father-killed-accident-Singapore.html>
 soon has her in tears again. Having experienced both sudden and protracted 
bereavements myself, I’m curious to know which she thinks worse, but she’s too 
puzzled by how my eyes can stay dry when I ask the question to reply, and 
instead we end up analyzing the role of emotional detachment in our respective 
professions.

In the weeks after we meet, the gossip columns run a new report about Kidman 
almost every day. She’s trying foranother baby 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/08/nicole-kidman-hopes-another-baby-age-49-despite-several-heartbreaks/>
! Kidman rules out 
<http://www.you.co.za/news/nicole-kidman-clarifies-comment-about-having-another-baby-at-49/>
 having more children! She’d love to have another one but says she’stoo old 
<http://www.ibtimes.sg/nicole-kidman-does-not-want-have-more-children-keith-urban-6330>
! Only one made me pause and wonder. According to the tabloids, Kidman and 
Urban are applying toadopt a child 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/2429684/nicole-kidman-and-husband-keith-urban-to-adopt-a-little-boy-from-india-to-add-to-their-brood/>
 from India. It is probably nonsense, of course, but it would be no great 
surprise if it turned out to be true.

• Lion is released in the UK on 20 January
 