
Nico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> said it is time 
to “drop the whole discussion” about Lewis Hamilton’s tactics during the Abu 
Dhabi Grand Prix and insisted he respects his Mercedes team-mate.

Rosberg crossed the line in second place at Yas Marina on Sunday to finish 
five points clear of Hamilton in the drivers’ championshipand secure his first 
Formula One world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/nico-rosberg-seals-first-f1-world-title-at-abu-dhabi-grand-prix>
.

The Mercedes head of motorsport, Toto Wolff, who appeared alongside Rosberg at 
a sponsors’ event in Kuala Lumpur on Tuesday, remains in “two minds” as to 
whether Hamilton will be punished.

Punishing Lewis Hamilton for Abu Dhabi antics could end up hurting Mercedes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/28/lewis-hamilton-backing-up-nico-rosberg-mercedes>
Mercedes, who won all but two of the 21 grands prix this season and sealed the 
constructors’ championship with three races to spare, strengthened their 
so-called rules of engagement earlier this season after Hamilton and Rosberg 
crashed in Spain and then Austria.

Hamilton was determined to try everything in an effort to take the title from 
his team-mate, who needed a top‑three finish, and backed Rosberg into the 
clutches of the chasing pack.

Whatever the Mercedes hierarchy make of the incident, Rosberg believes it 
should be left in the past. “In terms of his tactics in the last race, you can 
understand the team’s perspective that they weren’t too happy with that.

“But at the same time it’s easy to understand his perspective. It’s about the 
world championship so you can understand he wanted to try whatever it was 
possible to do. He did a really good job of it. He did it perfectly because I 
had no chance to try to overtake.”

Asked if he would have done the same in Hamilton’s position, Rosberg told BBC 
Radio 5 Live: “That’s too hypothetical, so there’s no point in going into that. 
We can just drop the whole discussion. There’s no point discussing this topic 
any more. It’s done and it’s in the past.”

The rivalry between the team-mates defined the season, with Hamilton winning 
10 races and Rosberg nine. Their relationship was put to the test but Rosberg 
remains respectful of Hamilton, having been close to the British driver since 
they were teenagers.

“Lewis is an amazing driver, he’s one of the best of all-time. It’s always 
tough to beat him. We have the base respect because we were really good friends 
back in the day. That’s always remained, that respect, so that helps even 
though it’s difficult because we’re within the same team fighting each other. 
It’s a very intense environment and not easy.”

Rosberg partied hard following his title win. “I can also confirm I’m a double 
world champion because we became party world champion on Sunday night as well. 
It was big. It was epic.”

Meanwhile, Hamilton was scheduled to complete a full day of tyre testing in 
Abu Dhabi on Tuesday but was replaced after the morning session. Pascal 
Wehrlein, the Mercedes junior driver who has raced for Manor, took over. 
Hamilton also withdrew from a tyre test in October because of a sore foot.

“Lewis felt unwell so Pascal stepped in for the later runs,” a Mercedes 
spokesperson said.
 