
For a driver who strove with such fierce diligence to win the world 
championshipNico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> has 
given up its fruits very quickly; champion on Sunday, retired on Friday, he was 
not even a six-day wonder.

For many years he has been one of the more anonymous of Formula One’s leading 
drivers. Now, finally thrust into the spotlight of glory, it is almost as if he 
could not stand the glare.

In truth Rosberg knows how almost impossibly difficult it was to win the F1 
title, how repetitive luck as well as formidable skill played their parts. In 
all likelihood he would always have remained a one-time winner. His 
achievement, though, is monumental. He not only climbed the mountain but left
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> in his 
shadow. That is Hamilton, the three-times world champion, faster and more 
race-crafty and the man who had beaten him almost on a consistent basis for 16 
years.

Nico Rosberg has called quits on his F1 career at the right time | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-remained-modest-and-unaffected-through-11-year-f1-career>
It was Hamilton’s greatness that defined Rosberg’s championship as a worthy 
one; as Nico’s father, Keke, would ruefully testify, the crown does not always 
go to the quickest driver.

Nico Rosberg took 10 years in Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> to finally win his prize – only 
Nigel Mansell took longer, with 12. By doing so Rosberg confounded the many 
people who said he would never be capable of prevailing against Hamilton over a 
season, and with 21 races we have just seen the longest campaign in F1 history. 
He has also been acclaimed, belatedly, in his own country following the second 
place in Abu Dhabi that got him over the championship line.

He was born in Wiesbaden, in Germany, 31 years ago but left with his family to 
live in Monaco at the venerable age of four weeks, and has lived there ever 
since, apart from when he is at his mansion in Ibiza.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fnico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50301cd48dd22f7ed8ece9aa42c7f788626f2d81%2F0_0_5355_3213%2F5355.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nico%20Rosberg%20drew%20the%20best%20from%20himself%20before%20bowing%20out%20as%20a%20F1%20champion%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fnico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nico%20Rosberg%20drew%20the%20best%20from%20himself%20before%20bowing%20out%20as%20a%20F1%20champion%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fnico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50301cd48dd22f7ed8ece9aa42c7f788626f2d81%2F0_0_5355_3213%2F5355.jpg>
 The trophy is relegated to the floor as Rosberg’s Abu Dhabi celebrations 
continued in the changing room. Photograph: Mark Thompson/Getty Images 
For Germans, Michael Schumacher was always the great racing hero. Schumacher 
was the driver with more wins and championships than any other. Crucially, 
though, he also had the common touch. After Schumacher there was the four-times 
winner Sebastian Vettel. The quiet and cerebral Rosberg failed to connect there 
in the same way. There is something essentially international about the man who 
speaks German, English, French, Italian and (a little less fluently) Spanish.

The introverted image is a little misleading. Last year Nicola Pohl, of the 
German newspaper Bild, told me: “He’s actually very funny on social media. He 
has jokes and he is teasing all the time.” The picture, though, was one of a 
calculated driver who has worked immensely hard, always talking to his 
mechanics and engineers, approaching each circuit with the care of a 
cartographer.

Nor did his racing take up residence in the memory. When it came to 
wheel-to-wheel battle he was second to Hamilton, though his vital passing move 
on Max Verstappen during the final race of the season in Abu Dhabi was 
accomplished and courageous.

Rosberg was a high-class journeyman, an eliminator of mistakes, usually two or 
three tenths of a second a lap slower than Hamilton but more likely than his 
celebrated Mercedes team-mate to extract the absolute maximum out of himself in 
every grand prix.

His gentle manner also belied an essential toughness. When Schumacher joined 
Mercedes people speculated he would wipe the track with Rosberg but it did not 
happen. And now he has come out on top against one of the quickest drivers the 
sport has seen.

Nico Rosberg announces shock F1 retirement after maiden world title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-shock-retirement-f1-formula-one>
There was also a keen intelligence. When Rosberg joined Williams and took 
their mandatory engineering aptitude test, he scored the highest marks in the 
team’s history. He turned down the opportunity to study engineering at Imperial 
College London to pursue a career in racing. “Everything relates to physics and 
maths,” he once said. He reads the business pages for fun.

He started karting when he was six and it was while racing karts at 15 that he 
came up against Hamilton. The German was behind, as usual, but the two became 
friends, playing football, eating ice creams and pizzas, competing on unicycles 
and telling each other how cool it would be if they ended up in F1.

Rosberg moved to German Formula BMW in 2002, and won the championship. He 
moved to Formula Three and tasted F1 when he first tested for Williams in 2004. 
He won the GP2 title in 2005 and at the end of the year was confirmed as a 
Williams driver for 2006. The following year he was a seven-times points 
winner, including a best of fourth. His first podium came in 2008.

He joined Mercedes in 2010, winning his first race in 2012. Hamilton joined 
him the following year. They got on well at first but then a series of clashes 
soured the relationship.

Then, in Austin last year, Hamilton won the title, barging Rosberg wide on 
turn one as he did so. Rosberg took it badly and the race was followed by the 
famous cap-throwing incident. Rosberg went away and had a long think. He 
returned a tougher competitor and a championship-winning driver.
 