
Nico Rosberg’s decision to walk away from Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-shock-retirement-f1-formula-one>
 with the taste of the podium champagne still in his mouth is a conspicuously 
brilliant one, not least because the newly crowned world champion took 
everybody with an interest in the sport – except, presumably, his nearest and 
dearest – by complete surprise.

Perhaps the most graceful consequence of his decision is that it allows him to 
retire on equal terms with his father, Keke, who won his sole world 
championship in 1982. It was Keke who put Nico in a go-kart at the age of six, 
and who nurtured and mentored his son through the early years, as could be seen 
in a charming little home movie which was widely viewed this week.

Nico Rosberg announces shock F1 retirement after maiden world title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-shock-retirement-f1-formula-one>
Keke got out of the sport unharmed, having tamed the 1,500-horsepower monsters 
of F1’s first turbo era, and he and his wife, Sina, will be delighted that 
their son has managed to negotiate his way through a career on the track and 
emerge unscathed. Even though the odds on that are much better than they were 
in Keke’s time, and incomparably better than for earlier generations, thanks to 
the modern emphasis on safety in the design of the cars and the layout of the 
circuits, there will still be a sense of relief.

It may also be that one of the reasons Nico is getting out is that he wants to 
make sure that his wife, Vivian, their 15-month-old daughter, Alaïa, and any 
further children can live their lives without the stress of knowing that he is 
heading off every couple of weeks to hurl a car around a track at speeds up to 
230mph.

The new champion is 31 years old. He has been racing for a quarter of a 
century and has spent the past 11 years inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, at the very pinnacle of the 
profession. He won the world title, which is something achieved by only 33 of 
the 742 men and women who have started grand prix races since the series began 
in 1950. His ratio of wins to races – 23 to 206 – is better than respectable 
for the modern era, particularly when his team-mate during his winning years 
was a world champion in his absolute prime.

But a factor in his decision must be the knowledge that he is not the fastest 
driver in Formula One, that his Mercedes colleague, Lewis Hamilton, has the 
edge in outright speed, and that next year he would be on something close to a 
hiding to nothing. He might not want to spend a year defending his title under 
further critical scrutiny from those who believe that his success was made 
possible only by a couple of engine failures on Hamilton’s car.

On Rosberg’s behalf it could be said that he was outstanding in terms of 
one-lap pace in qualifying, his 30 pole positions underlining his ability to 
get the most from his car in those controlled conditions. He was particularly 
good at working closely with his engineers, an attribute more vital than ever 
in the technology-saturated environment of Formula One in the 21st century, 
when drivers need to be able to absorb and carry out complex procedures 
relating to a variety of performance parameters while racing wheel to wheel 
with their rivals.

That talent struck the Williams staff when he took their engineering-aptitude 
test before joining the team in 2006, earning the highest marks they had ever 
seen. This season it enabled him to get to grips with the problems of coaxing 
the Mercedes W07 off the start line, something that initially eluded Hamilton 
and cost the Englishman – who fluffed five starts during the season – very 
dear. It is of no little significance that his engineers and pit crew held him 
in high esteem.

Some will no doubt claim that the decision betrays a certain lack of hunger. 
In a sense, that might be true. Michael Schumacher, Juan Manuel Fangio, Alain 
Prost, Sebastian Vettel, Jack Brabham, Jackie Stewart, Niki Lauda, Nelson 
Piquet, Ayrton Senna and Hamilton all won three or more titles. Hamilton, also 
31, yearns for a fourth, Fernando Alonso, 35, for a third. Fangio retired at 
47, Brabham at 44, Schumacher at 43, Piquet at 39, Prost at 38, Lauda at 36 and 
Stewart at 34.

Nico Rosberg drew the best from himself before bowing out as a F1 champion | 
Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/nico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion>
But although Rosberg’s competitive nature was hardly in doubt during his time 
in F1, he is now clearly satisfied with what he achieved. And it should not be 
overlooked that a man who turned down the offer of a place to study 
aeronautical engineering at Imperial College in London in order to pursue his 
racing ambitions might well have interesting and original ideas about what he 
wants to do with the rest of his life.

A personal memory is of seeing Rosberg on a flight home during his early days 
in F1, barely out of his teens, quietly taking his seat in economy class 
wearing a logo-free T-shirt and jeans, with none of the aura of entitlement 
that young sports stars tend to acquire along with their first contracts. There 
was an air of natural modesty and unpretentiousness about him that had clearly 
survived a privileged upbringing in Monaco and he has remained unaffected by 
his subsequent success.

What his decision will do is deprive the paddock of a man whose ready smile 
and engaging manner made him easy to like. The world of Formula One brings such 
pressures to bear on an individual’s temperament that it is hardly a surprise 
when behaviour is distorted. ButNico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> never gave a sign of believing 
himself to exist on another plane from those who tightened his wheel nuts or 
asked him for an autograph. While taking himself, as he put it in his 
statement, to the peak of the mountain, he remained identifiably a member of 
the human race.

“I’m following my heart,” he said when breaking the news of his retirement. 
“My heart is telling me this.” Good for him.
 