
The teenage me, buried deep beneath midriff fat and caution, screamed yes at 
the thought of a trip to the Swedish Arctic. The grown-up me – mother, wife, 
daughter, fulcrum of home life – started to risk assess. But my father had died 
in June and I thought a small adventure would do me good.


After two plane rides, I landed in Kiruna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/30/kiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away>
, home to the largest underground mine in the world – not that you see this, as 
the airport is tiny.

The drive to Jukkasjärvi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2016/dec/01/the-worlds-first-permanent-ice-hotel-in-pictures>
 is short. The Swedes use no special snow chains, they just drive, normally, 
through the snow and ice, without screaming. This is a small village, where the 
landscape shrinks to monochrome. The originalIce Hotel 
<http://www.icehotel.com/> is seasonal, but the new Ice Hotel 365 
<http://www.icehotel.com/about-icehotel/icehotel-365/> is open all year round 
and kept cool by solar panels.

With the addition of each thermal layer – you usually wear three – you shed 
other, unnecessary, rituals. Life becomes simpler, slower: no one really cares 
what you look like, as everything is about surviving. It is liberating and 
recalibrating. This is not a place to come to if you are on a diet. The cold 
means you must eat a lot. (I lost weight while I was there, despite eating 
heartily.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08a874fc94e78b17dfb97237121717147bc469eb%2F0_156_4756_2853%2F4756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nights%20on%20ice%20in%20Sweden's%20Arctic%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nights%20on%20ice%20in%20Sweden%27s%20Arctic%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08a874fc94e78b17dfb97237121717147bc469eb%2F0_156_4756_2853%2F4756.jpg>
 Purple reins … dog sleds in Swedish Lapland. Photograph: Asaf Kliger 
Jukkasjärvi is immensely pretty. When I was there it had just two hours of 
sunlight, so activity is packed in accordingly. The Ice Hotel complex consists 
of the ice structures themselves and small wooden buildings housing the warm 
rooms. The restaurant is a short walk across the road; meal times are set and 
food is not available at other times, but there was a great food truck down the 
road.

I found myself wandering round the camp at 2am, in -18C, wearing nothing but 
my pyjamas

As with the original hotel, the rooms in the IH365 are individually crafted by 
artists and beautiful. But now – unlike the original – some have warm, private 
en suite bathrooms, which are stunning, and a sauna.

I had seen pictures of the Ice Hotel, but to see it in the flesh, and 
understand the feat behind it, is incredible.

However, when I was alone in my room I couldn’t shake how tomb-like it felt, 
despite its size. Lying on reindeer skins on an ice bed in a thermal sleeping 
bag, I was not too cold but too hot, with no hope of variation: you were in the 
sleeping bag or out of it. I’d been awake for 23 hours by this point, so I 
thought I’d take a trip to my warm bathroom for some diversion.

Due to the cold, or teething problems, I got locked out of my bathroom and, 
more seriously, away from my warm suit. I found myself wandering round the camp 
at 2am, in -18C, wearing nothing but my pyjamas and a sleeping bag wrapped 
round my shoulders, looking for the 24-hour manned reception. Just as I was 
imagining the headlines: “Journalist found dead in PJs, no one knows what she 
was doing out of bed”, I found reception – saved! – and Gertrude put me and my 
frozen lungs back to bed with a hot chocolate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2032a631edc37b76c8fd26ff31a6efc531887fe%2F0_402_2088_2609%2F2088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nights%20on%20ice%20in%20Sweden's%20Arctic%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nights%20on%20ice%20in%20Sweden%27s%20Arctic%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2032a631edc37b76c8fd26ff31a6efc531887fe%2F0_402_2088_2609%2F2088.jpg>
 Paws for thought … Siberian huskies. Photograph: Alamy 
The activities are everything at the Ice Hotel: husky rides, survival courses 
(I can now light a fire without a match and make pine needle tea) and 
snowmobile tours across frozen lakes. There is a fabulous sauna near the cosy
Homestead <http://www.icehotel.com/hotel/food-drink/jukkasjarvi-homestead/> 
restaurant where I rolled in snow in my swimsuit. You can also jump into a hole 
cut in the frozen lake, but even my teenage self wouldn’t have done that.

Do walk up the road to Nutti Sámi Siida 
<https://www.facebook.com/Nutti-S%C3%A1mi-Siida-127020549998/>, where you can 
get excellent food, look at theSámi museum 
<http://www.siida.fi/contents/sami-museum/projects-of-the-sami-museum> and feed 
lichen to the reindeer. And do make sure you stand still, quite alone, at some 
point and stare at the apricot-coloured sky.

After two days, we drove to Nikkaluokta <http://nikkaluokta.com/en/>, where 
the road ends, picking up snowmobiles to get to a roadside café,Enoks 
<http://www.enoks.se/en/>, by Lake Láddjujávri. It wasn’t late, but it was dark 
and our path was lit only by the lights from the snowmobiles and small cane 
sticks to mark the path. It was a bit scary and exhilarating to realise you 
really are in the middle of nowhere with no phone signal, and your life 
depending on someone you met an hour ago. It was fantastic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38815f6311fc5d300bde1e746b79283091d7555c%2F0_0_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nights%20on%20ice%20in%20Sweden's%20Arctic%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nights%20on%20ice%20in%20Sweden%27s%20Arctic%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fnew-ice-hotel-swedish-lapland-arxtic-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38815f6311fc5d300bde1e746b79283091d7555c%2F0_0_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Light fantastic … the northern lights over the Ice Hotel. Photograph: Alamy 
Enoks has stood for 100 years, but was recently redone and is a modernist 
masterpiece. You can’t get over how warm it is inside, and how good the food 
is. A snowball’s throw away are four cabins where you sleep for the night: 
basic but gorgeous, like being in a doll’s house (each has a private bathroom). 
We ate, we drank Swedish whisky and, at 11.30pm, the northern lights came out, 
like the Wizard of Oz behind a heavy green curtain shining his torch.

At 11.30pm, the northern lights came out like the Wizard of Oz behind a heavy 
green curtain

The next morning we could fully appreciate Kebnekaise, Sweden’s highest 
mountain, right in front of us. We took snowmobiles on to a frozen lake, 
drilled holes in the ice and I caught a small perch which my guide killed and 
left for the Arctic foxes.

You miss the scenery later, when you’re home; when you’re there it’s so huge, 
so different, you can’t really take it in. I could have done with another day.

Two funny things happened to me in Sweden. Since my father died, I have had to 
surround myself with nice smells – an olfactory cocoon. In the Arctic I stopped 
wearing perfume. And after that first day, I stopped wearing my glasses, I just 
didn’t need them any more. I no longer needed to see detail – it was all about 
the big picture.

 * Annalisa Barbieri was a guest of Simply Sweden <http://simplysweden.co.uk/>
. The Ice Hotel - Luxury Snowmobile trip costs from £1,370pp, including flights 
and transfers, one night in an ice room and one in a warm room at the Ice 
Hotel, plus a night at the wilderness cabins, based on two sharing. Warm outer 
clothing is provided
 