
Some are calling it Nintendo’s last chance. At least at manufacturing a games 
console. The creator of smash-hit machines since the original Nintendo 
Entertainment System in 1983 suffered an ignoble commercial failure with Wii U. 
Announced last year and revealed in full on Friday, the newNintendo Switch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo-switch> machine has a lot to 
prove.

Why I am confident enough to pre-order a Nintendo Switch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/why-i-am-confident-enough-to-pre-order-a-nintendo-switch>
It’s a typically idiosyncratic creation. Described as a hybrid system, it 
works as a traditional home console, plugging into your TV, but it can also be 
slid out of its dock and played on the go, via a built in screen. The concept 
is fascinating, merging the portable and home experiences into one product, but 
what about the practice?

On Friday afternoon, Nintendo held hands-on events in several cities around 
the world. Outside the Hammersmith Apollo in London, a long queue of lucky 
fans, media types and industry insiders waited patiently, many bleary-eyed from 
having stayed up until 4am watching Nintendo’sSwitch console livestream from 
Tokyo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/nintendo-unveils-long-awaited-switch-game-console>
. All were eager to get inside, away from the cold and towards Nintendo’s 
future. Here’s what we discovered.

Hands-on with the machine
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb744c1781cf126c6e23760d2d9a89c36436f7aa%2F0_153_4284_2572%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb744c1781cf126c6e23760d2d9a89c36436f7aa%2F0_153_4284_2572%2F4284.jpg>
 The Nintendo Switch games console. Photograph: Chesnot/Getty Images 
Immediate first impressions. It’s small. The central tablet-shaped unit is 
smaller than a Wii U GamePad and has the same size screen - 6.2 inches, which 
is smaller than an iPad Mini. The dock through which you connect the device to 
your television is just a little bulkier. The Joy-Con controllers, which can be 
connected to the sides of the Switch to turn it into a handheld console, are 
tiny. Wrap your fingers around them, perhaps for a motion-controlled game of 
boxing, and they almost feel like they could disappear. You might want to 
actually wear your wrist strap for these, and don’t let your children run off 
with them or you’ll never find them again.

Still, with their curved edges and soft finish the Joy-Con are surprisingly 
comfortable in every possible configuration. The grip that turns a pair of 
Joy-Con into something that resembles a standard controller might look a bit 
silly - and canine - but it nestles snugly in the hand. It was difficult, 
however, to get a proper feel for the weight of both the grip and the handheld 
mode with Joy-Con attached to either side of the screen, because they were all 
attached to their stands with thick security cables.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe025e667d7b8f6ec39d33b4ae2dc4b51dcd6c5a9%2F0_59_2550_1531%2F2550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe025e667d7b8f6ec39d33b4ae2dc4b51dcd6c5a9%2F0_59_2550_1531%2F2550.jpg>
 Nintendo Switch in its box. Photograph: Nintendo 
Because of the security measures, it wasn’t possible to try much of the actual 
switching that gives the console its name, with one exception. When playing The 
Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, attendees could switch from television to 
handheld mode by removing the Switch from its dock, which proved to be almost 
instant, and back again, which took a second longer. Placing the Switch in its 
dock didn’t seem to quite have the satisfactory click expected, but that might 
again be blamed on the thick cable throwing off the balance.

Attendees weren’t allowed to try attaching the Joy-Con to the grip or the 
Switch itself, but the different games around the room were set up to be played 
in different ways. In handheld mode, games were displayed at 60fps and 720p, 
which looks pretty good on a screen that small. Some games were set up with the 
Switch as the display and the controllers detached, and for those it was common 
to see players leaning in to see more closely. It works, but is best saved for 
when you can’t use a television.

Importantly, while it wasn’t usually possible to test physical switching from 
one mode to another, moving between games set up to be played in different ways 
felt natural. Those with experience with the likes of analog sticks and 
triggers should have no problems adapting to the feel of the different control 
methods.


Hands-on with the games

Here are the titles we got a chance to play.

Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F082cc7dabe47be8e475288e555434d03a12863d5%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F082cc7dabe47be8e475288e555434d03a12863d5%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.png>
 Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Photograph: Nintendo 
Given the popularity of this long-running adventure series, it’s unsurprising 
that The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild was the only game with a 
substantial queue. Many of the attendees had alreadyplayed this demo at E3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/16/the-legend-of-zelda-breath-of-the-wild-hands-on-preview>
, but on a Wii U. The Switch version is largely similar, right down to the 
existence of Link’s Sheikah Slate, which was obviously meant to reflect the 
second-screen experience provided by the Wii U GamePad – an experience you 
can’t have on Switch because when it’s docked, the screen is not visible. You 
can of course undock your Switch and explore that beautiful world – 720p but 
still lovely – on the go, if only for up to three hours at a time.

1-2 Switch (Nintendo; launch title)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef79b0cbbebf4a939cfbf61b2bf8c173703e60aa%2F106_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef79b0cbbebf4a939cfbf61b2bf8c173703e60aa%2F106_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 1-2 Switch. Photograph: Nintendo 
The game that best showed off what the Joy-Con can do was 1-2-Switch, a 
collection of mini games designed to get players looking away from the screen 
and at each other. Each mini game on show was one-on-one competitive 
multiplayer, each player using a single Joy-Con to perform some action 
mimicking real life.

Quick Draw and Samurai Training use the accelerometer and gyro-sensors inside 
the controllers to test your reaction times, by respectively asking you to 
shoot your opponent or catch the sword they swing through your open hands. The 
latter also demonstrates the sturdiness of the Joy-Con, since you catch the 
sword by clapping the controller in your hand.

Ball Count and Safe Crack demonstrate the “HD rumble” technology in the 
devices that can make it feel like there are little balls rolling around inside 
the controller.Nintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> 
claimed that the rumble tech is so intricate it can even make the Joy-Con feel 
like a tumbler full of ice cubes. It’s cool, but unlikely to be used to its 
full extent in many games.

But the 1-2-Switch mini game everyone was talking about was Milk 
<https://youtu.be/cIdmsFjsvdo>, for which you hold the Joy-Con vertically, wrap 
your fingers around it, and move it up and down while applying rhythmic 
pressure to the top and bottom in turn. You know, to milk a cow. In the 
background, the screen shows a stylised view of a cow’s teats delivering the 
... product. Unsurprisingly, footage has already been a hit on social media.

These mini games are great the first time you try them, and would probably go 
down well at parties, just like the original Wii games did a decade ago, but 
the collection lacks the lasting appeal required to justify a purchase. It’s a 
shame Nintendo hasn’t chosen to bundle it in with the console, especially given 
the popularity of Wii Sports.

Snipperclips (Nintendo; March 2017)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a0c4fa27a6ec93f45e143241e22dd16cc3cbc00%2F106_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a0c4fa27a6ec93f45e143241e22dd16cc3cbc00%2F106_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Snipperclips. Photograph: Nintendo 
Another game that caused a lot of buzz on the showroom floor was a cooperative 
2D puzzle game that involves two shapes with feet and faces cutting chunks out 
of each other in order to create new shapes and solve challenges. Played in 
pairs with a Joy-Con each, Snipperclips fits well with the tendency players 
have to lean in when using the Switch on its kickstand as the display. Its 
unique mechanic feels very refreshing, and appropriate for a Nintendo console, 
but Snipperclips might not be as new as it seems. A very similar game called
Friendshapes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WJGooKIoy1Q>, from brothers Tom 
and Adam of SFB Games, was playable at EGX’s Leftfield Collection back in 2015.

Arms (Nintendo; March 2017)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ed8b724e8327d3173897714d3c429fbdf5599ab%2F96_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ed8b724e8327d3173897714d3c429fbdf5599ab%2F96_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Arms. Photograph: Nintendo 
Arms is reminiscent of the boxing game in Wii Sports, albeit with characters 
whose arms extend on springs and end in a variety of weapons. Hold two Joy-Con 
vertically and turned so that the buttons face inwards – which is still 
comfortable but makes you grateful for the wrist strap – and punch. You can 
also tilt the controllers to move, turn them inwards to shield, punch both at 
once to grab, press L and R to dash and jump, and press ZL or ZR to use a 
character’s special move - heal while shielding, hover, teleport and so on. 
There’s plenty of strategy here, but just as boxing was the lesser played of 
the Wii Sports games because it required each player to have a nunchuck, Arms 
is likely to suffer from its need for two Joy-Con each, especially given their 
listed price of £75 a pair.

Splatoon 2 (Nintendo; summer 2017)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb255631e460c1f2d133b62cb94a33ff49876561a%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb255631e460c1f2d133b62cb94a33ff49876561a%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Splatoon 2. Photograph: Nintendo 
Despite promises of a full sequel, Splatoon 2 feels very similar to the 
original, which will probably be just fine for those who racked up dozens or 
hundreds of hours and just want more of the same, or those who skipped the Wii 
U altogether and will experience it for the first time on Switch. The demo did 
include one new weapon, Splat Dualies, which let your squid shoot their 
coloured ink from both hands at once. Using motion controls – in this case in 
handheld mode – still feels gimmicky, fun at first but not ideal for fast-paced 
competitive play.

Mario Kart 8 Deluxe (Nintendo; 28 April)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fa1acfc330d01a6972684ff89f72206a6d1b891%2F80_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fa1acfc330d01a6972684ff89f72206a6d1b891%2F80_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Mario Kart 8 Deluxe. Photograph: Nintendo 
Mario Kart 8 Deluxe isn’t pretending to be anything more than an upgraded 
version of Mario Kart 8, which will suit both those who want to bring that 
experience with them when they upgrade from Wii U to Switch, and those who’ve 
never played the game before. Changes include the introduction of a battle 
mode, some new characters including ones from Splatoon, and an optional smart 
steering feature that keeps players on the track.

But the biggest Switch-specific feature, of course, is the ability to play in 
many different ways. At the event, attendees could play eight-player local 
multiplayer in handheld mode, with the Nintendo Switch Pro Controller in 
television mode, or with the Switch on its kickstand and two players each using 
one Joy-Con in a tiny steering wheel. Any way you play it, Mario Kart 8 is 
still great.

Fast RMX (Shin’en; March 2017)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4d50d8781a410dd5f81c05c831bfd01b21f6d39%2F121_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4d50d8781a410dd5f81c05c831bfd01b21f6d39%2F121_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Fast RMX. Photograph: Nintendo 
This colourful futuristic racer looked great in 1080p and 60fps on the 
television mode, but it would have been good to test out how it plays in 
handheld mode, whether you can still play two-player splitscreen and if that 
causes the frame-rate to drop. Still, with little more to worry about than 
staying on the track and switching your anti-gravity vehicle’s colour in time 
to catch boost strips, Fast RMX is good simple fun.

And the rest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c7582912095755c9951c1d879dffdc2678d9068%2F19_0_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c7582912095755c9951c1d879dffdc2678d9068%2F19_0_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Sonic Mania. Photograph: Sega 
Sonic Mania (Sega; Spring 2017) was described as a homage to Sonic. It’s 
neither a new game nor strictly a reboot. The demo was the first level of the 
original Sonic but with added Tails and dash ability, and a different boss 
encounter at the end.

Skylanders Imaginators (Toys for Bob; Activision; 3 March) was demonstrated 
the NFC, with players bringing Skylanders into the game by tapping them against 
the right Joy-Con. It works well, but feels less magical than placing them on a 
solid pedestal.

Super Bomberman R (Konami; 3 March) was also played with two players with a 
Joy-Con each, leaning into the Switch on its kickstand. This setup seems to 
work well for retro-type games, and we’ll probably see more come to Switch.


Just Dance 2017 (Ubisoft; 3 March) also worked well with each player holding 
just one Joy-Con, their small size and light weight an advantage for those who 
want to forget they’re holding a controller at all.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddefe0b2720496a3fa361073579fc518f0de2e38%2F0_256_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world's%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nintendo%20Switch%3A%20hands-on%20with%20the%20world%27s%20strangest%20games%20console&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnintendo-switch-games-console-london-launch-zelda-splatoon-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddefe0b2720496a3fa361073579fc518f0de2e38%2F0_256_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A Nintendo Switch launch event. Photograph: Chesnot/Getty Images 
Our verdict

As its name suggests, the main selling point of the Switch is the ability to 
play it in all sorts of different configurations. Though it was disappointing 
not to be allowed to try many of these actions at the event, most of the 
configurations were available and proved viable even if they sacrificed some 
resolution or power or – in the case of leaning in to better see the Switch on 
its kickstand – comfort. The question is whether people will see these options 
as reason enough to buy.

If we’re going to question the necessity of certain features, when will we see 
why the Switch needed a capacitive touch screen? What games will make the HD 
rumble worth whatever extra cost it added to the expensive Joy-Con controllers? 
Without having 1-2-Switch bundled in with every console, will players care 
about the motion controls and will developers bother to create more games that 
use them? Will there be enough online content to justify paying a monthly 
subscription after the free introductory period ends?

Of course, you could just see these features as a bonus to a console that 
looks and feels great, but then the selling point has to be the games. As far 
as launch titles go the Switch is lacking, but then the hardcore fans who’ll 
buy the console on day one will likely be satisfied with just the huge 
open-world Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. And for those who wait for 
Christmas there’ll be lots more to choose from, supposedly including a new 
open-world Mario game in Super Mario Odyssey.

As for third-party developers, word on the show floor was that the Switch is 
far easier to develop for than the Wii U, which could translate to better 
third-party support. Given the architecture is apparently similar to the latest 
Sony and Microsoft machines, it should at least be easier for developers to 
port across their PS4 and Xbox One games to bulk out the Switch library. 
Whether they do this or not will depend on whether the console shows signs of 
success. Low initial sales can quickly cause a vicious cycle in which 
publishers withdraw support and further lower a console’s chances.

This was a fun event, filled with familiar Nintendo experiences, but doubts 
remain. Given what happened with the Wii U, here’s hoping Nintendo can switch 
things up.
 