
The graphic stripes of the Haçienda nightclub motif; The Madchester music 
scene of the 80s and 90s and Peter Saville’s cover art for Joy Division and New 
Order – the stylistic and cultural influences of the north of England have long 
been reference points for the fashion industry. In 2003, designerRaf Simons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/02/raf-simons-confirmed-calvin-klein-chief-creative-officer>
 put Saville’s album imagery on the back of his parkas – coats that now change 
hands for more than £15k. More recently, Virgil Abloh of Off-White referenced 
the Haçienda in his designs, even recreating the club’s interior for his 
fashion week party with the help of its original creator Ben Kelly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda83a09cc39189c23ecff23356017e099e4a78f%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20soul%3A%20a%20fashion%20showcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20soul%3A%20a%20fashion%20showcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda83a09cc39189c23ecff23356017e099e4a78f%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 Derrin Crawford and Demi-Leigh Cruickshank in ‘The Liver Birds’, LOVE 
magazine, Liverpool, 2012. Photograph: Alice Hawkins 
The north has also produced some of fashion’s most talked-about designers and 
photographers from the past few decades, from millinerStephen Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/27/every-youth-movement-has-drugs-ours-was-fashion-stephen-jones>
 and menswear designerChristopher Shannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/jan/10/why-christopher-shannon-is-still-at-the-cutting-edge-of-fashion>
 to Alasdair McLellan who shoots covers for the likes ofMan About Town 
<http://www.manabouttown.tv/> and advertising campaigns for Louis Vuitton. And 
now a new exhibition that opens this month in Liverpool –North: Identity, 
Photography, Fashion 
<https://openeye.org.uk/whatson/north-identity-photography-fashion/> – aims to 
bring together northern cultural history alongside clothing, artwork, 
documentary images, fashion shoots and interviews in a show that cements the 
region’s homegrown creative output as well as its global influence.

Pinning down exactly what constitutes northern or southern style is arguably 
tricky. “I think it is impossible to summarise either region as having a 
specific style,” says Adam Murray, co-curator of the exhibition. “Often the 
north is written about or treated as one homogenised space, but this simply 
isn’t true. The same way that in the south, Bristol is very different to 
Plymouth or Milton Keynes. There are, though, certainly motifs and tropes that 
[fellow co-curator] Lou Stoppard and I have identified that would be difficult 
to argue have not originated in the north.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38a3b4b99d50198e0dce4ed43ed8439c09c08adc%2F269_233_2707_4399%2F2707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20soul%3A%20a%20fashion%20showcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20soul%3A%20a%20fashion%20showcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38a3b4b99d50198e0dce4ed43ed8439c09c08adc%2F269_233_2707_4399%2F2707.jpg>
 Gosha Rubchinskiy, SS17. Photograph: Gosha Rubchinskiy 
Stoppard – a writer, broadcaster and editor-at-large for fashion website 
SHOWstudio <http://showstudio.com/> – had increasingly noted northern 
influences in the work of key fashion designers, particularly in menswear. The 
rise of sportswear, and its nod to the 1980s casual look that was born in 
northern England, has seen it appear on a variety of runways. Stoppard points 
out Gosha Rubchinskiy’s SS17 collection, which featured tracksuits by Sergio 
Tacchini, Kappa and Fila. Raf Simons in SS16 also referenced Mark Leckey’s film 
Fiorucci Made Me Hardcore, which namechecks all three of the labels seen on 
Rubchinskiy’s runway.

For Murray, an academic based in Manchester, the beginnings of the show were 
initially sparked around 2008: “I noticed that fashion editorials were 
explicitly referencing northern England in their titles and use of locations,” 
he says. Pylons, terraced houses, brick walls and washing hanging on lines in 
back garden – these were all potential backdrops for models in designer 
fashions. “This mainly coincided with the height of [northern model]Agyness Deyn
 <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/agyness-deyn>’s fame,” adds Murray. “We 
have two of these editorials on display [in the exhibition] –[one by] Tim Walker
 <http://showstudio.com/img/images/155001-155200/155015_960n.jpg?1446654197> 
for British Vogue and [another by] Alasdair McLellan for i-D.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39be313fc0331e77d30bac7db87f2f72c79ee2d3%2F356_149_1389_1443%2F1389.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20soul%3A%20a%20fashion%20showcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20soul%3A%20a%20fashion%20showcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39be313fc0331e77d30bac7db87f2f72c79ee2d3%2F356_149_1389_1443%2F1389.jpg>
 From the series Skelmersdale, 1984. Photograph: Stephen McCoy 
The exhibition will also showcase relevant pieces by Simons and Abloh, 
alongside Adidas trainers – styles that reference Ian Brown of the Stone Roses 
and the Gallagher brothers of Oasis – and clothes by Paul Smith, which nod to 
Shaun Ryder of the Happy Mondays. Also on display will be documentary 
photography from the past 100 years, spreads from style magazines (including 
Glen Luchford’s original prints of the Stone Roses from the Face) and a film of 
the late Corinne Day (known for her photographs of Kate Moss as the beginnings 
of “heroin chic’) while shooting in Blackpool.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad01a6bd168de35666b5723daf2b350d4c5b7f7%2F134_258_749_936%2F749.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20soul%3A%20a%20fashion%20showcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20soul%3A%20a%20fashion%20showcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthern-soul-a-fashion-showcase-liverpool-open-eye-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad01a6bd168de35666b5723daf2b350d4c5b7f7%2F134_258_749_936%2F749.jpg>
 Untitled, Manchester, 1997-01. Photograph: Jason Evans 
“We were interested in the idea of an exhibition that was about place and 
space. There are so many amazing fashion exhibitions, but they are very 
London-centric,” Stoppard says. “There is a vogue for blockbuster, 
single-designer retrospectives and we wanted to do something different. We 
wanted to tie together ideas about identity and community with broader culture 
and fashion.” Turner prize winners Jeremy Deller and Mark Leckey have also lent 
for the show. A series of films with Gareth Pugh, Claire Barrow, Stephen Jones 
and Christopher Shannon also provide insight into growing up in the north, and 
the impact this had on their creative lives.

“All across the creative industries there are so many great talents who hail 
from the north and, while we do want to spotlight them, really this exhibition 
is about the people on the street,” says Stoppard. “I hope visitors recognise 
things that they experienced first hand – songs they danced to, clubs they 
frequented, streets they walked, icons they adored, clothes they wore. I want 
this exhibition to mean something to people.”

 * North: Identity, Photography, Fashion runs from 6 Jan to 19 Mar, at Open 
Eye gallery, Liverpool 
<https://openeye.org.uk/whatson/north-identity-photography-fashion/>
 