
The number of Nigerian women travelling by boat from Libya to Italy almost 
doubled last year, with the vast majority of new arrivals victims of sex 
trafficking and exploitation, according to theInternational Organisation for 
Migration <http://unitedkingdom.iom.int/>.

The IOM believes approximately 80% of the 11,009 Nigerian women registered at 
landing points in Sicily in 2016 were trafficked, and will go on to live a life 
of forced prostitution in Italy and other countries inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

The figure is almost double that of 2015, when 5,600 women were registered by 
the IOM. The 2016 figures represent an almost eightfold increase from 2014, 
when 1,450 Nigerian women were registered at landing points in Sicily.

“We have seen a huge increase in the number of Nigerian women arriving last 
year,” said Carlotta Santarossa, a counter-trafficking project manager for the 
IOM.

“According to our indicators we believe the majority of Nigerian women who are 
arriving into Italy are victims of trafficking and are likely to end up 
exploited in Italy or other European countries. InItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> the numbers are too high to provide 
all of them them with the services they need.”


Trafficked to Turin: the Nigerian women forced to work as prostitutes in Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/07/nigeria-trafficking-women-prostitutes-italy>
The IOM said the increase reflected a dramatic rise in the overall numbers of 
Nigerian men, women and children being registered at landing points in Italy. 
According to the agency’s latest figures, 37,500 of the 180,000 migrants 
arriving in Italy by sea last year were Nigerian, the first time they have 
eclipsed Eritreans as the largest national group. The total number for 2015 was 
22,000. About 3,000 of the 37,000 Nigerian migrants were unaccompanied minors.

Alberto Mossino, director of Piam Onlus, <http://www.piamonlus.org/> an 
anti-trafficking NGO working with Nigerian migrants, said the increase in 
Nigerians arriving by sea is indicative of the power of the highly organised 
trafficking gangs operating alongside Libyan militias to control migrant flows 
from north Africa.

“Before, migrants could arrive alone in Libya and make their way by boat to 
Europe,” he said. “Now, it is too dangerous: there is civil war and it is only 
the Nigerian and Eritrean trafficking gangs who are able to transport large 
numbers of people through the country, where militias are controlling the 
borders and ports.

“These are not smuggling gangs, their intention is to exploit and profit from 
the migrants they are transporting along the way, and women are the most 
lucrative cargo.”

According to surveys conducted by the IOM at landing points last year, more 
than 70% of migrants travelling overland through north Africa to Europe showed 
indications of human trafficking, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/18/70-of-migrants-to-europe-from-north-africa-trafficked-or-exploited-un-united-nations-survey>
 organ trafficking and exploitation along the way.


Escaping the sex trade: the stories of Nigerian women lured to Italy - in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/aug/07/escaping-the-sex-trade-the-stories-of-nigerian-women-lured-to-italy>
Among those questioned, 49% reported having being held in a location against 
their will, often for ransom. The majority of the cases occurred in Libya.

“Libya is a black hole at present, from a humanitarian point of view – all 
migrants arriving from Libya have faced violence and human rights violations,” 
said Flavio Di Giacomo, a spokesperson for the IOM in Italy.

Mossino said existing anti-trafficking services were at gridlock, with the 
Italian government providing only 1,600 places for victims of trafficking at 
specialist shelters.

“If there are 11,000 women arriving in one year, there is simply no way of 
providing them with any help or security,” he said. “There is nothing we can do 
to help them.”
 