
We will leave the European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> like a 
drunk tumbling out of a pub at closing time, perhaps with the barman’s boot on 
our backside. We’ll find ourselves face down on the pavement wondering what 
just happened. The idea of an orderly, negotiated exit retreats to the margins 
of possibility: the more likely outcome is chaotic rupture.

This cash for grouse scandal shows how Britain has become a plutocrats' 
paradise | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/28/britain-plutocrats-landed-gentry-shotgun-owners>
No industry will be kicked harder by Brexit than farming. It is uniquely 
vulnerable for three reasons. Small changes to the amount of goods allowed to 
enter this country with low trade taxes (a system known as tariff rate quotas) 
could knock many farmers out of business. There are86 agricultural products 
subject to these quotas 
<https://tradebetablog.wordpress.com/2016/08/10/hilton-beef-quota/> in the EU, 
and Britain might have to renegotiate every one of them, in some cases with 
dozens of other nations. Thecomplexity could be overwhelming 
<https://tradebetablog.wordpress.com/2017/01/06/limits-of-possibility/>.

Without labourers from the EU, fruit and vegetable growers will not get their 
crops off the fields. As a result of perceived hostility and a weaker pound, 
migrant farm labourfell by 30% 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/brexit-farming-agriculture-crisis-labour-shortage-national-union-farmers>
 after the referendum last year. If the government ends free movement, many 
producers will go under.

Most importantly, farmers here have developed a toxic dependency on European 
subsidies. These now provide, in aggregate,over half their income 
<https://www.ft.com/content/f88a6556-5b0f-11e6-9f70-badea1b336d4>. It is hard 
to see how the government could keep paying them in their current form.

Every year €50bn (£43bn) is taken from the pockets of European taxpayers of 
all stations, and poured disproportionately into thepockets of the very rich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/01/farm-subsidies-blatant-transfer-of-cash-to-rich>
. The money is paid by the hectare, so the more land you own, the more cash you 
are given. In England, the government has refused to limit the money a 
landowner can receive: some people receivehundreds of thousands of pounds a 
year in public funds <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37493956>. Social 
security is capped only for the poor.

Nor are these funds reserved for farming. The government uses this system to 
keep its members and friends in the style to which they feel entitled. Some of 
them claim this money for land used tobreed racehorses 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/10/23/uae-prime-minister-given-1m-farm-subsidies-horse-breeding-empire/>
 and shoot grouse. David Cameron’s governmentraised the public subsidy for 
grouse moors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/28/britain-plutocrats-landed-gentry-shotgun-owners>
 by 86%.

But that is not the worst of it. To claim most farm subsidies, you must keep 
the land bare: the system amounts to a €50bn perverse incentive for clearing 
wildlife habitats. Across the European Union, hundreds of thousands of hectares 
of woods, scrubland, reed beds, ponds and other “ineligible features” have been 
destroyed for thesole purpose of claiming public money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/waste-cash-leavers-in-out-land-subsidie>
.

The subsidy system sustains the greatest cause of habitat and wildlife 
destruction in Britain (whose impacts are far wider than all the building that 
has ever taken place here):sheep grazing on infertile land 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2013/06/meet-the-greatest-threat-to-our-countryside-sheep/>
. Sheep have not so much altered the ecosystem as removed it altogether, 
stripping most edible plants and much of the soil from the land, leaving 
nothing of what would once have been a rich mosaic of forest and glade except 
coarse grass, occasionally interspersed with bracken and bare rock: the only 
things the sheep can’t eat.

There are no official figures for the amount of land used by sheep in this 
country, so I commissioned some research of my own. The results are very rough 
and provisional. (A full survey would take many months and cost thousands.) But 
they are of this order: the area that is grazed by sheep in Britain is broadly 
equivalent to our entire arable acreage.

In other words, sheep occupy roughly the same amount of land as is used to 
grow all the cereals, oilseeds, potatoes, fruit, vegetables and other crops 
this country produces. Yet lamb and mutton provide just 1.2% of our diet. Nor 
are they feeding the rest of the world – imports and exports of sheep meat are
almost exactly matched 
<http://beefandlamb.ahdb.org.uk/wp/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/UK-Yearbook-2015-Sheep-200715.pdf>
. (I explain how thesefigures are derived on my website 
<http://www.monbiot.com/2017/01/11/explanation-of-the-figures-in-grim-reaping/>
.)

In other words, this is an astonishingly profligate use of land. It is hard to 
think of any industry, anywhere on earth, with a higher ratio of destruction to 
production. Because it is uneconomic, it depends entirely on European money. It 
should be a source of enduring shame to Britain’s big conservation groups that, 
out of sheer cowardice, they refuse to confront this pointless mass erasure of 
wildlife at public expense.

This spending – £3bn a year in the UK, which is roughly equivalent to the NHS 
deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/20/nhs-in-england-reveals-245bn-record-deficit>
 – has been protected only by the fact that our government is not directly 
responsible for it. As soon as the money appears on national accounts, it will 
become politically unsustainable. The system has to change. We should ensure it 
changes for the better.

New Zealand shows how not to do it. When subsidies were suddenly stopped there 
in 1984, small and medium-sized farms went under, and the government protected 
the remaining producers by scrapping environmental laws.

It would not be surprising to see this happen here. European measures 
protecting the natural world, such as the habitats and birds directives, are 
likely tobecome zombie legislation 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmenvaud/599/59902.htm>
 in the UK after Brexit, as the institutions required to enforce them will no 
longer exist. With Andrea Leadsom in charge of farming and Liam Fox in charge 
of trade, everything could go. Both farmers and conservationists should 
fiercely resist these outcomes.

We’re treating soil like dirt. It’s a fatal mistake, because all human life 
depends on it | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/treating-soil-like-dirt-fatal-mistake-human-life>
The only fair way of resolving this incipient crisis is to continue to provide 
public money, but only for the delivery of public goods – such as restoring 
ecosystems, preventing flooding downstream, and bringing children and adults 
back into contact with the living world. This should be accompanied by rules 
strong enough to ensure that farmers can no longer pollute our rivers,strip the 
soil from the land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/treating-soil-like-dirt-fatal-mistake-human-life>
, wipe out pollinators and other wildlife, and destroy the features of the 
countryside with impunity.

If farmers are to be exposed to market forces, the market should be fair. This 
means curtailing the power of the chain stores and, where necessary, breaking 
them up: it is outrageous that farmersreceive only 9% 
<http://peopleneednature.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/A-Pebble-in-the-Pond-final.pdf>
 of the value of their produce sold in supermarkets.

None of this will be easy; but we could pluck from the wreckage a better 
system of support for farmers and for the countryside than exists at the 
moment. It would be hard to think of a worse one.

• You can comment on this article via our Your Opinions thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/farmers-fear-brexit-save-british-countryside-european-subsidy-wildlife-agriculture>
, which opens at 10am on Wednesday

• A fully referenced version of this article can be found at monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>. Twitter: @georgemonbiot 
<https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot>
 