
I liked John Harris’s article (Stoke will show who speaks for working-class 
Brexit voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/stoke-on-trent-brexit-corbyn-waterloo-byelection>
, 14 January). He spent time in Stoke, but it takes longer to gauge the 
complexity of the crisis. I was born there, and spent years researching the 
city, listening to diverse voices to understand racism, Labour’s crisis and now 
Brexit. My new bookDistress in the City 
<https://www.ucl-ioe-press.com/books/social-justice-equality-and-human-rights/distress-in-the-city/>
 is the outcome.

Harris is right to mention the dramatic decline of industry and the anger 
caused by parachuting inTristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> (palpably a decent and 
talented man). My own view is the anger was less about him and more against New 
Labour arrogance. It is also true that Labour was in disarray long before, as 
old working-class self-help institutions buckled with the collapse of the 
economy and ward parties on particular estates evaporated. A once-strong civic 
culture fractured.

Places like Stoke once generated wealth for the whole nation and feel 
abandoned by elites. If NewLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
took such places for granted, neoliberal economics and the cult of 
individualism blamed people for their own plight. No wonder mental illness rose 
and people turned to the BNP – who listened, for a while – and later to Ukip 
and Brexit. But all is not lost: there are resources of hope in the city, in 
churches, in mosques, in campaigns about a new civic centre, and in adult 
education when working-class women from different ethnic backgrounds meet. 
Maybe the byelection could encourage more joined-up thinking about renewal, in 
this multicultural city, and the responsibilities of the whole nation in such a 
project.
Professor Linden West
Canterbury Christ Church University

• Tristram’s Hunt’s resignation (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
, 14 January) is another sign of Labour’s slow disintegration following the 
rejection by one-third of their MPs after the 2010 general election of their 
own manifesto commitment to a referendum on voting reform. This blocked the 
possible consideration of a coalition with the Lib Dems, which had seemed 
likely at one stage. Their refusal to countenance voting reform and an 
alternative arrangement ensured that David Cameron would become prime minister, 
and he was in Downing Street even before he could agree a coalition with Nick 
Clegg. And if Labour had stuck to its manifesto pledge in 1997 to hold a 
referendum on proportional representation, we would not be where we are now.
Chris Rennard
Liberal Democrat, House of Lords

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 