
Matthew d’Ancona: This address had a Thatcheresque sting in its tail

So the lady’s not for turning. Well, we knew that, didn’t we? Brexit means 
Brexit, no “partial membership”, no “half-in, half-out”. This was the section of
Theresa May’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>
 most heavily briefed in advance – but still gloriously welcome to the hard 
Brexiteers when she finally uttered the words like an ideological incantation.

Though delivered as an encomium to the comity of nations, this address also 
had a Thatcheresque sting in its tail. The prime minister would not, she said, 
accept, a “punitive deal” with the EU. Indeed, the pursuit of such a strategy 
would be an act of “calamitous self-harm” by the remaining 27 member states.

In such circumstances, they would lose access to crucial supply chains, to the 
City, and to the goodwill of Britain – which might, in retaliation,recast 
itself as an offshore tax haven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/philip-hammond-suggests-uk-outside-single-market-could-become-tax-haven>
. This was the prime minister as Don Corleone, warning the assembled diplomats 
of the continent that they were about to be made an offer they couldn’t refuse.

Theresa May's Brexit speech: 'No deal for Britain is better than a bad deal' - 
Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>
May made her statement with poise, a sign of her under-acknowledged growth in 
the role of prime minister. But her precision-tooled rhetoric could not 
disguise the difficulty of what lies ahead. She wants both to leave – fully, 
unambiguously – and then to negotiate selective agreements with specific EU 
institutions: the “greatest possible access” to the single market, a new 
relationship with the customs union, cooperation over law and order, defence, 
intelligence. She ruled out paying “huge sums” to Brussels for the privilege – 
but not, please note, an “appropriate” contribution.

As I wrote yesterday, Brexit is the easy bit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/hard-soft-brexit-theresa-may-speech>
. The prime minister must also steer the deal through parliament, which, quite 
rightly, will be given a vote on its content. In her negotiation with Brussels, 
she must prevent the “phased process of implementation” getting lost in 
“political purgatory”.

That work alone will dominate her premiership. Today, she maintained the poker 
face that is her trademark. The other 27 players must now decide how to play 
their hands.

Polly Toynbee: This looks like war

Call it clean, call it hard, but May’s red, white and blue Brexit threatens 
epic self-harm – out of the single market, out of the customs union, no 
half-in, half-out. Immigration she has put above all else, regardless of 
livelihoods and despite polls showing that Brexit voters would not want border 
control to cost them dearly.

Enoch Powell from the grave has finally won – Brexiteer leaders are his direct 
inheritors. Where other Conservative leaders always saw off their 
little-Englander, closed-border right flank, she is the first to cave in.

How she has sugared that hard truth in fantasy visions of her “stronger, 
fairer, more global Britain”, as if this “great global trading nation” with its 
gigantic trade deficit still ruled the imperial waves. Cake-and-eat-it 
delusions infused all she said: Irish border? We’ll sort it, God knows how. Get 
all the trade we want for every key sector – no problem, and no contributions 
either. They need us more than we need them, she boasts. If they try 
punishment, here’s her fist – a cut-throat tax haven race to the bottom, “our 
freedom to set a competitive tax rate”. How disgraceful too to use our 
intelligence capability as a deeply damaging added threat.

More from the realms of fantasy: time and again she claimed the country was 
united or coming together, at least, when it has never been more sorely split, 
emotionally, politically, regionally, generationally. Nor was there any comfort 
for EU nationals here and thus none for UK nationals over there. Had she meant 
her words of keeping the partnership with old EU allies, that one small gesture 
of true friendship would have opened her negotiations in a genuine spirit of 
amity. Instead, this looks like war.

Giles Fraser: The left must not keep moping about the downsides

I wonder if the symbolism was deliberate. For it was at Lancaster House that 
Margaret Thatcher delivered her “Europe open for business” speech 
<http://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/107219> in April 1988, extolling the 
virtues of the single market. Thatcher was one of the principal architects of 
this idea and her vision of Europe was that of a free trade zone where business 
could go on uninterrupted by the barriers of the nation state. Here, the free 
activity of business would not be interfered with by governments, whatever 
their elected mandate.

Key points from May's Brexit speech: what have we learned?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
Today, May appeared at Lancaster House to rightly insist on our tradition of 
parliamentary sovereignty – which is why parliament will get the final say on 
the Brexit deal – but also to undo Thatcher’s disastrous single market model. 
The EU has become little more than a club for big business, which is why it’s 
over atthe CBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/uk-business-leaders-cbi-train-crash-brexit>
 and atDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/absent-trump-dominates-davos-discussions-wef-starts>
 that they will be mourning Britain’s lack of membership the most.

Yes, she made lots of warm and compensatory noises about free trade. But from 
now on we get to decide our trade rules in the House of Commons. Which is why, 
despite the obvious comparisons between them, May has become the first prime 
minister to escape from Thatcher’s dark shadow.

The task for the left is not to resist any of this, still less to hope it will 
fail so that they can bask in an “I told you so” glow, but rather to redouble 
its efforts to repatriate the best bits of European law, such as workers’ 
rights and environmental protection, through the power of our own sovereign 
House of Commons. In other words, not to keep moping on about the downsides of 
leaving the EU, but to help shape our new relationship and win an election. 
Because the whole point of Brexit was to insist on our own right to determine 
our own future.

John Harris: Immigration is front and centre

Twenty-nine years ago, the Berlin Wall was still intact, acid house was in 
full effect and Margaret Thatcher was the prime minister. In April 1988, she 
made a speech at Lancaster House that set out the glories of the European 
single market, seemingly the embodiment of her free-enterprise credo: “a single 
market without barriers – visible or invisible”, which would give UK businesses 
“direct and unhindered access to the purchasing power of over 300 million of 
the world’s wealthiest and most prosperous people”.

Well, goodbye to all that: it is one of the most remarkable turnarounds of 
recent history that we’re now on our way out, set only on “the greatest 
possible access”. The most vocal spokespeople for the 48% are understandably 
howling their pain. But in political terms at least, that move and the speech 
that announced it seemed straightforward and successful.

Prime minister vows to put final Brexit deal before parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
May is no longer open to the charge that her government has no plan. By way of 
playing to the populist politics of the moment, immigration is front and 
centre. Even if MPs will be faced with a choice between a deal and no deal at 
all and thus vote in large numbers for what the government has negotiated, 
parliament will get the final say on Brexit’s terms. That faint sound you can 
hear is Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party, struggling to find a response that will 
have any traction at all.

And yet, and yet. Within May’s speech was an attempt to tie together a huge 
array of political and economic items that may spectacularly fail. The idea 
that what 23 June represented was a vote for a Britain “even more global and 
internationalist, in action and spirit” is clearly laughable. It is no good 
banging on about a country open to overseas talent – and the glories of 
scientific and academic co-operation – when you are already moving towards
cutting the numbers of EU students by over 30,000 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-news/cap-brexit-international-student-visas-cost-uk-economy-2bn-year-immigration-hepi-a7526026.html>
. Bromides about Scotland and Wales do not smooth over the fact that single 
market membership represents a huge red line forNicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/sturgeon-reiterates-hard-brexit-threat-scottish-independence-vote-referendum>
, and that the Union is once again creaking.

One other thing. This was effectively May’s last big moment of political 
control before article 50 is triggered, negotiations begin, and all that stuff 
about the best deal in the best of all possible worlds collides with what the 
EU wants. When that story takes flight, today – and its temporary political 
dividends – will feel like something from another age.
 