
Each week over the past tumultuous year of teaching, one of our Secret 
Teachers has lifted the lid on issues from the classroom. Here are our 2016 
favourites – let us know yours in the comments or viaTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach> (@GuardianTeach) and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianTeacherNetwork/>. And if you’d like to be a 
Secret Teacher in the new year, get in touch.

Parents, your ‘treats’ ruined our school trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jun/18/secret-teacher-parents-your-treats-ruined-our-school-trip>
“I suffered a sense of humour failure at 3.15am on day four of our recent 
residential trip …” – and so began one of our most popular Secret Teacher 
pieces this year. Warning: it includes contraband Haribo, wads of missing cash 
and some seriously sleep-deprived teachers.

Secret supply teacher: we’re used to trouble from students. If only we had 
support from staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/aug/27/secret-supply-teacher-were-used-to-trouble-from-students-if-only-we-had-support-from-staff>
It won’t comes as a surprise that supply teachers have it tough when it comes 
to pupils. Less expected, though, was the behaviour our writer experienced from 
other staff: “We seem invisible to most other teachers. We huddle in the corner 
of the staffroom like second-class citizens, ignored by all but other support 
staff, bright-eyed PGCE students and those NQTs whose sunny dispositions have 
not yet been crushed by the daily grind of education.”

Dear Nicky, I cried at the Sats hell you put my pupils through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/14/secret-teacher-dear-nicky-i-cried-at-the-sats-hell-you-put-my-pupils-through>
Sats are the cause of stress across the board: for pupils, parents and staff, 
as this primary teacher explained, in an impassioned letter to then education 
secretary Nicky Morgan. “I wanted to tell the children to close their test 
papers and that it doesn’t matter how many jars full of jam were made for the 
school fair. I wanted to march the children to Whitehall and for you to look 
them in the eye and tell them that despite all they have gone through, despite 
the living hell they face every day – the kind of hell that would bring most 
adults to their knees – that they still aren’t good enough for you and your 
chums in parliament.”

I moved to Africa – and realised how flawed British education is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/nov/26/secret-teacher-africa-is-teaching-me-how-flawed-british-education>
It’s always interesting to see which pieces get the biggest response. This one 
was hugely popular, perhaps because our writer painted a picture of a teaching 
environment where time, space and faith in professional judgment are abundant – 
in stark contrast to the experience of many commenting on the story. “It’s a 
low-pressure, high-freedom environment that places absolute trust in its 
teachers’ abilities,” they wrote. “I have time. Working hours are not whipped 
away from me for the box-ticking exercises of bloated middle-management teams, 
insistent that Ofsted will have our guts for garters if we don’t drop 
everything so we can Blu-Tack the school literacy policy on every inch of wall 
space.”

Let the government think I’m a failure, I’ve got my own success criteria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/09/secret-teacher-government-think-failure-own-success-criteria>
“This term I had the most soul-destroying conversation of my career…” It’s a 
dramatic opener from a teacher at the end of their tether. “I was told by my 
line manager that, although the school wanted to award my pay rise, the policy 
would not allow them to because the results in my department were not good 
enough.” What follows is an unexpectedly heartwarming tale of shaking off the 
stress of targets and creating your own yardstick.

Students need to know bad grades aren’t the end of the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/aug/13/secret-teacher-students-need-to-know-bad-grades-arent-the-end-of-the-world>
A useful reminder here, from an exam marker, that however all-encompassing 
exams can feel (for students and teachers), it’s crucial to keep a sense of 
perspective. “What do they actually test anyway? Memory, certainly. Time 
management. They test elements of competence in individual subjects. But, 
ultimately, they really test how good a person is at sitting exams – and this 
is even more true with the demise of coursework from many areas of the 
curriculum.”

Your child is our lowest priority unless they’re exam-age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/mar/12/secret-teacher-child-lowest-priority-exam-gcse-aleve>
This secondary teacher has classes across the age range, but has to focus on 
key stage 4 students rather than those lower down the school. It’s far from 
unusual but came to a head when the writer realised they had little to say 
about a key stage 3 child, Tom, at parent’s evening. “My performance as a 
teacher is judged completely on exam results,” they write. “Since the move away 
from national curriculum levels, it’s difficult even to judge if Tom is where 
he should be, and I haven’t got the time to worry about him. He seems OK, and I 
guess we’ll find out when he gets to year 10 and starts his GCSEs.”

Parents, stop undermining us in front of your children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/13/secret-teacher-parents-stop-undermining-us-in-front-of-your-children>
When parents are engaged and enthusiastic, they can make a teacher’s job 
immeasurably easier. When they’re not, well, take a look at this account from a 
secondary teacher: “The mother told me I couldn’t expect her daughter to work 
hard for her GCSEs unless I improved my behaviour management. ‘You should be 
able to control your class,’ she said. ‘How can you expect good grades if the 
class is naughty?’ Oh, so it’s not because she ignores my instructions? Or 
because she laughs in my face when I hand out worksheets? However you feel 
about us and our work, nothing good can come from undermining us in front of 
your children.”

I have no idea how to mark students’ work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/apr/09/secret-teacher-no-idea-mark-students-work>
The end of levels for key stage 3 assessment brought celebration for many, but 
it has also caused confusion, as one teacher confessed. “What we’ve got now 
feels like Frankenstein’s monster of assessment,” they wrote. “Different 
schools, different boroughs, different departments all doing different things, 
but with the same purpose. I’d love to sit down and carefully write my own 
assessment structure from scratch. But can I do it better than somebody who’s 
spent years studying assessment at university? No. And honestly, I’ve got my 
lessons to teach.”

My pupils’ creativity is being crushed by the punctuation police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jul/23/secret-teacher-my-pupils-creativity-is-being-crushed-by-the-punctuation-police>
There is so much to love about teaching, particularly getting to unleash 
creativity in young people. But assessing it? Not so much, which made for a 
great piece on the joy of writing and the challenge of keeping it alive in the 
classroom. “When we read a brilliant story, do we exclaim: ‘I loved how Charles 
Dickens used that semi-colon to separate two independent clauses’ or ‘I like 
Roald Dahl but I wish he had used the passive voice a little more often’?” It’s 
a rallying cry for common sense over box ticking.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 