
More than 500,000 people have had their payday and car finance loans written 
off after the main City watchdog stepped in to protect them from “unfair 
practices” by a debt collection firm.

These individuals became customers of debt purchase and collections firm 
Motormile Finance UK, which has agreed to write off £414m of debt after the 
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)criticised  
<https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/debt-purchaser-motormile-finance-agrees-redress-package>
 the way it was pursuing people for the sums it said they owed.


Motormile, which also trades as MMF, MMF Debt Purchase and MMF UK, describes 
itself as “one of the leading debt purchase companies in the UK,” and 
specialises in buying up old payday loans and other debts, and then attempting 
to recover this money.


According to consumer website forums, the company has bought payday loans from 
a number of lenders including Cash Genie, Peachy, Mr Lender, Lending Stream, 
Swift Sterling, WageDayAdvance and PoundsTillPayday.co.uk. It is also 
understood to have bought car finance loans.


The FCA said that after buying debts, the company failed to carry out the 
necessary “due diligence” to make sure the sums of money that were said to be 
owed were correct. It added: “This in turn led to unfair and unsuitable 
customer contact for recovery of those sums.”


A redress programme has now been set up, affecting more than 500,000 people. 
The vast majority – who typically received a letter or email saying that the 
debt had been passed to Motormile – will see their debts written off. Typically 
the debt will run into several hundred pounds per person.


In cases where the affected customers had started making payments to 
Motormile, it will be repaid to them. A total of £154,000 is being repaid to 
2,148 people, which averages about £72 per person.


Forums on websites such as MoneySavingExpert 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/> and the Consumer Action Group 
<http://www.consumeractiongroup.co.uk/forum/index.php?s=51295c7e12dbfec74d2940a7a8db2cf7>
 feature a number of posts relating to Motormile and its methods. Many site 
users have pasted copies of emails they said they had received from the 
company, some of which talk about how “adoorstep collection agent 
<http://forums.moneysavingexpert.com/showthread.php?t=4983641> will shortly be 
instructed to attend your property”. Some claim they have had default notices 
placed on their credit files.

Jonathan Davidson, director of supervision for retail and authorisations at 
the FCA, said: “We have agreed this package, and previous action, to protect 
the customers of Motormile from unfair practices. We have worked closely with 
Motormile, and are now satisfied with their progress and the way that they will 
address their previous mistakes.”


In August 2016 the FCA authorised the firm after being satisfied that the poor 
practices were “historical”, and major changes had been made.


Denise Crossley, chief executive officer at Motormile, said: “We apologise to 
all affected customers and are delighted that we are able to address the issues 
through the redress scheme we have agreed with the FCA. MMF are now fully 
authorised by the FCA, which is testament to them witnessing first-hand the 
serious approach we take to our regulatory responsibilities and our desire to 
treat customers fairly.

“We will strive to build on the excellent reputation we have in the market and 
continue to put customers first in everything we do.”

Customers do not need to take any action, as Motormile will contact those 
affected by February 2017. Thecompany has set up a dedicated page on its website
 <http://www.mmile.com/RedressProgramme.aspx> providing further information.

 