
I held in my hands one of the first animals to drag itself out of the water 
and onto land. Christened “Tiny”, she (I like to think it was female, but we 
can’t actually tell) is entombed in a chunk of boring, black rock. I ran my 
hands over the surface, feeling the bumps betraying a stone pregnant with 
fossils. Yet, from the outside there’s no sign of the treasure within: no one 
has ever actually seen it.

“We didn’t really know it was in the small piece of rock that we collected 
until it was CT scanned,” Dr Nick Fraser, Keeper of Natural Sciences at the 
National Museum ofScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> in 
Edinburgh told me. “We were quite surprised to find Tiny hiding in the sediment 
- we still only know it from the 3D scan and the 3D print and so haven’t had 
the pleasure of seeing the actual fossil!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe39831bae0118a19c3dcf1c7d3271ff23372ac4%2F0_0_3666_2769%2F3666.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe39831bae0118a19c3dcf1c7d3271ff23372ac4%2F0_0_3666_2769%2F3666.jpg>
Aytonerpeton microps, also known as “Tiny”. A fossil from the Early 
Carboniferous of Scotland. Photograph: Elsa Panciroli/Elsa Panciroli/National 
Museums Scotland 
Comfortably fitting in your hand and looking superficially reptile-like, Tiny 
is a rare fossil indeed. She comes from a time in the rock record that has 
traditionally yielded very few fossils. This time was namedRomer’s Gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/19/fossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land>
, after the scientist who identified the paucity, and it has achieved 
palaeontological notoriety both as an intriguing enigma, and because this 
enigma obscures the development of the first animals to live on land. What 
caused the gap? Mass extinction? Low oxygen? Or is there no gap at all, are we 
just not looking hard enough? Recent finds from Southern Scotland (including 
Tiny) suggest the latter may be true, yielding exciting new fossils of the 
earliest land-living vertebrates.

Tiny and I have a lot in common. We both have backbones, hinged jaws, lungs 
and four limbs. All of these are important steps in evolutionary development 
leading to the group called tetrapods, literally ‘four-footed’ in Greek. 
Tetrapods include amphibians, mammals, reptiles and birds.

Tiny and I both grew up on the shores of a Scottish loch; but whereas mine was 
a deep, cold, freshwater one, hers was tropical and probably brackish. During 
her lifetime, 350 million years ago, Scotland was part of an ancient landmass 
called Euramerica, straddling the equator. It was hot, around 30 Celsius, and 
lush green with ancient lycopod forests. A paradise you may be thinking, but 
watch out for the copious scorpions and centipedes crawling through the 
undergrowth.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba60cc76d1221dc0964c360b6ddafe834ad3123f%2F1358_0_6792_4075%2F6792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba60cc76d1221dc0964c360b6ddafe834ad3123f%2F1358_0_6792_4075%2F6792.jpg>
 Palaeoart of the environment where tetrapods first crawled onto land over 350m 
yrs ago. Illustration: Mark Witton/Mark Witton/National Museums Scotland 
The most important thing that Tiny and I may share however, is having five 
digits at the end of our limbs. If Tiny had this, she would be among the first 
animals who could play This Little Piggy.

 “There are two [animals with five digits] that we know for certain: Pederpes, 
and an isolated foot found by our project,” Professor Jenny Clack, Emeritus 
Professor at the University of Cambridge, explained the evolution of limbs and 
digits to me. Her latest multi-authoredscientific paper 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/s41559-016-0002> included the jumble of fossil 
bones that was Tiny. Many of the first tetrapods had more than five fingers and 
toes on each limb, some as many as eight. Clack elaborated “as limbs with 
digits evolved from fins, there must have been experimental forms, and the 
genetic regulation was less precise, allowing variability. These fish-like 
animals did not ‘walk’ in the conventional sense.”

Professor Clack is one of the biggest names in palaeontology. An unassuming 
woman in her late 60s, she has spent a lifetime researching the earliest 
tetrapod fossils in order to understand the evolution of the first land 
vertebrates – often called the “fish to tetrapod transition”. In the 1980s 
Clack and her team of researchers recovered fossils ofAcanthostega and 
Ichthyostega from rocks in Greenland. These were some of the animals undergoing 
this “transition”, and their anatomy surprised scientists. It seemed limbs had 
evolved from fins not for dragging the animal from shallow pool to pool, as 
previously suggested, but for movementwithin water. The first limbs allowed our 
ancestors to push their way through dense underwater vegetation in their swampy 
habitat.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F317f61e086673fc34fa1dbd5e384d4110c960fda%2F266_527_4478_2687%2F4478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F317f61e086673fc34fa1dbd5e384d4110c960fda%2F266_527_4478_2687%2F4478.jpg>
 Reconstruction of Ichthyostega, one of the earliest known tetrapods. 
Photograph: Elsa Panciroli/Elsa Panciroli/National Museums Scotland 
But why, I asked her, did five fingers turn out to be better than eight? 
“We’ll probably never know for sure,” Clack answered, “but I reckon it’s to do 
with producing a wrist or ankle that is both weight-bearing and flexible. The 
multi-digited forms did not have this; the limbs were stiff and paddle-like 
without good joints.”

Clack is one of the central driving forces behind the TW:eed 
<http://www.tetrapods.org/> project (Tetrapod World: early evolution and 
diversification), which includes researchers from the National Museum of 
Scotland, Universities of Leicester, Cambridge and Southampton, and the British 
Geological Survey. These researchers focus their considerable expertise on the 
rocks of Southern Scotland. These rocks are younger than those in Greenland, 
being from the Tournaisian (360-345 million years ago) - the notorious Romer’s 
Gap. This period marks the end of the Devonian, often referred to as the “age 
of fish”, and the beginning of the Carboniferous.

TW:eed have now successfully bored and logged two cores through hundreds of 
metres of solid Tournaisian rock. (If you’re unfamiliar with geological 
“logging”, think less lumberjack and more sedimentary accountant: it is the 
painstaking, detailed inventory of layers of rock in a sequence, telling you 
how the environment changed over time.) TW:eed’s logging in Scotland has been 
done to an impressive centimetre scale, making these the most detailed accounts 
of Tournaisian sediments in the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c53cd4f5643ebc74e514a6d6984ed987ea8fb28%2F0_105_700_420%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c53cd4f5643ebc74e514a6d6984ed987ea8fb28%2F0_105_700_420%2F700.jpg>
 Field work in the Scottish borders on rocks from “Romers Gap”. Photograph: 
University Museum of Zoology Cambridge 
“It does appear that if there had been a ‘gap’ it was much smaller than 
previously thought, and might have affected some groups less severely than 
others,” Clack told me, talking about the disappearance of many species at the 
end of the Devonian. “There was an extinction event for many fish species, but 
no-one is really sure what caused it.”

Clack and her co-authors found evidence in their rock cores that fires burned 
throughout the Tournaisian, challenging previous theories that low atmospheric 
oxygen during the time period caused extinctions. “Climate change, possibly, 
but not certainly. Whatever it was affected the flora as well, eliminating the 
large lycopsid trees that reappeared only five or six million years later.”

Tiny was not alone in her scorpion-infested Scottish swamp. Only one species, 
Pederpes finneyae, was previously named from this time period, but Clack and 
colleagues have named five new species, and found many more fossils too 
fragmentary to formally identify. This suggests that there may be a chance of 
finding further important Tournaisian fossils in Scotland.

“There is every chance!” Clack enthused, “no-one bothered to look at the right 
rocks previously. Because they don’t yield commercially exploitable resources 
these rocks did not have a history of accidental finds. So because no-one had 
ever found anything, no-one ever looked, and they were considered barren. It 
was a vicious circle.”

So what about Tiny? I visited Nick Fraser’s office at the National Museum of 
Scotland. On his desk between a cast of ancient reptile footprints and a 
battered taxidermy fish, lay a small chunk of white plastic, bearing nippy 
teeth and a chin full of dimples. It was a printed model of Tiny.

“We estimate that Tiny had a skull that was about five centimetres long. In 
other words pretty tiny, and certainly so when compared with some of the other 
tetrapods we’ve been finding,” Nick handed me the model, which had been 
enlarged to make the features clearer to the naked eye.

Thanks to micro CT-scanning, we needn’t break open the protective casing of 
rock in which Tiny was found: we can digitally reconstruct this creature hiding 
inside, in all her miniscule, toothed glory. Her scientific name,Aytonerpeton 
microps, delightfully translates as ‘the creeping one from Ayton with the small 
face’ (Ayton is the Scottish parish in which she was found). Her sharp little 
teeth probably crunched up those Euramerican scorpions; indeed the copious 
invertebrates that conquered life on land 60 million earlier would have 
provided a tempting menu for tetrapods venturing from the water.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aad6bd174d97a0fe1cc20e65ccdf968b971fd9a%2F0_102_5244_3146%2F5244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontologists%20reveal%20350m-year-old%20tropical%20Scotland%20bursting%20with%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpalaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aad6bd174d97a0fe1cc20e65ccdf968b971fd9a%2F0_102_5244_3146%2F5244.jpg>
 We’ve inherited five digits on our limbs from our ancient tetrapod ancestors. 
Photograph: Alamy 
I asked Fraser if Tiny had five fingers and toes: “We can’t be sure about the 
number of digits as it is somewhat disarticulated,” he replied, “but what 
remains of the toes don’t hint at more than 5 digits.”

These fossils may not be as sexy for the public imagination as dinosaurs, but 
they are arguably more important. They chart the way in which our ancestors’ 
skeletons adapted to life on land and the timing of our ancestors’ split from 
the ancestors of amphibians. As we find more fossils, we learn about the 
diversity of life on earth over 345 million years ago, and that Romer’s Gap may 
not be so much a gap, as a blind-spot.

I suspect that over the coming years we shall continue to find important 
additional fossils in Scotland
Dr Nick Fraser, National Museums Scotland 
“Currently Scotland has by far the richest assemblages of fossil tetrapods 
from the Tournasian anywhere in the world. So presently it is the most 
important place for trying to understand the nature of the early invasion of 
land by animals with backbones,” Fraser told me. “And of course this is a 
pivotal step in the evolution of life on land - without it there would have 
been no salamanders, no frogs, no crocodiles, no lizards, no dinosaurs, no 
birds, no mammals and therefore of course no humans. So pretty critical!”

When asked if Scotland was the only place to find such amazing fossils, 
Professor Clack replied “we are sure the right rocks exist elsewhere, should 
anyone be motivated to look - which we hope they now will be.”

 -----------------------

If you want to find out more about Scotland’s amazing Romer’s Gap fossils, the 
Fossil Hunters exhibition is now on tour around Scotland. It has already open in
Biggar <http://www.biggarmuseumtrust.co.uk/> (running until the 15th January), 
soon to reachMontrose <https://www.facebook.com/events/1603751626598169/> (21st 
January to 1st April), and finallyStornoway 
<https://www.facebook.com/MuseumnanEilean/>. 



References

 * Clack JA, Bennet CE, Carpenter DK, Davies SJ, Fraser NC, Kearsey TI, 
Marshall JEA, Millward D, Otoo BKA, Reeves EJ, Ross AJ, Ruta M, Smithson KZ, 
Smithson TR, Walsh SA. 2016Phylogenetic and environmental context of a 
Tournaisian tetrapod fauna <http://www.nature.com/articles/s41559-016-0002>. 
Nature Ecology & Evolution, 1, doi:10.1038/s41559-016-0002.  