
Parks Victoria staff have justified the use of their taxpayer-funded credit 
cards on hundreds of dollars worth of KFC because it is aneffective bait for 
luring feral cats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/feral-cats-now-cover-99-per-cent-of-australia>
.

On Monday Victoria’s environment minister, Lily D’Ambrosio, announced an 
external auditor would undertake an independent review of Parks Victoria’s 
credit card transactions over the past four years.

The investigation was prompted by a large number of credit card transactions 
and credit cards available to ParksVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> staff, the minister said.

Parks Victoria credit card statements requested by the opposition under 
freedom of information laws have since revealed that $260 was spent by staff 
across seven visits to the same KFC store over a four-month period.

Feral cats now cover 99.8% of Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/feral-cats-now-cover-99-per-cent-of-australia>
But a senior Parks Victoria staff member, who did not wish to be named, 
explained to Guardian Australia that “KFC is widely known to be the most 
effective bait for luring feral cats”.

He said the KFC transactions had been traced to use in baiting programs on 
French Island, the largest coastal island of Victoria, located 61km south-east 
ofMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>.

Dr Christopher Dickman, a biologist and feral cat expert from the University 
of Sydney, confirmed that KFC was sometimes used to lure the pests.

“There hasn’t been any data published on it so the information we have is 
anecdotal, but it does work for luring feral cats, though mainly in urban 
areas,” he told Guardian Australia. “Cats in remote areas are more suspicious 
of new foods, but cats in urban areas are more used to living close to KFC 
outlets and are familiar with the smell. It is a popular bait with a strong 
aroma that is very attractive to carnivores.”

Feral cats more likely to prey on native animals if rabbit numbers reduced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/03/feral-cats-more-likely-to-prey-on-native-animals-if-rabbit-numbers-reduced>
A senior scientist with the Arthur Rylah Institute for environmental research 
in Victoria, Dr Alan Robley, also confirmed fried chicken was used to lure 
feral cats into cage traps during research projects and management programs 
undertaken by Parks Victoria.

“Fried chicken is included in the national guidelines for trapping feral cats 
and is used due to its scent and prolonged freshness,” Robley said.

However, the Parks Victoria credit card statements also reveal $347 was spent 
at a jewellery store, $898 was spent at a mountain bike shop and more than 
$5,000 was spent across five transactions at JB Hi-Fi stores.

Staff also spent thousands of dollars in visits to the high-end Werribee 
Mansion Hotel and Spa, and $946 at Melbourne pub Saint and Rogue. Parks 
Victoria employees including the CEO are not allowed to purchase alcohol on 
their work-issued credit card, though work-related functions and meetings are 
sometimes held at hotels.


The shadow environment minister, Brad Battin, described the transactions as “a 
scandalous abuse of taxpayer money”.

Crossbenchers pledge to reform expenses as Sussan Ley scandal widens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/crossbenchers-pledge-to-reform-expenses-as-sussan-ley-scandal-widens>
“Whilst Victorians are facing a rising cost of living under Daniel Andrews, 
his bureaucrats are regularly wining and dining themselves on the taxpayer,” 
Battin said. “It just proves that there are always winners and losers under 
Daniel Andrews when his response is to have a ‘review’ and not cut up the 
credit cards of those abusing them.”

The transactions also show purchases from the Apple iTunes store, a $311 
transaction for pizza and $197 for Subway.

The credit card bill for Parks Victoria was $2.2m for last year. However, 
Parks Victoria has been phasing out the use of petty cash over the past few 
years due to the increased transparency that credit cards allow.

D’Ambrosio said she had ordered Parks Victoria to put in place a process to 
reduce the number of credit cards currently in use. “I’ve also asked Parks 
Victoria to investigate ways to better procure essential goods and services 
which are purchased regularly or in significant quantities,” she said.

“It’s vital that Victorians have full confidence that statutory authorities 
are complying with best practice standards, are working in an efficient and 
responsible manner and are always using taxpayer money appropriately.”

The acting chief executive for Parks Victoria, Margaret Gillespie, said she 
welcomed the review. “We are an organisation of approximately 1,200 staff, 
located across 120 offices and depots, which manages nearly four million 
hectares of park estate,” she said.

“Managing public lands requires significant and regular travel between 
locations, often over large distances and several days, and thus staff incur 
work-related travel costs for food, equipment and accommodation.”
 