
It’s that time of the year when the world’s financial and business “elite” 
gather in an expensive Swiss ski resort to drink champagne and declare that 
they are terribly worried about global inequality. This parody-defying event is 
theWorld Economic Forum in Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> 
and, to create the correct veneer of earnest contemplation, the organisers 
publish an assessment of the risks they think the world faces.

This year they have noticed “the growing mood of anti-establishment populism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/inequality-world-economy-wef-brexit-donald-trump-world-economic-forum-risk-report>
 and judge that reviving economic growth, which has been their cure-all for as 
long as anyone can remember, may no longer be enough to “remedy fractures in 
society.” That is why “reforming market capitalism must also be added to the 
agenda”.

Great, so what’s the big idea? Well, it’s really just a list of objectives. 
Try number one: “Fostering greater solidarity and long-term thinking in market 
capitalism.” You can’t beat a bit of fostering of solidarity, of course, but 
how, precisely, do you think this might achieved? You’ll scan the 70-page 
document in vain if you’re hoping for details. Chief executive pay – a burning 
issue not only in the UK – gets a passing reference, but only in the context of 
noting that it has increased “as firms have become larger”.

It’s easy to sneer, of course. Some people return from Davos claiming to have 
been stimulated, and not just by the hospitality of the 120 (count ’em) 
sponsors, mostly multinational companies. But can anyone recall any vaguely 
memorable – or even heretical – pronouncements from last year’s event? The only 
lasting impression is of how unfractured is the society of millionaire bosses 
enjoying each other’s company at shareholders’ expense. Please, one of you, use 
next week’s forum to point out the absurdity ofDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>.

Profit woes expose how far Foxtons has fallen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworld-economic-forum-davos-foxtons-argos-sainsburys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe382891e09da2cf02877175ae88702ba90155034%2F0_0_3500_2372%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parody-defying%20World%20Economic%20Forum%20must%20do%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworld-economic-forum-davos-foxtons-argos-sainsburys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parody-defying%20World%20Economic%20Forum%20must%20do%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworld-economic-forum-davos-foxtons-argos-sainsburys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe382891e09da2cf02877175ae88702ba90155034%2F0_0_3500_2372%2F3500.jpg>
 Foxtons has 50% more branches than it did at flotation in 2013. Photograph: PA 
A traditional view of Foxtons says the London-focused estate agent is utterly 
charmless, but the brilliance of its hard-charging, high-fee business model 
should be acknowledged. Perhaps it is time to revisit this thesis – not the 
charmless part, naturally, but the idea thatFoxtons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/foxtons> is as slick as supposed.

The latest profit warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/foxtons-shares-slump-after-significant-fall-in-london-property-sales>
 on Wednesday revealed how far Foxtons has fallen in these “subdued” times for 
the London property market. Top-line profits for 2016 are forecast to be £25m 
on revenues of £133m. A profit margin of 18.8% doesn’t sound too painful but 
consider Foxtons’ recent history.

Between 2010 and 2016, it converted at least 30p in every pound of revenue 
into profit. The highest profit margin was 35.7% (2013) and the lowest was 
30.7% (2015). In that context, a fall to 18.8% counts as a spectacular end to 
more than half a decade of stability.

That’s just how life goes sometimes, say Foxtons loyalists. In the jargon, the 
business is merely operationally geared – it has slow periods, as now, but 
coins it when the London market revs up. As long as the company doesn’t take on 
silly levels of debt (a lesson learned the hard way by one-time private equity 
owner BC Partners), it’s just a question of waiting. In the meantime, there’s a 
tidy living to be made from reliable lettings, now half the business.

Well, maybe. But Foxtons has 50% more branches than it did at flotation in 
2013 (65 v 42) yet revenues were lower in 2016 than then (£133m v £139m). Can 
that all be explained by normal market volatility? Or is Foxtons also having to 
travel further into outer London to find house sellers willing to pay its 
“premium” – call it princely – commission rate on sales of 2.5%? Are cut-price 
agents like Purplebricks, charging substantially lower fees on a flat 
structure, changing sellers’ perceptions of a fair commission?

For now, Foxtons, even as its shares hit 96p, against a float price of 230p, 
seems unflustered and confident that its profit margins will recover one day. 
Maybe it will be proved right. But the supermarkets were also confident until 
discounters Aldi and Lidl showed that the game had changed.

Argos deal gives Sainsbury’s reasons to be cheerful
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworld-economic-forum-davos-foxtons-argos-sainsburys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18672ad9c45865f48ee0fce6483921a9daf053d3%2F0_0_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parody-defying%20World%20Economic%20Forum%20must%20do%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworld-economic-forum-davos-foxtons-argos-sainsburys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parody-defying%20World%20Economic%20Forum%20must%20do%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworld-economic-forum-davos-foxtons-argos-sainsburys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18672ad9c45865f48ee0fce6483921a9daf053d3%2F0_0_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
 Sainsbury’s plans to put 250 Argos outlets into its stores over the next three 
years. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Christmas at Sainsbury’s was a comfortable snore. Like-for-like sales in the 
supermarketsadvanced at the mighty rate of 0.1% in the quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/sainsburys-record-sales-christmas-week-morrisons-argos-sales>
 and like-for-like volumes were dead flat. One is obliged to say this 
performance was marginally better than the City had expected – and better than 
Sainsbury’s had achieved in recent quarters – but the real interest was in 
newly acquired Argos. That was lively: like-for-like sales up 4%.

It’s still early days – and profit figures are awaited – but it’s probably 
time to concede that the Argos purchase is looking like a smart piece of 
business. Selling food has become hard graft, and progress may continue to be 
measured in fractions of percentage points for some time yet. Argos, on the 
other hand, offers the chance of a fizz of excitement as Sainsbury’s opens 
stores-within-stores and cross-sells between two sets of customers.

There are risks in merging two big supply chains and securing the promised 
cost-savings from closing redundant Argos high-street outlets – but there were 
also risks in doing nothing in the age of Amazon.
 