
Utah, a state rich in epic landscapes and national parks, is becoming ground 
zero for a fight between the$646bn outdoor industry 
<https://outdoorindustry.org/images/ore_reports/UT-utah-outdoorrecreationeconomy-oia.pdf>
 and state lawmakers over public land management.

At a trade show for outdoor clothing and gear makers in Salt Lake City this 
week, two prominent figures from the industry called on their peers to move the 
semi-annual event out of the state unless Utah leaders stopsupporting efforts  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/14/utah-federal-government-public-lands-money-standoff>
by Republicans in Congress to transfer or sell federal land to states. Utah 
governor Gary Herbert was also called out for challenging a federal law that 
allowedPresident Obama to create 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/28/barack-obama-national-monuments-utah-nevada>
 the new, 1.4m-acre Bears Ears National Monument in southeast Utah last month.

Utah prepares for legal showdown with government over control of public lands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/14/utah-federal-government-public-lands-money-standoff>
“Utah’s political leadership has unleashed an all-out assault against Utah’s 
protected public lands and Utah’s newest monument,”wrote Peter Metcalf 
<http://www.sltrib.com/opinion/4798906-155/op-ed-time-for-outdoor-retailers-to>
, a long time Utah resident who founded climbing and ski gear maker Black 
Diamond, in an opinion piece published in the Salt Lake Tribune on Tuesday to 
coincide with the start of the trade show. He noted that the trade show brings 
more than $40m to the city in direct spending each year, while the Outdoor 
Industry Association (OIA) estimates the figure can reach $80m annually.

The next day, Yvon Chouinard, founder of clothier Patagonia, said in an open 
letter 
<http://www.patagonia.com/blog/2017/01/the-outdoor-industry-loves-utah-does-utah-love-the-outdoor-industry/>
 to Herbert that the company will no longer attend the trade show unless the 
governor “wants our business – and that he supports thousands of his 
constituents of all political persuasions who work in jobs supported by 
recreation on public lands”.

Metcalf and Chouinard’s criticism reflect growing concerns by their industry 
and outdoor enthusiasts,such as hunters 
<http://www.grandviewoutdoors.com/bowhunting/selling-public-land-a-hunters-nightmare/>
, over what they see as public land grabs by state politicians who want to open 
up more of that land to oil and gas development. Such a move would limit or 
eliminate public access for recreation, disrupt wildlife and pose threats to 
air and water quality.

In 2014, a lengthy study 
<http://www.sltrib.com/news/1894004-155/economists-transferring-federal-lands-could-generate>
 found that if Utah took control of 31.2m acres of federal land in the state, 
for oil and gas development, it could generate around $50m in profit each year 
– but only if oil and gas prices were to remain at the 2014 rates. In Utah and 
other states, including Wyoming, in which some lawmakers are pushing for 
transfers, opponents worry that if the states find that they can’t afford to 
maintain those lands, they’ll be forced tosell them to private buyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/18/great-american-west-land-bundys-oregon>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fpatagonia-black-diamond-utah-public-land-bears-ears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafa27f99c2c08cd29cafa3d33231e8fb2d16e19b%2F0_202_6049_3630%2F6049.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patagonia%2C%20Black%20Diamond%20take%20on%20Utah%20officials%20over%20public%20land%20rights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fpatagonia-black-diamond-utah-public-land-bears-ears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patagonia%2C%20Black%20Diamond%20take%20on%20Utah%20officials%20over%20public%20land%20rights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fpatagonia-black-diamond-utah-public-land-bears-ears%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafa27f99c2c08cd29cafa3d33231e8fb2d16e19b%2F0_202_6049_3630%2F6049.jpg>
 The Left Fork of North Creek runs through the mystical Subway tunnel in Utah’s 
Zion National Park. The federal government managesover 60% of the land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/14/utah-federal-government-public-lands-money-standoff>
 in Utah. Photograph: Larry Geddis/Alamy 
Last week, Republicans in the House in Congress voted to eliminate a rule that 
requires the government to calculate the value of federal land, including the 
value created through recreation, before transferring or selling it to states 
or others. That change, if enacted, could remove a major barrier for speeding 
up land transfers.

Utah <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/utah> is a fitting place for a 
battle over public land. The state is home to Arches, Canyonlands and Zion 
national parks, as well as some 22m acres overseen by the federal Bureau of 
Land Management. The state is filled with red rock canyons and rivers that are 
the stuff of climbers’ and whitewater paddlers’ dreams.

Unsurprisingly, tourism and recreation fuel the state economy. Utah’s outdoor 
recreation industry is worth $12bn 
<https://outdoorindustry.org/images/ore_reports/UT-utah-outdoorrecreationeconomy-oia.pdf>
, including $3.6bn in wages and salaries, and supports approximately 122,000 
jobs, according to the OIA.

According to the University of Utah’s Kem C Gardner Policy Institute, which 
provides research and analysis to the state government, the leisure and 
hospitality industry (which encompasses more than just outdoor recreation) 
accounts for 146,795 jobs, outpacing manufacturing (125,160) and finance and 
insurance (62,860). The development of natural resources, such as oil, gas and 
minerals, generates a small slice of the pie at 8,500 jobs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fpatagonia-black-diamond-utah-public-land-bears-ears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda46aa13adcaf30038d8946f3d03d79b35cae884%2F0_147_5996_3597%2F5996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patagonia%2C%20Black%20Diamond%20take%20on%20Utah%20officials%20over%20public%20land%20rights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fpatagonia-black-diamond-utah-public-land-bears-ears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patagonia%2C%20Black%20Diamond%20take%20on%20Utah%20officials%20over%20public%20land%20rights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fpatagonia-black-diamond-utah-public-land-bears-ears%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda46aa13adcaf30038d8946f3d03d79b35cae884%2F0_147_5996_3597%2F5996.jpg>
 Turret Arch can be seen in Arches National Park in Utah, where outdoor 
recreation businesses oppose the state’s attempt to take control of federal 
land. Photograph: Nick Jackson/REX Shutterstock 
In a statement, the OIA said it will continue to take feedback from its 
members on determining the best venue for the trade show going forward. It 
added: “We must be clear that protection of America’s public lands, including 
those in Utah, are critical and any threat to their protection is a threat to 
the outdoor industry.”

Patagonia’s CEO Rose Marcario, who was at the trade show, said the company 
relies on the event to meet buyers and partners and promote its philanthropic 
efforts, but she added that “standing up for our principles is always our top 
priority”. She also noted that Patagonia alone can’t force change in Utah’s 
capital, and hoped that “other brands in the industry would follow our lead”.

Does Patagonia have the answer for narrowing the gender wage gap?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/17/us-companies-gender-wage-gap-patagonia-arjuna-capital-salesforce-expedia>
A spokesperson for Herbert said on Wednesday she didn’t know whether the 
governor has read either Metcalf’s opinion piece of Chouinard’s letter. But his 
deputy chief of staff issued a statement on Tuesday rejecting the claim that 
the governor is out to destroy the state’s public lands. The statement said 
Herbert’s objection to the Bears Ears designation was the “sweeping unilateral” 
nature of the move by an outgoing administration.

Utah’s lieutenant governor Spencer Cox attended the trade show earlier this 
week and listened to the concerns of industry representatives.

Metcalf, who retired from Black Diamond in 2014, helped to bring the trade 
show to Salt Lake City more than 20 years ago and make the state an attractive 
place for outdoor businesses, such as tour guides. Utah now has an Office of 
Outdoor Recreation to recruit outdoors-focused business to the state.

The trade show is under contract to remain at Salt Lake City’s Salt Palace 
Convention Center through 2018, but negotiations for the event in 2019 and 
onward will begin soon.

“I love this state and that’s why I’m so invested in these issues,” Metcalf 
said via a phone interview from the trade show, adding that the intent of his 
opinion piece was not to promote leaving Utah but to urge the governor to 
change his stance around public land and it best uses. “If that does not 
happen, I think the industry [association] will decide not to renew its 
contract.”
 