
Former Super League star and England stand-off Paul Cooke and journalist 
Adrian Durham teamed up this year to bring usJudas? 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Judas-Story-Paul-Cooke-x/dp/1785312057>, the story of 
Cooke’s eventful career and extraordinary move from Hull FC to Hull KR. I met 
up with them in a bar around the corner from the Guardian’s London office to 
discuss Cooke’s story and why Hull FC fanatic Durham was so keen to tell it. 
The book has become a best-seller with special editions for fans of both clubs. 
Cooke is now rated one of the most talented young coaches in the sport, helping 
Leigh Centurions reach Super League for the 2017 season. Here they are in 
conversation.

As assistant coach, you have helped Leigh earn promotion. What will they bring 
toSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> in 2017?


A lot. First and foremost the facilities are great. It’s a lovely ground, 
great atmosphere and a nice place to play. It’s been a long, long time since 
Leigh has been in the Super League. The town is success-starved with regards to 
top level rugby. Off the field the club is running really well. On the field, 
we have some experience in Kieran Purtell coming in, we have a new analyst 
coming in, we’re increasing the strength and conditioning side. We’re leaving 
no stone unturned. We’re looking to be self-sufficient and self-sustained so 
the owner doesn’t have to keep putting his hand in his pocket.

Leigh seem to have a lot of “characters” – players with a history of problems 
or ill-discipline.

The better players, the maverick sort of players, tend to have some sort of 
baggage and you’ve just got to learn how to handle it. We’ve got some complex 
characters that you’ve got to get to know and understand and look after. In the 
book I talk a lot about my meltdown. I wasn’t getting off the downward spiral 
for quite some time. I don’t think about it every day anymore. If I do think 
about it it’s because one of my players is on the slippery slope to where I’ve 
been. I tell them: ‘You either change pal, or you end up where I did. If you go 
the other way you probably won’t be alive.’ But we’ve also got a lot of players 
who are straight down the line. It’s an interesting mix.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fno-helmets-required%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpaul-cooke-interview-hull-fc-hull-kr-leigh-coaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53a93bdd98225beefb2fdea7b0dce4a1287cade8%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Cooke%20interview%3A%20leaving%20Hull%20FC%2C%20joining%20Hull%20KR%20and%20coaching%20Leigh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fno-helmets-required%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpaul-cooke-interview-hull-fc-hull-kr-leigh-coaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Cooke%20interview%3A%20leaving%20Hull%20FC%2C%20joining%20Hull%20KR%20and%20coaching%20Leigh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fno-helmets-required%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpaul-cooke-interview-hull-fc-hull-kr-leigh-coaching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53a93bdd98225beefb2fdea7b0dce4a1287cade8%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Paul Cooke and Adrian Durham joined me in a bar in London to talk about their 
book. Photograph: Gavin Willacy 
Much of your book is taken up with the way you left Hull FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hull-fc>. You must be looking forward to the 
Hull v Leigh fixture more than any in 2017?

Paul Cooke on Hull KR's last-minute relegation: 'I was devastated for them'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/oct/06/paul-cooke-hull-kr-hull-fc-rugby-league>
I’m just glad we didn’t replace Hull KR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hullkr> in the Magic Weekend and have to 
play Hull FC three times! We will have it all on to beat a top-four team like 
them. If we get anything it will be points gained for us. I don’t think I’ll be 
invited down to their training ground quite as much as I was in the past, and 
me and Lee Radford won’t be talking in the week before the game. But we’ll 
probably spend more nights having a beer in his house or my house dissecting 
both our side’s performances.

What did you make of Hull FC’s struggles after winning the Challenge Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/challengecup> this year?

It didn’t surprise me their season nosedived after Wembley. The 8s system 
means you are playing top teams every week after the cup final. In previous 
seasons you could drop your guard a bit and get away with it. You can see why 
they’ve fallen down. They were never going to do anything at St Helens after 
being pulled out of the infamous ‘Lee Radford Den’ in Hull only on the Tuesday 
afternoon. But if you had offered them a Challenge Cup win at Wembley they’d 
have bitten your hand off. At the start of the season, if you’d offered them 
third place in Super League and 80 minutes from winning the League Leaders 
Shield they’d have bitten your hand off. It was only the position they were in 
going into Wembley that fans are a little disappointed. But Hull fans should 
savour the win at Wembley and not the season whimpering out and what could have 
been.

Do you think this Hull side can be challengers for silverware for years to 
come?


Knowing Lee personally, I know they will have learned a lot of lessons from 
that. Lee was there in 2006 and 2007 and saw the team dismantled. They are 
taking steps to avoid that happening again with new contracts for the local 
boys Danny Houghton, Jamie Shaul and Scott Taylor, and long-term contracts for 
the overseas boys. Mahe Fonua has been fantastic. You’ve still got Motu Tony 
recruiting who was there in 2006. They will learn more from a decade ago than 
from this season. It looks like they are trying to build a dynasty rather than 
a one-off or two-off season team. They will have to shake it up a little. 
Gareth Ellis has got another year but he’s my age, 35. Mark Minichiello is 
another over 30 but he’s been fantastic – he’s probably ten years ahead of his 
time with regard to his body and recovery. But there’s lads coming through. 
Dean Hadley in particular, who I had on dual-registration at Doncaster, is an 
adequate replacement down the line.

Adrian, before doing the book 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Judas-Story-Paul-Cooke-x/dp/1785312057>, what did you 
think about Paul and the whole debacle of 2007 when he left Hull FC for Hull KR?


Durham: Because he scored that try to win the Challenge Cup he was a club 
legend to me. The fact he left and went to Rovers killed it in a lot of fans’ 
eyes. But not living in Hull, not being in that bubble with all the gossip and 
rumours, it was different for me. I certainly didn’t want him to leave, 
certainly not to Rovers – and I hated that – but I thought there must be more 
to this. Nobody is so stupid that they would leave a club where they are loved 
and have got everything and go across the road to one where they are going to 
be hated – and still live in this city! I always wondered why it didn’t come 
out and now we know why. I couldn’t really watch Paul playing for Hull KR. I 
even stopped watching the derby – you didn’t know that did you, Paul?

Clubs often take advantage and underpay their own academy products. Were you 
treated differently because you were a local?


I don’t know. I do think clubs exploit local players, 100%, or at least they 
did back then. They think: ‘They won’t want to move out of town, they’ll show 
loyalty, they don’t really want to leave the club, we can get away with paying 
them less.’ Kirk Yeaman probably should have earned more, Paul King should have 
earned more, and they could have done if they’d gone elsewhere – I know it’s 
true because I had the offer. They can exploit local players and when someone 
fights back they don’t like it.

Are you angry that the club destroyed a Hull FC team that could have become a 
serial contender?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fno-helmets-required%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpaul-cooke-interview-hull-fc-hull-kr-leigh-coaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5679a9104e791bbcfa265ef6ff4a35715841d5%2F0_95_2056_2756%2F2056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Cooke%20interview%3A%20leaving%20Hull%20FC%2C%20joining%20Hull%20KR%20and%20coaching%20Leigh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fno-helmets-required%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpaul-cooke-interview-hull-fc-hull-kr-leigh-coaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Cooke%20interview%3A%20leaving%20Hull%20FC%2C%20joining%20Hull%20KR%20and%20coaching%20Leigh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fno-helmets-required%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fpaul-cooke-interview-hull-fc-hull-kr-leigh-coaching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5679a9104e791bbcfa265ef6ff4a35715841d5%2F0_95_2056_2756%2F2056.jpg>
 Paul Cooke holds the Challenge Cup after scoring a last-minute try for Hull FC 
against Leeds Rhinos at the Millennium Stadium in 2005. Photograph: David 
Rogers/Getty Images 
Durham: I was working six days a week and if I got a day off when they were 
playing I would drive all the way from London to Hull to watch that team, but 
the club let that crumble. It was amazing to find out exactly what happened. 
It’s stunning that on their watch Paul was allowed to leave the club, one of 
the best the club has ever produced. It was incredibly frustrating. I get angry 
talking about it now. If you can’t resolve it then fair enough, but to not even 
talk about it is inexplicable.

How different is Hull FC now?

Durham: The current regime has the local sporting knowledge having been at a 
different club [Hull City]. When I first moved to Hull to go to university 
there, someone said to me, ‘What you have to bear in mind is this place is 50 
miles from England.’ It is its own republic: not in a negative way, there’s a 
very strong togetherness, they don’t like people who’ll dismiss them and they 
group together. Adam Pearson really gets the culture of sport in the city of 
Hull, unlike the owners of Hull City and the previous regime at Hull FC. People 
from that regime said there should be a merger, which is not even worth talking 
about. It’s ridiculous. They said the derby wasn’t important! Of course it’s 
important, for Super League let alone the city. It’s a major event in world 
sport. Even if you can’t feel it yourself, you’ve got to respect how the fans 
feel about it. Adam really gets that right.

How close were you to going back to Hull FC as an assistant coach last year, 
Paul?


Cooke: I wasn’t sure it would happen but I was happy to entertain the thought. 
I’d worked with Lee Radford before as an amateur coach and I knew the care and 
attention that he and Andrew Last were going to put into the job to turn things 
around on and off the field, living and breathing the sport of that city. It 
was exciting. I was looking forward to working there two days a week to improve 
the players’ attacking game. It was clear to see Adam had a completely 
different approach. He was driven to get the club to where it is today. That 
impresses me. But he had reservations, with good reason.

If Adam Pearson hadn’t had cold feet, would you have gone for it and just 
ridden out the fuss?


Cooke: We spoke about it. I went round Lee’s house and I said: ‘You do 
understand what we’re doing here?’ He said ‘Yeah, but Paul, when they see the 
way that we attack and we win a few games it will all be forgotten about’. And 
it would have been like that. But my partner was abused at a local supermarket 
and that really put me off. I thought Adam made a good decision, with his cold 
feet. The fans didn’t need another stick to beat Lee Radford with. That was the 
end of it. I was gone and moving on with my career.

Can you see as head coach of Hull FC at some stage in your career?


Cooke: Possibly. If Lee said to me now ‘see your contract out at Leigh and 
then come here,’ I would think about it. I’m just focussed on improving who I 
can, wherever I am. It’s not impossible, nothing is given where I’ve been in my 
career!

Can you see him going back to Hull, Adrian?

Durham: Yes, to either Hull FC or KR. If the opportunity comes when the time 
is right he would be a fool to turn it down. I think Paul will be England coach 
one day.

Do you consider yourself an ex-player or a coach now?

Cooke: I’m a coach. Playing has come and gone and I’m not really interested in 
what I was like as a player now. I’ve no desire to reminisce or tell anyone how 
good I was as a player. There’s the odd time when someone says ‘you should have 
played for Great Britain’ or ‘you should have played more times for England’. 
Yeah, but I didn’t because of what I was doing off the field. That’s the way I 
was. I’ve moved on from that. It’s about what I can change and what I can do 
now.

Is being an assistant coach a career in itself these days or do you want to be 
a Head Coach?

Cooke: I’ve got ambitions to go to the top but I think there are very good 
assistants who are only going to be assistants. It’s a different trait. You can 
get lost as a head coach with all paperwork, contractual duties, recruitment. 
That needs to be someone else’s job. League clubs are starting to go down the 
rugby union route now of having a head coach and director of rugby, or whatever 
you want to call it, as Hull KR did with Jamie Peacock. Leicester Tigers have 
Richard Cockerill as head coach and Aaron Mauger above him. Sarries have that 
too. That’s the way I’d want it to go. The definitive difference between a head 
coach and an assistant is the interaction with players. There’s more 
backstabbing with a head coach, players saying ‘I should be playing,’ while an 
assistant is more a pal of the players. You’re a bit of a go-between. I want to 
get as much experience as I can from as many different sports as I can. I’ve 
got ambitions to be as good a coach as I can be, but I could also spend my 
career being an assistant. I am quite fortunate to be in that position 
financially, from being a player in that I’m OK to be an assistant.

Some high-profile coaches have become assistants for major teams, such as 
Stephen Kearney, Steve McNamara, Andy Farrell, Shaun Edwards. Are you 
interested in that pathway?

Cooke: Absolutely. I’d love to. They are working under legends. Stephen’s been 
under Craig Bellamy and Wayne Bennett, McNamara with Trent Robinson. There’s 
that avenue. Just being involved in the sport is brilliant for me. Where I’ve 
been and where I am now are poles apart. It’s got to all line up for me to take 
a head coach job. Making long term plans doesn’t seem to work for me anyway.

In Judas?, a couple of major games get dissected by Paul from a coaching point 
of view, which blows away any notion of rugby league being a simple game…

Durham: When you talk to Paul about rugby league it’s a proper education. He’s 
so good it makes me felt like I was playing. I wanted to get that across in the 
book. Paul loves rugby league. We didn’t want to treat the audience like 
idiots. Sky have upped their game with their analysis now and taken it to a 
level that football is still trying to get to regarding punditry. When Paul 
talked about the (Challenge Cup-winning) try in 2005 it was mindblowing. All of 
that goes into a few split seconds. It’s an incredible level of intelligence 
make those decisions at that speed that can’t be measured in terms of A-levels 
and degrees.

Is that just the role of a half-back or are other players seeing the game like 
you do?


Cooke: Some players will. The pivotal players within the organisation – 
half-back, full-back, hooker – should be able to sit down and analyse a game 
like that. The ultimate aim of a coach is to get as many players as possible 
thinking like that. But you’ve got different abilities and attention spans, 
some complex players can’t think like that and are unable to perform certain 
skills. If everyone could think like that you’d have a world-beater of a team 
that would rarely get beat because it could think quicker than others. It’s not 
as easy as it seems when you break it down.

Are players now expected to know more now about every player or opponent than 
when you played?

Cooke: It’s becoming more apparent. I joined Hull KR in 2007 and the next year 
we got all the Opta stats onto the laptops. We’ve got all that at Leigh. We’ve 
got a drone that’s going to fly over training so we can see what position every 
player is in and where they are supposed to be. There’s a massive culture 
change. We’ve got the Huddle system where we can see who is logging on and for 
how long, ask them to feedback on the previous day’s training session. If 
you’re not prepared to buy into that your days at the club are numbered. I 
bought into that myself. I was fascinated by other players. I remember hearing 
Trent Barrett had a little black book on all of his opposition players. I never 
went that far but I stored the information in my own memory. I certainly could 
tell you a lot about Trent Barrett and the left edge or right edge defence at 
Wigan at the time. I can recall pretty much every bit of information I needed 
and use it at any time. Players are getting a lot more help with that now.

How do you assess an opposition? Is it simply by watching them play or by 
talking to other coaches?


Cooke: If you watch a team over a five-week period you can pick up the nitty 
gritty. I spoke to Lee Radford the other day about how we played against Leeds. 
He said ‘did you go from the right edge and go back to that spot’ etc. He said 
he could see what we were trying to do but were limited by the players we have. 
We spoke about Leeds, too. If you know what you are looking for you can pick up 
on things straight away. You’ve got to be a sponge. Knowledge is power and 
whatever I can pick up from rugby league coaches or rugby union coaches or the 
NFL or whatever, there’s always something.

• Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> 
andFacebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
• Judas? <https://www.amazon.co.uk/Judas-Story-Paul-Cooke-x/dp/1785312057>, by 
Paul Cooke <https://twitter.com/pcooke06> and Adrian Durham 
<https://twitter.com/talkSPORTDrive> is out now
 