
Almost £2bn was wiped from the stock market value of Pearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> after the beleaguered FTSE 100 
company issued profit warnings for the next two years and said it would cut its 
payout to shareholders.

The group is also putting up for sale its 47% stake in publisher Penguin 
Random House <https://www.theguardian.com/books/random-house>.

Shares in the group plunged by 30% as it said its US education business 
suffered a near-one third slump in revenues in the final quarter of the year.

John Fallon, the chief executive of Pearson, admitted that the company “got a 
few calls wrong” at its US business last year, including a belief that college 
enrolments would stabilise and the huge impact of students renting books 
through services such as Amazon.


Will the Pearson chief be brought to book over profits warnings? | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2017/jan/18/pearson-chief-profits-warnings-john-fallon-share-price>
He rejected suggestions that he should step down as chief executive but said 
he would start meeting with disgruntled shareholders in the coming days.

“I am accountable and I fully accept that accountability for the fact that we 
got two big calls wrong last year,” he said. “I am also accountable for leading 
the company through a far more difficult period than anyone could have 
imagined. The board have asked me and the management team to get on and that is 
what we are going to get on and do.”

Pearson has issued a string of profits warnings in recent years and axed more 
than 4,000 jobs last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/17/pearson-shares-sales-publisher-trading-conditions?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
. The cut in the dividend this year will bring to an end almost 25 years of 
annual increases.

Penguin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/penguin> Random House is the 
world’s largest book publisher, with titles ranging from Fifty Shades of Grey 
and The Girl on the Train, to Nigella Lawson and Jamie Oliver’s recipe books.

The sale of its stake could net about £1.2bn for Pearson and would mark the 
final exit from its once-considerable non-education publishing empire, which 
previously included the Financial Times and a 50% stake in the publisher of the 
Economist.

Bertlesmann, which owns 53% of Penguin Random House, said it was keen to 
increase its stake to as much as 75% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/22/bertelsmann-plans-to-raise-stake-in-penguin-random-house>
 with a further investor such as a private equity firm likely to take the 
remaining stake.


Pearson said it will issue an “exit notice” to Bertelsmann “with a view to 
selling our stake or recapitalising the business and extracting a dividend”.

It is understood that Pearson’s preferred outcome is to sell-out of the joint 
venture entirely.

The world’s largest education publisher has found itself struggling with a 
huge decline in textbook sales and the transition to digital learning following 
the rise of Amazon.


“The education sector is going through an unprecedented period of change and 
volatility,” said Fallon. “Our higher education business declined further and 
faster than expected in 2016. We are taking more radical action to accelerate 
our shift to digital models, and to keep reshaping our business.”

Pearson said it had been able to maintain operating profits of about £630m in 
line with City expectations for 2016 – but only because the company was paying 
£55m less than expected in management bonus payments.


It expects profits of £570m-£630m this year, well below the City consensus of 
about £700m, and has slashed its target of £800m in operating profits for 2018.

Pearson said the ongoing troubles at its North American higher education 
business, which accounts for about 45% of profits, meant that it would need to 
“rebase” future dividend payments.


The company has enjoyed a 24-year run of dividend increases, between 1991 and 
2015. The 2016 dividend is being frozen and the cut to future payouts is a 
major blow to Fallon and senior management.

“Our argument has been, and remains, investors have no visibility on what this 
company looks like in five years,” said Gary Paulin, the head of global 
equities for Northern Trust Capital Markets. “The one saving grace, the 
dividend, is now at significant risk. As, we suspect, is the chief executive’s 
tenure.”

Pearson has issued five profit warnings in the four years since Fallon took 
over running the company from Marjorie Scardino in 2013. He formerly ran 
Pearson’s international division.


He has pocketed more than £6m since becoming chief executive. This includes an 
estimate for his pay in 2016, which will not be made public until Pearson 
publishes its annual report later this year, as well as about £1.5m in total 
annual and long-term incentive payments.

Pearson said it was taking actions including investing a further £50m in 
speeding up the digital element of its education business, and reducing ebook 
prices by up to 50% for 2,000 titles, “making digital rental the best option 
for price-conscious students”.

Redundancy fears as Penguin Random House derecognises staff unions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/16/redundancy-fears-as-penguin-random-house-derecognises-staff-unions>
Fallon said that its £1.3bn higher education business in the US, which is 
about 50% tied to print text books, needed to move to a 75% digital model by 
2020.

He said that while currently Pearson gets one fee of more than $200 for its 
textbooks for three-year course use, services such as Amazon were eating away 
at its business by offering repeat rental options for each book to multiple 
students.

“Amazon and others buy in year one and rent five or six times over the course 
of three years,” he said. “What rental has done is eat into new book sales and 
that has had bigger impact than we thought. If that $200 textbook is used by 
six students over three years we are not getting $200 per use, it is divided by 
six. In a digital model we get $70 to $110 every time.”

Fallon said as Pearson moves to a predominantly digital model, which will mean 
5-6% declines in the US business each year while this happens, then its 
business “can’t be disrupted in this way any more”.

“You know this is a business that is going to be a winner from the analogue to 
digital process,” he said. “[It will be] a much more stable, reliable, 
repeatable business [and] at least as profitable.”
 