
For years a graffiti message has appeared throughout San Juan, Puerto Rico’s 
capital, as an urgent demand:Dragado ya! (meaning “dredging now!”).

 Even passersby who have never set foot in the eight barrios making up the 
Caño Martín Peña community – a large informal settlement along 3.75 miles of 
canal in the central city – know the message points to the dire need to dredge 
the waterway, which has become so clogged with refuse that those driving by 
with the windows down can immediately smell the stagnant waters.

This previously neglected area was originally established on mangrove wetlands 
and lacks adequate water drainage systems, so even mild rain storms led to 
flooding that backed up sewage and polluted waters, causing health and 
environmental problems for its 26,000 residents.

Desperate to alleviate these issues, the local community started organising 
themselves to demand the dredging of the canal, but feared the rising land 
values and displacement of families that such neighbourhood improvement tends 
to bring.

Residents spent two years collectively drawing up plans for the future of the 
area, ultimately creating a formal development and land use plan which was then 
adopted by the Puerto Rico planning board. With the help of national and city 
government support, local residents and organisations set up acollaborative 
project called Enlace <http://cano3punto7.org/nuevo/index-english.html> to help 
implement the plan to improve the canal and its adjacent communities in an 
inclusive way.

A crucial part of this involved the establishment of a community land trust, 
to inoculate against gentrification through collective ownership of land. The 
2,000 families ofel Caño – as the area is locally known – now collectively own 
200 acres of land that cannot be sold.

As part of the wider Enlace project, residents are involved in decision-making 
in the social and environmental transformation of their area, and are able to 
feel more secure about their future as landowners.

 Citizen participation and critical awareness has been fomented through 
various programmes: addressing and improving environmental justice, affordable 
housing, food security, violence prevention, local entrepreneurship, youth 
leadership and adult literacy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpeople-power-puerto-rico-canal-community-escaped-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F929eba0aef828b3f044213df74a089cb356c0e2e%2F0_1223_3412_2045%2F3412.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=People%20power%20in%20Puerto%20Rico%3A%20how%20a%20canal%20community%20escaped%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpeople-power-puerto-rico-canal-community-escaped-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=People%20power%20in%20Puerto%20Rico%3A%20how%20a%20canal%20community%20escaped%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpeople-power-puerto-rico-canal-community-escaped-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F929eba0aef828b3f044213df74a089cb356c0e2e%2F0_1223_3412_2045%2F3412.jpg>
 San Juan’s Caño Martín Peña community before the Enlace project. Photograph: 
Stephanie Maze/National Geographic/Getty Images 
The bonds within the community are evident the moment you step foot in the 
neighbourhood. On a recent afternoon, resident Carmen Febres pulled her car 
alongside two teens riding their bicycles and asked them if they had done well 
in school that day. “Sí,” nodded the boys in deference. She wagged her finger 
at them, “I’m keeping an eye on you!” As they pedalled away, they seemed to 
like her admonishing attention.

Every bit a leader, Febres is president of the G8, an umbrella organisation of 
the eightbarrios, which operates under a pluralism recognising their common 
interests while respecting the political, religious or cultural diversity among 
them. The G8 works in tandem with the community land trust and city government 
to progress the Enlace project, ensuring that residents have a say in all 
aspects of decision-making in the project.

Community gardening has been a central activity in the district, helping 
facilitate youth leadership and improving food security, as well as enhancing 
education about sustainable food. There are several communally managed urban 
gardens in the district and more across the wider city – all of which are seen 
as a response to the fact that 85% of food is imported inPuerto Rico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/puerto-rico>.

The radical model fighting the housing crisis: property prices based on income
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/16/radical-model-housing-crisis-property-prices-income-community-land-trusts>
These activities have helped the community become a model of self-improvement 
and sustainability, as well as fostering pride and a more secure sense of 
belonging among residents. It’s attracted international attention too: last 
October, the project was awarded the 2016 United NationsWorld Habitat Award 
<https://www.bshf.org/world-habitat-awards/>.

 Genesis Colón, 20, traveled to Quito last October for the awards as a member 
of the project’s youth leadership development group. The third of four 
siblings, she is studying nursing and is the first in her family to pursue a 
university degree. Colón says she wants to “see through to the future, to the 
dredging, and to struggle for the community”. She adds: “My family has 
considered leaving Puerto Rico, but I want to stay.”

 This is no small commitment in a country facing a historic $72bn debt 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-33317495]> and economic collapse. 
The impetus to leave at this time is strong, with emigration levels rapidly 
increasing (84,000 people 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/10/14/puerto-ricans-leave-in-record-numbers-for-mainland-u-s/>
 left for the US mainland in 2014-15), further eroding the tax base and in turn 
deepening the crisis. The US Congress has imposed a federal fiscal control 
board on Puerto Rico – a US territory of 3.4 million people – now poised to 
enact austerity measures that will likely eviscerate the public sector.

A sizeable portion of the debt is owed to predatory US vulture hedge funds – 
two US Supreme Court rulings nullified Puerto Rico’s supposed autonomy as a US 
commonwealth, exacerbating Puerto Rico’s colonial condition. At the same time, 
local laws designed to create a tax haven for the mega-wealthy are luring 
outside speculators.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpeople-power-puerto-rico-canal-community-escaped-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83e0b623f7d833522d7359f5c448bd63b67c39f9%2F0_247_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=People%20power%20in%20Puerto%20Rico%3A%20how%20a%20canal%20community%20escaped%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpeople-power-puerto-rico-canal-community-escaped-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=People%20power%20in%20Puerto%20Rico%3A%20how%20a%20canal%20community%20escaped%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpeople-power-puerto-rico-canal-community-escaped-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83e0b623f7d833522d7359f5c448bd63b67c39f9%2F0_247_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 ‘Using a land trust model gives a community a fighting chance to stay where 
they belong.’ Photograph: Line Algoed 
 This is a menacing prospect for communities without the kinds of protections 
that the Caño Martin Peña’s G8 have forged. “It’s easy for communities to lose 
control for not having the right piece of paper,” says David Ireland, director 
of theBuilding and Social Housing Foundation <https://www.bshf.org/>, which 
partners with UN Habitat to organise the World Habitat Awards. He adds that 
using a land trust to deal with speculators picking off members is not usually 
seen outside a highly developed context. “While not a guarantee, it offers a 
level of protection, and gives a community a fighting chance to stay where they 
belong.”

The community land trust also helps sustain the area by generating income 
through renting its properties, developing vacant lots and implementing various 
projects. Individual houses can also be sold, with a right to use the 
community-owned land they stand on.

 Building community trust, especially in such a climate, has been a key 
achievement on both macro and micro levels. Perhaps the project’s most delicate 
programme involves relocating families whose homes are most prone to flooding 
or stand in the way of dredging. Integrating members of 130 families who have 
already moved to coach residents facing relocation has been key to its success, 
according to Lyvia Rodríguez, who directs the Enlace project.

 In her view, the challenge is to create hope for the society and country as a 
whole, with environmental policy positively influencing economic advancement.

 With more than 100 collaborators and allies, from university oral history 
projects to solidarity with other community struggles – such as the activism 
combating disposal of toxic ash in Peñuelas to the country’s south – a spirit 
of exchange has flourished.

Jakarta's eco future? River community goes green to fight eviction threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/25/jakarta-kampung-tongkol-eco-future-river-community--green-to-fight-eviction-threat>
 This kind of vision has attracted Line Algoed, an urban anthropologist from 
Belgium, to work withel Caño. She aims to establish an international 
observatory of popular knowledge on community land trusts in informal 
settlements, “so community leaders in so-called ‘slums’ around the world can 
find their way to the Caño to exchange information with people like Carmen 
Febres, to get this model translated to other communities worldwide”.

To share this land trust and development model with communities worldwide, a 
group of about 20 people from NGOs and community enterprises in Latin America, 
North America and Europe will visitel Caño in February. 

 Algoed also sees an important shift in moving away from the emphasis on 
individual land titles in regulating informal settlements, towards collective 
land ownership as a more effective protection of historical and cultural 
communities. She says the project also sets an example for architects and 
engineers to participate in community initiatives rather than hope to win the 
interest of members without that grassroots work.

 Ireland shares such a holistic view in promoting not just the community, as 
if in isolation, but in relation to the rest of the city. “When poor people get 
displaced,” he says, “they often become the poorer for it, and continued 
displacements worsen city life as a whole. A mixed city where everyone benefits 
makes for a healthier social fabric.”

The graffiti messages throughout San Juan show that while community 
development is flourishing, environmental progress is slower: the government 
keeps postponing the dredging of the canal – with an estimated cost of hundreds 
of millions of dollars – due to the country’s ongoing financial crisis.

Still, just a few steps from the Sacred Heart University train station in the 
teeming Santurce area of San Juan, with the tall buildings of The Golden Mile 
banking district looming in the background, one can now sense change in the air 
atel Caño.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 