
Anti-whaling campaign group Sea Shepherd says it has photographed Japanese 
whalers carrying out a slaughter inside Australia’s Antarctic whale sanctuary, 
the same day the Japanese prime minister,Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, was in Australia on a state 
visit.

In the first documented killing since the international court of justice ruled 
Japan’s Antarctic whaling illegal in 2014, Sea Shepherd released photographs of 
what it says is a dead minke on the deck of the whaler Nisshin Maru at 11.34am 
on Sunday.

Sea Shepherd activists, who took the photos by helicopter after five weeks 
shadowing the Japanese whalers, said the Nisshin Maru crew tried to hide the 
slaughtered minke with a tarpaulin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fphotos-japanese-whalers-killing-minke-sanctuary-says-sea-shepherd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbfc33db1e9407cac9cf89e779725bbfb68d9fe4%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photos%20show%20Japanese%20whalers%20killing%20minke%20in%20sanctuary%2C%20says%20Sea%20Shepherd&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fphotos-japanese-whalers-killing-minke-sanctuary-says-sea-shepherd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photos%20show%20Japanese%20whalers%20killing%20minke%20in%20sanctuary%2C%20says%20Sea%20Shepherd&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fphotos-japanese-whalers-killing-minke-sanctuary-says-sea-shepherd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbfc33db1e9407cac9cf89e779725bbfb68d9fe4%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
 Sea Shepherd activists say this photo shows a dead minke whale covered by a 
tarpaulin on the deck of the Nisshin Maru whaler factory ship. Photograph: 
Glenn Lockitch/Sea Shepherd 
The whaling fleet’s harpoon ships Yushin Maru and Yushin Maru #2 then covered 
their harpoons, according to Sea Shepherd.

The photographs are also the first to document the Japanese fleet’s killing of 
whales since Australia’s federal court in 2015 found the industry was in 
contempt for killing protected whales in Australia’s declared sanctuary.

The court fined Japanese whalers $1m over the killings but the fines were 
ignored.

Abe left Australia on Sunday after a two-night stay in Sydney, which included 
meeting his counterpart,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, on Saturday to 
discuss trade and security in Asia.

The photographs were taken by the helicopter from the Sea Shepherd ship, the 
Steve Irwin, the anti-whaling group said, providing coordinates to show it was 
inside the Australian whaling sanctuary.

Adam Meyerson, the captain of the Sea Shepherd patrol ship Ocean Warrior, 
said: “The whale killers from the Nisshin Maru were caught red-handed 
slaughtering whales in the Australian whale sanctuary.

“The Steve Irwin has shut down their illegal operations and caught them trying 
to hide the evidence.”

Jeff Hansen, the managing director of Sea Shepherd Australia, said a “lack of 
action by the Turnbull government” in response to the killing of whales in 
Australian waters on the tail of a state visit from Abe showed “the government 
has no spine when it comes to protecting the wishes of Australians to defend 
the Southern Ocean whale sanctuary”.

Wyanda Lublink, the captain of the Steve Irwin, said the whalers “know they 
are in contempt of the ruling of the international court of justice and the 
Australian federal court”.

“The fact that the Japanese crew went to cover up their harpoons and the dead 
minke whale on deck just shows that they know what they’re doing is wrong,” she 
said.

Sea Shepherd said in a statement on Sunday that the killing of whales had been 
halted after the helicopter relayed the whaling fleet’s position to the Steve 
Irwin, which was on course to intercept the factory ship.

Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> had previously caught hundreds 
of whales a year in Antarctic waters, eluding a worldwide moratorium on whale 
hunting under a “scientific” research program other nations regarded as a sham. 
The meat from the program, which is subsidised by the Japanese government, is 
sold in Japanese restaurants. But the whale meat, common in Japanese school 
lunches during the 1960s, now rarely figures in the diets of most Japanese.

Whaling watchdog shrinks loophole allowing Japan's 'scientific' hunts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/whaling-watchdog-shrinks-loophole-allowing-japans-scientific-hunts>
A spokesman for the Australian environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, was 
contacted for comment.

The Coalition has condemned Japan’s whaling activities and Turnbull was 
believed to have raised the issue privately with Abe,Fairfax has reported 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/first-glimpse-of-japans-whale-slaughter-in-defiance-of-international-court-20170115-gtrtzm.html>
. But the government has resistedcalls to send a government vessel to patrol 
its waters and intervene 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-03-25/calls-for-australia-to-take-action-against-japanese-whalers/7276788>
.

International law professor and whaling expert Tim Stephens has told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-23/sea-shepherd-hunting-japanese-fleet-whaling-season-begins/8145652>
 that Australia could put a stop to whale hunting by taking Japan to the 
international tribunal for the law of the sea.

Stephens said the tribunal had “a system of mandatory dispute settlement” of 
which it would be difficult for Japan to opt out.
 