
‘That doesn’t sound very interesting,” says my five-year-old son with a frown. 
I’ve just broken the news to him that we’re going on a vineyard tour. “To find 
out how they make wine!” I say, as if we’re going to see a spacecraft, hoping 
he’ll catch my enthusiasm. He doesn’t. He’s struggling to compute that holidays 
aren’t just about what he and his three-year-old brother want to do. It’s a 
tough lesson.

Planning a summer trip to meet the needs of my two energetic sons, my 
super-chilled husband and somewhere-in-the-middle me was never going to be 
easy. For the kids, the beach has to be safe for paddling and sandcastle 
building, yet I like beaches with waves strong enough for surfing. My husband 
likes sea swimming, surfing and sandcastle building too but he also craves the 
chance to unwind with some decent food and wine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa305da3d03cb62c17db12c985433b3072b8f709c%2F0_0_5265_3160%2F5265.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=family%20wine%20beach%20holiday%20France%20Atlantic%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=family%20wine%20beach%20holiday%20France%20Atlantic%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa305da3d03cb62c17db12c985433b3072b8f709c%2F0_0_5265_3160%2F5265.jpg>
 Lac d’Hourtin is France’s largest freshwater lake. Photograph: Alamy 
Luckily we all love cycling, so we decided to come to the Médoc-Océan region, 
north-west of Bordeaux to see if it could meet our various holiday needs. We 
based ourselves at Village Western, a lovely, forested campsite in Hourtin 
Port, which is not on the sea but by Lac d’Hourtin, France’s biggest freshwater 
lake. With shaded pitches for tents and comfy mobile homes, it was quiet, 
particularly for mid-August, and had a cowboy theme, with on-site horse riding, 
tipis and totem poles aplenty. The mostly French clientele flocked to evening 
classes in making lassoes and dreamcatchers. Our kids loved the pool and the 
fact they could cycle everywhere (there was bike hire on site): from our pitch 
to the pool, to buy woodfired pizza in the evening andpains au chocolat in the 
morning.

The campsite was just five minutes’ cycle, via off-road paths, from the lake, 
1½ hours by bike from the Médoc vineyards and an hour, according to Google 
Maps, to the Atlantic Ocean surf beaches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23730f9d831cb0a50e3e995eee90da39037a2f3c%2F0_577_2448_1533%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=family%20wine%20beach%20holiday%20France%20Atlantic%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=family%20wine%20beach%20holiday%20France%20Atlantic%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23730f9d831cb0a50e3e995eee90da39037a2f3c%2F0_577_2448_1533%2F2448.jpg>
 The off-road cycle track to the coast 
Eager to hear the roar of the ocean, we set off first to Hourtin Plage on an 
off-road route through ancient pine forests. It was 13km, so we put the kids in 
a trailer – great for them as they told Gruffalo stories all the way, but a 
little harder on our legs. We emerged from shaded forest to the bright skies 
and buzz of the popular surfing town an hour and a half later, dunes stretching 
into the distance on either side.

We grown-ups tag-teamed a quick surf each, the eldest caught his first waves 
on a bodyboard, and the youngest jumped small but strong waves with my husband 
in the lifeguarded section. Refuelled by pizza atLe Grillon  
<http://www.legrillonhourtin.fr/#_=_>in town, we rode back to the campsite as 
the early evening light slanted through the pines.

The next day we headed out for our first wine tour, the children baffled as to 
why we weren’t going back to the beach. The 30km cycle, often on busy roads, 
took well over two hours, and we arrived at Chateau Lynch Bages (jmcazes.com 
<http://www.jmcazes.com/en/chateau-lynch-bages/visits>) near Paulliac, hot and 
sweaty and with the kids already restless. The tour (€9) was, perhaps, a little 
too formal, the wine a bit pricey.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6042bfc50f74d3c3229c39065799bdac72aa9ed%2F0_731_4669_2801%2F4669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=family%20wine%20beach%20holiday%20France%20Atlantic%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=family%20wine%20beach%20holiday%20France%20Atlantic%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6042bfc50f74d3c3229c39065799bdac72aa9ed%2F0_731_4669_2801%2F4669.jpg>
 Wine o’clock … Chateau Larose and its vineyards. Photograph: Alamy 
Château Larose <http://www.vignoblesdelarose.com/> which we visited a few days 
later, proved more of a success. We cheated a little by driving to Paulliac, 
hiring bikes there (funbike.fr <http://www.funbike.fr/nos-magasins.html>) and 
riding through pretty vineyards on quiet country roads to the stunning 
19th-century chateau, which was the first European vineyard to win awards for 
sustainable development. Staff greeted us and our children with smiles, and I 
watched the boys play in the children’s area while my husband went on the 
(free) tour and tasting, and bought a crate, a seal of approval.

To save the kids from wine boredom, we limited more tastings to friendly local 
wine shopCave l’Atlantide <http://www.cave-atlantide.com/> in Hourtin town and 
spent the rest of our time on ocean beaches, exploring pine forest trails, and 
at the nearby lake, where the water was as warm as a bath and super-calm, 
though it was lifeguarded too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb03c8db9940a7a9d36a71968192333a13f235728%2F0_566_2448_1854%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=family%20wine%20beach%20holiday%20France%20Atlantic%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=family%20wine%20beach%20holiday%20France%20Atlantic%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fplenty-of-wine-and-no-whining-a-family-holiday-on-frances-atlantic-coast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb03c8db9940a7a9d36a71968192333a13f235728%2F0_566_2448_1854%2F2448.jpg>
 Sam and her sons at Hourtin Plage 
The children loved charging about in the soft, squelchy sand and swimming in 
the seemingly neverending shallows. They played for hours, building sandcastles 
and watching older children on dinghies, stand-up paddleboards and windsurfers.

I’m sure they would have been happy at the lake or the campsite pool all week, 
but as we sat amid the pines while the children looped around us on the bikes, 
we raised a glass of our local wine to a holiday that ticked a few parents’ 
boxes, too.

Way to go

 Ferry crossings were provided by Brittany Ferries (Portsmouth-Caen from £150 
return per car,brittany-ferries.co.uk <http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/>). 
Camping at Village Western (village-western.com 
<http://www.village-western.com/>) from £17 a night for a pitch for two with 
electricity. Under-11s stay free and bike hire starts at £38 for seven days. 
For off-road cycling routes around Hourtin, visitmedococean.co.uk 
<http://www.medococean.co.uk/walks-rides/over-fitfy-routes-discover/cycling-trails#!/page/1>
 