
An Israeli police officer and an Israeli Arab have died during clashes over a 
court-ordered operation to demolish homes in an Arab Israeli village in the 
south of the country.

Police spokesman Micky Rosenfeld said a local man sped toward the forces 
deployed to the Umm al-Hiran village early on Wednesday as they were securing 
the area ahead of its planned demolition. He said a jeep raced toward the 
police, killing officer Erez Levi, 34. Police opened fire at the driver, 
killing Yaakub Abu al-Qiyan, 50, who Israeli officials later said belonged to 
an Islamist group. The clashes continued, and several police officers were 
wounded.


Local residents said Qiyan was trying to leave town and only lost control of 
his vehicle after police shot at him. Qiyan’s brother, Ahmad, said he was 
“murdered in cold blood,” and Amnesty International called for an investigation 
into the reports of excessive force by police.

“The police are light on the trigger when it comes to Arab citizens,” the Arab 
advocacy group Adalah said in a statement in which it accused the police of a 
“culture of lying”.

Palestinians have carried out a number of attacks using vehicles against 
Israelis over the past year and a half, and earlier this month aPalestinian 
truck driver rammed into a group of Israeli soldiers, killing four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/truck-rammed-into-pedestrians-jerusalem>
.

Ayman Odeh, a politician and head of the Arab Joint List in the Israeli 
parliament, was wounded in the clashes on Wednesday, along with several others. 
Odeh was taken to a hospital with blood streaming down his forehead.

He told Israel’s Army Radio that he was shot by overzealous officers who were 
deployed after extensive negotiations to delay the demolition broke down.

“This is a direct order from [Prime Minister Benjamin] Netanyahu, who wants to 
enflame the area,” he said. “This is a disgrace.”

The public security minister, Gilad Erdan, accused Odeh of stirring up the 
conflict and lying about what happened. He said he hoped the incident would not 
spark further divisions between Jews and Arabs inIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> but said that if it happened 
politicians such as Odeh bore responsibility.

“He was there to enflame tensions and incite to violence,” Erdan told Army 
Radio. “He contributed to a very serious event that may also have criminal 
implications for him.”

Arabs make up a fifth of Israel’s population. They enjoy full citizenship but 
frequently face unfair treatment in areas such as jobs and housing.

The Israeli government recently vowed to crack down harder on illegal Arab 
construction following criticism from Jewish settlers, who face a court-ordered 
evacuation of an illegally built outpost in the West Bank.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fisraeli-arab-killed-in-clashes-with-police-over-home-demolitions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe28308da6ffaef0cc2a872e9b6cb2141d961d2ba%2F0_34_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20officer%20and%20Israeli%20Arab%20man%20killed%20in%20home%20demolition%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fisraeli-arab-killed-in-clashes-with-police-over-home-demolitions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20officer%20and%20Israeli%20Arab%20man%20killed%20in%20home%20demolition%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fisraeli-arab-killed-in-clashes-with-police-over-home-demolitions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe28308da6ffaef0cc2a872e9b6cb2141d961d2ba%2F0_34_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Israeli police and residents following clashes in Umm al-Hiran Photograph: 
Ammar Awad/Reuters 
Last week, authorities demolished 11 homes in the central city of Kalansua, 
sparking a general strike among Israeli Arabs, who say the problem stems from 
longstanding barriers to acquiring proper permits put in place by the state.

Wednesday’s evacuation plans involve a long-running dispute between Israel and 
the formerly nomadic Bedouins of Umm al-Hiran village. Israel moved part of a 
Bedouin clan to the state-owned land 60 years ago but now wishes to relocate 
residents to a government-designated Bedouin township.

An adjacent part of the village slated for future demolition is zoned for a 
new development catering to religious Jewish families with ties to the West 
Bank settlement movement.

Arab Israelis have risen to prominence in sports, politics, entertainment and 
the judiciary. But Jewish Israelis have long viewed the community with 
suspicion, as many of Israel’s Arabs closely identify with Palestinians living 
in the West Bank and Gaza.

The Israeli president, Reuven Rivlin, said the housing dispute must be 
resolved and urged all sides to refrain from letting the incident spiral into 
further conflict.

“I turn to all leaders across Israel, particularly in the Arab community, and 
say this is a stressful and difficult time, and we must all work together and 
do everything in our power to bring calm, in words and in actions,” he said. 
“We must find a solution and a plan to deal with this burning national, social 
and civic issue before it is too late.”
 