
As a self-confessed pop geek I enjoy poring over the credits of a song via 
Spotify, Wikipedia, the CD booklet or, given this is 2017, the inlayof a vinyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/03/record-sales-vinyl-hits-25-year-high-and-outstrips-streaming>
 LP. I like to scan through the 15 or so people listed and try and work out who 
did what, usually double-checking Sean Paul  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/05/sean-paul-drake-kanye-dancehall-bieber>
was involved in some capacity. Loading up a webpage or a streaming site or 
trying to get the booklet out of the CD without tearing the pages can take 
time, so luckily nowadays artists are making it easier by listing all of a 
song’s personnel in the artist field. Influenced by the rise in streaming, the 
march of the faceless dance producer and the ego of the so-called “super 
producer”, chart pop has become a modular entity, constructed around various 
co-headlining elements – the photogenic EDM producer! The reasonably successful 
singer! Any rapper! – to leave no genre, and therefore no audience base, out in 
the cold.

The current UK No 1, for example, is by dance-classical crossover boffins 
Clean Bandit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/23/clean-bandit-claim-christmas-no-1-with-rockabye>
, featuring not only resurgent dancehall rapper Sean Paul (of course), but pop 
newcomer Anne-Marie too. Meanwhile the Justin Bieber-lite Are You Sure? is a 
sonic car crash involving Dutch producers Kriss Kross Amsterdam, long-forgotten 
pop urchin Conor Maynard and if-the-cash-is-right-I’m-there rapper Ty Dolla 
$ign. These two artist pileups join actor/singer Hailee Steinfeld’s 
collaboration with EDM producers Grey andZedd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/07/zedd-edm-dance-electronic-music> 
on Starving; The Mack by Nevada featuring Mark Morrison andFetty Wap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/19/fetty-wap-i-didnt-even-get-to-use-no-bed>
; Shed a Light by Robin Schulz and David Guetta featuring Cheat Codes; any 
Major Lazer song and, deep breath, Lil Wayne, Wiz Khalifa, Imagine Dragons, 
Logic, Ty Dolla $ign and X Ambassadors’ Sucker for Pain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-59jGD4WrmE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-59jGD4WrmE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-59jGD4WrmE&media=>
In most of the cases listed above, the seemingly random conflation of singers, 
rappers and producers creates a default streaming platform sound, the sort of 
Spotify playlist mainstay that plays out like a vague approximation of Justin 
Bieber’s 2015 tropical house anthem, Sorry. If the various guests can bring in 
extra fans who perhaps wouldn’t typically listen to that particular genre, 
that’s great news all round. But why, for example, is that Hailee Steinfeld 
song not just a Hailee Steinfeld song? She’s the pop star element of it and 
dominates the video, she’s had songs out in her own name before, all of which 
were co-written and produced by people other than her. Why is the artist field 
cluttered by the song’s two co-producers? For this, we need to blame the 
super-producer boom of the 00s, label box-ticking, the rise of EDM and, 
finally, Rihanna.


Both Timbaland and the Neptunes – AKA Pharrell Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/08/pharrell-williams-interview-daft-punk>
 and Chad Hugo – ruled early 00s pop, and their presence was often as important 
to the success of a song as the artists involved. Both also released producer 
compilation albums, Timbaland with his Shock Value series and the Neptunes with 
their US No 1 Clones, featuring the likes of Jay Z, Nelly and Kelis. Suddenly 
the people typically behind the scenes were positioned front and centre, a 
trend continued via the rise of EDM (and the lucrative DJ slots that came with 
it), along with Calvin Harris appearing as a featured guest – despite “only” 
producing it – on Rihanna’s immaculateWe Found Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tg00YEETFzg&hl=en-GB&gl=GB>. In Harris’s 
laser-augmented slipstream, vaguely photogenic, lower-tier dance producers with 
a working knowledge of when to do “the drop” and who are permanently available, 
as well as credibility-assisting rappers, have had a field day. The mechanics 
behind riding the sonic zeitgeist are laid bare. It’s also a neat way for 
labels to continue the risk-free trick of chucking a new singer on to a dance 
track to gain them some exposure, the idea being the more their name crops up 
on a Spotify playlist – even if it is alongside six other people – the better. 
NewcomerRaye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2017/jan/09/music-poll-of-polls-aj-tracey-nadia-rose-raye-rag-n-bone-man-stefflon-don-tom-grennan-will-joseph-cook>
, for example, is currently involved in no less than four top 40 songs, 
covering tropical house, dance, R&B and pop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpop-producers-rappers-credit-headliners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc885408bcd7baebfed749ba2501359d2a6a5bc8%2F0_0_3000_1934%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20pileup%3A%20music's%20crowded%20chorus%20of%20producers%2C%20rappers%20and%20bit-part%20players&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpop-producers-rappers-credit-headliners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop%20pileup%3A%20music%27s%20crowded%20chorus%20of%20producers%2C%20rappers%20and%20bit-part%20players&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpop-producers-rappers-credit-headliners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc885408bcd7baebfed749ba2501359d2a6a5bc8%2F0_0_3000_1934%2F3000.jpg>
 One of the faces of the super-producer boom … Pharrell Williams. Photograph: 
Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP 
Obviously in a post-TV talent show world, pop cynically showing its inner 
workings is hardly new, but this new trend of Transformers pop, fusing together 
different parts to create an unwieldy whole, not only makes it almost 
impossible to recommend the song to a friend, but spreads the talent involved 
even thinner than it was. Obviously the splicing of genres is to be celebrated, 
but when the various parts are mulched into one homogenous sound, the list of 
people involved becomes irrelevant anyway. You might as well be reading a 
shopping list.
 