
The pound has clocked up its biggest one-day gain against the dollar since 
1998 as traders seized onTheresa May’s pledge that parliament would vote on any 
Brexit deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/uk-brexit-plan-theresa-may> 
and welcomed some clarity on the government’s plans for leaving the EU.

The FTSE 100 headed in the other direction, recording its biggest daily fall 
since the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote in June. The share index has 
beenboosted for several months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/ftse-100-on-course-for-longest-ever-winning-streak>
 by the fall in the pound, which helps exporters and those companies with 
overseas earnings, and some of that effect was unwound on Tuesday as the pound 
jumped almost 3%.

The UK currency had been under pressure in the days before the prime 
minister’s key speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/16/sterling-skids-to-three-month-low-on-hard-brexit-concerns>
, as investors fretted over the prospect of the blow to trade and economic 
prosperity from a hard Brexit deal that leaves the country outside the European 
single market.

What do business leaders think of Theresa May's Brexit speech?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/business-theresa-may-brexit-speech-uk-eu>
But on the day of the speech the pound was buoyed early on by news of a rise 
in inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/uk-inflation-hits-two-year-high>
. Some investors took that as a further sign that the next move in interest 
rates would be up, which in turn would strengthen the attraction of sterling.

Once May took the podium, the pound rallied further against the dollar and the 
euro as she confirmed the likely deal to leave the EU would mean quitting the 
single market but that it would be put to a vote in both the upper and lower 
houses of parliament.

“In laying out the government’s 12 guiding principles for the upcoming 
negotiations, Mrs May did remove some key question marks about the government’s 
approach and promised that both houses of parliament would get to vote on any 
Brexit agreement,” said Stephanie Flanders, a strategist at JPMorgan Asset 
Management. “This seems to have reassured investors.”

The pound is still down about 17% against the dollar since the referendum and 
economists warned there was scope for it to fall further, given much 
uncertainty remained around the UK’s likely Brexit deal and the nature of 
negotiations with the rest of the EU.


But on Tuesday it managed to recover some of its recent losses to reach a 
10-day high of $1.2398, a rise of 2.9% on the day. It had dipped below $1.20 on 
Monday on hard Brexit worries. TheFTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> closed down 1.5% at 7,220.38.
Market reaction to Theresa May's speech 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/may_speech_reaction/giv-3902pzrHIGzzdBY5/>
 Market reaction to Theresa May’s speech 
Commenting on the jump in the pound, Connor Campbell, a financial analyst at 
spread-betting firm Spreadex said: “As some expected, the pound had worked out 
most of its negative feelings about Theresa May’s Brexit intentions already, 
leading the currency to piggy-back on the less terrifying aspects of the prime 
minister’s announcement for some rather impressive gains.

“It shows just how desperate the currency was for clarity that May’s speech, 
with its firm stance on leaving the single market and vague promises of free 
trade and some kind of new customs agreement, could inspire such a reaction 
from sterling despite most of what was said being pound-negative.”


Sterling’s gains were also flattered by weakness in the dollar after Donald 
Trump said the US currency was overvalued. Trump said US companies could not 
compete with China “because our currency is too strong. And it’s killing us”, 
the Wall Street Journal reported.


Richard Falkenhall, senior currency strategist at the Nordic bank SEB said the 
rally would prove to be temporary.

“Despite the threats in today’s speech, the UK’s position in negotiations will 
be very weak once exit negotiations under the treaty starts. There is only a 
two-year period and the UK has the most to lose if negotiations fail. The 
two-year period will create a lot of uncertainty which is likely to harm the 
British economy and in particular the important British financial industry.

“We view today’s pound rally as temporary and expect sterling to weaken again. 
We would not be surprised if comments from the EU as well as the UK sound very 
negative in the initial phases of the negotiations and during the exit process.”


Andrew Goodwin, senior economist at the consultancy Oxford Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, also noted that the 
negotiations were far from guaranteed to succeed.

“The prime minister did make a potentially important commitment to ask both 
houses of parliament to vote on the final deal, a promise which caused sterling 
to spike upwards,” he said.

“But we do not see this as materially reducing the probability of the UK 
leaving the EU; it looks unlikely that ‘remaining’ will be one of the two 
options that parliament will be able to vote for.”
 