
“I didn’t want to do the 1970s,” said Miuccia Prada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada> backstage at her fashion show in 
Milan on Sunday night. “But it just came out, naturally. It was an important 
moment for protest, for humanity. Which is now very necessary.”

As Italian style’s most intellectual designer – a self-proclaimed “leftist 
feminist” and former Communist party member and mime artist – Prada always has 
something complex to say about the state of the world through fashion. At her 
autumn/winter 2017 show her perspective was particularly unsettling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fit-was-nasty-with-flowers-pradas-unique-approach-to-new-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a4c552af25253c7a75dc2c533d3dc81c87b8bc%2F1542_714_2922_1753%2F2922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prada%20explores%20the%201970s%20in%20a%20'naturally%20enigmatic'%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fit-was-nasty-with-flowers-pradas-unique-approach-to-new-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prada%20explores%20the%201970s%20in%20a%20%27naturally%20enigmatic%27%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fit-was-nasty-with-flowers-pradas-unique-approach-to-new-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a4c552af25253c7a75dc2c533d3dc81c87b8bc%2F1542_714_2922_1753%2F2922.jpg>
 Prada’s autumn/winter 2017 show put 1970s suits into a concrete art 
installation. Photograph: Maestri/WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
The show was considered thought-provoking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/22/max-mara-bombshell-glamour-with-intellectual-chops>
 before a single model had even stepped on the catwalk. It was staged in a 
cavernous concrete space-cum-art installation where sharp-cornered beds in 
creepy motel colours of sludgy green and mustard were spotlit from above, like 
slabs in a mortuary. If this was some kind of a comment about domesticity, it 
was not a blissful vision.

The clothes were less chilling and gentler than the setting, however, focusing 
on tropes of mundane 1970s commuter belt life in strokeable fabrics. Men wore 
orange corduroy suits and trenchcoats and held brown leather briefcases. Women 
were dressed in mohair twinsets with socks and sandals.

Their clashing colour combinations and weird patterns – deep teal offset 
against dappled white and pink floral patterns – transformed a prissy 
silhouette into something awkward and high fashion. There were also what Prada 
called “naive gestures” threaded through the collection: shell necklaces on men 
and jumpers that were decorated with ship paintings, calling to mindthe work of 
the untutored Cornish painter and fisherman, Alfred Wallis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/09/tate-st-ives-modern-artists-localism>
.

Prada remains the most influential brand in fashion, from an industry 
perspective, and backstage journalists and well-wishers hung on to every word 
and slyly decoded her outfit. Even that was a whirl of contradictions: a 
sherbet yellow skirt with marabou trim, a grey silk blouse with a mandarin 
collar, an ornate gold necklace and earrings and a grey V-neck jumper that 
looked very much like something from Uniqlo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fit-was-nasty-with-flowers-pradas-unique-approach-to-new-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F439f02b6eea074b858f1f05336df54c4349895fd%2F145_0_2530_4080%2F2530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prada%20explores%20the%201970s%20in%20a%20'naturally%20enigmatic'%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fit-was-nasty-with-flowers-pradas-unique-approach-to-new-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prada%20explores%20the%201970s%20in%20a%20%27naturally%20enigmatic%27%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fit-was-nasty-with-flowers-pradas-unique-approach-to-new-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F439f02b6eea074b858f1f05336df54c4349895fd%2F145_0_2530_4080%2F2530.jpg>
 A model during Prada’s show. Photograph: Maestri/WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
“It is impossible to summarise,” she began in typically opaque style. “The 
main sentiment is to go from bigness to smallness. Of going from something very 
big to something more human and simple. There is a sense of normality, which is 
very important. Everybody has too much to do, to follow. Somehow we lose out 
normal nature.” There was also, she agreed, a sinister air. “A crudeness. It 
was nasty. With flowers.”

Despite the industry’s continued reverence, Prada has fared less well with 
customers, posting a slump of nearly a quarter in net income in the first half 
of 2016. Analysts have laid the blame on over-expansion of stores and on 
overpriced handbags. Its woes are thrown into sharp relief by the success of 
fellow Italian megabrandGucci <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci>, 
whose new creative director, Alessandro Michele, has transformed the brand into 
something a lot more nuanced and esoteric – something a little more like Prada.

A key part of Prada’s fightback plan is to focus on digital efforts. Before 
the show the brand posted a series of unsettling videos on Instagram that 
purported to explain the show’s narrative, featuring smashing crockery and hazy 
bedroom scenes, with tag lines designed to inspire chin-stroking: ‘Privacy is a 
luxury’ and ‘The revolution starts at home’. How very enigmatic. How very Prada.
 