
I was invited to a White House reception last year in honour of Black History 
Month <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/blackhistorymonth>; I had worked on 
Capitol Hill for 10 years. I was allowed to bring a guest, so I took my 
three-year-old son, Clark. He knew the significance; he knows whoBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> is. His favourite book is our
White House Pop-Up Book 
<https://www.amazon.com/White-House-Pop-Up-Book/dp/1938700244>.

Clark was one of the youngest people there; he’s very personable and loves 
interacting, so as soon as we arrived he took off, making his way through the 
crowds with me trying to follow. We hadn’t been there long when an usher 
spotted him and brought him to the podium where the president was due to speak. 
He stood near the front while the usher prepared the stage, looking at the 
crowds, completely unflustered.

When the president came out, Clark made his way to the front of the rope 
barrier. I couldn’t get through the crowds myself; I’m not the lady standing 
behind him, I’m just to the left, barely in shot. I don’t know who she is, but 
Clark was completely unfazed.

After he’d spoken, the president and first lady greeted the guests. When he 
reached Clark, Obama knelt down, straightened Clark’s tie, and talked to him 
for about a minute. I couldn’t hear what they said. By the time Michelle 
reached us, I was standing back behind Clark. She asked how he was feeling, 
checked he felt safe and not too squeezed, and we took a selfie. Half an hour 
later, Obama signed Clark’s book: “To Clark – dream big dreams!” He didn’t want 
to leave – he wanted to look in all the rooms, and soak it up.

Later that night, a friend called to tell me that this photograph was on 
Instagram, which I don’t use. I was taken aback, it’s such a beautiful picture. 
It says: this is my president, and I can be whatever I want to be.

Two days later, I got a call from the official White House photographer, 
Pete Souza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/29/pete-souza-photographing-the-real-barack-obama>
. He wanted to talk about the picture, because it had such an impact: a young 
African American boy with our first African American president. He sent us a 
copy plus two outtakes, and Obama signed it: “Clark – thanks for visiting the 
White House. Dream big dreams, and work hard to achieve them – you will do 
great things!”

‘Our parents went without food so we could eat’: growing up in Manchester in 
the 1960s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/02/thats-me-paul-pryde-moss-side-manchester>
A canvas of the photograph hangs in Clark’s room; a month ago, it appeared on 
the president’s website. Kids and teachers at his school say, “You’re famous!”, 
but I think he’s a bit too young to realise.

The Washington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/washington-post> asked 
me if I thought Clark realised he was talking to a black president. I don’t 
think children see in colour – and he’s the only president Clark knows. He 
calls his white friends “brother”. We’re exposing him to politics: we read him 
stories about how the world works, and listen to theHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> soundtrack in the car. We’re going 
again to the newNational Museum of African American History & Culture in 
Washington DC <https://nmaahc.si.edu/>.

I’m hopeful Clark will see another black president in his lifetime; the next 
generation of leaders are already coming through: Harold Ford Jr,Senator Cory 
Booker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/08/newark-mayor-cory-booker-senate>
, new California senatorKamala Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/14/kamala-harris-female-obama-california-senate>
. Clark knows he has to work hard, but he has an exciting future ahead of him.

• Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com 
<mailto:thatsme@theguardian.com>
 