
With the festive season again upon us, I am happy to help by suggesting a 
range of modestly priced Guardian and Guardian-related puzzle things for you to 
choose as gifts:

* Eric Westbrook’s 3-D crossword puzzle calendar. Each month has its own 
puzzle. As a bonus it is linked online to a monthly prize competition and a 
newsletter for the solutions. There is a program available for downloading that 
enables totally blind solvers to take part. Of the home team, Arachne, 
Enigmatist, Nutmeg, Pasquale, Picaroon, Puck and Rufus have each set one of the 
12 puzzles. Of each purchase price of £12.99 £5 goes to the BBC Children in 
Need Appeal, with the remaining net profit shared between BBC CiNA and the RNIB 
Pears Centre for Specialist Learning. All is better explained at
www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk <http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/> where the 2017 
calendar may be ordered.

* Boatman has been setting cryptic puzzles for the Guardian since 2008. Last 
month he publishedBoatman the First 50, which is what is says on the label – 
his first 50 Guardian puzzles, each with a story attached of how it came into 
being, of his thought processes in developing it and of the interaction 
involved between setter, solver and even, so help me, editor. It should be of 
particular interest to aspiring setters and may help to disabuse them of the 
idea that all there is to setting a puzzle for publication is to upload 
Crossword Compiler software, fill in a grid and think up some passable clues. 
The book is available fromwww.ypdbooks.com <http://www.ypdbooks.com/> or from 
what are known as the better bookshops.

* In 2013 our very own crossword blogger Alan Connor wrote a book to mark the 
conventionally accepted 100th anniversary on 21 December 1913 of the 
publication of the first ‘modern’ crossword in the long defunct New York World. 
Its title wasTwo Girls, One on Each Knee, taken from a clue [PAT + ELLA] set by 
Rufus (though in his anonymous moonlighting capacity as a Daily Telegraph 
setter). This month Alan has produced another book,The Joy of Quiz, which with 
the same informative and jolly style covers the 80 years during which the quiz 
has become a British national institution to rival the crossword.

* Can You Solve My Problems? is a compilation by Alex Bellos, author of the 
wonderfulFutebol: the Brazilian way of life, made up of 125 classic puzzles of 
the last 2,000 years from all over the world. They will keep everyone going for 
the full Twelve Days of Christmas and far beyond: available from
https://bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com> .

* I am getting a bit suspicious about the recent urge on the part of the UK 
security services (MI5, MI6 and GCHQ) to come out of the closet and tell, if 
not all, at least something. Within very living memory the Government 
Communications Headquarters (pre-1946 it hid itself in plain view as the 
Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park) would never comment on 
what it was up to or even admit publicly that it existed. But last month 
Penguin publishedThe GCHQ Puzzle Book, inviting you to test yourself against 
more than 140 pages of codes, puzzles and other challenges set by its code 
breakers. It even has a foreword by the Duchess of Cambridge, whose grandmother 
Valerie Middleton (née Glassborow) was one of the posh young women who worked 
as secretarial staff in ‘Hut 6’ at Bletchley. Proceeds from the sale of this 
puzzle book are to be donated to Heads Together, the mental health campaign 
with which she, Prince William and Prince Harry are connected.

_____

Patrick Wildgust, the Curator of the Laurence Sterne Trust, recently asked if 
I could help him with an even more abstruse puzzle than any in the books listed 
above. He looks after Shandy Hall, the house in the village of Coxwold in North 
Yorkshire where the author of Tristram Shandy (published between 1759 and 1767) 
lived and wrote in the last half of his life (d. 1768).

Torquemada, the Observer crossword setter Powys Mathers, produced a Puzzle Book
 published by Victor Gollancz in 1934. Its final puzzle takes the apparent form 
of a 100-page murder-mystery novelette entitled ‘Cain’s Jawbone’. You are told 
that, by accident, the pages have been printed in an entirely haphazard order 
but that it is logically possible for a solver by intelligent reading to sort 
the pages into the only possible correct order. The re-ordered story then 
allows the solver, in some unspecified way, to list the six murderers involved, 
together with their victims. The then generous prize of £15 was offered for the 
first two correct entries but no record seems to exist anywhere of the solution 
to this puzzle.

Two more recent books have used the same device, known as ‘a book in a box’, 
ie one where the pages are loose and in no particular order. One isComposition 
No 1 (1962) by the French experimental novelist Marc Saporta, who died in 2009, 
aged 86; the other isThe Unfortunates (1969) by the English polymath B.S. 
Johnson, who committed suicide in 1973, aged 40. Patrick is working on 
connections between the three novels and the Torquemada puzzle and would be 
greatly assisted by discovering the solution the ‘Cain’s Jawbone’ puzzle. Any 
ideas?

 _____

Work is under way to get the monthly Genius puzzle added to the system that 
handles the rest of the crossword puzzles. But it may take some time yet to get 
there and, meanwhile, the puzzle still has to be uploaded manually by the 
central production team. However, this uploading process seems to have been 
less accident-prone in the last couple of months and my fingers remain crossed.

September’s Genius No 159 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/sep/05/genius-crossword-no-159> by 
Jack attracted 25 entries on the first day and 224 by the deadline. PSC, a 
regular faithful from Australia, was first in at 05:28 on 1 September but the 
next four were, I think, newcomers at the top of the entry board: MLN 
@btinternet (07:17), OMP @O (09:24), wetmtz (10:39) and TGOxford (11:03). 
October’s puzzle,No 160 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/oct/03/genius-crossword-160> by 
Puck, had two old hands in first and second place (m1f at 03:59 and PSC from 
Australia at 04:16), followed by a considerable gap before the next entry, of 
which there were 24 by the end of the first day and 268 by the deadline. The 
currentGenius No 161 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/nov/07/genius-crossword-no-161> is 
the second to be set by Soup. In his true colours as Hamish Symington, Soup has 
just taken over from Tom Johnson as editor of the monthly crossword 
subscription magazine1 Across <http://1across.co.uk/>. This closes another 
Guardian crossword circle, for the magazine was founded by Araucaria in 1984 
and edited by him until 1994. Tom Johnson, known to us as Maskarade, edited the 
magazine from 2000 until this year. And Hamish Symington designed and installed 
Araucaria’s personal crossword website, from which he took orders for bespoke 
cryptic puzzles. Not surprisingly, there was heavy demand for personalised 
Araucaria puzzles, the fees for which he donated to charity.

_____

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 