
If you’re a senior woman in Silicon Valley then 2017 is shaping up to be a 
lucrative year.The New York Times reports 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/30/technology/join-our-board-companies-hotly-pursue-new-wave-of-women-in-tech.html>
 that recruiters have been wooing women in the sector – with some senior women 
turning down up to 20 board invitations. More and more companies are now 
choosing to publish their diversity figures, and if the numbers stay the same 
each year it starts to get a little embarrassing. So in a bid to keep their 
clients happy, recruiters are finally actively searching for female candidates.


A good thing, right? On the one hand this is a step forward – tech companies 
in the US havejust 15% women at board level 
<http://www.catalyst.org/knowledge/statistical-overview-women-workforce> 
compared with the Fortune 500’s average of 22%. And for the talented women of 
Silicon Valley who fought their way up in these firms (or more commonly left, 
started their own businesses and then were feted) it must be nice to finally 
receive the recognition they deserve. But if tech thinks it can solve its 
diversity problem by telling board-level recruiters to “make sure there’s a 
woman on the shortlist”, then they’re about to fall into the “golden skirt” 
trap.


When Norway introduced quotas for the number of women on boards in 2006 
everyone thought that it would lead to less qualified board members. They 
assumed that there simply wouldn’t be enough senior women to meet the demand. 
In fact what happened was that a small group of well-known, very senior women 
started to pick up board position after board position. They became known asthe 
golden skirts 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/the-deal-magazine/norways-quota-act-creates-the-golden-skirt/news-story/4858c59d81d6dff54bde69e84ae4551e>
. So while Norwegian boards had technically made the quota of 40% female board 
members, they were all the same women. The gender diversity on boards had 
increased but the range of skills and personalities had only slightly increased.


It seems this could also be a problem for Silicon Valley. Recruiters tend to 
go for the more obvious options. And while not every tech company can have 
Sheryl Sandberg on its board, this doesn’t stop the same few names being touted 
again and again. Nor are recruiters or the companies they’re recruiting for 
particularly ingenious when drawing up shortlists. Julie Bornstein, COO at 
Stitch Fix,told New York Magazine 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/12/tech-companies-diversity-boards.html> that the 
first place tech directors look when trying to fill a role is within their own 
networks. They might be hiring a woman, but they’re still hiring someone who’s 
as much like them as possible.


'She’s been life changing': Why female mentors matter in tech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2017/jan/16/shes-been-life-changing-why-female-mentors-matter-in-tech>
In doing this tech companies are forgetting that simply bringing a woman on to 
the board is not a guarantee of change.Research shows 
<https://www.wcwonline.org/pdf/CriticalMassExecSummary.pdf> (pdf) that you need 
a critical mass of women at board level to guarantee that their voices are 
heard and that they have an impact on the governance of the board. Also, most 
companies find that getting buy-in for diversity policies at the top level is 
easier than actually enacting them throughout the organisation. It’s not enough 
to just have figureheads and supporters sitting at the boardroom table, you 
need them throughout the organisation. This is particularly important at the 
middle-management stage where women often drop out or are overlooked.


The final thing for these tech companies to remember is that it’s very easy to 
hold gender as the marker for diversity within an organisation, but it’s not 
the only form of diversity. There’s race, age, sexuality, disability and, most 
overlooked, diversity of thought and experience. Trying to get more women at 
board level is a great start but it would also be interesting to see tech 
companies really looking at how they bring in employees with more diverse 
backgrounds. Those who haven’t taken the same path through education or perhaps 
need some help to step up into their next role.


In the meantime, the phones of the senior women of Silicon Valley will 
continue to ring and I encourage you, ladies, to pick them up. And then ask for 
double whatever they’re offering.


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 