
Radiohead: ‘The only band exceptional enough to force Chris Morris into a 
public space on a Friday night’

What better pre-gig omen is there than the sight of Chris Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/20/chris-morris-comeback-stewart-lee-comedy-vehicle>
 arriving on a bike? The second night of Radiohead’s run of London shows was 
attended by some of Britain’s most refined cultural figures – PJ Harvey, Adam 
Buxton, Julian Barratt and Kate Bush (mode of transport unknown, but I imagine 
son the back of a snow leopard or riding a magic carpet) – plus an army of 
scrupulous mortals who punished those inconsiderate enough to partake in 
inter-song conversation or iPhone filming with severe shushes. I was nervous 
because of the pressure of reviewing a band that mean so much to me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/28/radiohead-review-textured-set-which-flits-between-medicinal-bliss-and-fractious-fury>
, and so a lot of the night was spent panicking about how to describe such 
spectral songs and emotions, and whether or not I was getting the best possible 
view of Jonny Greenwood. It’s only when I look at the set list for that night – 
The National Anthem, Airbag, Idioteque, Weird Fishes/Arpeggi, Everything in Its 
Right Place, and one of my favourite songs ever, Separator – that I am reminded 
of what an incredible experience it was; the return of a band still evolving, 
improving decades into their career. The only one exceptional enough to force 
Chris Morris into a public space on a Friday night.Harriet Gibsone

HMLTD: ‘David Bowie in 1972 reincarnated in five peacocks on a tiny stage’

Neither of the two bands that, in some strange way, felt like they were 
showing me something new played what I might think of the “best” shows of the 
year. Nor did they provoke some startling emotional connection. They played 
gigs where I felt the stirrings of something different, something I didn’t 
necessarily understand and probably wasn’t meant to, and I didn’t care. And 
both bands exist at the Venn-diagram intersection of completely amazing and 
absolutely terrible. The first was the Garden, who I saw twice in three days: 
once in London, then at End of the Road, and laughed out loud with delight at 
their unfettered preposterousness. The second was Happy Meal Ltd, who appear to 
have become HMLTD for legal reasons. You might very well go to see HMLTD and 
come away thinking there’s rather a shortfall of, you know, actual songs. And 
you’d be right. But that didn’t matter: what they were was self-invented rock 
stars, David Bowie in 1972 reincarnated in five peacocks on a tiny stage, 
people who were born to be great, even if they can’t be good, yet. They might 
not turn out to be great – though I very much hope they’ll learn to write the 
songs to go with their presence – but for half an hour in a Camden pub they 
were the best thing ever.Michael Hann

The Stone Roses: ‘A joyous, communal experience’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75edbcd6bc38a4a13aa89fafed8795fa73400683%2F0_181_4104_2463%2F4104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Radiohead%2C%20Sia%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20bees%20%E2%80%93%20our%20writers'%20favourite%20gigs%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Radiohead%2C%20Sia%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20bees%20%E2%80%93%20our%20writers%27%20favourite%20gigs%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75edbcd6bc38a4a13aa89fafed8795fa73400683%2F0_181_4104_2463%2F4104.jpg>
 ‘This is for the unemployed’ … Ian Brown on stage in Manchester earlier this 
year. Photograph: MCPIX/REX/Shutterstock 
I’m always struck by how so many of the Stone Roses gigs I’ve been to have had 
an uncanny personal significance. Shortly after I first saw them, at Leeds 
Warehouse in 1989,the band gave me an interview for my fanzine 
<https://www.mdmarchive.co.uk/artefact.php?&aid=1607&bid=921&fbid=17>, which 
helped me to get off the dole and get started as a writer. The next time, at 
Leeds Polytechnic, I met a girl with whom I’d spend the next 17 years. At 
Heaton Park in 2012, I was simultaneously nervously excited about the imminent 
birth of my son (who was, er, due on the day of the gig) and grieving for my 
dying dog. I didn’t expect anything like that from their low-key warmup in 
Halifax in June, but it provided another emotional experience. Pop legends 
don’t often rock up to the small, unfashionable Yorkshire town, and the locals 
responded by packing out the pubs and turning the Victoria theatre into a scene 
of untrammelled joy and celebration. The band surely felt it, too, and – in the 
sort of intimate venue they’d have played before their supernova success – 
delivered a performance worthy of their heyday. With the balcony rocking 
dangerously, Ian Brown said: “This is for the unemployed. This is what we used 
to do.” I remembered that music had been as much an escape for them as it had 
been for me, and it was probably no different for anyone in the audience. In a 
year typified by hatred and division, it felt important to be part of such a 
joyous, communal experience.Dave Simpson

SOPHIE: ‘The kind of swelling, singalong wave of euphoria that leaves you 
smiling long after the music has faded’

At 6pm on the evening I was due to review SOPHIE’s first big London show, I 
received a phone call from the PR. Despite previously promising me a review 
ticket, he told me I would no longer be on the guest list: apparently SOPHIE – 
AKA a Glasgwegian man called Samuel Long – had issued strict instructions not 
to let reviewers in. I wasn’t sure if this was actually a general policy or if 
Long simply didn’t want a square newspaper like the Guardian misunderstanding 
(or, heaven forbid, endorsing) his act. It didn’t matter: being a fan I’d 
already bought tickets, so I went and wrote about it anyway. And I’m glad I 
did. SOPHIE’s awkward, aggressive and often deeply disconcerting take on 
saccharine dance-pop was hugely divisive when it first appeared in 2013. There 
was a tendency to dismiss it as hipster detritus, and as much as I loved it, I 
wondered whether the critics were right in viewing it simply as an overwrought 
exercise in subversion – had I kidded myself into seeing its potential as 
exciting and gratifying pop music? As it turned out, I needn’t have worried – 
the gig was far from a postmodern poseup. Instead, Long transformed his back 
catalogue into a steady stream of crowd-pleasing tracks, while an audience of 
frenzied teenagers, ultra-hip students and a surprisingly large number of 
bog-standard adults proved that SOPHIE’s songs were more than capable of 
providing the kind of swelling, singalong wave of euphoria that leaves you 
smiling long after the music has faded. Sadly for him, I gave it a rave review.
Rachel Aroesti

Sia: ‘This was not what a gig is supposed to look like’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4368e14fce61ace1a87066571453c7552e12f1%2F0_156_3173_1904%2F3173.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Radiohead%2C%20Sia%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20bees%20%E2%80%93%20our%20writers'%20favourite%20gigs%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Radiohead%2C%20Sia%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20bees%20%E2%80%93%20our%20writers%27%20favourite%20gigs%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4368e14fce61ace1a87066571453c7552e12f1%2F0_156_3173_1904%2F3173.jpg>
 About much more than the central performer … Sia at Coachella. Photograph: 
Christopher Polk/Getty 
This year Coachella didn’t really have a “Coachella moment”; that one defining 
performance that dominated coverage and took the performer to a different 
level. Ice Cube’s gangsta-rap masterclass came close,LCD Soundsystem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lcd-soundsystem> dusting off the cobwebs was 
special, and so was Calvin Harris shouting random things out of a giant 
spaceship. But the most impressive thing in the desert this year was Sia’s live 
show, which was a mix of contemporary dance and silent film; the antithesis of 
the modern pop performance. Filmed segments featuring actors such as Paul Dano, 
Gaby Hoffmann, Ben Mendelsohn and Tig Notaro were accompanied by dancing 
choreographed by Ryan Heffington. Sia stood stage left and way in the back, and 
offered so little crowd engagement that on later legs of her tour fans asked 
for their money back. If you wanted some call and response, “banter” and a 
witty segue into Cheap Thrills, this wasn’t for you. The use of Coachella’s 
huge screens and the attempt to make a contemporary gig about much more than 
the central performer felt truly different – this was not what a gig was 
supposed to look like. Sia is someone who has been criticised for not engaging 
in the way pop stars are supposed to. Not showing her face, shunning interviews 
and sticking to songwriting and recording. But actors, choreographers and 
performers want to play along with her, and embrace the chance to do things a 
bit differently; if that’s not what a “Coachella moment” should be, I don’t 
know what is.Lanre Bakare

Darren Hayman: ‘A genuinely magical atmosphere, in the most surprising of 
settings’

I confess to feeling a degree of trepidation about Darren Hayman’s performance 
at Maplebeck village hall in Nottinghamshire on a warm evening in June. I could 
understand why he was playing there – Maplebeck is a thankful village, where 
all the men who went away to the first world war returned alive, and his 
current musical project is about thankful villages – and I’ve been huge fan of 
Hayman’s music for decades, since he was the frontman of 90s indie band Hefner. 
But I’m also aware that his music is an acquired taste: the fragility of his 
voice in particular is something that’s always seemed to have a polarising 
effect, and his theme-driven latter-day work has taken him down some pretty 
arcane paths. How would an audience who I got the distinct feeling didn’t 
really know what they were letting themselves in for – young kids, pensioners 
drinking cups of tea, people who I suspected had turned up expecting a talk – 
respond? I needn’t have worried. They were utterly rapt: by Hayman’s music – 
rickety, folky, decorated with lo-fi electronics – and the hazily 
impressionistic films he’d made to accompany it. In fact, the more abstract the 
music got, the more they seemed to enjoy it. I couldn’t work out if it was 
proof of the audience’s open-mindedness, or that there was something charming 
about Hayman himself and undeniable about his music (probably both)But it made 
for a genuinely magical atmosphere, in the most surprising of settings.Alexis 
Petridis

Grimes: ‘Fun does not begin to cover it’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76a68fc27f6f422ca4a4f58be1a8367b006623cb%2F0_309_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Radiohead%2C%20Sia%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20bees%20%E2%80%93%20our%20writers'%20favourite%20gigs%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Radiohead%2C%20Sia%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20bees%20%E2%80%93%20our%20writers%27%20favourite%20gigs%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76a68fc27f6f422ca4a4f58be1a8367b006623cb%2F0_309_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Manga banshee … Grimes on stage at Brixton Academy earlier this year 
Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
Most people, it seemed, had dressed up as Grimes: girls, boys, in-between, 
young, old enough to know better. The screaming was unrelenting, to the point 
where Grimes begged her fans to stop, a very polite Canadian freaked out by all 
the love. When her own screams came (on songs like Kill V. Maim, or Go, written 
for Rihanna), Grimes turned back into a manga banshee. In contrast with 
previous live performances, where non-existent budgets dictated what this 
burgeoning electronic producer could do (frown down at her gear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9tsjAn2EA4c)>, cradling the mic in her neck), 
the Art Angels tour had a budget and a mission: to cross a rave (the sonics!) 
with a pop show (the non-stop tunes! The backing dancers!) in a parallel 
universe where there weren’t freaks and normals, but everyone was on board this 
hyper-modern, intimidating, cathartic, female juggernaut, waving glowsticks. 
The beats were pulverising. The bass drops were nauseating. The massed vocals – 
live, backing and canned – suggested tooled-up angels on helium. In the company 
of friend-cum-support act HANA, Grimes pinballed around the stage with an 
absurd, over-size bow on her head, triggering a deluge of sound here, adjusting 
her gear there, thwacking drum pads; a female auteur, doing out-and-out pop on 
her own terms, without the scent of a male agenda anywhere. Fun does not begin 
to cover it.Kitty Empire

Jennifer Walshe and Tomomi Adachi: ‘Only 20 minutes long, but it captured 
years of happiness and heartache’

Taking place at what was also my festival of the year, an electricity-free 
avant-garde affair out in the Cambridgeshire countryside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/03/wysing-polyphonic-review-avant-garde-sound-without-electronics>
, this was an extra uptick from the day’s constant highs. The audience sat 
around the edges of an empty gallery space, with Walshe and Adachi stalking 
around the middle like toddlers on a nameless mission. They chattered at each 
other in a stream of nonsense, sometimes querying, sometimes indignant, 
sometimes hysterical. Adachi took to making sounds through a length of flexible 
plastic tubing, occasionally goosing audience members with it as if in some 
incredibly highbrow panto. But it wasn’t some study in infantilism – their 
confusion and pain was often very adult. Sometimes they seemed to directly 
interrogate one another; at others they spoke their wordless anxieties through 
each other. Brandished sheets of tinfoil went from funny noisy playthings to 
blankets for cowering beneath. To me, this was a portrait of marital breakdown: 
the frustration when passion can’t find its usual path; when love is dizzy from 
the blows it has sustained. It was probably only 20 minutes long, but it 
captured years of happiness and heartache.Ben Beaumont-Thomas

Be at the Hive: ‘The roar of passing aircraft engines was submerged into the 
drone’

When I first heard that a couple of members of Spiritualized had teamed up 
with a Nottingham-based artist called Wolfgang Buttress, his teenage daughter 
and 40,000 bees to make a drone album I had many thoughts: “how?”, “why?” and 
“er, that’s pretty damn weird”. One of the thoughts I didn’t have was, “That 
sounds like it will lend itself particularly well to the live environment.” But 
then the Be project has a habit of messing with your preconceptions. As I 
listened to the album One over the course of this year, I realised that this 
was more than just some wacky art project. Not only did it sound sublime – 
meditative and restorative – but it acted as a powerful comment on the natural 
world, and the responsibilities of human beings within that. Anyone who’s met 
Buttress will swiftly realise that he’s not one for doing things by halves. 
Earlier this year, he reconstructed the gigantic metal beehive originally 
displayed at the 2015 Milan Expo within Kew Gardens. His next move was to stage 
a concert of One there – with the band playing in the base of the Hive, while 
attendees were free to roam around it, or simply lie back on the floor and 
drift away as the music combined with a spectacular light show (generated, 
remarkably, by the activity of a hive of bees based over a hundred miles away). 
It was an astonishing show, not least because Kew Gardens is based under 
Heathrow’s flight path: the roar of passing engines was submerged into the 
drone rather well, but they did act as a stark reminder as to what we’re doing 
to the earth’s atmosphere. While everything else showed us just what we have to 
lose.Tim Jonze
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4d92f035954093883870ec3c51f2e4856caaf3d%2F0_288_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Radiohead%2C%20Sia%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20bees%20%E2%80%93%20our%20writers'%20favourite%20gigs%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Radiohead%2C%20Sia%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20the%20sound%20of%20bees%20%E2%80%93%20our%20writers%27%20favourite%20gigs%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fradiohead-sia-stone-roses-writers-favourite-concerts-gigs-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4d92f035954093883870ec3c51f2e4856caaf3d%2F0_288_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Scene-baiting anti-hero … James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem Photograph: Kevin 
Winter/Getty Images for FYF 
LCD Soundsystem: ‘If they go away again, I’m leading the hunt’


When LCD Soundsystem announced their comeback in January this year, many fans 
were cynical. Had James Murphy turned their split or hiatus or whatever it was 
into slick pantomime? Here was our acerbic, scene-baiting anti-hero, the 
besuited dude in a sludge of hipster posers, who’d cranked up the emotional 
pornography with an epic goodbye tour and accompanying live DVD – only to 
return five years later. Was this it, the ultimate betrayal? If they’ve made 
their grave, should a band stay dead and done? But live on the Other Stage on 
Glastonbury’s final day LCD’s resurrection felt spiritual, not sanctimonious. A 
giant disco ball suspended above their altar threw glittering shards across the 
crowd’s collective wonder. Murphy in a white tux guided us through a greatest 
hits set – the sound of every house party from 2005 to 2007. No matter the 
claggy, welly-dragging mud below; up above was a reaffirmation of the New York 
outfit as dance-punk underdogs, the festival anti-headliners – Us V Them, LCD 
Soundsystem versus Coldplay, who were playing the Pyramid Stage that night. All 
was forgiven when they played All My Friends, taking on new poignancy as the 
20somethings who’d danced knock-kneed at house parties to its art-punk-disco 
grappled with their 30s and the 30somethings with their 40s. For all their 
emotional heft, however, LCD were also technically magic. To see them spread on 
the stage in a circle, a panopoly of instruments and machinery and people, was 
to remember how intense the timing and structure of this music is. You’ve never 
quite clocked a concentration face like Pat Mahoney’s when Murphy crouches down 
and stares at his kick drum. The festival shows in the summer surely weren’t 
just money earners, but testament to that exceptional musical kinship. I just 
hope they have a game plan for the future – holograms, cryonics, whatever. 
Because if they try to go away again, I’m leading the hunt.Kate Hutchinson
 