
You never expect anyone to actually live in a riverside penthouse. You only 
ever see them in movie versions of London – sleek, soulless, improbably empty 
lairs for Bond villains or corporate baddies. But, it turns out, they exist in 
the real world, too – like the 11th floor Lambeth apartmentRaimund Berthold 
<http://www.berthold-uk.com/> and his partner, Paul, have shared for over a 
decade.

In some ways, it’s just like countless other London flats. Bedroom, bathroom, 
open kitchen/living room, room-too-small-to-be-anything-but-a-spare-room, each 
stuffed with its owners’ treasured possessions. But this one comes with a 
panorama that sweeps from theMI6 building 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SIS_Building> and Battersea power station to the 
palaces of Parliament and Millbank. And the clutter is an enviable collection 
of contemporary art.

It’s a long way from the ski resort of Arlberg, Austria, the designer’s 
childhood home. “Great winters, boring summers!” he laughs. “But I was always a 
city boy at heart.” In the late 1990s, he came to visit a friend in London and 
never left. Berthold ended up atCentral Saint Martins 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/csm/>, and (after stints at McQueen, Westwood and 
Ferragamo) went solo. He’s gone on to become one of London menswear’s quieter 
success stories, with his own studio in Soho, a recently launchedwebshop 
<http://www.berthold-uk.com/>, and a loyal international customer base.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Flondon-penthouse-flat-with-contemporary-art-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50174a17bf2c27fec432009f4c64ee64f13938ad%2F0_396_5254_3153%2F5254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Raimund%20Berthold's%20penthouse%20panorama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Flondon-penthouse-flat-with-contemporary-art-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Raimund%20Berthold%27s%20penthouse%20panorama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Flondon-penthouse-flat-with-contemporary-art-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50174a17bf2c27fec432009f4c64ee64f13938ad%2F0_396_5254_3153%2F5254.jpg>
 Making a splash: the designer with an installation by Korakrit Arunanondchai. 
Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
The couple bought the flat in the early Noughties, when the building – a brick 
1960s office block wedged into the middle of the Albert Embankment – was 
converted into flats. Back then, surrounded by industrial units, it was lacking 
the kind of homely, domestic warmth they’d have calledheimlich back in Arlberg. 
But for Berthold, that was part of the charm. “It’s a bit less villagey round 
here. I don’t really need to know the neighbours.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Flondon-penthouse-flat-with-contemporary-art-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F352edc8fb23fd33dacf0b2486e5a6c0ad69e464b%2F0_0_3392_4774%2F3392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Raimund%20Berthold's%20penthouse%20panorama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Flondon-penthouse-flat-with-contemporary-art-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Raimund%20Berthold%27s%20penthouse%20panorama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Flondon-penthouse-flat-with-contemporary-art-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F352edc8fb23fd33dacf0b2486e5a6c0ad69e464b%2F0_0_3392_4774%2F3392.jpg>
 Body of work: fingernail painting and Lego-filled legs by Ed Fornieles. 
Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
Light and low-ceilinged, the flat is thoughtfully laid out, with grey-veined 
marble flooring and storage neatly folded away into flat white walls. Rather 
than being displayed with gallery precision, the couple’s art collection 
mingles fluidly with their everyday life. Battered concrete spheres byOscar 
Murillo 
<http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/oscar_murillo.htm?section_name=pangaea>
cluster in the living room corners, alongside aKlara Lidén 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/27/artist-of-week-klara-liden>
 video and Lego-filled silicone legs byEd Fornieles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jan/20/animal-house-art-frat-party>
;Magali Reus <http://www.magalireus.com/current.html> padlocks float off a 
column next to a tree-trunk installation byPipilotti Rist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/sep/26/pipilotti-rist-hayward-gallery-review>
. The tiny study has been taken over by vast, primary coloured canvases and 
mannequins by Thai painterKorakrit Arunanondchai 
<https://www.artsy.net/artist/korakrit-arunanondchai>.

“We’ve got one more piece coming, a huge lightbox.” Berthold confesses. He 
looks around half-despairingly. “Maybe the books could go…”

The furnishings are low-key, yet elegant, from a cocoon-like midcentury chair 
(a present from Paul’s Finnish mother), reupholstered in tufted grey fabric, to 
the smocked-leather Patricia Urquiola seat, placed at the living room’s prow, 
which spins to allow its owner his own moment of Bond villain excess.

It’s the perfect spot for a despot to survey his city. “At night, it becomes 
this amazing backdrop of lights. I like that it feels kind of anonymous.” 
Berthold says. “You sit in the middle, observing rather than being part of 
something.”

Anonymity may well have been the lure, but its occupant’s hospitable 
personality is stamped all over the apartment. As you leave – past an early
Tracey Emin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/emin> sketch, a pair of 
legs upended to flick a cheery farewell V-sign – what’s striking isn’t the view 
or Berthold’s extraordinary collection of objects. It’s how veryheimlich his 
home is, despite it all.
 