
Here is this week’s playlist – songs picked by a reader from your suggestions 
afterlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/05/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-with-notable-alliteration>
. Thanks for them all. Read more about how our weekly Readers Recommend series 
works at the end of the piece.

One of the hidden benefits of taking a spin in the RR “guru” chair is that you 
get the chance – or accept the obligation – to read through all the nominations 
and comments. This week’s offerings produced a couple of interesting points 
about the game generally, and the list-selection process in particular. On that 
basis, I’m throwing in a few more explanatory notes on the A-list than usual 
this time around. They may even help anyone who fancies their first turn behind 
the wheel to avoid a pothole or two.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&media=>
 The YouTube playlist. 
Alliteration promised to be a fruitful topic for rap and hip-hop-type songs. 
It possibly still was, but the returns would have been even better had I 
noticed earlier that two nailed-on-from-the-outset choices were zedded years 
ago (Blackalicious with Alphabet Aerobics and Eric B & Rakim with Follow the 
Leader, if you’re asking). Our list thus commences withRoots and Mellow My Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5hBC7ovAn6Y&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=1>
, a rhyming onslaught containing the wholly relevant lines “manic mad musicians 
… makers of noise erupt abruptly”.

A recurring dilemma for the “guru” – well, this one anyway – is whether to 
favour songs that suit one’s own taste, or embrace those that, shall we say, 
untick the boxes. Suffice to say that if I stuck resolutely to the former 
approach thenRusholme Ruffians 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9JU8XCXwv2A&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=2>
 by theSmiths would not have featured here. The justification by reader 
ScarletsOHywel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/05/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-with-notable-alliteration#comment-90593749>
 was too good to resist, though: “The title has both alliteration and assonance 
and, as a bonus, alliterates in the same way as readers recommend.” Very well 
played!

Pursuing that point, some difficult decisions had to be made this week between 
eminent wordsmiths, and one particular head-to-head gave me much food for 
thought. Ultimately, tales of “Two Ton Ted from Teddington 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/90602065>” and treacle 
tart-based temptation tipped the balance in favour ofBenny Hill and Ernie (The 
Fastest Milkman in the West) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8e1xvyTdBZI&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=3>
. Joni Mitchell did make the B-List, in fairness ...

Certain other selections need less explanation: 

“Be mine sister salvation, Juke Joint Jezebel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=91w6Q2tytLc&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=4>
 is coming for my cremation,” warnKMFDM. And if anybody nominated a song with a 
more arrestingly alliterative name thanKu Klux Klan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K1eq5YU7eO4&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=5>
 bySteel Pulse, it escaped my notice.

Another obvious fit for the topic was Lowkey & Faith SFX with Alphabet Assassin
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ToZUIdbgqjE&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=6>
. An undeniably apt title, and I can summarise the song no better than by 
quoting a YouTube commenterwho opined 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ToZUIdbgqjE&lc=z13de3sr4zivtxmls22zfv4bxwiru5wsz>
: “My man compressed the dictionary like a zip file.” Quite.

Regardless of personal musical taste, any playlist needs light and shade, and 
the next two choices stood out for vivid rather than exuberant phraseology:

“Helplessly hoping her harlequin hovers nearby / Gasping at glimpses of gentle 
true spirit.” The image conjured up byRichie Havens in Helplessly Hoping 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SNZDvvWRwzU&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=7>
 is a fine one, but perhaps not quite as cinematic asPatti Smith’s Kimberley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2oV_COYyHKM&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=8>
:

“So I ran through the fields as the bats with their baby vein faces / Burst 
from the barn and flames in a violent violet sky.”

The musing in the comments during the week on whether a relatively small 
number of participants enjoy disproportionate listing “success” made me pause 
and reflect. To me, RR has always been a level playing field, but a thought did 
occur – might a guru encounter a conflict of interest if someone raised such a 
concern? Would there be pressure to spread the selection net wider? Happily, in 
my case, the eternal consideration is whether nominations are in any way 
reminiscent ofWarren Zevon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/09/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
’s lyrical genius, so (musing notwithstanding)Metro make the list on merit with 
Flame 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1kX8LOVII0o&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=9>
: “I see flames along the Seine / I know the stains on your satin skirt / Come 
from another lover.”

In similar vein, Olivia Chaney on the pitfalls of cramped, shared 
accommodation inToo Social 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6gIcr0QvrA&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=10>
: “This house is too social / Kitchen constant coffee confessional.”

Our penultimate track is Flip, Flop and Fly 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tLP6PScAYVk&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=11>
 byBig Joe Turner. The Elvis version was also nominated, but Big Joe edged it; 
scoring additional points by being introduced onstage as “The Boss of the 
Blues”.

Finally, what better way to conclude a playlist on this topic than with a 
remarkably economical use of capital letters, for both band and song title, to 
fine alliterative effect:AC/DC’s Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=whQQpwwvSh4&list=PLW43ObHWrrOi-ice64vkLdxfEj3oiNHa2&index=12>
.

Note: not all songs appear on the Spotify playlist because some are 
unavailable on the service.

New theme: how to join in

The new theme will be announced at 8pm (GMT) on Thursday 12 January. You have 
until 11pm on Monday 16 Januaryto submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  