
“One thing people often gloss over when talking about the regional press now 
is that we are commanding huge and very loyal online audiences,” says Henry 
Faure-Walker, chief executive atNewsquest <http://www.newsquest.co.uk/>, the 
publisher behind 19 daily titles includingThe Argus <http://www.theargus.co.uk/>
 in Brighton andThe Northern Echo <http://www.thenorthernecho.co.uk/> in 
Darlington. “We have some markets, such as York, where 75% of the population 
visits our website at least once a week. Local journalists’ content has never 
been read more than it is today.”


Trinity Mirror <http://www.trinitymirror.com/>, Johnston Press  
<http://www.johnstonpress.co.uk/>and Newsquest all reported a year-on-year 
increase of average daily unique browsers across their digital networks in June 
2016. This is compared to a general decline in print sales of paid for regional 
dailies, with local weekly newspapers losing anaverage 9.2% of sales in the 
second half of 2015 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/regional-daily-abcs-north-and-midlands-titles-hit-hardest-as-print-sales-in-overall-decline/>
 compared to the same period the year before, according to ABC.


As audiences shift from print to online platforms, regional publishers are 
reinventing their business models to ensure they still deliver. As Jeff Henry, 
chief executive at Archant, whose titles include theEastern Daily Press 
<http://www.edp24.co.uk/home> in Norfolk and the Ham & High 
<http://www.hamhigh.co.uk/home> in London, says, “Readers and advertisers have 
more choice than ever before and our challenge is quite simple – relevance.”


The changing face of content

Less emphasis on “hard news” is one change in evidence. “It’s less about shock 
and horror on the front page,” says Faure-Walker. “My sense from talking to 
editors is that there is a shift away from car crash content. People seem more 
receptive to a slightly gentler approach than shouty red-top journalism.”

Archant is seeing a similar transition. “Successful features on a lot of the 
online platforms are the evergreen pieces of content – great walks in Norfolk 
or great places to eat, for example,” says Henry. “These generate a lot of 
ongoing interest and are relevant for people in our areas.”


It is about taking a broader view, says David Higgerson, publishing director 
at Trinity Mirror, whose regional titles include theManchester Evening News 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/> and the Bristol Post 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/>. He says that such “popular” content boosts 
brand awareness. “The serious journalism is as important as ever but we are 
much more likely to be successful in maintaining that if we’re reaching an 
audience, and we are much more likely to reach an audience if we are part of 
people’s everyday lives beyond just news.”


Capitalising on new channels

Changing reader behaviour is also demanding that journalists work in a 
different way. Archant is transforming its journalists into content providers 
across multiple platforms. “For example, someone working on a story for one of 
our newspapers may also contribute to our TV channel plus Twitter and WhatsApp. 
If we maintain ourselves within the ghetto of print, that is what it will 
become.”


New online platforms – in particular Facebook – have been a focus for Johnston 
Press too, which saw its digital unique users rise by 7% year-on-year in 
November 2016, reaching 22.4m. The publisher conducts newsroom training around 
creating high-quality posts with local relevance and a high propensity for 
sharing, and has also invested in technology. “We’ve introduced new social 
publishing tools that give local journalists a way to effectively reach as many 
people as possible through machine learning, which gets smarter about when and 
where to post content across our accounts,” says Jeff Moriarty, chief digital 
officer atJohnston Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press>. 
One example is its use of a tool called Social Flow, which uses real-time data 
about what target users are engaging with and where to ensure that content is 
posted at the optimum time and place.


Johnston Press has also embraced Facebook Instant Articles, and its decision 
to harness rather than fight Facebook is reflective of the attitude of many 
regional publishers.Newsquest <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsquest> 
encourages its journalists to be active on Facebook and, as Faure-Walker says, 
while the social media giant is “a competitor for ad dollars, it is better to 
work with them and reap the benefits of community engagement in our cities and 
towns than treat them as the enemy.”


Tapping into data 

Data is playing an increasing role in driving news too. Trinity Mirror has a 
dedicated six-strong data unit, and part of its role is to crunch the latest 
government data and send it to every title. “It means you haven’t got 
journalists in 40 of our newsrooms all poring over the same data when it first 
comes out,” says Higgerson. The data is then interpreted locally to drive a 
story. For example, when the ONS (Office of National Statistics) released 
figures in December last year relating to deaths from legal highs, various 
Trinity titles ran the story, including Wales Online, which reported that 
deaths were at theirhighest level in five years in Wales 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/deaths-involving-legal-highs-wales-12382530>
.

How publishers are turning up the heat in the ad-blocking war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/sep/02/publishers-ad-block-users-hide-content>
Last year, Trinity Mirror’s data unit secured funding from Google for the 
development of its Perspecs app, which shows news stories but also links to 
other online articles that express an alternative viewpoint. “It will help 
shape our journalism in the future,” says Higgerson. “We have to recognise that 
we aren’t the only people telling stories and the best way to get people coming 
to us more often is to tell the story ourselves but also give people a chance 
to see the other side.”

Finding new ways to survive

Online ad revenues are clearly rising – Faure-Walker says 30% of Newsquest’s 
ad revenues now come from digital – but regional publishers aren’t relaxing, 
and diversification into other areas is key.


Archant now runs more than 100 events a year, and last year it launched the 
first ice rink for Norwich under the banner of its local newspaper. “We got 
14,000 people paying £10 to skate, plus sponsorship and advertising, 
[generating] well over £250,000,” says Henry. He adds that Archant’s new events 
platform, called Live, which will host forthcoming events from food and drink 
awards to wedding and property shows, will be “equally important to our 
relevance in future as anything else”.


One of the broader areas Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> is investing in is 
e-commerce, forging affiliate deals with retailers. “If local people are 
wondering about the best deals they can get on Black Friday, for example, we 
will write about that and link to places selling those things where we probably 
have affiliate deals in place,” says Higgerson. “It means that half an hour’s 
work can result in thousands of pounds of revenue.”


Regional publishers appear confident that print will last at least another 
decade. But their investment in educating journalists, advertisers and sales 
teams about digital – and their move into alternative revenue streams – shows 
they are certainly not blind to reality.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

 