
Michael Stipe <https://www.theguardian.com/music/michael-stipe> stops in 
mid-sentence. Something is bothering him. “I’m gonna fix your collar,” he says. 
“It’s gonna drive me crazy. I wouldn’t think of anything but your collar for 
the rest of my life.” He stands up, walks around the table from his side to 
mine, and – as every fibre of my being screams, “Do not touch me. I am British. 
I am repressed. I do not like complete strangers invading my space” – he stands 
behind me and carefully rearranges my collar until it is to his satisfaction.

REM to go live on Facebook with the Guardian – send in your questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/nov/15/rem-to-go-live-on-facebook-with-the-guardian-send-in-your-questions>
There’s a certain irony. It’s me invading Stipe’s space, for one thing. The 
former REM singer is, as he puts it, “insanely shy” – he eschews eye contact 
for much of our conversation, and much of his face is now hidden behind a beard 
of ZZ Top proportions – and interviews in the latter years of REMoften 
portrayed an antsy man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/10/rem-interview-michael-stipe>, 
niggling with his interlocutors, ill at ease with something. He’s here today on 
a hot October afternoon, back at REM HQ in Athens, Georgia, to talk about the 
25th anniversary of the album Out of Time, the one withLosing My Religion 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xwtdhWltSIg> on, the one that sold 18m copies 
and made them famous around the world. And he seems a lot happier than he did 
in those final REM interviews before they disbanded in 2011. In fact, he’s a 
delight.

When REM <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rem> split, he says, he wondered: 
“‘Well, who am I now?’ But it didn’t knock me over. I thought it would. But I 
was like, ‘Wow! Now I can read a book! I can listen to other music! I can 
create a new voice for myself!’ And that’s what I’ve spent the last five years 
doing. Five years and a few weeks. I love the post-REM me. I actually do. And 
that’s not a therapist talking. I just like where I’m at. It feels really good.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxwtdhWltSIg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxwtdhWltSIg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxwtdhWltSIg&media=>
 Watch the video for Losing My Religion. 
The previous evening in the one Athens restaurant that serves until midnight – 
having polished off a plate of three different kinds of oysters and a bowl of 
clam chowder, washed down with three glasses of chenin blanc – bassist Mike 
Mills seemed equally at ease. It had been the Ryder Cup the previous weekend 
and he had been watching it – “Davis Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davis-love-iii> is a great friend of mine” – 
and you rather get the impression that REM’s principal function was to enable 
Mills to fulfil a lifelong dream of watching professional sport wherever and 
whenever he likes. Does he miss REM? “Not really. I went to a U2 show earlier 
this year. For the first two or three songs, I was thinking, ‘I could be doing 
this.’ And then … ‘BUT I’M NOT! IT’S GREAT! Let those boys carry on. I’m 
perfectly happy to be a spectator!’”

It’s easy to forget quite how good REM were 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/19/10-of-the-best-rem>. They 
weren’t always good – Stipe reckons they put out “several great records – and a 
couple of stinkers” – but whatever way you cut it, they were perhaps the most 
wonderful American band of the 80s and 90s, the founding fathers of what became 
known as “alt-rock”. Their first album,Murmur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/feb/05/rem-murmur-deluxe-michael-hann-reissue>
, was perfect, a misty and mysterious reverie. They followed that with one 
miraculously good record after another, and while people might disagree on 
where things started slipping, one could make a case for every album up to and 
including their 10th,New Adventures in Hi-Fi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/mar/16/popandrock.shopping1>, being a 
classic, and for much of their later work being unduly neglected.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbefa3746577a979aa0089c38431f324b3818305f%2F0_250_2000_2000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM%20on%20Out%20of%20Time%20at%2025%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20the%20voice%20of%20a%20generation%20is%20not%20a%20pretty%20place%20to%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%20on%20Out%20of%20Time%20at%2025%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20the%20voice%20of%20a%20generation%20is%20not%20a%20pretty%20place%20to%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbefa3746577a979aa0089c38431f324b3818305f%2F0_250_2000_2000%2F2000.jpg>
 Michael Stipe – and beard – in New York in 2016. Photograph: Mireya 
Acierto/Getty Images 
Peter Buck, the guitarist who was the onstage rock’n’roller to Stipe’s 
eccentric performance artist, knew from the minute they formed in 1980 – 
drummer Bill Berry making up the quartet – they had something remarkable in 
their chemistry. “Michael and I had been writing songs, and Mike and Bill had 
played together in high school,” he says down the phone – he didn’t make it 
back to Athens. “And we met and rehearsed, and at the end of the rehearsal we 
had six songs we’d written. A couple of people came in, and one of them said: 
‘How long have you guys been playing together?’ I said: ‘About 
three-and-a-half-hours.’ I’m not saying we were great, but we had something, 
and it was the interplay of our ideas.”

If you look at it coldly, in fact, it is something of a miracle that REM could 
even exist – four young men, who happened to be in the same place at the same 
time, with a gift for combining perfectly: not just in the obvious ways, but 
also in how Mills’s gift for counterharmony complemented Stipe (listen to the 
chorus ofIt’s the End of the World As We Know It) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z0GFRcFm-aY>, how Berry added yet more depth 
with his own harmonies, how Buck had a gift for guitar lines that sounded both 
timely and timeless. “A very good band does hold true to the axiom: the whole 
is greater than the sum of the parts,” Mills says. “The fact that we all met 
each other and formed a band is the mindblowing thing. It had to be these 
people, in that time, in that space, to make this happen.”

In another era, Stipe wouldn’t have been a rock singer. Were he young now, he 
might have become a video artist, or a photographer, or some nonspecific 
creative type. But when rock’n’roll hit him in 1975, that was the obvious path 
for an unusual kid with an urge to make art: “That’s when I thought: ‘This is 
what I’m gonna do.’” And even then, where many songwriters write because they 
have a burning urge to share something with the world, Stipe wrote songs for a 
less driven reason: “I needed 12 songs for an album. And the guys would push me 
very hard. And I was the slowest. And I’ll always be the slowest.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2229f5ee3fb55aff4c1fc2e28c4db1cb900ddb1d%2F0_0_3300_1981%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM%20on%20Out%20of%20Time%20at%2025%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20the%20voice%20of%20a%20generation%20is%20not%20a%20pretty%20place%20to%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%20on%20Out%20of%20Time%20at%2025%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20the%20voice%20of%20a%20generation%20is%20not%20a%20pretty%20place%20to%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2229f5ee3fb55aff4c1fc2e28c4db1cb900ddb1d%2F0_0_3300_1981%2F3300.jpg>
 The band backstage in 1984. Photograph: Paul Natkin/WireImage 
You can hear that in Stipe’s writing. Some REM lyrics are terrific. Some are 
really not very good. But what they had in their favour was Stipe’s unique, 
oaky voice, one that could imbue pretty much any set of words with emotional 
force and deep resonance. TakeEverybody Hurts 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rOiW_xY-kc>, a worldwide hit single so 
potentially platitudinous that it has become an X Factor staple: Stipe makes it 
sound like the most comforting and profound lyric in pop history.

Out of Time, Stipe thinks, is where he started to write well. “I had a pretty 
clear idea of what I was good at and how I could manifest that, but also the 
power of the word.” He realised that “a shitty nonsensical lyric” could work in 
one song, but equally that he could deliver words that “actually fucking 
resonated on a very deep level. And soCountry Feedback 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0CYitiDJPTE> resonated on a very deep level. I 
knew that instantly. It wrote itself. I began to realise around Document [in 
1987] that I had skill and I honed it. In time it went from skill to art and my 
job was to forget everything and allow the instinct to take over, and that’s 
when the great songs came. Losing My Religion was instinct, Country Feedback 
was instinct,Me in Honey  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XRyEkOfQSg>…” At 
the time, Stipe said Out of Time was their first set of love songs. Not any 
more. “I think I just said that. I needed a line. But they’re not love songs, 
are they?”

It appears to gall him, still, that a lot of people remember Out of Time not 
for the great songs, but for the sugar-sweet bubblegum pasticheShiny Happy 
People <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iCQ0vDAbF7s> (“I’ve made my excuses 
over and over again and I’ll go to The Hague with my excuses for that song”), 
but it’s him who brings it up, not me. And then he tries to rationalise it with 
an anecdote that involves James Franco making a TV series “about identical 
twins and the high jinks that happen”, which reminded him of an Elvis Presley 
film about identical twins and, yes, their high jinks, about getting the name 
of that film wrong, but how the soundtrack to that film –Kissin’ Cousins 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0057227/> – was the first album he bought because 
he lovedthe title track <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uOF9lzGLz-8>. “It’s 
still a really good song. Anyway, that was Shiny Happy People.” I try my best 
to look like I have some idea what he’s talking about. “I have great stories, 
but I’m a terrible storyteller,” he says, accurately.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5rOiW_xY-kc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5rOiW_xY-kc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5rOiW_xY-kc&media=>
 Watch the video for Everybody Hurts. 
Out of Time was released just as the first Gulf war got underway. It’s coming 
out again 
<http://www.remhq.com/news/25th-anniversary-reissue-of-out-of-time-due-out-november-18th-via-concord-bicycle/>
 at another troubled point in American life. It’s a coincidence, but an odd 
one. “We still have a Gulf war going on,” Buck observes. “I’m just so 
disgusted.” Mills observes of Donald Trump that “he was bad enough as a private 
citizen, but he’s much worse as a politician”.

Stipe is most damning. “Donald Trump shouldn’t have made it through the third 
week of the Republican clown car of candidates,” he says. “The media jumped on 
him because he’s a great reality TV star and we’re watching the greatest 
reality TV show of all time unfold in real time through the American 
presidential election.” That morning, Stipe says, his French boyfriend had told 
him how France needs to update the Fifth Republic. “America has never updated,” 
he notes. “We’re still working like the Bible or the Qur’an, we’re working off 
a set of rules from another era. We need to really seriously look at who we are 
and where we are and bring things up to speed.” Or,as he sang on Cuyahoga 31 
years ago <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XdC6thlCAlI>: “Let’s put our heads 
together / Start a new country up.”

REM’s politics was something that defined them at the height of their fame. At 
the 1991 MTV video music awards, where the band won six awards, Stipe used the 
group’s appearances tostrip off his T-shirts 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fMbYPDAaIA0>, revealing a series of slogans – 
“Wear a condom”, “Choice”, “Alternative energy now”, “The right to vote”, 
“Handgun control”, “Love knows no colours”, “Rainforest”. That was just the tip 
of the iceberg: Stipe, especially, always seemed to be talking up his favoured 
causes; it was something he felt was both a duty and a privilege, but it 
created pressures. “The hardest part was being put in the position of being 
‘the voice of a generation’,” he says. “It’s not a pretty place to be. It’s not 
easy. I tried. I did try to use the platform of being a public figure. But you 
find yourself sitting at a table, with someone saying: ‘Describe to me the 
problems of global warming from a sub-Saharan perspective.’ I’m a pop star. 
That’s not what I went to school for.”

When the group began, Buck had insisted on a series of guidelines – moral, 
ethical, personal, financial, aesthetic – that would steer them throughout 
their career. Some were fairly trivial – no leather onstage, so they didn’t 
look like every other rock band. Some were crucial – sharing all songwriting 
credits equally, regardless of who wrote the song, so there would be no 
arguments about money down the line. Some of those guidelines are still in use 
– Buck tells me that earlier in the day we speak the group had turned down a 
multi-million-dollar offer to have their music soundtrack an advertising 
campaign (“I don’t want my children to see me being a whore”). And it’s still 
the case that any one of the members can veto any decision related to REM, as 
was the case throughout their career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb47a5aae9d57f85ebcf652b3064458abfcdb528%2F0_125_3032_1819%2F3032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM%20on%20Out%20of%20Time%20at%2025%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20the%20voice%20of%20a%20generation%20is%20not%20a%20pretty%20place%20to%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%20on%20Out%20of%20Time%20at%2025%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20the%20voice%20of%20a%20generation%20is%20not%20a%20pretty%20place%20to%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb47a5aae9d57f85ebcf652b3064458abfcdb528%2F0_125_3032_1819%2F3032.jpg>
 REM, with Stipe in one of the slogan T-shirts he wore at the 1991 MTV awards. 
Photograph: The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images 
So who used the veto most often?

“I think Michael might have done it more, but as the face of the band, things 
affected him more than us,” Mills says.

I put that to Stipe. “Ooooh!” His lips form a little moue, and he raps the 
table twice. “We had a run-in last week, me and Mike Mills,” he says, and he 
laughs. “And I gave in to his desires. I don’t know if that’s the case. If he 
says it is, then he doesn’t say things like that without a reason.”

“Off the top of my head, I’d say Michael,” Buck says. “But it might be me.”

I tell Buck that Stipe had seemed surprised when I said Mills had nominated 
him. “He shouldn’t be. I would be fairly comfortable saying he and I would be 
pretty close to tied. I can rant for 10 minutes about why something is morally, 
ethically, culturally wrong. And Michael might just say: ‘I don’t wanna do 
that.’”

The different members of REM took to their superstardom after Out of Time in 
different ways. Mills sounds as if he was utterly untroubled by it: “Nothing 
felt like it came on too fast, nothing felt like it was more than we could 
handle.” (“Of course he would,” Stipe says. “That’s his personality.”) Buck 
professes to having thought “it was all kind of bullshit. We just made a record 
– big deal. When we went around to do the next record, Automatic for the 
People, I just disappeared off the face of the earth. Grew a big beard and 
drove round in my car and flopped in motels for a year. So I never really had 
to confront the overwhelming nature of it until 1995 [when REM toured after six 
years off the road], which was mindblowing for all of us.”

Stipe, though, was the frontman, the one who had to stand in the headwind. 
“The face. Mike Mills called me Face. I was the recognisable one to the world 
at large.” He relied on the other three to stop becoming, in his words, a 
monster. “If I believed everything that was said about me and all the 
adulation, anyone in that position would [become one],” he says. And yet 
Stipe’s insecurities plagued him. If a show wasn’t sold out, he was horrified. 
“If I was going to put that much effort into it, and I did, I wanted to know 
that I had a rapt and captive audience. I would always, always look around and 
find the one person who was yawning or looking at their watch. You have to 
believe that what you’re doing is so important that everybody is going to be 
absolutely and completely captivated and in the moment with you. And when you 
see that one person putting on their lipstick or checking their watch or 
talking to their girlfriend … wow.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYYOKMUTTDdA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYYOKMUTTDdA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYYOKMUTTDdA&media=>
 Watch the video for Shiny Happy People 
He got increasingly fed up, too, with the portrayals of his public persona. He 
became bored with who he seemed to be, what he was saying. He wearied of being 
called “enigmatic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/mar/06/michael-stipe-rem-collapse-interview>
” by people trying to boil down his sometimes contrary, sometimes diffident 
personality into a single word. Recalling that causes him to reflect on his 
father, who shared similar traits. “His humour was really dry, and really 
smart,” he says. “He reacted to things that he saw, and he reacted to them in a 
way that was hysterically funny. Most people didn’t understand that. Or would 
take a day or two before going, ‘Oh my God, that was really astute and 
hysterical.’ I got a little bit of that. So the enigmatic thing I understand. 
But it became hideously close and I became really bored with myself, and I 
didn’t think I had anything new to say. I’d played that character. I didn’t 
think I could do it again.”

Perhaps the one most affected was Bill Berry. He left the group in 1997, 
explaining simply that he wasn’t enjoying it any longer. They continued without 
him for 14 years, in which it sometimes seemed they stumbled more than skipped. 
“The three-legged dog went through the meat grinder and ended up in … where’s 
the place they grind up the bones and turn them into glue? The rendering 
factory,” Stipe says.

You might expect Mills, Berry’s high-school friend, to have been the one who 
missed the drummer’s presence most. He says not. “I think it was harder on 
Peter, because Bill was the balance. Bill and Peter wanted more concision in 
the songs. Michael and I tended to elaborate and add more things.”

“The power dynamic shift that occurred between the three of us was so profound 
as to literally break up the band and put it back together and break it up and 
put it back together,” Stipe says.

“No one really wanted to listen to me,” says Buck. “Which was fine. But no one 
really had a lot of set goals in mind either. Bill was a no-bullshit guy, and 
with him gone, it feels to me in retrospect that I was more aggressive than I 
should have been and everyone was pushing back not to have me bully them. We 
were all pushing in such different directions, and we were feeling such 
frustration and anger about it. I started backing away from the whole thing: I 
had to be talked out of the tree a couple of times, when I said: ‘I don’t want 
to do this any more.’ After the 2005 tour, I was totally fed up and we just 
didn’t talk for, I don’t know, a year.”

Stipe remembers things being just as bad seven years earlier, when they made Up
 <http://www.allmusic.com/album/up-mw0000040590>, their first album without 
Berry. “We made choices that were not great choices, because we simply weren’t 
talking. That record really needed an editor, but we could not only not arrive 
at a decision, we couldn’t be in the same room together. It was bad.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905f82e6de3fc38fe5fde3d72f5a9a3c667e2fce%2F0_84_4469_2682%2F4469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=REM%20on%20Out%20of%20Time%20at%2025%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20the%20voice%20of%20a%20generation%20is%20not%20a%20pretty%20place%20to%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=REM%20on%20Out%20of%20Time%20at%2025%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20the%20voice%20of%20a%20generation%20is%20not%20a%20pretty%20place%20to%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Frem-rout-of-time-at-25-voice-of-generation-michael-stipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905f82e6de3fc38fe5fde3d72f5a9a3c667e2fce%2F0_84_4469_2682%2F4469.jpg>
 Live at the Milton Keynes Bowl in 1995. Photograph: Mick Hutson/Redferns 
All three agree – they would, wouldn’t they? – that REM were back on track by 
the time they called it a day in 2011. Their final two albums,Accelerate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/mar/21/shopping.popandrock> and 
Collapse Into Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/mar/03/rem-collapse-into-now-review>, 
seemed more in touch with what had made REM great in the first place than some 
of their immediate predecessors, and the three were able to part once again 
reconnected with what Buck describes as “a deep and abiding friendship. It was 
nice to have nothing but the music and our friendship tying us together, as 
opposed to the music, the friendship, the contracts, the upcoming tour, the 300 
employees we’re hiring – all the other things that tend to get in the way of 
interpersonal relationships.”

REM gave Stipe something that nothing else ever has: adrenalin. “It’s a very 
powerful drug,” he say. “And you have to wean yourself off it carefully. I 
still miss it. But, hopefully, you find other things to get excited about.” 
Buck, for his part, longs for particular eras of the group’s lifespan. “I miss 
being in REM in 1983 and 1987. Which is to say, I miss being young and in the 
centre of my culture.”

What REM have left is a legacy, of both music and of how a band should comport 
itself, one you see replicated whenever a band with principles crosses over to 
a mass audience: Radiohead, for example, might consider how much they owe to 
REM. “We did a remarkable job of maintaining integrity throughout a very 
difficult period and in a difficult industry,” Stipe says. “We forged a new 
path. We created a new way for people to look and approach this and not become 
an empty puppet or a dog and pony show.” He pauses. “What’s the other part I’m 
proud of?”

The records?

Stipe looks up and laughs. “Yeah!”

The 25th anniversary deluxe edition of Out of Time is released on Universal on 
18 November. Michael Hann’s trip to Georgia was paid for by Universal.
 