
The birth of Americana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/last-waltz-heartworn-highways-americana-scorsese-country-music>


This year marked 40 years since the making of two of my favourite music 
documentaries: Scorsese’s legendary The Last Waltz, which charts the final days 
and farewell concert of the Canadian-American group The Band, and the 
lesser-known Heartworn Highways, which portrayed, on a shoestring, the 
fledgling days of“outlaw country” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/15/country-luke-bryan-outlaw-drug-addicts-music-interview>
 in Texas and Tennessee. It was the kind of piece for which you wish you could 
have a wordcount three times as long. It was also the only article I’ve ever 
written that earned a letter from Martin Scorsese. I believe he called it 
‘lovely’. I hope you like it, too.Laura Barton

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/last-waltz-heartworn-highways-americana-scorsese-country-music>
Searching out the spirit of independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/the-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for>

Compiling the Future 50 – our survey of the most exciting young artists at 
work – gave me optimism during what felt like the beginning of the end this 
autumn. Although the act of sifting through blogs, Soundcloud and Bandcamp 
pages as well as thousands of emails to prune the list to 50 acts was 
relatively gruelling, the self-motivating ambition of a new wave of artists, 
many of whom come from low-income backgrounds and are entirely DIY in their 
approach to creating, was very inspiring. I doubt the new jazz-fusion EP by a 
bedroom producer from Baltimore will be able to overturn the rise of the far 
right, but it gave me hope that the apocalypse was not upon us … just yet.
Harriet Gibsone

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/the-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for>
The overwhelming experience of the Springsteen show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/10/bruce-springsteen-makes-you-feel-alive-wembley-stadium>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6715059ef0c3e29e9f379574f97ff156a9686ae%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembering%20Bowie%2C%20digging%20the%20Dancing%20Queen%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20features%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembering%20Bowie%2C%20digging%20the%20Dancing%20Queen%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20features%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6715059ef0c3e29e9f379574f97ff156a9686ae%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
 Bruce Springsteen and Nils Lofgren … on stage at Coventry Ricoh Arena in June 
2016 Photograph: Michael Hann 
I had, genuinely, the best week I’ve ever had during summer half-term. I took 
my son to New York for the first time – we went to the baseball, to the soccer, 
up the Rockefeller Center, on the ferry to Ellis Island – and then I came back 
to see, on successive days,Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/30/bruce-springsteen-interview-born-to-run-change-someones-life-right-song-donald-trump>
 in Coventry,AC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/acdc-review-axl-rose-lisbon-first-gig>
 at the Olympic stadium, then Springsteen again at Wembley. The AC/DC show was 
great, but the two Springsteen shows were, as usual, superlative, producing in 
me a complicated range of emotions. I spent several days thinking about them, 
and then tried to turn the many different things I had been feeling into a 
words. I’d intended to write 700 or so; it took me 1,565, and even then I felt 
I had barely scratched the surface.Michael Hann

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/10/bruce-springsteen-makes-you-feel-alive-wembley-stadium>
When the cosmopolitan took over the mainstream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jul/15/one-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1>

One Dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/01/drake-spotify-most-streamed-artist-2016>
 is unequivocally the year’s biggest song, tying with Wet Wet Wet with 15 weeks 
at number one and almost breaking Bryan Adams’ all-time record – partly down to 
being a good record, but mostly the result of Drake dancing up on the zeitgeist 
until it eyerollingly relents. As I said when I wrote about it, it’s nothing 
like Everything I Do or Love Is All Around. Where they were white and 
traditional, Drake was cosmopolitan and fresh; where they were shared cultural 
moments, sizeable numbers of people over the age of 35 hadn’t even heard One 
Dance. This was a 2016 kind of hit, one driven by a young streaming audience 
endlessly hitting replay.Ben Beaumont-Thomas

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jul/15/one-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1>
Why Dancing Queen is the best song ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/08/40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F508171df8aeb10a3393771fbffab598abf66145a%2F0_582_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembering%20Bowie%2C%20digging%20the%20Dancing%20Queen%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20features%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembering%20Bowie%2C%20digging%20the%20Dancing%20Queen%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20features%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F508171df8aeb10a3393771fbffab598abf66145a%2F0_582_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Abba … Perfect pop Photograph: Alamy 
The task here wasn’t to argue why Abba’s Dancing Queen is one of the best pop 
songs ever – it clearly is, and if you don’t agree you deserve nothing but a 
cold, hard look at yourself in the mirror – but to try to get under the hood 
and uncover what makes it so. Pete Waterman credited the way the band absorbed 
myriad influences. Say Lou Lou praised the lyrical theme that binds it 
together. Judy Craymer, the woman behind Mamma Mia!, cited the way it spoke to 
fans young and old. Along the way, I got some fascinating anecdotes (I 
especially the liked the one about New York police allegedly being worried that 
the song was so euphoric it could cause disorder if played in public), but did 
I really get any closer to working out what makes the song tick? Of course not. 
As Waterman said to me – if you could boil that down, then we’d all be writing 
hits.Tim Jonze 

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/08/40-years-abba-dancing-queen-people-just-surrender-to-it>
Scene, and now heard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/28/theres-a-hunger-for-the-next-frontier-the-new-cosmic-americana-gram-parsons>

I worked at NME long enough to know that sticking names and boundaries on 
spurious “scenes” is one of the best ways to piss off artists. With this piece 
on “new cosmic Americana” – highlighting innovative guitarists in Durham, 
Nashville, Kentucky and Chicago – the instinct was less to jam a label on it 
than attempt to distil the way that brotherly musicians such asWilliam Tyler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/02/william-tyler-modern-country-review-a-paean-to-the-old-weird-america>
,Hiss Golden Messenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/09/hiss-golden-messenger-heart-like-a-levee-review>
 and Chris Forsyth make music that’s both familiar and searching – other than 
bracing synthpop, it’s this music that’s kept me going in this, Our Year of 
Eternal Misery. It can also be hard to pitch features on individual artists of 
this smaller stature – page counts are low, budgets tight – so combining them 
gave them heft, and let me sketch the very real ties of their inspiring 
community. It’s my own failure as a critic that I still don’t think I can 
really explain why this music means so much to me. Maybe it’s nice for some 
loves to remain ineffable. I hope this taster piece led a few new converts into 
the same, not unpleasant dilemma.Laura Snapes

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/28/theres-a-hunger-for-the-next-frontier-the-new-cosmic-americana-gram-parsons>
Remembering David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F193bfec69d80be18adfeb4426a4505332aa41957%2F0_28_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembering%20Bowie%2C%20digging%20the%20Dancing%20Queen%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20features%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembering%20Bowie%2C%20digging%20the%20Dancing%20Queen%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20features%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F193bfec69d80be18adfeb4426a4505332aa41957%2F0_28_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 David Bowie … on the Diamond Dogs tour in 1974 Photograph: Terry O'Neill/Getty 
Images 
In recent years, I’ve got glumly used to legendary pop stars dying. We’re now 
half a century away from 1966, the white-hot epicentre of that decade’s pop 
explosion. People who were in their 20s then are in their 70s now: the law of 
averages says some of them are going to snuff it. But I was stunned whenDavid 
Bowie died <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/obituary-david-bowie>
. It seems stupid to say it now, after a year in which it’s been picked apart 
and all the clues he left about his imminent death discovered, but before 10 
January, Blackstar really didn’t seem like the work of a dying man: it seemed 
like a fresh start, yet another fantastic reinvention. I was so stunned that 
the whole day felt – and, bizarrely, still feels in retrospect – like a weird 
dream. I had no idea what I was going to write, or how I was going to write it, 
even though the Guardian was on the phone telling me – for the first and, I 
suspect, only time in my career – that they were actually holding the front 
page. So I wrote this.Alexis Petridis

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation>
How radio made a community of Bowie fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/15/how-radio-reacted-to-bowie-people-come-and-join-you-thats-the-way-it-should-be>

In the immediate aftermath of the death of David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-of-cancer-aged-69-reports>
, features rightly flurried out about the man and his many magical legacies. I 
wrote one of them, about the rabbitholes that Bowie’s final album burrowed us 
in, but I was also interested in what BBC 6Music became on that peculiar Monday 
when we found out he’d died: a memorial site, a chapel, a wake. Radio is both a 
deeply old fashioned and strangely modern medium, something that many Bowie 
fans grew up with, but something that still speaks to them, intimately, in a 
world full of noise. I listened in.Jude Rogers

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/15/how-radio-reacted-to-bowie-people-come-and-join-you-thats-the-way-it-should-be>
When fans go to war online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/18/hashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars>

As social media becomes even more all-prevailing, I’ve started to think more 
about how it affects what’s most important to me – pop music. While there have 
been some fairly harmless side effects – Olly Murs gurning through some 
“shareable content”, for example – there has also emerged a trend towards 
pushing pop fans into warring tribes. A recent, more extreme addition to these 
online battles has seen the rise of strange hashtag parties celebrating various 
pop stars’ imaginary deaths. I spoke to a selection of hashtag warriors from 
around the world to uncover the reasons behind this murky addition to the pop 
cosmos.Michael Cragg

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/18/hashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars>
The greatest album sleeves, chosen by the best sleeve designers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/22/the-greatest-record-sleeves-as-chosen-by-the-designers>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F274f0bb31e5f64b76fdb1e1cab8b42546356cb43%2F0_0_3056_2966%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remembering%20Bowie%2C%20digging%20the%20Dancing%20Queen%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20features%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remembering%20Bowie%2C%20digging%20the%20Dancing%20Queen%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20our%20favourite%20features%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fremembering-bowie-dancing-queen-best-music-features-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F274f0bb31e5f64b76fdb1e1cab8b42546356cb43%2F0_0_3056_2966%2F3056.jpg>
 Heart on sleeve … some of the greatest covers ever Photograph: Alicia Canter 
for the Guardian 
Like anyone who’s stared at record sleeves for much longer than is probably 
healthy, I wondered if the designers of the classics would be like their work. 
WouldJoy Division designer Peter Saville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2011/may/29/joydivision-neworder> 
would be dark and enigmatic? Might 4AD artistic genius Vaughan Oliver speak to 
me from a strange landscape of blood-red pumping hearts and luminous green 
lava? In fact, Saville nattered about New Order, Oliver – a genial Geordie – 
called me a “southerner” for being from Yorkshire (although he now lives in 
Epsom) and Elbow artist Tash Willcocks Skyped me from a clothes-strewn flat 
that was as big a mess as my place. I’m still pondering how such powerful, 
otherworldly artwork can come out of people who seem so weirdly normal.Dave 
Simpson

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/22/the-greatest-record-sleeves-as-chosen-by-the-designers>
Searching for DJ Derek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/23/dj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol>

I was commissioned to write about the life of DJ Derek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/17/dna-tests-confirm-death-of-missing-dj-derek-bristol>
 when he was still missing but, one day after I contacted his niece Jennifer, 
Derek’s body was discovered, which made reporting the piece a much sadder and 
more delicate process. I was struck by the intense affection his friends and 
family had for him and inspired by the way he pursued his passion for DJing 
with no expectation of wealth or recognition. No article I’ve written has ever 
had such a warm reception from readers. In death, as in life, Derek inspired a 
great deal of love.Dorian Lynskey

 * Read the article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/23/dj-derek-life-death-unlikely-reggae-legend-bristol> 