
The Rugby Football League has confirmed four bids have been lodged to create a 
rugby league team in Bradford followingthe liquidation of the former Super 
League champions Bradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-go-into-liquidation>
 last Tuesday.

The Bulls went out of business when the club’s administrators failed to find a 
new bidder, after the last remaining party pulled out of discussions. TheRFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> fielded 12 expressions of interest 
regarding the possibility of setting up a professional club, and they will now 
assess the four bids which were submitted before Monday’s midday deadline 
before making a decision “as soon as possible”, they said in a statement.

Bradford Bulls’ fate was down to years of mismanagement of a trailblazing club 
| Aaron Bower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-rugby-league-liquidation-rfl-championship>
“The RFL can confirm that it will assess four official bids to create a new 
professional Rugby League Club in Bradford,” its statement said. “The RFL set 
out a clear process last week and subsequently received 12 requests for further 
information regarding the possibility of setting up a new professional club in 
the city.

“The four bids that have been submitted will remain confidential and will now 
be thoroughly assessed by the RFL Executive which aims to make a recommendation 
to the RFL Board as soon as possible.”

The Guardian revealed last week that the former Wasps CEO and owner David 
Thorne was interested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/wasps-owner-expresses-interest-in-re-forming-bradford-bulls>
 in reforming the Bulls and it is understood he has lodged a bid with the RFL.

Another bid has been lodged by the Rotherham Titans chief executive, Richard 
Lamb, whose plans revolve around forming a “community sports club” which will 
be majority-owned by the club’s fans. Lamb’s bid consists of a fans’ trust 
owning 52% of any club put together to take the 12th and final place in the 
Championship this coming season. Any new club will start with a 12-point 
deduction, the RFL confirmed last week.

Lamb’s plan also involves the potential appointment of Damian Irvine, the 
former Cronulla Sharks chairman, as chief executive. The fans’ trust would aim 
to give supporters the chance to be involved with the direction of the new club 
in Bradford.

The Bulls are due to play their first pre‑season fixture on Sunday against 
Batley, and the RFL will decide this week whether to sanction the game after 
the club’s remaining players signalled a desire to play. Seven of Bradford’s 
squad who were contracted for the 2017 season have left the club following 
liquidation but, with the coach Rohan Smith in charge, the players still 
without a club are planning to play against the Bulldogs.

Batley, it is understood, will contribute a portion of the gate receipts to 
the players and staff involved for Bradford if the fixture goes ahead.
 