
Ian Ritchie, the Rugby Football Union’s chief executive, has described 
concussion as one of the biggest challenges facing the game.

Reflecting on the incident involving George North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/northampton-saints-escape-sanction-george-north-concussion-rugby-union>
 in a match between Northampton and Leicester, Ritchie said that while he did 
agree North should not have been allowed to return, he was happy with the way 
the Concussion Management Review Group had dealt with the issue. The CMRG 
decidednot to impose sanctions on Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/northampton-saints-escape-sanction-george-north-concussion-rugby-union>
 but made nine recommendations to Premiership Rugby to try to ensure similar 
mistakes would not be made again.

Sale face concussion management investigation over TJ Ioane treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/sale-concussion-management-investigation-tj-ioane>
“I understand the point that people were disappointed there were no sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/21/george-north-concussion-northampton-premiership-rugby-rfu>
, and disappointed George was not removed from the pitch and we hope everyone 
learns from that,” Ritchie said as the RFU announcedit was investigating Sale 
over a possible breach of concussion management protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/sale-concussion-management-investigation-tj-ioane>
. “We all agree George North should have been removed but the important thing 
is how do we learn from the circumstances, and how do we make it more 
stringent, rather than looking at sanctions.”

When the CMRG announced its findings in late December, the Rugby Players’ 
Association released a statement saying: “We feel sanctions would have sent a 
clear message about the gravity of concussion mismanagement.”

Ritchie said: “I was not on the panel. I have just read the report and it 
makes very clear the primary thing of looking after the welfare of the player 
was not being flouted. There is information that could and should have been 
made available and the recommendations deal with that. There wasn’t a 
deliberate flouting of the protocol and therefore player welfare was still at 
the centre of that.”

Ritchie said he believed it was more important to educate teams, and that 
sanctions should be imposed only as a last resort. “Penalties are always at the 
end of the spectrum” for ‘repeated and deliberate offences.’”

Ritchie refused to criticise Northampton’s behaviour in the days after the 
incident: “We got to the right end conclusion. Never mind the particular 
circumstances of the particular club.” He also preferred not to criticise the
Sale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> director of rugby, Steve 
Diamond, who said in September: “All you need to have is a slap on the head and 
they have you off the field for 13 minutes now. I don’t know where we are going 
with it.”

Rugby’s tackling laws a step forward but serious injuries remain inevitable | 
The Breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/tackling-laws-serious-injuries-inevitable-breakdown>
Ritchie said: “Directors of rugby are absolutely entitled to their own 
opinions so they’ll say what they say. As you’ve gathered from all I’ve said we 
recognise we need to address the challenges.”

The investigation involving Sale relates to their 29-26 defeat at Harlequins 
last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/denny-solomona-scores-every-time-sale-steve-diamond-harlequins>
, during which the back-row TJ Ioane appeared to be concussed but remained on 
the pitch and completed the match.

“The RFU and Premiership Rugby have appointed Dr Julian Morris to be the 
independent chairman and will be joined by the RFU’s director of professional 
rugby, Nigel Melville, and Phil Winstanley, the rugby director at Premiership 
Rugby,” read a statement.

Ritchie said he felt it was “inevitable” there were going to be more cases for 
the CMRG to examine and that the process would be subject to review. He felt a 
key question to address were whether the process could have been sped up. It 
took 17 days for the CMRG to investigate what happened to North.

“Can we do it quicker? Or is it worth giving the time because it is such an 
important issue?” Ritchie said, adding the authorities would need to look at 
how to resource the CMRG. “If you are doing one a month that is one thing if 
you are doing three or four a week that is another.”
 