
Donald Trump’s US election victory and the UK’s vote to leave the European 
Union will cast a long shadow over the global elite’s annual gathering in the 
Swiss ski resort ofDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> this week.

This year, 3,000 politicians, business leaders, economists, entrepreneurs, 
charity leaders and celebrities will head to theWorld Economic Forum (WEF)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>to discuss the state of the world. 
As usual there’ll be big speeches, ultra-tight security, and experts in every 
field under the wintry sun. There’ll also be plenty of champagne and canapes 
for delegates gathering in expensive hotels to discuss issues such as 
inequality and the backlash against globalisation.

But this year’s WEF won’t be the same. Twelve months of seismic shocks have 
shaken Davos Man and Woman’s world view, and left them struggling to understand 
and address the new reality. These seven key themes will dominate this year’s 
meeting:

Trump and the rise of populism

The official theme of this year’s forum is “responsive and responsible 
leadership”. It’s a timely issue, asDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> heads to the Oval Office.

Trump is the living, breathing, tweeting antithesis of the WEF and its belief 
in “multi-stakeholder” solutions: the idea that big problems are solved by 
working together, rather than by isolationism and protectionism. The 
president-elect’s ability to tap into public anger and disenchantment has 
shocked Davos into talking of a crisis of western democracy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa76f49fea4f401c3178796bb8cf7e6605f2a29ff%2F0_174_5210_3126%2F5210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robotics%2C%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%20turn%20up%20the%20heat%20amid%20the%20snow%20of%20Davos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robotics%2C%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%20turn%20up%20the%20heat%20amid%20the%20snow%20of%20Davos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa76f49fea4f401c3178796bb8cf7e6605f2a29ff%2F0_174_5210_3126%2F5210.jpg>
 Klaus Schwab, founder and president of the WEF, unveiling this year’s 
programme. Photograph: Laurent Gillieron/AP 
WEF founder Klaus Schwab wants leaders to respond to populism by sticking to 
their core values and “honestly explaining the breadth and complexity” of the 
world’s problems. But he admits that regaining public trust is a daunting task. 
“There has to be a recognition that we are in unmapped territory that placed 
the status quo, and by extension leaders themselves, into question,” he said.

Trump won’t be at Davos, but one of his top advisers, financier Anthony 
Scaramucci, will outline the new administration’s priorities on Tuesday.

The Obama era will be represented by outgoing vice-president Joe Biden, who 
will hold meetings and keep pushing his Cancer Moonshot project.

Reform of capitalism
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2bfabc8f980b19787c7f988b2ec8db9c8cd6681%2F0_86_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robotics%2C%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%20turn%20up%20the%20heat%20amid%20the%20snow%20of%20Davos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robotics%2C%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%20turn%20up%20the%20heat%20amid%20the%20snow%20of%20Davos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2bfabc8f980b19787c7f988b2ec8db9c8cd6681%2F0_86_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A worker cleans the WEF logo in Davos. Photograph: Jean-Christophe Bott/EPA 
Eight years after the financial crisis, Davos recognises that stronger 
economic growth alone isn’t enough to fix the world’s problems.WEF’s global 
risks report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/inequality-world-economy-wef-brexit-donald-trump-world-economic-forum-risk-report>
, released last week, argues that a “growing mood of anti-establishment 
populism” means market capitalism must now be reformed, and several panels will 
examine how this could happen. One panel will consider the plight of the 
“squeezed and angry” middle classes, with contributions from International 
Monetary Fund chief Christine Lagarde and hedge fund billionaire Ray Dalio.

Davos will also examine whether it’s time to give all citizens a basic income, 
to cushion them from the impact of technological change.

“Machines, the argument goes, can take the jobs, but should not take the 
incomes: the job uncertainty that engulfs large swaths of society should be 
matched by a welfare policy that protects the masses, not only ‘the poor’,”said 
World Bank senior economist Ugo Gentilini 
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/01/in-a-complex-world-the-apparent-simplicity-of-universal-basic-income-is-appealing?utm_content=buffer1e42f&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
. “Hence, basic income grants emerge as a straightforward option for the 
digital era – one seemingly backed by Silicon Valley and trade unions alike.”

China

Being lectured on the importance of “inclusive globalisation” by a communist 
leader will be a new experience for Davos delegates. Trump’s election is 
expected to create a vacuum in global leadership, and Xi Jinping could be the 
man to fill it. He’ll become the first Chinese president to attend Davos, and 
will leadan unprecedented 80-strong delegation of business leaders, economists, 
academics and journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/china-xi-jinping-world-economic-forum-davos-donald-trump>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a60ca54c85189f619a01b8c49b68688392785db%2F408_258_1401_841%2F1401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robotics%2C%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%20turn%20up%20the%20heat%20amid%20the%20snow%20of%20Davos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robotics%2C%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%20turn%20up%20the%20heat%20amid%20the%20snow%20of%20Davos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fdavos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a60ca54c85189f619a01b8c49b68688392785db%2F408_258_1401_841%2F1401.jpg>
 Xi Jinping will be the first Chinese president to address the WEF. Photograph: 
Lintao Zhang/Getty Images 
Xi will deliver the opening plenary address on Tuesday, and use it to defend 
cooperation and economic globalisation. He’s expected to warn that countries 
could face rising confrontation, poverty and war if they descend into 
protectionism and isolationism.

With Trump committed to withdrawing from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, Xi can 
now push for a Beijing-led trade deal. But he’ll also face pressure from 
European leaders, who are unhappy about Chinese firms dumping cheap exports, 
including steel, on their markets.

Climate change

Environmental issues are as important as ever this year, with campaigners 
worried that the Trump administration will scrap US commitments to tackling 
global warming. A group of scientist are setting up an “Arctic Basecamp” summit 
in Davos, to lobby delegates about the dangers of climate change. Temperatures 
at the top of the world were “alarmingly high” last Christmas, they say, with
some parts of the Arctic region 20C warmer than usual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/extraordinarily-hot-arctic-temperatures-alarm-scientists>
.

Former US vice-president Al Gore is attending, as is Christiana Figueres, who 
led the UN convention on climate change. They should find a receptive audience: 
environmental issues dominated the WEF’s annual survey of global risks for 2017 
behind the threat of nuclear war.

Robotic risks

The “fourth industrial revolution” will once again be a key theme at this 
year’s Davos, where the focus will be on the problems created by technologies 
such as smart robots and driverless cars. The WEF will examine whether the loss 
to these innovations of millions of jobs is undermining social cohesion and 
contributing to the rise of populist parties.

Davos will also consider whether increased use of artificial intelligence and 
the “internet of things” are laying firms open to a new wave of cyberthreats 
and security beaches. This area of technology has until now been only lightly 
regulated; is the world ready to hand more decision-making powers to machines?

Army of staff descends on Davos to serve WEF super-rich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/13/army-of-staff-descends-on-davos-to-serve-wef-super-rich>
Delegates will also ponder the dangers posed by “weaponised” AI systems and 
smart robots. The WEF warns that autonomous weapons systems could be designed 
to “swarm” over a nation’s existing military defences, overwhelming them in a 
massive coordinated attack.

“This risks upsetting the global equilibrium by neutralising the defence 
systems on which it is founded,” it goes on. “This would lead to a very 
unstable international configuration, encouraging escalation and arms races and 
the replacement of deterrence by pre-emption.”

Brexit

A year ago, it was hard to find many people at Davos who though that Britain 
either should, or would, vote to leave the European Union. Like Trump’s 
victory, the Brexit vote dealt a blow to WEF’s underlying principles – and 
fuelled the argument that they don’t really understand today’s world.

On Friday, chancellor Phillip Hammond will outline his vision for the UK-EU 
relationship, and its implications for investment and migration. Barclays chief 
executive Jes Staley will give his views, amid fears that the City could lose 
tens of thousands of jobs.

London mayor Sadiq Khan is taking his fight against a “reckless”Brexit to 
Davos. He will give a speech to business leaders, and hold talks with other 
politicians as part of his push for “privileged access” to the single market.

Helping the developing world

More than half of the sessions at Davos are on the subject of social inclusion 
and development, as the WEF tries to live up to its commitment to improve the 
state of the world. A sprinkling of celebrity stardust among the snow may help 
get these issue noticed.

Musician Shakira will discuss her work establishing schools for 
underprivileged children in Colombia, and actor Forest Whitaker will outline 
his foundation’s efforts to foster peace and reconciliation in disadvantaged 
parts of the world. They’re both collecting awards from the WEF – along with 
musician Anne-Sophie Mutter for her support for young musicians.

Hollywood star Matt Damon is also back at Davos, to promote his Water.org 
charity, which seeks to end deaths from unclean drinking water.
 