
It’s already possible to be in two places at once in the Marvel Cinematic 
Universe, as Benedict Cumberbatch proved during several out-of-body experiences 
in last year’s Doctor Strange. Sothe New York Post story 
<http://pagesix.com/2017/01/12/this-cumberbatch-body-double-is-basically-a-cumber-twin/>
 that the Sherlock star has been replaced by a body double for the shooting of 
scenes as the sorcerer supreme in the forthcoming MCU instalment Avengers: 
Infinity War Part One should come as no shock. Moreover, with Rogue One: A Star 
Wars Story having shownyou don’t even need to be alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/16/rogue-one-vfx-jon-knoll-peter-cushing-ethics-of-digital-resurrections>
 to star in a new movie, we should hardly be surprised that an actor no longer 
has to be on set to get involved in a shoot.

Disney has denied that Cumberbatch’s performance will be superimposed over 
that of Broadway thesp Aaron Lazar, just as the late Peter Cushing’s features 
blanketed those of Holby City actor Guy Henry for Grand Moff Tarkin’s return in 
Gareth Edwards’ Rogue One. But the Post’s story reveals the brave new and 
rather scary world of ghosted performances that we now live in.

Rogue One VFX head: ‘We didn’t do anything Peter Cushing would’ve objected to’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/16/rogue-one-vfx-jon-knoll-peter-cushing-ethics-of-digital-resurrections>
 Cushing’s posthumous appearance in Rogue One was inspired by a determination 
to bring back as many fan favourites as possible from the original Star Wars – 
and perhaps, if we’re being cynical, the knowledge that morbid curiosity would 
help boost the box office receipts. It is hard to imagine that studios, 
particularly those struggling with the scheduling conflicts that always come 
into play when working with busy A-list talent such as Cumberbatch, won’t 
consider taking a similar route with still-living talent in the future.

The chorus of disapproval, should the British actor choose to shoot his scenes 
in Infinity War six months after everyone else, would be far less cacophonous 
than it was for Cushing’s return. And with a living Cumberbatch still 
available, the technical task would no doubt be rather easier than the one 
faced by Rogue One’s visual effects artists. Moreover,Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> already has a history of creating 
performances digitally with great success, Mark Ruffalo’s mo-capped turn as the 
Hulk perhaps representing the high water mark.

We also know that Marvel movies regularly use green screen setups for fantasy 
scenes, though it’s arguable that the results are superior when – as with James 
Gunn’s Guardians of the Galaxy – actors shoot against real backdrops. Disney 
recently shot an entire Jungle Book movie without sending 11-year-old star Neel 
Sethi anywhere near India. Jon Favreau’s remakewas filmed entirely in a 
California warehouse 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/article/jungle-book-jon-favreau-disney-film>, with the 
photorealistic talking animals, treacherous cliffs, windswept grasslands and 
verdant forests all created in post-production. Technology has moved on apace 
since the days when the shark attacks in 1999’s Deep Blue Sea prompted guffaws 
in the multiplex rather than shock and awe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Frogue-one-peter-cushing-doctor-strange-how-will-cgi-resurrection-change-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f1aa91364e7d1faab1809a8c908d1864c077cdf%2F0_828_3624_2173%2F3624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One's%20CGI%20resurrection%20tech%3A%20how%20'ghosting'%20will%20change%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Frogue-one-peter-cushing-doctor-strange-how-will-cgi-resurrection-change-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%27s%20CGI%20resurrection%20tech%3A%20how%20%27ghosting%27%20will%20change%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Frogue-one-peter-cushing-doctor-strange-how-will-cgi-resurrection-change-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f1aa91364e7d1faab1809a8c908d1864c077cdf%2F0_828_3624_2173%2F3624.jpg>
 Benedict Cumberbatch as Doctor Strange. Photograph: Moviestore/Rex Shutterstock
It’s tempting to speculate that Rogue One’s “ghosting” tech might provide a 
solution for Ben Affleck,who has been complaining 
<http://movieweb.com/the-batman-ben-affleck-better-batsuit/> about the prospect 
of trying to direct forthcoming DC instalment The Batman while wearing the 
caped crusader’s famously rigid suit, and the age-old problem of what to do 
when the Joker has turned up, razor-edged playing cards and poison gas at the 
ready, and you really need a Batpee. No worries Ben, we have the technology to 
give that challenge to some other poor chump on a Screen Actors Guild day rate 
while you sit comfortably in the director’s chair sipping coffee and focusing 
all your attention on the finer details of the mise en scene. Frankly, the 
results would not be any worse than Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. And in 
any case, are you really trying to tell us the clunky, half-tonne Frank 
Miller-inspired mechsuit you wore to take down poor Kal-El wasn’t mapped in 
afterwards? These technologies are already with us, and not just to resurrect 
the dead.

What we shouldn’t expect is for them to always work as well as in Cushing’s 
return in Rogue One. Whenever a new technology makes an impact in Hollywood, it 
does so because it has been introduced with such verve and brio that every 
other film-maker suddenly wants their own box of tricks to play with. James 
Cameron’s Terminator 2: Judgment Day, with its pioneering use of CGI to create 
the shapeshifting T-1000, inspired a thousand imitators in 1991. But for every 
District 9, with its remarkably life-like alien denizens of a future 
Johannesburg, we’ve had at least two or three like the CGI Jabba in the Special 
Edition of Star Wars. Likewise, when Cameron gave 3D a new lease of life with 
the release of Avatar in 2009, the next few years were full of examples of 
ersatz stereoscopy, such as 2012’s Wrath of the Titans, a viewing experience 
that did not so much create a sense of depth as the feeling that battling 
ancients Sam Worthington, Rosamund Pike, Bill Nighy et al had been glued to the 
screen by the post-production team.

Disney deny negotiating with Carrie Fisher's estate for rights to her digital 
image
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/13/carrie-fisher-disney-negotiating-for-digital-rights-star-wars>
As for ghosting tech, it’s likely that its full potential will only be seen in 
a decade or so. As Disney’s swift intervention to clarify the Post’s 
Cumberbatch story proves, studios are wary of any sense that they are 
“cheating” their audiences. In light of the Mouse House’sequally rapid rebuttal 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/13/carrie-fisher-disney-negotiating-for-digital-rights-star-wars>
 of reports that it is planning to bring the late Carrie Fisher back for Star 
Wars: Episode IX, it also seems unlikely there will be a repeat, any time soon, 
of the situation that saw Paul Walker appear posthumously in Fast and Furious 7.

Nevertheless, it’s clear that Rogue One has changed the game for ever. The 
challenge for Hollywood, if and when it decides the use of such technology is 
appropriate, is to maintain standards. Seeing one’s favourite movie star appear 
in a new film when they were not able to make the original shoot is one thing – 
at least if it is impossible to see the digital tinkering at work. The prospect 
of watching on as your hero’s legacy is destroyed in a hideously ham-fisted 
rendering is one that does not bear thinking about.

 