
The engineering giant Rolls-Royce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> has apologised after it 
was found to have paid bribes including a luxury car and millions of pounds’ 
worth of cash to middlemen to secure orders in six countries, including 
Indonesia, Russia and China.


Britain’s leading multinational manufacturer made the admissions on Tuesday at 
the high court in London, a day after it was revealed that it would pay £671m 
in penalties to settle long-running corruption allegations. In a statement read 
out in court, the firm said it “apologised unreservedly for the conduct which 
has been uncovered”.

The settlement was reached with investigators from three countries – the UK, 
US and Brazil – who five years ago started to scrutinise allegations that the 
firm had hired middlemen to pay bribes to win contracts.

Rolls-Royce: questions remain despite £671m bribery settlement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/rolls-royce-bribery-settlement>
Richard Whittam, a QC for the Serious Fraud Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>, detailed the findings 
of what he said was the “largest individual investigation conducted by the SFO 
to date”.

The agreement between the firm and the SFO – called a deferred prosecution 
agreement – revealed systemic and long-running use of middlemen over three 
decades. The court heard that:

• In Indonesia, Rolls-Royce gave $2.25m (£1.8m) and a Rolls-Royce Silver 
Spirit car to an individual in exchange for a “favour to Rolls-Royce on a 
contract” for Trent aero engines to be provided to GarudaIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>. Separately Rolls-Royce paid a 
representative from a rival bidder to deliberately submit an uncompetitive bid 
on a contract Rolls-Royce successfully secured.


• In Thailand, the firm paid more than $36m between 1991 and 2005 to agents to 
help it secure three separate contracts to supply Trent aero engines to Thai 
Airways.


• In India, where the use of agents to secure defence contracts is prohibited, 
Rolls-Royce disguised its use of middlemen as “general consulting services”. 
The company also admitted paying to retrieve a leaked list of intermediaries 
after they were obtained by the Indian tax authorities.


• In Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, Rolls-Royce failed 
to prevent bribery in relation to two contracts for which it was bidding. A 
middleman hired by the company paid bribes to public officials, although 
Rolls-Royce later pulled out of both deals, in part due to concerns raised over 
the fact that it had obtained confidential information from a competitor.


• In China, Rolls-Royce failed to prevent bribery in relation to the extension 
of a £5m cash credit to China Eastern Airlines in exchange of the purchase of 
engines for aircraft in 2013. Some of the funds paid were intended to be used 
for employees of CEA to attend a two-week MBA course at Columbia University, 
including what Whittam described as “four-star accommodation and lavish 
extracurricular activities”.

• In Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, Rolls-Royce won a 
contract to supply equipment to the state-owned energy company Gazprom by 
making payments to a senior Gazprom official.

Sir Brian Leveson QC, the president of the Queen’s bench division of the high 
court, said the case raised questions about whether it would ever be in the 
public interest to prosecute a company as big as Rolls-Royce.


“My reaction when first considering these papers was that if Rolls-Royce were 
not to be prosecuted in the context of such egregious criminality over decades, 
involving countries around the world, making truly vast corrupt payments and, 
consequentially, even greater profits, then it was difficult to see when any 
company would be prosecuted,” he wrote in his judgment.

However, he concluded that despite the scale of the crime, it was still 
appropriate to allow the deferred prosecution agreement (DPA) and approved it.

Robert Barrington, the executive director of Transparency International, said 
the SFO had presented “a poor case” for the DPA, saying: “This gives the 
impression that Rolls-Royce is too big to prosecute.”

He said: “There was talk about pensioners and employees, but no mention of the 
victims of corruption. The poor case could have been offset by details about 
the prosecution of individuals, but there was nothing about that. If these are 
not the circumstances for a prosecution, then what are?”

More than 30m documents relating to middlemen were examined by 70 
investigators during the SFO’s £13m inquiry, and more than 200 interviews of 
current and former Rolls-Royce employees were carried out. Arrests and searches 
were made both in the UK and overseas. “It has been a huge task,” said Whittam.

The high court was told negotiations between the firm and investigators had 
been “concertinaed” to complete an agreement with US regulators before Donald 
Trump becomes president on Friday.

The settlement means the engineering giant will avoid being prosecuted by 
anti-corruption investigators in the US, the UK, or Brazil, although individual 
executives may still be charged. Under the terms, Rolls-Royce will agree to 
admit wrongdoing, pay the fine and submit to other measures to monitor its 
conduct over a specific period. If it does not break the agreement, it will not 
be prosecuted at the end of the agreed period.

Leveson said: “It is important nobody thinks that in financial terms the 
company is being treated dramatically differently … to the way in which it 
would have been dealt with had it gone to court. The big difference is the 
extent of the cooperation.”

In agreements announced on Monday, Rolls-Royce said it would pay £497m to the 
SFO. It will also pay $169m in penalties to the US Department of Justice and 
$25m to the Brazilian authorities.

The anti-bribery investigations have undermined the reputation of the 
multinational, which sells turbines and engines for passenger jets and military 
aircraft around the globe. The car company of the same name is a separate firm.

Warren East, chief executive of Rolls-Royce, said: “The behaviour uncovered in 
the course of the investigations by the Serious Fraud Office and other 
authorities is completely unacceptable and we apologise unreservedly for it. 
This was unworthy of everything which Rolls-Royce stands for, and that our 
people, customers, investors and partners rightly expect from us.

“The past practices that have been uncovered do not reflect the manner in 
which Rolls-Royce does business today. We now conduct ourselves in a 
fundamentally different way. We have zero tolerance of business misconduct of 
any sort.”

Shares in Rolls-Royce jumped 6% on Tuesday after news of the settlement broke. 

Last year an investigation by the Guardian and the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/rolls-royce-middlemen-may-have-used-bribes-to-land-major-contracts>
 reported that Rolls-Royce had hired “commercial agents” or advisers to help it 
secure high-value contracts in at least 12 countries.

 