
Here is a 2017 question to ponder: who is the most influential person in 
top-level rugby? In days of yore it was always the players and, for better or 
worse, the referee. More recently it could be argued it is the TMO or even the 
TV director who selects the key replays. Increasingly, though, we are entering 
a third age, with players, match officials and entire swaths of the media in 
complete thrall to one particular individual. Welcome to the era of the rugby 
super coach.

The past 12 months, perhaps above all others, have intensified the trend. Each 
year prior to the ever-popular Rugby Union Writers’ dinner (the importance of 
proper hydration in early January cannot be emphasised enough) a poll of 
members is conducted to identify the year’s most influential or dominant 
personality. Alongside that Pat Marshall Memorial Trophy, there is also a 
special award for those who have made an outstanding contribution to the sport 
and who personify its best aspects. In central London on Monday, for the first 
time, both those prestigious awards went to coaches rather than players, in the 
form ofEddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> and Ben Ryan 
respectively.

World Rugby ‘disappointed’ with Northampton over George North injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/world-rugby-disappointed-northampton-george-north-injury>
It is difficult to argue otherwise unless, perhaps, you have a New Zealand 
postcode or your surname is Barrett. The shrewd, vastly experienced Jones has 
presided over England’s extraordinary post-World Cup resurrection, with the 
national team enjoying a 100% Test record in 2016 including a first grand slam 
since 2003 and anunprecedented 3-0 series win in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
. Ryan, despite assorted off-field obstacles, helped Fijibring home the 
country’s first Olympic gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/fiji-great-britain-rio-2016-rugby-sevens-final>
. Both stories would make enthralling movies; in Ryan’s case a couple of 
inspirational short films are already out there.

Both men, of course, will be the first to acknowledge their players have done 
the really hard yards. Would Jones have been recognised had Owen Farrell, Maro 
Itoje and Billy Vunipola not been in his dressing room? How would Ryan have got 
on without his outstanding leader Osea ‘Oscar’ Kolinisau? As Ryan said of his 
captain before his team’s triumphant final in Rio: “He’s teetotal and religious 
but in my first tournament in charge the selectors told me not to pick him 
because he was a troublemaker. I wouldn’t have been able to survive the three 
years I’ve had in Fiji without him.”

Equally, however, would England and Fiji have soared so high without Jones and 
Ryan? The two men differ in character but among their shared qualities are a 
teaching background, an empathy with players, restless intelligence and a 
never-ending search for knowledge. Rugby is a simple game in essence but there 
are myriad ways to approach it. The common feature of both Jones’s and Ryan’s 
work has been their ability to get their teams pulling together as one and 
operating entirely on the same page tactically.

If this was easy, everyone would do it at a click of their fingers. There is 
no shortage of former-player experts out there but achievement in the white-hot 
crucible of international rugby requires nerve and a certainty under pressure 
given to few. Delve a little deeper, too, and something else strikes you about 
Jones and Ryan. Key to their success has been understanding that all good 
things have a shelf-life. The game is littered with once-successful coaches who 
stayed at their posts too long.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frugby-super-coach-eddie-jones-ben-ryan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b4bb052aad0ce5cf2047ca68038b52a3f499e61%2F0_264_2885_1731%2F2885.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rugby%20is%20ruled%20by%20the%20super%20coaches%2C%20but%20their%20reigns%20are%20short%20and%20sweet%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frugby-super-coach-eddie-jones-ben-ryan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rugby%20is%20ruled%20by%20the%20super%20coaches%2C%20but%20their%20reigns%20are%20short%20and%20sweet%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frugby-super-coach-eddie-jones-ben-ryan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b4bb052aad0ce5cf2047ca68038b52a3f499e61%2F0_264_2885_1731%2F2885.jpg>
 Fiji head coach Ben Ryan, left, enjoys their rugby sevens Olympic gold in Rio 
with Ro Dakuwaqa. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
Of course, there are exceptions, Sir Alex Ferguson the most obvious of them. 
Steve Hansen is entering his sixth year as the All Blacks head coach, having 
spent well over a decade with the team, and is still going strong. In the 
majority of cases, though, four or five years as head coach of the same Test 
team and maybe seven seasons as a club director of rugby would appear to be the 
optimum.

Richard Cockerill did not become a bad Leicester director of rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-may-miss-richard-cockerill>
 overnight but his message, after almost eight years, had possibly become too 
familiar. Jones, as he has already made clear, will not be chasing another 
four-year term in office at Twickenham; he has not hung around longer than four 
years in any of his previous senior coaching jobs. Ryan, similarly, ended his 
Fiji stint straight after the Olympics; the vivid memories will never fade but 
off-field politics have just seen him omitted from the nominations for the 
annual Fiji Rugby Union awards. Nirvana, if ever it is achieved, seldom lasts 
forever.

There may be a quiet message here for one or two established coaches wondering 
what to do next. There is always a risk, of course, of the next big job not 
arriving to order. But while the era of the super coach may have dawned, the 
stats suggest even the most inspirational gurus have a best-before date in 
terms of presiding over the same team.

Part of Jones’s and Ryan’s secret has been an ability to grasp that their 
personal influence is finite; it encourages more decisiveness and leaves them 
better placed to make tough decisions for the common good. Which, when you 
think about it, is the same mindset required by virtually every leading player 
and captain. Could it be that great modern-day coaches and athletes, all too 
aware of their sporting mortality, share more similarities in 2017 than they 
have ever done?

Tackle fever

There is no question the debate about high-tackle interpretations is going to 
run and run. With sanctions having been increased in mid-season, in particular, 
some players clearly feel they are being asked to tread on eggshells, not easy 
if you happen to be 20st. It is worth reiterating, then, precisely what 
referees are being asked to focus on when it comes to dangerous tackles. The 
first question they have been told to ask themselves is simple: is it foul 
play? Then there are three criteria: was the tackler a) in control? b) was 
there significant force? c) was the initial contact to the head? If the three 
answers to those questions are all ‘yes’ the tackler can expect a red card. In 
the end it is not that complicated.

And another thing …

When the European pool draw was originally made this Saturday’s fixture 
between Glasgowand Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/munster-anthony-foley-racing-92> 
did not necessarily leap out as the European winter’s plum tie. It says 
everything about both teams’ rising confidence that it is suddenly a must-see 
game, not to mention a potential Lions selection eliminator. The winner will 
also be on course for a home European quarter-final, with Racing 92 and 
Leicester nowhere. Not many were predicting that in October.
 