
When two rugby worlds collide, concussion is the outcome. Five players 
sustained head injuries during thedraw between Saracens and Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report>
 last Saturday, but only one was due to a high/reckless/dangerous tackle. The 
rest were suffered by the tackler, going low and not getting his head position 
right.

World Rugby’s two new laws govern tackles that involve contact with the head. 
Those who say there is nothing new about them and that they are a re-emphasis 
of what was already written down, should look at the governing body’s website 
which describes them as “new laws to address reckless and accidental tackles”. 
They are part of the drive to reduce the number of concussion cases in rugby 
union.

In the short term, if the weekend offers any evidence with James Haskell 
leaving the field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/england-james-haskell-head-injury-wasps-comeback>
 just after he had come on for Wasps against Leicester on Sunday after getting 
knocked out attempting a tackle, the figure may go up before it comes down. A 
generation of players used to going high in the tackle are being forced to 
readjust on the hoof. Technique takes time to finesse and defence coaches have 
to give their charges anti-crash courses.

Rugby union’s new tackle laws: what are they and will they make a difference? 
| Michael Aylwin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/06/world-rugby-new-tackle-laws-what-are-they>
High challenges, or collisions, are a legacy of rugby league’s influence on 
union, which grew markedly from the early years of the 2000s. Players who had 
previously been coached to tackle around the waist or lower were now encouraged 
to aim higher to prevent the offload. The result is that 72% of concussion 
injuries are sustained in the tackle and nearly 60% of all injuries are the 
result of a tackle. Which is why World Rugby, having established protocols and 
procedures for players who are concussed, both ensuring that they have a 
thorough assessment at the time and that they do not play again until they have 
passed a series of tests and been cleared medically, is introducing measures 
designed to ensure that players revert to the time when everybody went low.

Referees have been told to punish high tacklers with cards. The Saracens prop 
Richard Barrington was sent off against Exeter for a “dangerous charge” on 
Geoff Parling after his team-mate Brad Barritt had struck the second row in the 
face with his outstretched left hand. Barritt avoided punishment even though he 
had been the player who had clearly contravened the reckless part of the new 
law categories. The match officials determined that Barrington had caused the 
injury, but far from charging he stood there as Parling, knocked out by 
Barritt’s challenge, fell towards him.

Barritt’s action was the type of offence the crackdown was designed to punish, 
reckless and because the arm was swinging upwards carrying a significant risk 
of making contact with Parling’s head while Barrington, coming into the 
challenge behind Barritt, could not get out of the way. It will take time 
before players adapt to the instruction that the high way is the wrong way.

Much of the focus on injuries and player welfare in the past few years has 
centred on concussion, and rightly so because of the long-term health 
implications to players who suffer it. In time, attention has to turn to other 
areas given the physical toll the game is taking on players at the elite level.

The England head coach, Eddie Jones, names his squad for the Six Nations next 
week and his side will be nowhere near at full strength in the opening match 
against France. Very few of his players have avoided serious injuries in the 
past few years.

Mike Brown had extended time off because of concussion before the 2015 World 
Cup; on the wing, Jonny May was out for 10 months with a knee injury last year, 
and Jack Nowell and Anthony Watson missed the autumn internationals with 
injuries picked up at an England training camp the previous month; in the 
centre, Manu Tuilagi has had a wretched three years, Jonathan Joseph had a 
pectoral injury after the last World Cup and Owen Farrell missed the first six 
weeks of the season with a hip problem.

At forward, Joe Marler will miss the first two rounds of the Six Nations 
because of a leg injury; Dylan Hartley missed 14 weeks last season because of 
concussion; Dan Cole was out of action for nine months in 2014 following neck 
surgery; a spinal operation sidelined Joe Launchbury in the 2015 Six Nations 
and his fellow locks Maro Itoje and George Kruis missed all and part of the 
autumn series respectively with Kruis currently out of action with a cheekbone 
injury; Chris Robshaw will miss the Six Nations this year because of a shoulder 
problem; the Vunipola brothers are unlikely to play much part, if any, because 
of knee injuries, Haskell’s first appearance of the season after toe surgery 
lasted 35 seconds on Sunday; Mike Williams has broken his arm three times in 
the past year; Jack Clifford missed 10 weeks this season because of ankle 
damage; and Sam Jones was ruled out of action for five months in October after 
leg and ankle injuries.

Wales are without Dan Lydiate for the rest of the season; Taulupe Faletau has 
only made five starts for Bath this season because of a knee injury; Leigh 
Halfpenny, Rhys Webb and Jonathan Davies all missed the 2015 World Cup because 
of long-term injuries; Gethin Jenkins will miss most if not all of the Six 
Nations, along with the second row Bradley Davies; Rob Evans missed the first 
three months of the season with a wrist injury; Alun Wyn Jones sat out the 
final 10 weeks of last season with a toe problem; and Sam Warburton has made a 
habit of coming back from injury at the start of an international window.

Rugby union weekend talking points from the Premiership and Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action>
And so it goes on. At the start of the Rugby Championship in August last year 
Australia lost three inside‑centres in the first half. Matt Giteau lasted 11 
minutes before going off with an ankle injury that ruled him out of the 
tournament; Matt Toomua lasted 19 minutes before being concussed (and two games 
into his Leicester career two months later sustained a knee injury that has 
probably ended his season) and his replacement Rob Horne went off with a 
shoulder injury nine minutes after coming on.

Concussion is not the only thing. Other injuries may have a crippling effect 
on players before they pick up their bus passes and so much comes down to the 
tackle area. It is not only that players have been coached to go higher in the 
past decade, but the breakdown has become the battleground. At Saracens on 
Saturday there were 35 set-pieces and 203 rucks and mauls. The number of 
tackles attempted was 278. Back in the days when tacklers went low, there 
tended to be more set-pieces than rucks and mauls and far fewer tackles.

A reversion to the old game of more set-pieces than rucks and mauls, when 
backs ran at backs rather than 18st forwards, will not happen, not least 
because the sport has attracted a new audience that would not be impressed by a 
ball-in-play time of less than 20 minutes and a lot more whistling.

How likely is the crackdown on rugby league tackling being effective if the 
rugby league line of defenders remains? Is there a way of sucking more forwards 
into a breakdown? Concussion may become less common, but fortunate will remain 
the player who goes through a professional career without surgery at least once.
 