
On 13 September we published a Cryptic crossword set by Crucible (No 26,364 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/26364>) to celebrate the Last 
Night of the Proms at the Royal Albert Hall that evening. The clue for 1 down 
was 'Nice way to retain line in exhortation to Britannia (4)' for the solution 
RULE [RU(L)E, with 'rue' being a road in Nice].
Michael B., a long-time and loyal Guardian crossword solver who lives in 
France, objected that the 'rule' in 'Rule, Britannia/Britannia rules the waves' 
was not an exhortation, but was the optative form of the verb 'to rule'. In 
other words, when they sang that night in the Albert Hall, the audience was not 
ordering Britannia to rule the waves but expressing the fervent hope that she 
would continue to do so. His view was that the common error reflected in our 
clue is the result of the fact that many Victorian and later publications of 
the song, written by James Thompson and set to music by Thomas Arne, have the 
comma after the first 'rule' and have 's' at the end of the second one. 
However, its original and proper version has neither and reads: 'Rule 
Britannia/Britannia rule the waves'. He pointed out that Arne's other 
well-known song, God Save the Queen, is also not an exhortation to God to do 
the right thing, but an expression of the hope that he will continue to do so. 
Otherwise it would be 'God, Save the Queen'. And he is right, as you cancheck 
for yourself <https://openlibrary.org/> and in the McMaster University 
collection of Georgian songs <https://library.mcmaster.ca>.

Boatman's Cyptic puzzle of 19 September (No 26,369 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26369>) contained a clue (27 
across) which read: 'Little chap, separated from master wizard, about 99, with 
his staff (5,4)', which required 99 to be IC in Roman numerals in order to make 
MAGIC WAND [where 'little chap' = ALF, MA = Master of Arts, the wizard is 
GANDALF and W = 'with', producing MA/G(IC/W)AND(alf). Richard W. protested, 
having had a proper grounding in Latin at school, that the correct way to write 
99 is XCIX, not IC. He was generous enough to say that, perhaps, by now IC is 
an established crossword convention and that there aren't any real Romans 
around to argue. This issue has come up before and, obviously, neither Julius 
nor any other of the Caesars would have had the least idea what IC was supposed 
to mean. But my memory is of some authority on post-classical, medieval and 
other dog god Latin with evidence that, for many hundreds of years, IC and the 
like were used pretty extensively, presumably to save space. However, if I 
found such an authority then, I cannot immediately find it now and so fall back 
on Australian support for the use of IC in Cryptic puzzles. 
www.highlightpress.com.au provides me with the following:
'Sometimes cryptic clues break the conventional use of Roman numerals. 
Examples: 49 = IL, 99 = IC, 499 = ID , 999 = IM.'

September's Genius (No 135 set by Crucible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-29638,00.html>) produced 31 
entries on the first day and 259 by the deadline. The first three in were from 
the same solvers in the same order as for the previous month: David H, Tony 
with Demon and Peter C in Queensland. The fourth, though, m1ferrier is, I 
think, a newcomer to the winners' enclosure.

Congratulations to Danuta Rosendorff from New South Wales, who is the winner 
of the September Genius puzzle.

â€¢ This article was amended on 13/10/2014. It originally stated Rule Britannia 
was set to music by "Robert Arne", instead of "Thomas Arne"

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editoguardianunlimited.co.uk>
. For Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 