
If you live in a snowy part of the world, you probably already have a solution 
for running in the stuff. But for those of us who live in regions such as the 
south of England, where snow flurries are rare, it can be a little intimidating 
when we do find ourselves faced with a trundle across the lovely white blanket. 
Will I slip and fall? Will it be too hard, like running on sand? Should I just 
take the day off? Or the week off (depending on where you live)? Or stick to 
the gritted roads?

 Some of you may be already filing this under #firstworldproblems, especially 
if I admit that I personally encountered this dilemma while on a skiing holiday 
in Katschberg, Austria. The lovelyFalkensteiner resort 
<https://www.falkensteiner.com/en/hotel/cristallo> where I stayed had a running 
machine in the gym, sure, but wouldn’t it be more fun and exciting to get out 
into the mountains. Did the snow really need to stop me?

 Before I left I did my research. One thing that would help would be some 
special shoes. I know, not another pair, right? For light snowfalls, or even 
snow a few centimetres deep, you can get away with regular trail shoes, but if 
you’re venturing out into something deeper, where you may end up sunk ankle 
deep, then unless you want frozen, wet feet, special shoes can be a lifesaver. 
I opted for theSalomon S-Lab XA Alpine 
<http://www.salomon.com/uk/product/s-lab-xa-alpine.html?article=391216>, which 
are basically a regular pair of Salomons sealed inside a waterproof skin, or 
gaiter, that fits snugly around your ankle to stop any snow getting inside and 
freezing your feet.

 Top ultrarunner Elisabet Barnes, who owns the shop MyRaceKit.com 
<http://www.myracekit.com/>, says if you don’t want to splash out on new shoes, 
it can be a good idea to wear a trail gaiter such asRaidlight Stop Run Gaiters 
<http://www.raidlight.com/en/gaiters-and-accessories/605-stop-run-gaiters.html>
, which will do the same thing and stop snow coming in between the sock and the 
shoe.

Snow joke: winter running in Lapland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/24/winter-running-lapland-sweden-ice-hotel>
As I head out of my hotel in my S-Labs and running gear, I get a few odd 
glances, and a fellow Brit comments: “You’ve come on a skiing holiday and 
you’re going jogging?” It does feel a bit like I’m in a fancy cocktail bar and 
have ordered a cup of tea, but the mountains beckon – off the piste, without 
any need of a chairlift. And I’m no good at skiing anyway. After two days of 
falling over, it feels good to be back on relatively solid ground.


 Apart from the pistes, in Katschberg there’s a network of cross-country ski 
routes and mountain biking routes, both of which, because of the gentler 
slopes, make for accessible running. I’m lucky that the snow is a bit too light 
for the skiers and a bit too heavy for the bikes, so I have the routes to 
myself.

 The first thing I realise is there are many types of snow. This one is 
compact and a little icy. In most cases, it doesn’t give way and is like 
running on a fairly solid, if slippery, path. Occasionally, though, it does 
break, revealing uneven ground underneath, and so I have to moderate my pace 
and watch my step.

 Scottish ultrarunner Donnie Campbell broke the Ramsay Round winter record 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-highlands-islands-38209045> last month – 
running up 24 Munros in just under 24 hours. He was also wearing the Salomon 
S-Lab XA Alpine and says he didn’t get a single blister or hot spot.

 “When running over ice or compacted snow,” he says, “it is important to have 
a quick cadence, so if one foot slips the other foot will only be a fraction of 
a second from touching the ground, which will hopefully stop your slip. Also, 
don’t change your direction of travel or speed suddenly – this will reduce the 
risk of slipping and falling.

“For running over soft snow, it is worth considering how hard you are working 
in relation to the speed you are going, as often it could be more efficient to 
actually walk.”


So with a quick, quick step, I make my way along the Austrian trails. I decide 
to take my time, stopping to take in the spectacular views along the way, and 
to make sure I don’t fall over. I’m doing fine and enjoying myself heartily 
when I spy a narrow path leading steeply up into the woods. I have the voices of
Richard Askwith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2014/feb/28/running-free-richard-askwith-review-martin-love>
 and Vybarr Cregan-Reid in my ears, both of whose books urge runners to 
explore, to wander from the beaten path.


 Now, it could be argued that by running halfway up a mountain in Austria I’m 
already off the beaten path, but as Cregan-Reid says in his bookFootnotes 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/1108162/footnotes/>: “The landscape is not 
just a backdrop to my run … it actually beckons to us.”

 This path is beckoning to me and so I follow it up. Alas, it’s just a 
woodcutter’s trail that soon ends in a clearing of freshly made tree stumps. I 
turn and head back but halfway down the steep path, my watch beeps. I glance at 
it to see how slowly my last mile was run, and that distraction is enough. My 
quick cadence slows thoughtlessly, my mind is distracted, and what out of the 
corner of my eye looks like snow turns out to be a sheet of solid ice. Thump, 
I’ve fallen over, winded, cursing and struggling to breathe.

 Luckily I’m uninjured, apart from some bruised ribs, and manage to run back 
without any problems, but it’s a stern lesson not to underestimate the 
environment when running in extreme conditions. And perhaps, when running in 
snow, to put a limit on wandering off the path.

• Adharanand Finn is author of The Way of the Runner 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275156/s/the-way-of-the-runner/>
 