
Thomas Bjorn will use a Wednesday morning media conference to set out his 
European qualifying credentials for the 2018 Ryder Cup, with the captain 
expected to announce a raft of changes from the circumstances which preceded
heavy defeat at Hazeltine last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
.

Thomas Bjorn announces review of selection policy for Ryder Cup team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/ryder-cup-thomas-bjorn-announces-review-selection-policy-2018-match>
It is understood Bjorn, who will speak alongside the Tour’s chief executive 
Keith Pelley, will raise the number of captain’s wildcard selections by one to 
four. Eight automatic qualifiers would therefore be pulled jointly from 
existing European and world order of merit lists. Bjorn agreed his plans during 
a Tuesday evening meeting of the European Tour’s tournament committee in Abu 
Dhabi.

Other proposed changes include the enhancement of qualifying points in events 
held closest to the Ryder Cup cut-off point, a move which in theory should 
boost Europe’s chances of deploying form players. Those who opt play on the PGA 
Tour in the same weeks as the European Tour’s newly enhanced Rolex Series 
tournaments face the prospect of receiving noRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> qualifying points for the event in 
question.

The existing five events required to retail full European Tour status, which 
makes a player eligible for the Ryder Cup, could now reduced by one.

Controversy ensued before the last meeting of the United States and Europe 
when the in-form EnglishmanPaul Casey refused to rejoin his home tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/25/paul-casey-ryder-cup-golf-pga-european-tour>
, citing family reasons for basing himself on the opposite side of the 
Atlantic. Despite calls by the likes of Rory McIlroy, however, the European 
Tour will continue to insist on playing commitment for membership.

Bjorn, who was confirmed in his new role in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/thomas-bjorn-named-captain-europe-2018-ryder-cup>
, will have Jim Furyk as an opposite number on the outskirts of Paris next year.
 