
Sam Warburton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-warburton> has not told 
Wales that he wants to give up the captaincy but he will meet Rob Howley at the 
beginning of next week to discuss the position as the interim head coach 
prepares for Tuesday’s Six Nations squad announcement.

There has been speculation that Warburton, who has led Wales a record 49 times 
over six years, has agreed to give up the captaincy to concentrate on playing. 
He faces the threat of Justin Tipuric at openside flanker and was used on the 
blindside in November, but it is understood that he has not spoken to Howley 
since the end of the autumn international series.

Wales need to think on their feet, rather than being told at half-time what to 
do | Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/the-breakdown-wales-rob-howley> 
Howley will name his captain on Tuesday. If he decides to replace Warburton, 
the second-row Alun Wyn Jones, who led the 2013 Lions in the absence of the 
injured Warburtonin the series-clinching third Test against Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/06/australia-lions-third-test-match-report>
, would be the probable successor, with Gethin Jenkins, who wore the armband in 
three of Wales’s four November internationals, injured and likely to miss at 
least the first month of the Six Nations.

Warburton, who has won 69 caps, became Wales’s captain in 2011 and later that 
year became the youngest player to lead his country in a World Cup at the age 
of 22. He is eighth on the list of players who have captained a Test team the 
most on 51, which includes the Lions’ first two Tests against Australia four 
years ago.

He has always said that captaincy is not something he covets and that his 
target is first to be named in the Wales, or Lions, squad and then make the 
starting lineup. He has for the last six years been an automatic first-choice 
for Wales on the openside and what he needs to know from Howley is whether 
Tipuric’s form and the emergence of the Gloucester back-row Ross Moriarty have 
changed that.

While Wales have accommodated both Tipuric and Warburton occasionally, the 
latter does not want to follow England’s Chris Robshaw and be considered only 
as a blindside flanker. He may be picked there for Wales’s first match of the
Six Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> with Taulupe Faletau 
a doubt at No8 because of a knee injury and Dan Lydiate ruled out for the rest 
of the season, but in the long term sees himself as a No7 and would not want to 
use the captaincy as a means of bolstering his position in the side.

Jones, in contrast, is an automatic selection and one of the outstanding 
forwards in world rugby this decade. Like Warburton, he is a candidate to lead 
the Lions in New Zealand in the summer, but second-row is one of the most hotly 
contested positions with all four home unions having contenders, four in the 
case of England.

The Lions head coach, Warren Gatland, said last month that he would pick 
someone who had a good chance at the start of the tour of being in the Test 
team. “I have not got someone definitely in mind at the moment,” he added. “I 
hope that evolves over the next few months. Form is paramount and we will put 
our best side out.”

Warburton was installed as the bookmakers’ favourite for the captaincy when 
Gatland, who was in charge in 2013, was reappointed as head coach, but he has 
been overtaken by Ireland’s Rory Best, who was praised by Gatland for his form 
last year. His position of hooker looks more clearcut than most and England’s 
Dylan Hartley will need to rehabilitate himself in the Six Nations at the end of
his latest suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/dyland-hartley-banned-six-weeks-available-six-nations-rugby-union>
.
 