
It is still 21 months since Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> were beaten on European duty but 
this was anything but a relaxing Sunday lunchtime in west Wales. Not until the 
final play of a heavy-duty game, with 14 men on the field, did they manage to 
deny the Scarlets a hugely satisfying English scalp, extend their unbeaten 
record in the Champions Cup to 14 matches and guarantee their presence in the 
last eight.

While the Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> will feel some 
regret, having seen off Toulon on home turf this season, there also has to be 
admiration for Saracens’ refusal to bow to the seemingly inevitable. The 
previous week they also battled back to draw with Exeter having gone down to 14 
men with injuries continuing to strip them of several key figures. There is an 
abundance of character or competitiveness in this squad, as they keep 
underlining.

European Champions Cup roundup: Northampton take revenge on Castres
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/european-rugby-champions-cup-roundup-northampton-castres-connacht-zebre>
They will still need to defeat Toulon at home this weekend to secure a home 
quarter-final but, by the end of March, George Kruis, Brad Barritt, Alex Goode, 
and at least one Vunipola brother should be back to reinforce their collective 
challenge. If Chris Ashton can maintain the poacher’s knack that earned him two 
crucial second‑half tries here, Saracens will feel a successful defence of 
their title remains more than feasible.

It will not concern them overly that a chance to surpass Munster’s record of 
13 successive European victories disappeared into the grey Celtic skies. When 
the impressively accurate Dan Jones knocked over his fifth penalty to put his 
side 22-15 ahead with six minutes left a local red-letter day seemed extremely 
likely, a sense heightened when Will Skelton was sent to the sin-bin for 
attempting to slap a theatrically-minded James Davies.

Saracens seldom seem to know when they are beaten and roused themselves for an 
18-phase pounding of the Scarlets’ line. With no time left to kick a penalty to 
the corner, a show‑and‑go by Owen Farrell sliced a last-gasp hole through the 
middle of a weary home defence and there was Ashton, the sharpest of supporting 
actors, lurking to touch down his 33rd try in 51 European games, equalling the 
great Brian O’Driscoll.

Only Toulouse’s Vincent Clerc has scored more in this tournament and Ashton, 
who is due to join Toulon next season, will fancy overhauling the Frenchman at 
some point. For a player who has had to spend 13 weeks on the sidelines this 
season after being banned for biting, simply being back on the pitch is enough. 
His Test days may now be behind him but he remains a reliable danger on foreign 
fields.

A draw had not seemed the likeliest outcome for long periods, with Saracens 
being hassled at the breakdown and failing to satisfy the French referee at the 
scrums. Apart from an outstanding performance by Alex Lozowski in the 
unfamiliar role of full-back and an effervescent performance from Schalk Brits, 
there was a slightly disjointed feel to the visitors’ first-half effort with 
Lozowski’s lovely try‑creating flick to Nathan Earle in the 13th minute proving 
a rare flash of inspiration.

With the entire Wales coaching team in attendance before the Six Nations squad 
announcement on Tuesday, Saracens received no joy from the home tight five and 
Jones’s boot ensured a 9-5 Scarlets’ lead at half-time, helped by a couple of 
misses off the tee from Farrell. When Ashton made a defensive fumble which led 
directly to Scarlets increasing their lead in the second half, a modest-sized 
crowd also began to detect the possibility of English blood.

Wasps stay on course as Dan Robson secures last-gasp win over Toulouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/wasps-toulouse-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
Good approach work from Schalk Burger and Lozowski at the other end did allow 
Ashton to make amends shortly afterwards but, within three minutes, the 
forceful Scott Williams had surged on to Aled Davies’s long ball to put the 
Scarlets back in charge at 19-12. By this time the action was hotting up, 
Skelton losing control of the ball when a try looked certain and Lozowski, 
after another fine break, throwing a hasty forward pass to Ashton after the 
wing had demanded the ball despite the presence of several nearby defenders.

Ultimately it was to be Ashton’s day after all. “Both his tries were just the 
sort of tries we are accustomed to seeing him scoring with him sniffing the 
opportunity,” said his director of rugby, Mark McCall. “They were outstanding 
support lines. It is what he has been doing for years and years. It was good to 
see it was still there despite the fact he hasn’t played a lot of rugby this 
season.”

Scarlets, unsurprisingly felt very differently. “It felt like we lost even 
though we drew,” Scott Williams said. “I thought we dominated them physically 
but they probably had that bit of experience at the end that won them the game.”

Scarlets L Williams; McNicholl, Parkes (J Davies, 67), S Williams, S Evans; D 
Jones, A Davies (J Evans, 67); R Evans (W Jones, 71), Owens (capt; Elias, 54), 
Lee (Kruger, 62), Ball (Price, 78), Beirne, Shingler, J Davies, Barclay (Boyde, 
67).

Try S Williams. Con D Jones. Pens D Jones 5.

Saracens Lozowski; Ashton, Bosch, Tompkins, Earle; Farrell (capt), 
Wigglesworth (Spencer, 67); Barrington (Tamositele, 50), Brits (George, 50), 
Figallo (Koch, 50), Itoje, Hamilton, Rhodes (Skelton, 56), Burger (Brown, 71), 
Wray.

Tries Earle, Ashton 2. Cons Farrell 2. Pen Farrell.

Sin-bin Skelton 77.

Referee A Ruiz (Fr). Attendance 7,491.
 