
Scott Pruitt 

Environmental Protection Agency administrator 

Donald Trump picks climate change sceptic Scott Pruitt to lead EPA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
Background 

Scott Pruitt is a controversial choice to head the Environmental Protection 
Agency. A climate change skeptic who has repeatedly sued the agency, Pruitt 
faces strong opposition from Democrats and environmentalists who view him as 
too cozy with the fossil fuel industry and a direct threat to Barack Obama’s 
agenda to halt global warming.

Pruitt, who has served as Oklahoma’s attorney general since 2011, is currently 
representing the state in a lawsuit against the EPA to halt the clean power 
plan, an effort by the Obama administration to curb greenhouse gas emissions 
from coal-fired power plants.

Pruitt has called the EPA’s rule “unlawful and overreaching” and has cast 
doubt on the overwhelming scientific evidence that human activity is causing 
the planet to warm.

Key points to watch 

Climate change and climate science: Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has called climate change a 
“hoax invented by the Chinese” and pledged to withdraw the US from the Paris 
agreement, the international commitment to reduce carbon emissions. Pruitt has 
so far expressed a consistency with the president-elect’s thinking. Democrats 
will probably grill Pruitt over his own past comments on climate change, a 
debate he has said is “far from over” despite the consensus among scientists 
that fossil fuels are a primary cause of global warming. He may be pressed to 
defend his views and explain why he is skeptical of climate science.

Regulatory action: The Obama administration has taken action to regulate air 
and water pollution to curb greenhouse gas emissions, all of which are in 
jeopardy with Pruitt at the helm of the EPA. He is likely to face a line of 
questioning on his belief that it is the right of the state – and not the role 
of the federal government - to regulate the environment. But air quality and 
bodies of water do not abide by state lines, so how does he propose dealing 
with interstate and national issues?

Fossil fuel industry: Pruitt will probably be pressed over his ties to the 
fossil fuel industry by Democrats who are alarmed that as head of the EPA he 
will prioritize business over environmental protection. Democrats will probably 
try to extract a commitment from him to protect the environment over business 
interests. He is also likely to be asked about the companies he has received 
money from and whether he would recuse himself from decisions involving these 
companies.
 