
Our latest inset was one we were dreading, and not just for the rubbish 
refreshments. We knew the news wouldn’t be good. The status quo – one of 
discontent and rock-bottom morale – was about to get even worse. And then came 
the announcement: as a means of saving money, the school would not be replacing 
staff who leave.

Instead, their duties are to be “absorbed” by other staff members, presenting 
several immediate problems. Firstly, these remaining staff members may not have 
the expertise and experience to perform these duties effectively. Secondly, 
they almost certainly don’t have time to give to these responsibilities.

Secret Teacher: becoming an academy destroyed my school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/sep/24/secret-teacher-becoming-academy-destroyed-school>
Mind the gap

The gaps in knowledge, experience and relationships cannot simply be papered 
over with something that looks vaguely similar. The departure or redundancy of 
school staff – some of whom are indispensable and have made an immeasurable 
impact – will have lasting and harmful repercussions far outweighing potential 
monetary gains. And the departure of someone from a job means more when it is 
children who will miss them.

Our deputy head is among those on the way out and he will not be replaced. He 
has taught children and guided staff, he has been the driving force of the 
school’s ethos and has acted as the main facilitator of relationships with 
primary feeder schools. That his many duties will simply be “absorbed” is an 
insult to the most effective teacher I have had the privilege to work with, and 
a worrying sign of things to come.

As a result of staff losses, combined with our school already being 
oversubscribed, class sizes will now increase, in many cases to more than 30 
pupils. The mind-boggling workload demands already placed on staff are well 
known, although rarely addressed – and they can only get worse now.

There is a silent understanding about the school’s mock exam period falling so 
conveniently close to the Christmas break, for instance. I got just three hours 
off my usual classes during the exams, and then had to find about 20 straight 
hours to mark the scripts – you can guess when I managed to do that.

Exodus of experts

But it’s the vulnerable students who will suffer the most in this process, of 
course. EAL (English as an additional language) students and those with 
disabilities, for example, require expert staff to really thrive in an 
inclusive environment.

The jobs of those people who help us to teach these students – the teaching 
assistants, the drivers, the pastoral workers, the translators and numerous 
others – are also under threat. For years we’ve witnessed the ludicrous 
treatment of these staff become normalised. These heroes – because that’s what 
they are to me and the young people they help daily – are completely 
unrecognised.

At least teachers have (or have had) unions. Even so, thanks to 
performance-related pay and the fact that annual increases are now far from 
guaranteed, we’re left to do a hell of a lot potentially for a hell of a lot 
less than we would have, and this situation is only becoming intensified.

Secret Teacher: I feel too old for this job, but I'm trapped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/dec/10/secret-teacher-i-feel-too-old-for-this-job-but-im-trapped>
When I tell students that teaching carries prestige in China similar to that 
of being a doctor or lawyer, they laugh and don’t believe me. This is a career, 
arguably a vocation, in the pursuit of which I have sacrificed many things: 
money is just one. If I look back five years to when I worked for a technology 
company, to the moment just before my crisis of conscience and subsequent entry 
into teaching, I was doing a little for a lot.

In a parallel life, one in which I’d kept climbing the ladder, I hazard a 
guess that this austerity would be something I’d just read about in a throwaway 
paper on the London Underground, much like education budget cuts, teacher 
burnout and falling literacy levels. It wouldn’t have touched me, or my £50,000 
per year.

If I hadn’t become a teacher, I may have had a house, more fancy dinners, and 
better holidays. But I chose this career, and I choose to remain. Only the 
dedication of teachers is keeping education going, even as the money is 
“running out”.Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> simply 
cannot afford to go bankrupt.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 