
Even now, well into the second decade of the 21st century, we tend to view 
video games as a guilty pleasure. For anyone over the age of 25, they’re often 
something you sneak off to do when no one is at home. They’re a furtive treat, 
filled with the cultural equivalent of empty calories.

Partly this is to do with how video games have been marketed for the last 30 
years – predominantly at teenage boys. The games industry has taught us to see 
games as loud, brash and arcane. On top of this, the most visible titles tend 
to conform to familiar stereotypes: Call of Duty is about killing enemies; 
Candy Crush Saga is about killing time. When you’re not entrenched in games, 
these highly marketed titles become representative – you don’t see the other 
things going on behind these entertainment monoliths. It’s just like, if you 
only go to the cinema in the summer, you’re in danger of thinking that all 
movies involve indestructible people wearing capes.

But the last five years has seen a huge renaissance in video game design. The 
democratisation of the medium (through cheap development tools and the rise of 
super-fast broadband) has brought in new voices and ideas. Fascinating things 
are happening.

So here are seven reasons why, if you haven’t played many video games in the 
past, or still feel a little self-conscious about your Xbox or PlayStation, you 
should try more video games this year – and not feel bad about it.

They’re economical
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02127d45733e85ab39b43a6acfc98ef33414dc61%2F25_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02127d45733e85ab39b43a6acfc98ef33414dc61%2F25_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Witcher 3: hundreds of hours of entertainment – and beautiful scenery 
Photograph: Namco Bandai 
As the global economy shows few signs of drastically improving, getting the 
most out of our entertainment choices is going to be important this year. And 
video games remain astoundingly good value. A big mainstream release like 
Witcher 3 or Fifa 2017 will cost around £50 on console and less on PC, but they 
can provide hundreds of hours of entertainment. Take the online shooting game 
Destiny. A year after the game’s release,a study of player patterns 
<http://www.geek.com/games/how-bungie-devilishly-trapped-its-players-in-destiny-1619668/>
 found that the average session was three hours, and the average player had put 
77 hours into fighting alien monsters. That’s an enormous amount of 
entertainment for that initial £50 outlay.

Most titles have replayability features built in. Big adventure games like 
Dishonored, Assassin’s Creed and Tomb Raider are filled with sub-quests, hidden 
areas and collectible items that encourage and reward replay and exploration. 
Competitive multiplayer titles such as Overwatch, Fifa and Rocket League 
effectively function like sports – you play and improve over many months, 
discovering new skillsets and features. And of course, waiting a few weeks 
before buying a game, or looking out for sales on download sites like Steam, 
Xbox Live and PlayStation Network, will get you those experiences for even less 
money.


They’re culturally prescient
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a444d82385dadbd4bcc9f281c72bc414a9bfc16%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a444d82385dadbd4bcc9f281c72bc414a9bfc16%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Westworld: it’s basically about video games Photograph: HBO 
A lot of the people now making, producing and funding television and movies 
grew up playing video games – and that influence is becoming ever more obvious 
and important. Two of the most interesting television programmes of 2016, Mr 
Robot and Westworld, were inspired by game design and conventions – the latter 
has beenwidely read 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2016/10/the-gamers-of-westworld/505970/>
 as a comment on the sorts of interactive immersive worlds we find in games. 
We’re now seeing the very structure, culture and design principles of games 
being expressed and explored in traditional narrative media.

From the deeply interconnected Marvel movies, filled with easter eggs, clues 
and puzzles, to the rise of immersive theatre productions, we’re being asked to 
take more of an active role in the entertainment we consume. So playing video 
games is effectively preparing you for the future of broadcast media, and 
ensuring you understand what’s going on in, say, the next Ready Player One, or 
Stranger Things or the films of Alex Garland, JJ Abrams or Duncan Jones.

They’re social
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F230d1512ab32e6320b1232dea7a5894515eda2eb%2F0_717_8984_5391%2F8984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F230d1512ab32e6320b1232dea7a5894515eda2eb%2F0_717_8984_5391%2F8984.jpg>
 Music titles like Singstar show that games can be social and inclusive 
Photograph: Sony 
The popular stereotype of the lone gamer sat in a bedroom staring at a screen 
was never particularly accurate, but now its laughably out of date. Most titles 
have multiplayer components that let you easily play against other people 
online – but if that’s too intimidating, there are also a lot of “local” or 
“couch” multiplayer games that you can share with friends in the same room. 
Recent examples include the hilarious cooperative kitchen game Overcooked, the 
crazed VR experience Keep Talking and No One Explodes, and the beautiful 
puzzler Lovers in a Dangerous Spacetime. But you can also pick up a cheap old 
Xbox 360 or PlayStation 3, grab a copy of Rock Band or Guitar Hero and enjoy 
many nights of terrifyingly incompetent karaoke fun.

But in a lot of important ways, almost all games can be shared. I know a lot 
of couples who sit down and play adventure games like Life is Strange or 
Walking Dead together, taking turns with the controls, helping each other, 
discussing tactics and options. We learn a lot about our friends through play, 
and how you cooperate on video game tasks is a pretty good indicator on how you 
will cope with real-life challenges. In short, video games will save your 
relationship. I’m only half joking.

They’re the future of self-expression
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcb39157817d9def51ca93ec76b19905f948cbbe%2F90_0_2690_1615%2F2690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcb39157817d9def51ca93ec76b19905f948cbbe%2F90_0_2690_1615%2F2690.jpg>
 Designer Nina Freeman starring in her own video game, Cybele 
Thirty years ago, when young angry people wanted to express something about 
their lives, they would pick up a guitar and write a song; if they wanted to 
tell a story, they might have written that as poetry or bought a camcorder and 
made a film. Now they’re just as likely to make a game. Cheap tools like Unity, 
free creation packages like Twine and Scratch, all put development into the 
hands of anyone with a basic laptop. Creators like Anna Anthropy, Nina Freeman, 
Robert Yang and Jason Rohrer make idiosyncratic, personal, troubling, unusual 
and political games, exploring new avenues for self-expression, pushing at the 
boundaries of what games are and what they can say.Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> have become the permissive 
creative space that punk rock once was.

On a more mainstream level, we’re gradually seeing the barriers between 
interactive and linear media being broken down. Over the last decade, from
Dubplate Drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2005/sep/26/media.broadcasting> to 
Defiance 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-05-16/defiance-syfys-ultimate-transmedia-adventure>
, there have been halting experiments in transmedia – the combination of game, 
web and television elements to create new story forms – but these will 
inevitably become more common as generation swipe matures. Games will break out 
of two-dimensional screens and into rooms, either through VR or AR, or through 
new combinations of TV and tablets. It’s possible that in twenty years, the 
idea of sitting down and justwatching a narrative drama will seem outdated and 
anachronistic. So you may as well start practising now.

They tell us where technology is going
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a82071601f2e57eba4c938ec6d7de0fa22a294%2F0_224_3362_2018%2F3362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a82071601f2e57eba4c938ec6d7de0fa22a294%2F0_224_3362_2018%2F3362.jpg>
 People test virtual reality Samsung Gear VR glasses at the Grand Palais 
exhibition hall Photograph: Charles Platiau/Reuters 
Video game players are hugely demanding when it comes to interface design – 
both in terms of input devices (ie controllers) and in-game information 
displays. Video games are also pushing the envelope when it comes to artificial 
intelligence, procedural content generation and physics modelling. This means a 
lot of the technologies that are going to affect our lives in the next decade 
are being tested and developed in the video game sphere.

Sometimes this is obvious. Currently, most virtual and augmented reality 
development is in video games: the PlayStation VR, Oculus Rift and HTC Vive 
headsets are mostly being used to make games, but that won’t always be the case 
– when headsets become less unwieldy and when more movie and television 
companies start to explore the possibilities of 360-degree video, VR and AR 
experiences are going to become a lot more common. We’ll be shopping in VR, 
attending sports events in VR, using AR to redesign our living rooms. Learning 
about these technologies now is a good idea.

But there are less obvious ways that games are taking a role in shaping our 
futures. Video games have become important testbeds for artificial intelligence 
research. The Google-owned AI company DeepMind tests its intelligent programs 
by pitting them against video games – the latest example is StarCraft. In the 
US, Dr Mark Riedl and his colleagues at Georgia Tech university have developed 
a game-like narrative platform called Quixote, where AI agents are able to 
learn moral lessons from player-created stories; this approach could well be 
used in the coming years toteach robots how to make moral decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/18/robots-could-learn-human-values-by-reading-stories-research-suggests>
. Microsoft’s research department in Cambridge is using Minecraftto test and 
teach AI bots 
<http://blogs.microsoft.com/next/2016/07/07/project-malmo-lets-researchers-use-minecraft-ai-research-makes-public-debut/#sm.00000e4ybdwo39f6ezmft8j1qpvd6>
.

The future of communication with our major service providers – from banks to 
retailers – is with intelligent chatbots. Games offer practice in talking to 
machines.

They tell us about our kids
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1e6e2c8eaf0753e19c958f2d753c75cc5fbe88%2F0_187_5126_3076%2F5126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1e6e2c8eaf0753e19c958f2d753c75cc5fbe88%2F0_187_5126_3076%2F5126.jpg>
 A growing number of children now expect all screens to be interactive 
Photograph: Alamy 
With the arrival of smart phones and tablets, games are more pervasive than 
ever. Children are now growing up expecting all screens to be interactive – a 
phenomenon that’s being referred to asgeneration swipe 
<http://digitaluncovered.com/generation-swipe-what-toddlers-know/>. They are 
using tablets in school, they’re being taught to code, and they’re creating 
apps. They are digital natives. Alongside this, the mass adoption of social 
media platforms like Instagram, Snapchat and YouTube has given rise to a new 
relationship between teens, technology and entertainment. Kids expect to be 
able to interact. They watchStampy 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/stampylonghead/videos> or PewDiePie 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/PewDiePie/videos> on YouTube and interact with 
pro gamers and vloggers on Twitch streams – they communicate with each other 
through memes and photos. A lot of the interfaces they use are game-like. So 
understanding video games is important.

But more than this, playing video games with your kids is joyous. Whether that 
means building a castle together in Minecraft, or a functioning rocket in 
Kerbal Space Program, or just solving puzzles and breaking things in Lego 
Dimensions, it’s a way of meeting with your children in a domain they enjoy and 
feel comfortable. It lets them take the lead; it lets them show you stuff. The 
skills are also transferable and can expand into the real world. The obvious 
example is Pokémon Go, the AR game which turns local landmarks into playable 
spaces – my sons have learned more about their hometown through playing this 
game than through years of just walking around. But games can also stimulate an 
interest in architecture, ecology, physics, logic, philosophy ... I’m an 
optimist in this area; some argue that video games provide only insular lessons 
applicable solely within their own worlds. But having a child on the autism 
spectrum, I have seen first-hand how games can inspire an interest in the world 
and its mysteries.

They’re fun
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F720ba5673f136c023c7ef06dfe5893a08fc62fac%2F60_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20reasons%20why%20grown%20ups%20should%20play%20more%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-grown-ups-should-play-more-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F720ba5673f136c023c7ef06dfe5893a08fc62fac%2F60_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Grand Theft Auto V – because you will probably never crash land a helicopter 
on an LA freeway in real-life Photograph: Rockstar 
Did I mention this? Games are fun. They provide fascinating worlds to explore 
and take part in, they let us do incredible, sometimes terrible things without 
recourse. They test out intelligence and reaction; they posit weird futures and 
possibilities; they let us take control of lives and bodies that we could never 
own or experience. They are made by artists and visionaries, they provide 
moments of utter transfixing beauty and resonance. The glowing sunset over the 
city of Los Santos in GTA V, the swoop of a dragon over the plains of Skyrim; 
the desperate struggle to survive in the snowy wastelands of The Long Dark; the 
heart-wrenching power of friendship in Life is Strange – these are valid forms 
of escape and experience; they tell us things.

In 2017, a year of uncertainty and vast technological change, it is time to 
see video games alongside – and equal to – books, television and cinema as a 
popular imaginative medium. It is OK to play.
 