
Zinedine Zidane smiled that smile, the one that has served him so well. What 
had his team lacked, he was asked; what was it they had needed? “Five minutes,” 
he said gently. Not long, but long enough to change everything. No one had 
beaten Real Madrid in 40 matches, going back nine months, 30 teams and five 
competitions, butSevilla beat them in five minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/sevilla-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
. “We knew that this would happen one day,” Zidane said. He just didn’t expect 
it to happen like this; by 10.30pm on Sunday, he didn’t expect it to happen at 
all. No one did. But then, suddenly, there was bedlam and, before they knew it, 
Sevilla’s players were standing before their fans, celebrating a huge victory 
that Madrid had thought was theirs.

There’s a line in Sevilla’s anthem, belted out before games and plastered on 
billboards round their Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán stadium, that says in huge white 
letters on a red background: “it’s said they never give up”, and afterwards 
their manager, Jorge Sampaoli, insisted that the key to their 2-1 win against 
Madrid was that they “never lowered our arms”. This season that’s true, too: if 
this season’s league games had ended in the 85th minute, they would be 13 
points and six places worse off. And yet on 85 minutes, you wondered if they 
finally had, if this time they really were beaten. If Madrid, unbeaten since 
April,somehow unbeaten just four days before in this very arena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/sevilla-real-madrid-match-report>
, really were invincible.

Stevan Jovetic seals Sevilla win over Real Madrid in thrilling late turnaround
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/sevilla-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
Sevilla faced Madrid for the third time in 10 days and it was happening again. 
Beaten 3-0 at the Bernabéu in the Copa del Rey last 16 first leg, they’d been 
winning 3-1 with seven minutes left in the return leg, believing that, wow, 
they could actually do this, only for a penalty and Karim Benzema’s 93rd-minute 
equaliser to secure Madrid’s 40th consecutive unbeaten game and a new Spanish 
record. Now, first vs second in the league,Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> were losing 1-0 and time, like 
the energy in their legs, was escaping them. It felt over. It probably would 
have been but for Sergio Ramos, that one man story-generating machine.

 As Sevilla’s players left the Lebreros hotel and their bus made its way to 
the Sánchez Pizjuán, 50 metres away, they edged through a tunnel of flares and 
flames, fireworks going off all around them. This was, Marca’s cover had 
announced, Spanish football’s “big night”, and they were ready. A couple of 
hours later, though, they had seemed spent. Sevilla had played well – again – 
and it had been intense, impressive and enjoyable, with Steven N’Zonzi 
astonishing again. “An octopus,” Sampaoli called him. But with three central 
defenders and Casemiro immense, Madrid exercised increasing control, and 
Ronaldo’s 67th-minute penalty, their third in three games, appeared to end it 
early. The Pizjuán had fallen quiet, as if resigned, while Madrid “relaxed”, 
Marcelo said.

Their record would be 41 unbeaten, their lead over Sevilla seven points with a 
game in hand against Valencia. Sampaoli had sent on Pablo Sarabia and Stevan 
Jovetic, but Sevilla had not had a shot since the 53rd minute; neither team had 
since the penalty and it was late now, the game gone. But the game is never 
truly gone.


It was Ramos time – with a twist. Sarabia’s free-kick curled inwards from the 
left and, from just by the six-yard box, it was headed into the net. The 
Pizjuán erupted, the celebration coming in stages: first the release of the 
goal, the sense of revenge from Wednesday night, the late goal returned, a goal 
to equal things up, and then the realisation. All round the stadium they looked 
at each other, barely able to believe it: “Was that Ramos?!”


Sergio Ramos, the man who had made a career of late goals, headers that change 
matches and destinies; who had scored the late header that denied Sevilla the 
European Super Cup; the former Sevilla player this game had been all about, who 
they’d whistled all night, the noise reaching 100 decibels when his name was 
read out, and who now they cheered. It had to be him.


 When Madrid had won a penalty in midweek, Ramos had taken it, a point to 
prove. Somehow, you knew something was coming. He dinked a Panenka down the 
middle to make it 3-2, the fightback begun, and turned to the Biris in the 
north stand, who had been abusing him that night and have been ever since he 
left as a 19-year-old. He signalled to his ears and then to the name on his 
shirt, before raising his hand in apology to the rest of the stadium – an 
apology few accepted.

Debates began, the subject dominated. Perhaps the most decisive game of the 
season so far became all about Ramos, the usual sides taken and trenches dug. 
There were stories about his hurt and about theirs too, talk was of formal 
complaints. There were statements and pleas for peace. “I’ll be buried with a 
Sevilla flag and a Madrid flag,” Ramos said. “It’s mad for Ramos and Sevilla to 
be divided,” Sampaoli said; “Sergio Ramos’s behaviour has always been 
exemplary,” Madrid’s communiqué claimed. On Sunday, AS’s cover led on: “Ramos 
returns to the volcano.” When he walked out, he embraced Sampaoli, and was 
whistled by fans. There were some chants of “son of a bitch” and chants for 
Dani Alves and Ivan Rakitic – two players that, Ramos noted, get treated as 
“Gods” when they go back despite not being brought up asSevillistas, unlike him.


 All the buildup had been about him, but the game hadn’t – although he played 
extremely well – until the 85th minute, until the moment that would mark this 
and may mark the entire season almost as much as his late equaliser in the
clásico. Ramos seems to have an inbuilt sense of theatre. Another late, 
decisive header, but with a difference. He’d done it so many times to so many 
teams, including Sevilla; now he’d done it to his own team. At the Pizjuán, 
four days afterthat penalty, in the midst of that debate. Cue a thousand jokes 
and a million memes. “It wasn’t just words: he really is aSevillista.” giggled 
El Diario de Sevilla. For Sevilla’s fans, this was not just fun, it was funny. 
“Ho! Ho! He who laughs last laughs better,” said the cover of Estadio 
Deportivo. “God’s law”, one Sevilla director put it.

 Celebrating, they already thought it couldn’t get any better, but then it did 
get better. In the 93rd minute, Jovetic cut inside from the left and from 20 
yards curled the ball into the net off the hand of the out-of-position Keylor 
Navas. There was pandemonium at the Pizjuán; players, staff and Sampaoli (of 
course) running round madly in all directions leaping and jumping into each 
others’ arms. “Open your eyes: it wasn’t a dream,” said El Diario de Sevilla. 
Another goal, another story for the game that one paper called the “most 
literary” there has been. It had been, Eduardo Florido wrote, “epic, 
passionate, spectacular, paradoxical, literary, vibrant, unforgettable, mad, 
memorable, funny, incredible, romantic, spiritual even, almost religious …” and 
now it had its finish.

Another of Monchi’s discoveries, another footballer hoping to restart his 
career at the Pizjuán, the striker they hope turn their football into goals, 
Jovetic had arrived in Seville from Italy admitting that he had learnt his 
Spanish watching the TV series Los Serrano. Two days later, he was playingReal 
Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>. He scored. Four days 
after that he was playing Madrid again. And he scored again. The goal that 
finally defeated them, 41 games later, and reopened the title race. “Sevilla 
revolutionise the league!” shouted Marca’s front page, while El Mundo 
Deportivo, who led on “KO, Ramos style: Madrid taste their own medicine,” 
cheered “Viva la Liga!” and Sport’s over shouted: “League on fire!” Inside, 
they went for the old favourite: “Hay Liga!”. There is a league.


 There is. And there might even be three teams in it. Barcelona are just two 
points behind Madrid this morning. Sevilla, meanwhile, are just one. 
“Candidates”, says the front of the Seville edition of AS. Asked if Sevilla 
were contenders Zidane said: “Of course.” Asked why, he replied: “You’ve seen 
them.” Sergio Ramos added: “They’re candidates, but let’s see which teams hold 
on when it gets tough.” Sevilla’s president Pepe Castro insisted: “The league 
is for other teams with bigger budgets but we’ll try everything.” Vitolo said: 
“It’ll be hard with Barcelona and Madrid there, but this team has soul. The 
longer we’re around getting in the way, the better.”

Luis Suárez and Lionel Messi on target as Barcelona thrash Las Palmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/barcelona-las-palmas-la-liga-match-report>
On Sunday night, they got in the way, alright. At the fourth attempt, the 
third in 10 days, Sevilla did what 30 others could not: beat Madrid. And while 
they needed some help from Ramos, while everything changed in five minutes, it 
was not solely chance. Asked about the performance against Madrid in the 3-3 
draw in midweek, after which Zidane had admitted that Sevilla “deserved more,” 
Sampaoli rightly insisted: “it’s not fight … it’s play.” On Sunday night, he 
insisted – again, with some justification – that it hadn’t been one game, it 
had been more. Across the three matches, he said, Madrid had been the better 
side for only 40 minutes. Against Barcelona, Sevilla had eventually been undone 
by Leo Messi, but they had been impressive too. So, why not embrace their 
candidacy, as Sampaoli has done before? If only because the ambition may serve 
them well.


 Sevilla’s opponents are powerful ones and there are flaws still. It’s hard to 
avoid the sense that they do not take enough chances and do not make enough 
either – it’s not only, or not even, the finishing that occasionally lets them 
down; it’s the final pass or as often the penultimate pass – but they’re great 
to watch, they’re scoring more goals than they have in a decade and this is the 
best start in their history. They’ve never reached the halfway stage of the 
season, when everyone has played everyone once, with so many points: they are 
on 39 when the previous best was 38 – and they still have a week to take that 
to 42. All with a new manager bringing an entirely new identity – one that has 
made Spanish football a better place – and trying to build a team with 11 
players arriving in the summer and 13 leaving.

“Did you expect to be so well placed, so soon?” Sampaoli was asked. “No,” he 
said. “Never.”


Talking points

• “Winning is all that matters,” Diego Simeone said, after a largely tedious 
1-0 win over Betis at the weekend. “And if you don’t believe me, look at the 
Ballon d’Or.”

• Do not adjust your sets. Paco Alcácer, André Gomes and Aleix Vidal really 
did do good things at the weekend. And before you say that’s cruel, go tell 
that to Luis Enrique, who was busy laughing his head off down on the bench when 
Vidal scored in 5-0 win over Las Palmas on Saturday. You could tell they were 
laughing because AS helpfully put circles round their faces. You might have 
missed it otherwise. Maybe Barcelona have strength in depth, after all.

• Mr Wolf is cleaning up again. Voro, told that he will be staying to the end 
of the season and given an actual manager’s contract for the first time in his 
fifth spell as Valencia manager, did what he tends to do and won. The match day 
delegate and eternal caretaker has the best percentage record of any manager in 
the club’s history. This weekend, they beat Espanyol 2-1 – their first win in 
three months. He’s already better than the man he follows into the job (and the 
preceded of course). Under him, they have picked up 10 of a possible 15 points. 
Under Prandelli, they got six of 24.

• Oh, and Prandelli left, in part, because Simone Zaza wasn’t coming. This 
weekend, Zaza missed his flight, but he has come.

• Darwin Machís: four clear chances, none taken, and Leganés drew 0-0 with 
Athletic.

• Could this be the best league we’ve seen for years? If you do a table of the 
points earned in games among the top six this season, as@esttoper 
<https://twitter.com/esttoper?lang=en> has done, it reads: Sevilla 10, 
Villarreal 9, Madrid 8, Barcelona 7, Real Sociedad 4, Atlético 1. At the top, 
anyway. At the bottom, nothing much is happening. If it was first versus second 
in Seville, it was bottom versus second bottom in Granada. It finished 1-1 
which really doesn’t help either of them. Sporting, meanwhile, lost 3-2, with 
manager Abelardo whistled during the game. They have been in the relegation 
zone for some time and look set to be there for some time to come … quite 
probably all the way to the end. Valencia’s win leaves them even more adrift 
this week. Sporting are four points from survival.

• BOOM! Jack Harper is back in his home town, and scoring too. Scoring two, in 
fact.

• He’s fast. He’s lovely too. Eskerrik asko.

Results: Leganés 0–0 Athletic, Barcelona 5–0 Las Palmas, Atlético 1–0 Betis, 
Deportivo 0–0 Villarreal, Valencia 2–1 Espanyol, Celta 1–0 Alavés, Sporting 2–3 
Eibar, Granada 1–1 Osasuna, Sevilla 2–1 Madrid.

Monday: Málaga-Real Sociedad.
 