
She made her name with raw and unfettered performances in films such as 
Breaking the Waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/21/breaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier>
 andHilary and Jackie, but at the age of 50 Emily Watson admits that she 
thought those days were behind her. Then she was offered the leading role in 
the BBC’s eagerly awaited adaptation of Louise Doughty’s acclaimed thriller,
Apple Tree Yard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/16/apple-tree-yard-doughty-review>, 
playing a middle-aged woman who begins an unlikely and increasingly dangerous 
affair.

Louise Doughty: ‘I don’t think I write thrillers – but other people seem to’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/22/louise-doughty-thrillers-apple-tree-yard-black-water>
“I guess when I first read it I thought ‘really?’” Watson says, laughing. “I 
mean I’ve been described in the press before as a character actor who gets 
laid, which I think is a great description, but as the years go by you get laid 
less and less on screen and then you sort of stop, so I definitely felt that, 
like that Amy Schumer sketch, I’d had my last fuckable day – and then suddenly 
here I am. It was pretty cool although I did have to kind of swallow a few 
times when I read the script.”

The role of Yvonne Carmichael, a highly successful scientist and apparently 
happily married mother of two whose one reckless decision sends her life 
spiralling out of control, came as a pleasant surprise. “It was kind of great 
because these days when I go and do a movie the team is being run by a 
22-year-old and I’m playing the mum,” she says. “And then you go and do TV and 
you’re running the show and the 22-year-old is in for a couple of days, which I 
won’t lie was a nice thing.”

It helped, she adds, that she and Ben Chaplin, who plays Yvonne’s risk-taking 
new lover, Mark Costley, had known each other for a long time. “As a younger 
actor I had a lot of experiences of those sort of sex scenes where everybody 
leaves and you’re just thinking ‘hurry up and say cut’ but we felt: let’s not 
do this, let’s actually talk through the beats of what would happen and how 
this would play out. I’m quite proud of that and how it turned out – although 
you do have to know someone quite well to do it.”

Nor was Watson the only one thrilled by the drama’s willingness to tackle 
middle-aged sexuality with a clear eye. “I get offered a lot of relationship 
dramas but it’s very rare to find something that’s so central to the age you 
are and the experiences you’re having,” says the director, Jessica Hobbs.

“The appeal with Apple Tree Yard wasn’t just that it was a story about a woman 
but that it’s a story about a woman of a certain age and I loved that because 
your sexuality doesn’t die with your age. You don’t have to apologise for it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Femily-watson-apple-tree-yard-middle-aged-women-infidelity-sexuality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7d7ba5d98b27cd7928ccf41718019b57bd49009%2F0_157_4387_2632%2F4387.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%20and%20the%20middle-aged%20woman%20%E2%80%A6%20a%20groundbreaking%20BBC%20drama%20tells%20it%20like%20it%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Femily-watson-apple-tree-yard-middle-aged-women-infidelity-sexuality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%20and%20the%20middle-aged%20woman%20%E2%80%A6%20a%20groundbreaking%20BBC%20drama%20tells%20it%20like%20it%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Femily-watson-apple-tree-yard-middle-aged-women-infidelity-sexuality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7d7ba5d98b27cd7928ccf41718019b57bd49009%2F0_157_4387_2632%2F4387.jpg>
 Watson with Ben Chaplin, who plays Mark Costley in Apple Tree Yard. 
Photograph: Nick Briggs/BBC/Kudos 
Doughty, the author, agrees, admitting that her biggest fear was that the 
programme-makers would “cast young” because “not only would the plot not work 
if she had young children but it’s also important that they’re both 
middle-aged. They’ve been around the block and they’re both a bit rumpled. One 
of the most important lines in the book, which I was so glad Amanda kept, was 
when Yvonne says to Costley, ‘Oh well, you didn’t sign up for this’ and he 
replies, ‘I signed up for you’. Because until then it has been kind of a sexual 
folly but there is also a genuine love story and a real tenderness there.”

That tenderness is partially driven by the fact that behind the scenes, 
producer Chris Carey apart,Apple Tree Yard is an almost entirely female affair: 
in addition to Hobbs, the screenplay was written by Amanda Coe and Manda Levin 
and Lucy Richer are executive producers.

“It sort of speaks to the nature of the project that when I walked in and met 
Jess, she said to me ‘I’m four days older than you’ and there was immediately 
this sense of being women in the same place in life and working in a tough 
industry and just having a kind of kinship before we even started,” says 
Watson. “Throughout this piece there’s been a sense of doing something with a 
kind of solidarity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Femily-watson-apple-tree-yard-middle-aged-women-infidelity-sexuality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7c0a1cdd1a0d297d184ce16cf398f0ccadf07ed%2F0_160_3248_1949%2F3248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%20and%20the%20middle-aged%20woman%20%E2%80%A6%20a%20groundbreaking%20BBC%20drama%20tells%20it%20like%20it%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Femily-watson-apple-tree-yard-middle-aged-women-infidelity-sexuality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%20and%20the%20middle-aged%20woman%20%E2%80%A6%20a%20groundbreaking%20BBC%20drama%20tells%20it%20like%20it%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Femily-watson-apple-tree-yard-middle-aged-women-infidelity-sexuality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7c0a1cdd1a0d297d184ce16cf398f0ccadf07ed%2F0_160_3248_1949%2F3248.jpg>
 Watson with Christian Bale in 1997 film Metroland. Photograph: 
Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
There is also the feeling that Yvonne’s desire for escape resonates with 
middle-aged women in particular, says Doughty. “We’re just really tired and our 
competence has to take so many forms,” she says. “We’re partners, mothers, 
looking after elderly relatives, holding down a career. It’s exhausting and 
[therefore] it’s tempting when someone comes along and says here’s a box of 
chocolates, put your feet up and let me massage your toes. It’s not just that 
Yvonne falls in love with Costley, it’s that she falls out of love with herself 
and with the careful, competent persona she’s created. The trouble is that 
society doesn’t really let women take a holiday from themselves and the price 
you pay can actually be enormous if you get caught.”

The way that price is paid is intended as a very clear contrast to the likes of
True Detective <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective>, The 
Fall <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-fall> and Gone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/05/gone-girl-review-two-different-readings-modern-marriage>
, with their tendency to fetishise their female characters, presenting them as 
victims of their own desires and punishing them for stepping outside accepted 
lines. “When we started to develop the show, the first series ofThe Fall was 
very present in our minds,” admits Levin, the head of development for Kudos, 
the production company behind the adaptation. “We wanted to put out something 
that looked at women of that age but wasn’t incredibly objectified and that 
tackled the way that female confidence can sometimes be seen as an invitation 
when it’s just simple happiness – that idea that just walking down the street 
feeling good about yourself can actually be seen that way.”

Coe agrees. “One of the most appealing things for me about this drama is that 
it’s as messy as human life,” she says. “Yvonne’s marriage isn’t simple, her 
affair isn’t simple. It’s all beautifully complex just as life is because 
people do make complicated decisions and choices and that’s what’s really 
interesting.”

As for Watson, she remains delighted by the way the script celebrates 
middle-aged womanhood in all its imperfections. “Another real fist pump moment 
for me was when I read the line ‘jelly baby, I want to fuck’. “It was like 
yesss, old fat women are really attractive.”

Apple Tree Yard starts on BBC1 on 22 January at 9pm. Louise Doughty’s latest 
novel, Black Water, will be published in paperback in March.
 