



The traditional 25-year mortgage could be on the way out, with growing numbers 
of first-time buyers opting for deals lasting 30 or 35 years – suggesting that 
many will still be burdened with home loan debt in their 60s and 70s.

The Halifax said that in 2016, about 28% of all first-time buyers with a 
mortgage opted for a 30- to 35-year term – up sharply from 11% in 2006.


Meanwhile, the average price first-time buyers are paying hit a new high last 
year, passing the £200,000 mark for the UK as a whole, and rising above 
£400,000 in London.


With high house prices, student debts and a rise in the age at which couples 
have children, many people are tending to buy a home later and opt for a longer 
repayment term. According to the Halifax, the average age of a first-time buyer 
is now 30, though this disguises regional variations. The average figure for 
London is 32, but in certain boroughs, such as Barnet and Ealing, and locations 
such as Slough in Berkshire, it is 34.


Stretching the term of the loan reduces monthly payments, which can seem 
attractive to those with tight finances. The Halifax offers mortgage terms of 
up to 40 years and said that with a repayment mortgage, the longer the term, 
the lower the monthly payment.


However, it warns potential borrowers: “It will take you longer to pay off the 
loan, so you will pay more interest. This means it will cost you more over the 
life of your mortgage.”


This trend means that mortgages that last into retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/16/mortgage-new-offer-age-95> are 
becoming more common. Traditionally, many lenders would only grant a mortgage 
up to an individual’s planned retirement date.


In its report, the Halifax said that as the cost of a typical first home has 
risen, there has been a growing trend towards mortgage terms longer than the 
traditional 25 years.


In 2006, almost two-thirds (64%) of first-time buyers opted for a term of 
between five and 25 years, while the remaining 36% were over 25 years. Ten 
years on, the picture is dramatically different: 60% of first-time buyer 
mortgages involve a term of at least 25 years.


In 2016, the average price paid by someone who had never owned a property 
before was £205,170 – the highest on record. At the height of the housing 
downturn in 2009, the figure stood at £135,254.


In London, first-time buyers have seen the average price rise by 81% since 
2009 to reach £402,692 – again, the highest on record.

 