
It is said that the average person consumes 144 pints of cow’s milk 
<http://www.bottle2bottle.com/ff-milk.asp> a year, but 40% of that is poured on 
to cereal. The definition of what an average person is seems to include 60% who 
are children. But what was once touted as the one-stop supplier of most 
nutrients is going out of fashion –Americans drink 37% less milk than they did 
in the 1970s, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/06/20/the-mysterious-case-of-americas-plummeting-milk-consumption/>
 and in the UK dairyconsumption overall has fallen by a third in the past 20 
years 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/food-and-drink/should-we-be-drinking-milk-arguments-for-and-against-dairy-10192238.html>
.

Milk is increasingly getting a bad press. What gluten intolerance did for 
bread, lactose intolerance is doing to milk.A recent blog suggested 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2013/06/28/us_milk_consumption_falling.html>
: “Maybe people are drinking less milk because it is poisonous to many of us.”

The solution

Lactose is the sugar found in milk and dairy products and it needs the enzyme 
lactase to break it down. Without enough lactase, the lactose is broken down by 
bacteria in the small bowel, causing bloating, flatulence, stomach cramps, 
diarrhoea and nausea. Globally, around 70% of us don’t continue producing 
lactase after we have finished breast or formula feeding. Genetically, babies 
need milk – adults not so much. But northern Europeans, who thousands of years 
ago got into cattle farming, have adapted to cow’s milk and have a genetic 
mutation so that only between 2 and 15% have a degree of lactase deficiency. 
This rises to 23% in central Europeans and 95% in Asian populations.

So is lactase deficiency the normal state? Not really – it made sense to drink 
milk at one time, so we adapted to do so. And cow’s milk is nutritious – it 
contains calcium, vitamins A and D and riboflavin, as well as protein and isn’t 
heavy on calories. Dr Miranda Lomer, senior consultant dietitian in 
gastroenterology at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, says our bodies 
may find the calcium in cow’s milk easier to extract than from the supplements 
in almond and coconut milks (which are generally less nutritious). Lomer also 
points out that lactase deficiency does not equal intolerance and even people 
withlactase intolerance <http://www.aafp.org/afp/2002/0501/p1845.html> can 
still usually drink milk in tea (around 50ml) or on cereal – between 250 to 
375ml a day.

You can see your GP for a lactose breath test, but Lomer suggests drinking a 
large glass of milk. If you get bloating, gurgling and diarrhoea within the 
next 24 hours, you should consider yourself intolerant. But you may still be 
able to have milk in cereal and tea. People may have ethical issues about 
exploiting cows for their milk, but it isn’t true to say we aren’t meant to 
drink it – because in northern Europe, we are genetically modified to do so.
 