
The future of the British Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> remains in doubt despite 
suggestions from Formula One’s chief executive, Bernie Ecclestone, that two 
circuits had been in contact regarding holding the race.

Silverstone’s owners, the British Racing Drivers’ Club (BRDC), were revealed 
on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/future-f1-british-grand-prix-silverstone-in-doubt-hosting-costs>
 to be considering dropping the meeting after 2019 due to the cost. However 
alternatives are thin on the ground and several contenders have already ruled 
themselves out.

Future of F1 British Grand Prix at Silverstone in doubt over hosting costs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/future-f1-british-grand-prix-silverstone-in-doubt-hosting-costs>
The chairman of the BRDC, John Grant, told members of the “potentially ruinous 
risk” of hosting the race, saying that they have the option to leave their 
contract, which runs until 2026, in three years. Ecclestone responded by 
confirming there was a break clause but that he was keen to maintain the 
meeting and had been contacted by other tracks.Silverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> is the only circuit in the UK 
with the necessary grade one classification to host F1 and the difficulties for 
alternative venues are both technical and financial.

Three other British circuits currently have grade two status and would have to 
undergo considerable development. Donington Park, which won the right to host 
the grand prix in 2008 but had to pull out after it was unable to meet the 
£135m cost of redevelopment, has had no contact with Ecclestone and has no 
interest in holding the race. They confirmed to the Guardian: “The board has 
consistently made it clear that we have no intention of bidding for the British 
Grand Prix.”

The second circuit with grade two status, Rockingham Speedway, was equally 
unequivocal, with Peter Hardman, the chief executive, saying they had not 
approachedFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> Management 
(FOM) and have no intention of doing so.

The third, Brands Hatch, which co-hosted the race with Silverstone between 
1963 and 1986, is part of the Motorsport Vision (MSV) group owned by the 
Renault driver Jolyon Palmer’s father, Jonathan, who has successfully developed 
it as a business. MSV declined to comment on any future plans nor whether they 
had been in touch with Ecclestone but any bid would still require a huge 
undertaking. Proposals to reprofile the circuit for F1 in the 90s fell through 
as did rebuilding when they won the right to host the race in 2002. These 
improvements would still have to be implemented, while the paddock facilities 
as they stand are extremely unlikely to meet the demands of modern F1.

Any track would still also need to pay the race fee, estimated to be £17m this 
year, into which FOM builds an escalator clause that sees it increase during 
the contract, a cost which despite attendances of over 130,000 for the past two 
years, has resulted in Silverstone considering pulling out.

The other touted option, the Circuit of Wales, is a project that has been in 
torturous gestation since 2011 and which still has yet to be built. It has the 
potential to reach Grade 1 standard but it would depend on the project moving 
forward with considerable alacrity, unlikely after the Welsh government refused 
to underwrite the project last year, although they remain in discussion with 
organisers and even given the partnership with the Extreme Sports Company the 
track announced on Friday.

The circuit declined to comment on whether they had been in discussion with 
Ecclestone, suggesting it might be one of the candidates he suggested.

However, the threat from Silverstone may yet prove to be the opening salvo in 
a bid to renegotiate their contract since Liberty Media’s takeover of the sport 
was accompanied by a commitment to ensuring classic venues remain on the 
calendar and reducing costs.

The former BRDC president Damon Hill has joined Jackie Stewart in calling for 
government assistance. “This is a much-loved national event but, for whatever 
reason, it has always been very difficult to get additional funding from 
government,” said the 1996 world champion. “Now is the time to look at the 
British Grand Prix in the context of what is happening elsewhere and realise 
that it is an extremely good shop window for waving our banner and pointing to 
our brilliance in this field.”
 