
You have to talk to Simon Rattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/simon-rattle> for quite a time to be 
confident that his apparent modesty and self-denigration is completely genuine. 
Modesty, somehow, is the last quality one looks for in a young man who carries 
the high approval, and the still higher hopes, of a growing number of 
discriminating musicians, and who on Sunday – less than a month after his 
twenty-first birthday – conducts his first Festival Hall concert with a major 
London orchestra, taking the New Philharmonia through a programme of Berlioz, 
Mozart, and Shostakovich.

If success hasn’t spoiled Rattle, it has surprised and slightly bewildered 
him; half of him remains the boisterous student while the other half has had to 
age fast and painfully. At one point he refers to “my friends at school, in the 
real world.” He admits that the hardest thing has been the changeover from 
being a student to being a professional: “ It’s the loneliness. . . one’s a 
nomad.” When we meet he is lumbered with about three armfuls of scores which 
he’s wondering how to get back to the flat in Ealing where he has borrowed a 
temporary bed.

Rattle was a precocious and versatile musician as a boy in his native 
Liverpool. At eight he was playing in a concert “dressed as a bluecoat boy in a 
pair of trousers that went about six inches below my shoe-level.” At 13 Fritz 
Spiegl gave him his first professional job, playing timpani in Handel’s 
Fireworks Music: at this stage he was already building a reputation as 
percussionist and pianist. The following year, though, he decided that what he 
really had to do was conduct.

He was helped in this particular intent by what he calls “my lifelong 
predilection for forming orchestras, groups, getting people to play, preferably 
by blackmail.” This came in handy, too, when at the age of 16 he went to the 
Royal Academy of Music. “I went there as a pianist and a percussionist, trying 
to make it as clear as possible that I wanted to carve. You’re not supposed to 
carve until your second year, but one has to make opportunities. By the time I 
got out I had conducted a lot of operas, and even more bits of operas.” He had 
also given performances, still talked about, of two of Mahler’s biggest 
symphonies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fsimon-rattle-at-21-archive-interview-my-worst-and-best-qualities-are-rashness-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F622a057b99afc9b8b8751e940119d7d77dfcf9f3%2F105_884_3062_2812%2F3062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Rattle%20at%2021%20-%20archive%20interview%3A%20'My%20worst%20and%20best%20qualities%20are%20rashness'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fsimon-rattle-at-21-archive-interview-my-worst-and-best-qualities-are-rashness-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Rattle%20at%2021%20-%20archive%20interview%3A%20%27My%20worst%20and%20best%20qualities%20are%20rashness%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fsimon-rattle-at-21-archive-interview-my-worst-and-best-qualities-are-rashness-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F622a057b99afc9b8b8751e940119d7d77dfcf9f3%2F105_884_3062_2812%2F3062.jpg>
 Simon Rattle, February 1976. Photograph: Peter Johns for the Guardian 
In the year before going to the Academy he had played in the National Youth 
Orchestra (“I didn’t want to join until then – I wanted something with a more 
adventurous social life”), which gave him the chance to meet and work with 
Pierre Boulez. Not often, I imagine, would Boulez be prepared to enter into 
lengthy discussion of Le Marteau sans Maître with a 15-year-old, but his 
assessment here proved precise as ever.

“Boulez really was a ‘formative experience’,” says Rattle, responding in 
spirit to the cliche-question. “I then went through a terrible Boulez patch, 
trying to conduct like him.” He also talks, perhaps with even greater 
enthusiasm, of John Carewe, a conductor whose thorny intellect has probably 
prevented wider acceptance: “I go to him with increasing respect. He’s saved me 
five years of professional experience.” And yet, swinging to the farthest 
possible extreme: “For me the greatest musical influence among all the 
conductors is Furtwängler, and the only conductor who carries on his school 
today is Giulini. Spontaneity is the great thing. One’s admiration for Boulez 
is something else altogether – admiration rather than love, which as Barbara 
Cartland will tell you is very different.”

In 1974, when he was 19 and already a sort of part-time staff conductor at the 
Academy, he went in for the John Player InternationalConducting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/conducting> Competition. The opposition was 
numerous and gifted, all of it older and more experienced. Rattle won, 
sensationally. “People do plan their lives, you know, and I had my life well 
planned, I had the money to do a fourth year at the Academy. I just went into 
the competition for fun, for the experience of conducting a professional 
orchestra. I didn’t think I had a chance, and I almost didn’t want to win 
anyway. I was surprised rather than elated: I had to grow up all of a sudden.”

The competition established him, providing a contract with the Bournemouth 
Symphony Orchestra as a working base. Since then he has been busy, inheriting 
the Hockney-designed Glyndebourne Rake’s Progress from Bernard Haitink, 
directing the English Chamber Orchestra in Spain, conducting the London schools 
Symphony Orchestra in Mahler and Ligeti in an outstandingly successful Festival 
Hall debut, and much else. Orchestras generally have taken to him, responding 
to the sharply perceptive musicianship, the sheer vivacity, and respecting him 
for respecting their greater age and experience.

With one orchestra, he says, it took a long time to work out a viable 
relationship. And one distinguished brass player, in the north of England, 
greeted him with a little baby’s rattle – but the same player, the previous 
week, had thrown birdseed at the pianist in a work by Messiaen, so maybe it 
wasn’t really personal. He is even in the position of refusing invitations. He 
has recently turned down the chance to conduct Tchaikovsky (“works I’ll never 
be at home with”) and also certain pieces of Brahms and Mozart, which he simply 
doesn’t feel up to yet. In the case of the classical masterpieces he says he 
would prefer a run through with amateurs – “then I can sit down and learn the 
works properly.”

“My worst and best qualities are rashness: the good part of it is due to 
youth, which is of course why I’m not a great conductor.” He doesn’t add, or 
even imply, the word “yet,” but it seems to hang in the air. “But now is the 
time to go slow rather than to rush ahead and capitalise on what is, quite 
honestly, only the same sort of reaction that Shirley Temple produced. It’ll be 
all right providing I’m given time to study. I’ve got time on my side, but I 
mustn’t misuse it.

“At the moment when I approach Mozart, for instance, I feel I’m on foreign 
territory. I adore Mozart, but I find it very difficult. I’ve done all the 
worst performances of Mozart’s Fortieth Symphony – including a dreadful one 
with the ECO in Spain, and they played so well, bless them.” Knocking still 
further, he says: “There is very little interest in a conductor under 50” 
(demonstrably, and happily, untrue). Yet he does fight against letting the age 
thing obsess him. Is he worried about breaking out of the whizzkid image? “I 
see that being a problem for a man of 40...”

Nor is there any problem in his mind about his musical likes and dislikes; 
here indeed is the confidence of youth. “Mahler and all the related composers – 
the most obvious are Berg and Maxwell Davies – and also in this century, Ravel 
and Stravinsky; in the nineteenth century, Dvorak and Berlioz; in the previous 
century, Haydn.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fsimon-rattle-at-21-archive-interview-my-worst-and-best-qualities-are-rashness-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ff417ac5b24f036617476bf51fb2d50e910ca0%2F0_0_2191_881%2F2191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Rattle%20at%2021%20-%20archive%20interview%3A%20'My%20worst%20and%20best%20qualities%20are%20rashness'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fsimon-rattle-at-21-archive-interview-my-worst-and-best-qualities-are-rashness-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Rattle%20at%2021%20-%20archive%20interview%3A%20%27My%20worst%20and%20best%20qualities%20are%20rashness%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fsimon-rattle-at-21-archive-interview-my-worst-and-best-qualities-are-rashness-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ff417ac5b24f036617476bf51fb2d50e910ca0%2F0_0_2191_881%2F2191.jpg>
 The Guardian, 13 February 1976. 
He wants to conduct a lot of other music besides: those massive full scores he 
was dragging around were of Gershwin’s Porgy and Bess, of which he is shortly 
giving a rare concert performance. Plans and hopes are numerous: he has ideas 
of making music-theatre a much more complete experience than usual. It seems a 
fair bet that in the course of time he will become the youngest conductor ever 
to do a Sunday’s NPO concert is, be agrees, “exciting; terrifying, and yes, 
just a step along the road.” As he says it he is, once again, on the outside 
looking in slight bewilderment at the phenomenon called Simon Rattle.
 