
At first glance, Wong Kuan Ying looks like a typical Singaporean boss, with 
her smart, full-length trousers and impeccable posture, even at the end of a 
nine-hour shift. Her colleagues in Singapore’s West Coast Market Square food 
court are dressed more casually, in shorts and T-shirts. Some of them look past 
the working age: you avert your eyes from their tired knees; they avert their 
eyes when you thank them.

Kuan Ying tells me she is 72 but she doesn’t look it. Each day when she gets 
home, however, she has to unscrew her right leg from below the knee. Acute 
diabetes has left her missing the lower part of one leg, and all the toes from 
her other foot.

Some days, she says, the prosthesis feels like a hard, heavy stone biting into 
the soft wrinkled folds of her stump. Even on the days it fits well, it is a 
relief to take it off and let her skin breathe. “I am much better now,” she 
says. “In the early days, I would hold this stump and cry.”

Kuan Ying’s job could have easily have gone to a younger, stronger person – or 
a foreign worker willing to work for less. But the Singaporean government is 
actively pushing its elderly to continue working.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4f2bd02d83f42eba2758653616629a4397cda2%2F1906_0_3212_4016%2F3212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singapore's%20'silver%20tsunami'%3A%20how%20the%20city-state%20depends%20on%20its%20elderly%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singapore%27s%20%27silver%20tsunami%27%3A%20how%20the%20city-state%20depends%20on%20its%20elderly%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4f2bd02d83f42eba2758653616629a4397cda2%2F1906_0_3212_4016%2F3212.jpg>
 Kuan Ying’s prosthetic leg is a result of her acute diabetes. Photograph: Toh 
Ting Wei 
In 2012, it introduced the “policy of re-employment” – to encourage citizens 
to continue working beyond the official retirement age of 62, while giving 
employers the flexibility to decide who they wished to retain, and the terms of 
their retention. The “minimum” re-employment age was set at 65 in 2012, and in 
2017 it will be raised to 67 – though people can work beyond that if both 
parties agree. The country has, meanwhile,tightened its foreign worker intake 
<http://www.todayonline.com/commentary/understanding-need-curb-foreign-labour?singlepage=true>
 to allow more residents to get jobs.

The main reason for this is what Singapore anxiously calls the “silver 
tsunami”: by 2030, one in five people in the city-state will be over 60. Added 
to this, Singaporeans have thethird-highest life expectancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/global-life-expectancy-increases-by-five-years-to-71-who>
 in the world, at 82.7 years.

At 10pm in the market the dinner crowd has gone home, and the last of the 
stores are closing up. Only men drinking beer in the open remain. It’s 
take-it-easy hour, but for Kuan Ying there is still plenty to do: clean the 
dishes, stack them away, clean the counters, count the cash. If someone asks 
for a coffee or tea, she pours it out from the long-spouted kettles with the 
flourish of a juggler.

The drinks counter is the busiest among the food stalls: in the Singapore 
heat, you always need a drink. Kuan Ying is the barista, cashier and keeper of 
the stall, and her work never ceases. Singaporeans are reported towork the 
longest hours in the world 
<http://news.asiaone.com/news/business/sporeans-work-longest-hours-world>, 
averaging 2,402 hours a year; Kuan Ying clocks up around 3,042 hours annually.

Her son William has told her not to work like this: 28 days a month, S$1,600 
(£900) in total, no overtime. She should be watching TV at home, he says. But 
she is grateful for the job; it staves off the desolation of empty afternoons, 
helps put away a little every month in case her leg gives trouble, and eases 
the financial pressure on her son. At S$2,000, his salary is slightly higher 
than hers, but he has to cover the mortgage and utility bills.

When I sought to interview older workers in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore>, most declined. A few spoke 
politely but briefly. Kuan Ying is the only one who invited me home and told me 
her story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c063e2de7fd25b55c4bc569a517466999110f03%2F0_31_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singapore's%20'silver%20tsunami'%3A%20how%20the%20city-state%20depends%20on%20its%20elderly%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singapore%27s%20%27silver%20tsunami%27%3A%20how%20the%20city-state%20depends%20on%20its%20elderly%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c063e2de7fd25b55c4bc569a517466999110f03%2F0_31_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A cobbler fixes a pair of shoes. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Her diabetes struck suddenly. Initially, she went to see the doctor about 
recurrent pain in her feet – in her job as a cook at a university, she stood 
for several hours of the day and presumed it was simply exhaustion. She was 
rushed into surgery; a toe was removed.

It was the first of several such operations (she doesn’t keep count because it 
upsets her) and it was a shock. She stayed home for seven months. What would 
happen to the mortgage? Would she ever leave the house again?

‘Stingy nanny state’

Singapore has historically disliked the idea of welfare. The iconic former 
prime minister,Lee Kuan Yew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/22/singapore-lee-kuan-yew-dies-91>, 
dismissed it as an attitude: “welfarism” – the tendency to sponge off the 
state. “Cradle-to-grave welfarism blunted the ambition of many budding 
entrepreneurs,” he said.

The country has tended to believe instead in the principle of individual 
responsibility, with the occasional small helping hand. The Economist memorably 
christened it the “stingy nanny state <http://www.economist.com/node/15524092>”.


The stingy nanny has softened a bit, however. “In recent years, many of our 
policies have certainly become more inclusive, compassionate and aimed at 
helping the poor get a better shot at life,” says Radha Basu, an award-winning 
former journalist with the Straits Times, Singapore’s largest English 
newspaper. “We now have a universal medical insurance scheme, and the social 
safety nets have been strengthened.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54716c658f1f290bf537f02331084a635639dc5c%2F0_96_2875_1725%2F2875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singapore's%20'silver%20tsunami'%3A%20how%20the%20city-state%20depends%20on%20its%20elderly%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singapore%27s%20%27silver%20tsunami%27%3A%20how%20the%20city-state%20depends%20on%20its%20elderly%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54716c658f1f290bf537f02331084a635639dc5c%2F0_96_2875_1725%2F2875.jpg>
 In 2015, 12% of Singapore’s workforce was over 60 – with a concentration of 
elderly workers in low-wage work. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
The re-employment policy and its accompanying incentives have increased the 
proportion of older citizens working: in 2006, 5.5% of the workforce was above 
the age of 60; by 2015, thishad risen 
<http://stats.mom.gov.sg/Pages/Labour-Force-In-Singapore-2015.aspx> to 12%. But 
there is a worrying concentration of elderly workers in low-wage work, such as 
the cleaning, security and sales sectors.

Singapore does not have a minimum wage; it categorises S$1,900 per month and 
below as “low-wage work”. According to statistics compiled by the Ministry of 
Manpower in 2015, 73% of cleaners and labourers were above the age of 50. Among 
plant and machine operators and assemblers, it was 66%.

As a result, it has become increasingly common to see older workers like Kuan 
Ying doing difficult physical work. These are the things tourists notice 
quickly, and sometimesmention in online forums 
<https://www.quora.com/Why-are-there-so-many-old-people-working-in-hawker-centers-in-Singapore-I-noticed-some-old-people-cleaning-tables-who-are-having-a-hard-time-walking>
. “What’s wrong with old people working?” many Singaporeans ask in return. 
After all, they earn an independent income, and they stay active.

When Kuan Ying returned to work after her toe was removed, some of her 
doughtiness returned. The money paid some bills, the loneliness was soaked up, 
sleep came swiftly again. She bought firm, strong shoes and avoided eating 
things that would exacerbate her diabetes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c5b787de2090217437556dd32648fb68a9d4bf3%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singapore's%20'silver%20tsunami'%3A%20how%20the%20city-state%20depends%20on%20its%20elderly%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singapore%27s%20%27silver%20tsunami%27%3A%20how%20the%20city-state%20depends%20on%20its%20elderly%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsingapore-silver-tsunami-city-state-elderly-workforce-ageing-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c5b787de2090217437556dd32648fb68a9d4bf3%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Many Singaporeans believe giving the elderly an independent income is the most 
dignified option. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Then, two and a half years ago, her right leg had to be amputated from just 
below the knee, leaving behind a crumpled pink stump and hollowing out a 
lifetime of savings. While she spent 40 days in hospital, she tried to remind 
herself of how far she had come: an unschooled single mother who raised her two 
children, William and Diana, on her own, looked after her dependent mother 
until her death, and bought her own house. She could get over this.

Some months ago she secured a job in the market at the foot of her housing 
complex. She would no longer have to take the bus to the mall, and the minutes 
she saved felt like a gift. She didn’t mind that she didn’t get the mandatory 
day off every week, or a printed pay slip, or that her salary was low.

Earlier this year, she received a Pioneer Generation Card, which allowed her 
to buy a new prosthesis for only S$400. The fit is better than the first one, 
she says, gentler on the stump. Without the subsidy, it would have cost her 
S$1,300 – an unaffordable sum.

The Pioneer Generation Benefits, introduced in 2015, is the PAP government’s 
most generous elderly care initiative, offering handsome health subsidies to 
all those born in 1950 and before. But many among this “pioneer generation” 
speak no English and have little formal education. As Singapore’s economy has 
evolved past manufacturing into an economy of highly skilled services, there is 
little place for them other than on the lowest rungs.

Which cities have the oldest residents?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/27/oldest-residents-elderly-ageing>
Nonetheless, every one of the half-dozen pioneers I talk to says they are 
happy to still be working and earning. As an outsider, this can be hard to 
understand: at the end of a lifetime of working, why would anybody want to 
undertake work that involves hard, physical labour at the bottom of the chain 
of command?

But many Singaporeans believe this is the reasonable culmination of an ageing 
society. Indeed, once you get past the unsettling image of frail people doing 
manual labour, they believe this is the more dignified option – keeping the 
elderly active and giving them an independent income.


“There is plenty of help available to those who need it, but nobody goes to 
you offering handouts,” says Alan John, a former deputy editor of The Straits 
Times. “People have to seek help themselves and it can be hard to navigate the 
system; to know who to ask, where to go, what forms to fill out.”


When I relay this comment to Kuan Ying, she motions urgently to our 
translator. “Tell her,” she says, “I’ve had my fill of [those forms]. I applied 
for help after my amputation – nothing. I made 10 applications to get this 
flat.”

“But,” she adds after a few moments, “I am glad they have realised there are 
poor people in Singapore now. Two years ago, they did not. You tell them, I am 
glad.”

Translation by Toh Ting Wei. Reporting for this article was supported by the 
Asia Journalism Fellowship <http://www.ajf.sg/> in Singapore, funded by Temasek 
Foundation International
 