
Sir Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> may have 
to pay £1bn to resolve the problems facing the BHS pension scheme under 
proposals tabled by MPs.

The work and pensions committee, which is chaired by Labour MP Frank Field, 
has called for the government to introduce a “nuclear deterrent” to stop 
companies or individuals trying to avoid their responsibilities to pension 
schemes.

This deterrent would be a fine from The Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator (TPR) worth three times 
the amount it believes a company or individual should contribute towards 
filling the deficit in a pension scheme. Given that the regulator is understood 
to be seeking £350m from Green for the BHS pensions scheme, this means it could 
threaten the billionaire tycoon with a charge of about £1bn.

Pensions Regulator fires BHS warning shot with £255m Coats Group deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/pensions-regulator-bhs-coats-group-legal-proceedings>
The deterrent is part of a package of measures proposed by the parliamentary 
committee to avoid anotherBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> 
scandal.

BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> collapsed into administration 
in April, leading to the loss of 11,000 jobs and leaving a £571m deficit.The 
regulator has started legal proceedings against Green and Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
, the former owners ofBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, in an 
attempt to fill the deficit. They collected millions of pounds from the 
retailer.

Field said: “It is difficult to imagine [TPR] would still be having to 
negotiate with Sir Philip Green if he had been facing a bill of £1bn, rather 
than £350m. He would have sorted the pension scheme long ago.”

As well as threatening punitive fines, the MPs said TPR must become a 
“nimbler, more proactive regulator”. They said the regulator must consider 
recovery plans for pension schemes in deficit that last more than 10 years as 
“exceptional” and that it should approve every major corporate transaction.

These powers would have allowed the regulator to block a 23-year plan drawn up 
by Green for the BHS pension scheme while he owned it in 2012, and stop the 
sale of the retailer to Chappell, a three-time bankrupt.

In addition, the committee wants pension trustees to have the power to 
negotiate a restructuring of struggling schemes that could result in better 
outcomes than entering the Pension Protection Fund, where benefits are cut by 
at least 10%. The PPF, a government-backed lifeboat scheme, is funded by a levy 
on all defined benefit pension schemes. The MPs say that good corporate 
behaviour could be rewarded in future by paying less into the PPF.

Field added: “The measures we set out in this report are intended to reduce 
the chance of another scheme going down the BHS route. We hope and expect that 
we will never again see a company like BHS be able to come up with a 23-year 
recovery plan for its pension fund, and certainly not that it would take the 
regulator two years to really begin to do anything about it.

“It is further inconceivable that Sir Philip Green’s deal to dispose of BHS 
and its giant pension deficit for £1 to a dismally unqualified man, with no 
plan for the pension schemes and no means of financing one, would have evaded 
or passed any mandatory clearance scheme.”

Aside from the BHS scandal, the pension problems facing British companies are 
stark. By the standard measure used by the PPF, 4,272 defined benefit schemes 
are in deficit and the size of the black hole is £195bn. There are 5,794 
defined benefit pension schemes in the UK.


In response to the report, a spokesperson for the Department for Work and 
Pensions said: “The majority of employers are managing their pension schemes 
responsibly but a few recent examples have raised some important questions. In 
the coming months we’ll be publishing a green paper on pension funding and as 
part of this we’ll be looking at powers of [TPR].”

Lesley Titcomb, chief executive of TPR, said: “We welcome the committee’s 
report which recognises the importance of robust and proportionate regulation 
for workplace defined benefit pension schemes and of ensuring that workplace 
pension savers and the Pension Protection Fund are well-protected. We note its 
recommendations and will consider them carefully.

“We continue to discuss options with DWP for the legislative and regulatory 
framework for workplace pensions, and how this might be improved, ahead of the 
green paper, which will consider the future of pension funding, the regulatory 
framework and TPR’s powers.”
 