
Matt Scott has earned a recall to Scotland’s squad for the Six Nations 
Championship. The Gloucester centre was omitted fromthe November Tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/scotland-georgia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 but has worked his way back into Vern Cotter’s pool after scoring 12 tries in 
18 games this season.

The uncapped Edinburgh forwards Cornell du Preez and Simon Berghan are also 
included in the 37-man squad. Du Preez was involved in the autumn while Berghan 
is included amid doubts over the fitness of his fellow Edinburgh prop WP Nel, 
who aggravated a neck injury during his side’s European Challenge Cup victory 
over Harlequins.

England’s Simon Middleton picks four uncapped women in Six Nations squad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/18/england-women-six-nations-squad-simon-middleton>
Cotter said: “WP Nel will be going for a scan later on Wednesday so we’ll get 
an idea of whether he will be available or not for the competition. There is a 
doubt over his availability following the injury he had this weekend.”

Cotter praised Scott for responding to his omission in the perfect manner. The 
coach said: “It’s not what you say, it’s what you do isn’t it? And he has been 
working on things, mostly some of the defensive work he has had to do, staying 
in systems and make better decisions.

“He has taken that on board and it shows the quality of the man that he is 
able to accept there are things he is able to work on and he has got better at 
it. I wouldn’t say it’s fully done and we are not going to tell a player that, 
we will tell him to keep working. But there have been improvements and he’s 
doing a god job.

“You can be strong and humble at the same time and he is humble, hard-working 
and his mental strength his showing. He wants to be here and he has shown his 
desire: he wants to be here. He has got some great qualities and as we know in 
this game it comes down to a couple of errors that change results.

“If there is anything we have learnt in our time together it’s the fact that 
errors are the biggest contributors in wins and losses. If we can minimise them 
then we give ourselves a better chances.”

Du Preez was preferred ahead of the 21-year-old Magnus Bradbury, who made his 
debut against Argentina in November. Cotter said: “Cornell is probably a more 
seasoned campaigner and a little bit more physical in the contact. We like what 
he does, things stop around him or they go forward very quickly around him, and 
we like that.

“Magnus has got a great talent, we just feel he hasn’t started games 
particularly well. He has finished them a lot better and he needs to bring the 
intensity at the start of games. He is still a talent.”

Duncan Taylor, John Hardie and Huw Jones have been included despite a shortage 
of playing time while the Edinburgh stand-off Duncan Weir has been named after 
a broken jaw contributed to his absence in November.

The Glasgow scrum-half Ali Price is included while his team-mate Peter Horne 
is among those unavailable because of injury.

Scotland’s opening Six Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> 
match is against Ireland at Murrayfield on 4 February.

Scotland Six Nations squad

Forwards Allan (Glasgow), Barclay (Scarlets), Berghan (Edinburgh), Brown 
(Glasgow), Dell (Edinburgh), Du Preez (Edinburgh), Fagerson (Glasgow), Ford 
(Edinburgh), Gilchrist (Edinburgh), J Gray (Glasgow), R Gray (Toulouse), Hardie 
(Edinburgh), Harley (Glasgow), McInally (Edinburgh), Nel (Edinburgh), Reid 
(Glasgow), Strauss (Glasgow), Swinson (Glasgow), Toolis (Edinburgh), Watson 
(Edinburgh), Welsh (Newcastle), Wilson (Glasgow).

Backs Bennett (Glasgow), Dunbar (Glasgow), Hogg (Glasgow), Hoyland 
(Edinburgh), Jones (Stormers), Laidlaw (Gloucester), Maitland (Saracens), Price 
(Glasgow), Pyrgos (Glasgow), Russell (Glasgow), Scott (Gloucester), Seymour 
(Glasgow), Taylor (Saracens), Visser (Harlequins), Weir (Edinburgh).
 