
Donald Trump has been called a “master media manipulator 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/business/media/trump-media-news-conference.html?_r=0&mtrref=t.co>
” by the New York Times, a “genius 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/kanye-west-trump-support-231601>” 
tactician by Kanye West and a “master wizard 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2015/10/06/dilbert_creator_predicts_master_wizard_trump_will_win_election_with_his_linguistic_kill_shots.html>
” of persuasion by the creator of Dilbert.Whether 
<https://twitter.com/i/moments/819786803221626881> or not 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/trump-master-media-manipulator-malarial-press-conference-wildlife>
 that is the case, there are certain patterns of language and action the 
president-elect uses to try to dominate the media, win political debates, and 
intimidate enemies. Here the Guardian examines some of them.



Trump only looks like a master media manipulator because he’s allowed to | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/trump-master-media-manipulator-malarial-press-conference-wildlife>
Empty spectacle

Trump has repeatedly trotted out props and friends to create the appearance 
that he has support for his claims, even though the props are often meaningless 
and the friends say little to bolster his case. At his long-awaited press 
conference last week, for instance, staff stacked manila folders next to the 
lectern at Trump Tower. The folders were stuffed with papers that Trump said 
were “some of the many documents” in which he had signed over control of his 
company to his sons. His aides, however, refused to let anyone see the papers.

During the campaign, Trump answered criticism of failed business ventures 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/washwire/2016/03/03/what-ever-happened-to-trump-shuttle-trump-steaks-trump-vodka/>
 with a similar tactic, displaying “Trump Steaks” that were actually provided by
a Florida meat company 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-03-09/when-trump-steaks-at-a-trump-event-aren-t-really-trump-steaks>
. This week, he also had a lawyer take the mic to explain how Trump would 
supposedly prevent conflicts of interest in his presidency, creating the 
appearance of ethics. Republican and Democratic ethics attorneyspilloried the 
plan 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/01/12/us/politics/ethics-experts-trumps-conflicts-of-interest.html>
, saying it would do almost nothing to forestall corruption and abuses.

Empty words

Trump sometimes says nothing while creating the appearance of a statement, 
littering sentences with inflated adjectives, muddled grammar and digressive 
clauses that derail whatever meaning his sentence started out with. Leaving 
such words open to interpretation, he canplease white supremacists 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/08/05/488802494/former-kkk-leader-david-duke-says-of-course-trump-voters-are-his-voters>
 who hear dog whistles, insist that critics “misunderstand 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/08/seven-times-trump-was-misunderstood-226846>
” him, andcontradict himself 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/04/03/donald-trumps-ever-shifting-positions-on-abortion/>
 endlessly.

Discredit everyone

From a civil rights hero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>
 to theparents of a war hero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/donald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech>
 and thecollected conclusions 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/01/13/donald-trump-has-convinced-republicans-to-doubt-the-intelligence-on-russias-hacking/>
 of the US’s intelligence leaders, Trump has yet to find a person or community 
he is unwilling to denigrate. His attacks are usually ad hominem and rarely 
have substance behind them. For instance, on Saturday he accused John Lewis, a 
man who was beaten and arrested in his peaceful protests for civil rights in 
the 1960s, of being “all talk”.

The ploy is simple: destroy the credibility of anyone or anything that might 
not mesh with his ideas. The effect is destructive for everyone: it casts doubt 
on legitimate elections (including his own), honest reporting, peaceful 
protests and the systems and civil rights that Americans rely on.

Credit conspiracy theories

Trump tries to give credibility to sources without any evidence. He has 
boosted a fictional tabloid conspiracy theory 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/trump-ted-cruz-jfk-assassination-226020> 
about Ted Cruz’s father and John F Kennedy’s assassination and retweetedfalse 
crime data 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/nov/23/donald-trump/trump-tweet-blacks-white-homicide-victims/>
. Heclaimed 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/232572505238433794?lang=en> that an 
“extremely credible source” told him Barack Obama’s “birth certificate is a 
fraud” – a lie that Trump onlyrecanted 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/17/us/politics/donald-trump-birther-obama.html>
 three months ago.

Browbeating

Last week, the president-elect of the United States indulged in shouts of 
“you’re fake news” at a CNN reporter who had not fabricated any news and was 
trying to ask a question. The president-elect’s incoming press secretary, Sean 
Spicer, thenthreatened to eject <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YDQeqL_zCpA> 
the reporter from future briefings for “rude” behavior. Crude intimidation was 
a daily tactic during the campaign, as the candidate blacklisted newspapers, 
and Trump sometimes denigrated reporters by name, resulting insteady waves of 
harassment <http://www.marieclaire.com/politics/a21997/donald-trump-katy-tur/>, 
while his supportersthreatened 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/the-press-always-got-booed-at-trump-rallies-but-now-the-aggression-is-menacing/2016/10/14/6092ea34-922d-11e6-9c52-0b10449e33c4_story.html>
 the press and sometimesattacked 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-supporter-strikes-protester-trump-decries-deplorables-comment-n647111>
 protesters.

Authoritarian regimes, such as those led by Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and 
Russia’s Vladimir Putin, have not only threatened free press and dissenters but 
used their regimes tojail 
<https://cpj.org/2015/01/imprisoned-russian-journalist-sentenced-to-new-thr.php>
 andbeat <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-35769634> them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/stop-the-press-turkey-crackdown-journalists-overdrive-since-coup>
. This week, Erdoğan praised Trump for putting the CNN reporter “in his place” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2017/01/12/amid-turkeys-media-crackdown-erdogan-praises-trump-for-putting-cnn-reporter-in-his-place/?utm_term=.fd6732c57d9d>
.

Attention hog

Whether or not Trump deliberately creates distractions to draw attention away 
from damning stories, as some journalists have alleged, newsrooms have 
struggled with how to cover the sheer volume of stories that he creates: about 
extreme, possiblyunconstitutional 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/donald-trump-muslim-registry-constitution-231527>
proposals 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/2016-presidential-debate-fact-check/2016/09/trump-is-wrong-stop-and-frisk-was-ruled-unconstitutional-228729>
; potentialconflicts of interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/us-ethics-chief-criticises-trump-transition-sons-control-businesses>
 around the world; hisboast of sexual assault 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
 and accusations of the same against him; his support fromhate groups 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/us/politics/alt-right-trump.html>; his 
rejection of longstanding allies andembrace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/30/donald-trump-russia-obama-sanctions>
 of Putin; and more.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Trump has attacked traditional news organizations at an opportune moment. 
Drained of advertising money by the internet, newsrooms lack staff and 
resources to investigate and document his actions and their reach is fractured 
by social media and tech giants that have replaced them. Regardless of Trump’s 
intentions, though, whenever he picks a fight with a celebrity, it can distract 
people from his administration’s actions.

How does Donald Trump lie? A fact checker's final guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/how-does-donald-trump-lie-fact-checker>
‘Gaslighting’

Trump, his vice-president elect, Mike Pence, and his adviser Kellyanne Conway 
all have a history of insisting that basic facts are untrue, something the 
writer Lauren Duca has called “gaslighting 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/donald-trump-is-gaslighting-america>”, after 
the 1938 play <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gas_Light>. This week Conway 
argued at length, falsely, 
<http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/11/politics/anderson-cooper-kellyanne-conway-trump-intelligence-report-russia-cnntv/>
 with a CNN anchor about what was in a CNN story, and Pence declared himself a 
lifelong supporter of an independent press, even though he once tried to use 
taxpayers’ moneyto create a state-run news organization 
<http://www.indystar.com/story/news/2015/01/26/pence-starts-state-run-news-outlet-to-compete-with-media/22370005/>
. Trump, meanwhile,claimed 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/us/politics/donald-trump-transition.html> 
that the US intelligence chief, James Clapper, had said one thing, while a 
statement issued by Clapper said nothing of the kind.


 