
A male snow monkey has been observed attempting to have sex with female sika 
deer on Japan’s Yakushima Island, in an unusual example of interspecies mating 
behaviour.

Sandpipers go the extra 8,000 miles to have as much sex as possible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/10/sandpipers-go-extra-8000-miles-have-sex>
It is only the second recorded example of sexual relations between two 
distantly related species.

Snow monkeys and sika deer generally have a symbiotic relationship, with the 
deer eating fruits dropped from the trees by the monkeys and the monkeys 
grooming the deer and occasionally riding on their backs.

The latest paper, published in the journal Primates 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10329-016-0593-4>, describes how a 
low-ranking male monkey was observed repeatedly performing sexual mounts on at 
least two different female deer. One doe was seen to bolt and run off, but 
another female did not appear to object, and licked her side after the monkey 
ejaculated.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl8HFDnM7Sdw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl8HFDnM7Sdw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl8HFDnM7Sdw&media=>
“This individual showed clearly sexual behaviour towards several female deer, 
some of which tried to escape whilst others accepted the mount,” the paper 
reports.

Marie Pelé, the lead author based at the University of Strasbourg in France, 
said: “No ambiguity is possible, it is clearly sexual behaviour.”

The only previous reported case of sexual interactions between two distantly 
related species, was that of anAntarctic fur seal observed sexually harassing 
king penguins 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/earth/story/20141117-why-seals-have-sex-with-penguins> – 
and in one instance, eating a bird after having sex with it.

'Sexual depravity' of penguins that Antarctic scientist dared not reveal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/09/sex-depravity-penguins-scott-antarctic>
“This macaque was a non-troop adult male, in other words low in hierarchy,” 
said Pelé. “He was therefore probably either peripheral or belonged to a group 
of peripheral males, as other males were observed in the vicinity of the deer.”

The monkey was also seen guarding the target of his affection and chasing away 
other male monkeys who came near.

The scientists said that “mate deprivation” was the most likely explanation 
for the unusual behaviour, after also considering the possibility that the male 
was learning to copulate or had failed to recognise that the deer was a member 
of another species.


“The most realistic hypothesis would be that of mate deprivation, which states 
that males with limited access to females are more likely to display this 
behaviour,” the researchers conclude.
 