
We all know what students are like nowadays, don’t we? Special snowflakes who 
can’t cope with the real world, who refuse to venture out of their safe spaces 
to learn anything, who are so achingly PC they won’t even let their institutions
serve sushi in the cafeteria 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandculture/article/32038/1/lena-dunha-msupports-that-sushi-is-cultural-appropriation>
. When they’re not wasting their lives on social media or fighting for a fairer 
world for all, these mewling, overprivileged babies like to spend their time 
policing their academic superiors on their curriculum choices.

The latest scandal? Step forward Soas students’ union <https://soasunion.org/>
, which has outraged basically every outlet in the rightwing press by calling, 
astonishingly enough, for such great philosophers as Kant, Plato and Descartes 
to be banned from the curriculum,just because they are white 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2017/01/08/university-students-demand-philosophers-including-plato-kant/>
.

As part of a wider campaign to “decolonise” the curriculum 
<https://www.facebook.com/DecolonisingOurMinds/>, the union has proclaimed, 
“the majority of philosophers” taught at Soas University of London should be 
from Africa or Asia, and – when the great names of European philosophy are 
taught, which is something that should only happen when absolutely necessary – 
it should be from a critical standpoint, accounting for (for instance) the 
colonial context in which Enlightenment thought arose.

Given the nature of Soas as an institution, it makes sense for the students to 
study more African and Asian thought

Read the news articles on this story and you’d be convinced that some great 
act of intellectual barbarism was about to take place. But in truth, the notion 
that anything untoward is going on here is mostly nonsense.

Allow me to explain. First, it must be noted that despite the headlines no 
one, at any point, has actually called for white philosophers to be dropped 
from the curriculum at Soas – aka the School of Oriental and African Studies. 
Even at its most extreme, all theSoas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/school-of-oriental-and-african-studies> 
students’ union demands (and note that their demand has no binding force 
whatsoever) is that European philosophers only be taught in preference to 
African and Asian ones when necessary. Adopting this principle, if it turns out 
that say, Kant, has expressed some insight that is vital for understanding some 
aspect of reality, then he should be allowed to remain in the curriculum.

This seems fair: there’s only so much thought one can study as an 
undergraduate, and students should have a right to not waste their time on any 
second-rate thinkers who happen to have snuck themselves into the western 
canon. If we’re going to teach philosophy at a university, then it seems more 
than worthwhile to critically reflect on which philosophers we’re focusing on, 
and why. Indeed, this is something that Kant himself, whose mature work is 
pitched against dogmatism in all its forms, would welcome.

Second, philosophers should also welcome the demand that European philosophy 
be studied in its appropriate social and historical context. This doesn’t just 
mean PC hand-wringing: it can be used to actively enrich our understanding of 
these texts. Consider an example such asLeviathan by Thomas Hobbes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/apr/03/religion-philosophy-hobbes-midgley>
 – one of the founding documents of western political thought. Hobbes argues 
that we need a state authority invested with absolute power – because otherwise 
society would collapse into what he calls “the state of nature”, where no one 
has any security and life is nasty, brutish and short. The state of nature is 
often called a fiction, but if you read Leviathan closely you’ll notice that 
Hobbes is actually getting it from early anthropological accounts of Native 
American civilisation, which he describes as being devoid of any understanding 
of law. This of course is deeply problematic – and it’s exactly the sort of 
point that, if we understand it in its proper context, can allow us to get a 
better, richer understanding of Hobbes (and obtain a better understanding of 
our social world in general).

Philosophy can teach children what Google can’t – and Ireland knows it | 
Charlotte Blease
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/philosophy-teach-children-schools-ireland>
Third, even if the Soas students had demanded that all white philosophers be 
banned from the curriculum, it’s still unclear to me how much would actually be 
lost. You wouldn’t know it from reading any of the other news articles on this 
topic, but Soas doesn’t actually have a philosophy department – and nor does it 
offer a BA degree in philosophy. Rather, Soas offers aBA in world philosophies 
<https://www.soas.ac.uk/religions-and-philosophies/programmes/ba-world-philosophies/>
, which is run by the department ofreligions and philosophies 
<https://www.soas.ac.uk/religions-and-philosophies/>. Given the nature of this 
course and the nature of Soas as an institution, it makes complete sense for 
the students to want to study more African and Asian thought at the expense of 
European. Of course if nearby Birkbeck decided to purge its curriculum of 
European thought, that would be an entirely different issue. But these matters 
are context-sensitive, and diversity across curricula should be welcomed.

Finally, the stereotype of students as easily “triggered” special snowflakes 
who use political correctness to police their teachers is one I simply don’t 
recognise. Most of the students I’ve encountered as a university lecturer are 
bright, engaged and want to be challenged. And to be honest, that’s something I 
recognise in the statement issued by the Soas students as well. This 
oh-so-scandalising statement reads to me like it must have been produced by 
students who are deeply invested in their course and care passionately about 
what they study. As educators we have a duty to respond to and nurture this 
passion.

• This article was amended on 12 January 2017 to clarify a reference to Soas 
student’s union and that Soas stands for School of Oriental and African Studies.
 