
A trinity comprised of a self-help guru, a technology magnate and a group of 
San Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> nuns was 
victorious Thursday over a group of residents upset over the prospect of more 
homeless people in their neighborhood.

At a hearing of the city planning commission, an order called Fraternite Notre 
Dame received approval to open a new soup kitchen in the Mission district, 
despite strenuous objections from some locals. The nunslearned last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/san-francisco-fraternite-notre-dame-soup-kitchen>
 that they would have to leave their current location after being hit with a 
rent hike and received help from an unanticipated source.


Soup kitchen puts San Francisco nuns on front lines of city's housing crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/san-francisco-fraternite-notre-dame-soup-kitchen>
“They channel nothing but love,” said Tony Robbins, a motivational speaker and 
the author of Unlimited Power and other personal-development books. Onstage 
Robbins has a dominant persona, but in the presence of the nuns, it was 
replaced by an air of deference and humility.

He read of the sisters’ plight in the news and donated more than $1m to help 
them relocate. “They are – when I say they’re persistent, they’re unstoppable.”

Others have fallen under their spell. Marc Benioff, CEO of the software giant 
Salesforce, said that Robbins, whom he referred to as “our brother”, had 
“guided us here to support them and help them”. He and his wife, Lynne, have 
also contributed financially, though a spokesperson did not say how much.

Earlier in the day, Robbins and Benioff paid a visit to the sisters’ current, 
and imperiled, soup kitchen in the rough Tenderloin area. Outside, there were 
three black SUVs and a man wearing an earpiece; inside, a homeless visitor 
named Ulrich Lars was nonplussed. “I have never met him before,” he said of 
Robbins. “Who is he exactly?”

The odd grouping of religious devotees and business tycoons stood together by 
tables serving the homeless; Robbins (6ft 7in) and Benioff (6ft 5in) towered 
over the more petite sisters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftony-robbins-marc-benioff-homeless-soup-kitchen-san-francisco-nuns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b726975cc38d41709c229ab9631983606427553%2F20_59_2112_1268%2F2112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Soup%20kitchen%20run%20by%20nuns%20and%20funded%20by%20self-help%20guru%20approved%20in%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftony-robbins-marc-benioff-homeless-soup-kitchen-san-francisco-nuns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Soup%20kitchen%20run%20by%20nuns%20and%20funded%20by%20self-help%20guru%20approved%20in%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftony-robbins-marc-benioff-homeless-soup-kitchen-san-francisco-nuns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b726975cc38d41709c229ab9631983606427553%2F20_59_2112_1268%2F2112.jpg>
 Tony Robbins and Marc Benioff paid a visit to the sisters’ current, and 
imperiled, soup kitchen. Photograph: Alastair Gee for the Guardian 
Robbins compared the sisters to Mother Teresa, whom he said he had once met in 
Tijuana in the company of actor Martin Sheen. He said he was receptive to their 
plight in part because he had become homeless at the age of 17, after a family 
dispute in which his mother brandished a knife at him.


“I stayed on the side of the mountains and I stayed in a laundry room of a 
friend, and then I eventually made enough money to buy a little 1968 Volkswagen 
bug, and I slept in that for about two-and-a-half, three weeks, till I made 
enough money to get an apartment.”

A rising homeless population in the west has resulted in more shelters and 
battles over where to put them. At the hearing in a grand committee room, 
opponents of the sisters’ plan stepped up to a dais while three nuns, wearing 
habits and seated in the second row, looked on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftony-robbins-marc-benioff-homeless-soup-kitchen-san-francisco-nuns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95bb8b844e0f23781e464a407fb1743713ee0148%2F0_0_2612_1568%2F2612.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Soup%20kitchen%20run%20by%20nuns%20and%20funded%20by%20self-help%20guru%20approved%20in%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftony-robbins-marc-benioff-homeless-soup-kitchen-san-francisco-nuns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Soup%20kitchen%20run%20by%20nuns%20and%20funded%20by%20self-help%20guru%20approved%20in%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftony-robbins-marc-benioff-homeless-soup-kitchen-san-francisco-nuns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95bb8b844e0f23781e464a407fb1743713ee0148%2F0_0_2612_1568%2F2612.jpg>
 Tony Robbins: ‘They are – when I say they’re persistent, they’re unstoppable.’ 
Photograph: Alastair Gee for the Guardian 
“God bless you, sisters,” said local resident John Montoya. But, he added, the 
area was already home to a shelter and had become dangerous. “I can’t walk my 
four-year-old granddaughter down the street, just think about that. I have to 
watch her every move.” One local woman said she had been sexually harassed, 
while a man said he had had to clear up needles and human excrement. 

Later, in a short, fiery oration, Sister Marie Valerie read out Bible 
quotations about helping the poor. One supporter – of dozens who spoke – 
stepped out of his wheelchair, pushed it to the microphone and accused 
objectors of Nimbyism. When the board announced its unanimous decision, Sister 
Mary of the Angels, a dainty Haitian woman, let out a whoop.

After reaching out to the sisters, Robbins invited them to attend a four-day 
program titled Unleash the Power Within, adding that he thought the sisters 
were themselves powerful.

“That’s what you guys are, nothing but love,” he said to Sister Mary of the 
Angels.

She answered that she was glad they had met. “Before, no happy,” she said.
 