
Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> will restore a full 
train service from next Tuesday after industrial action by drivers was 
suspended.


The company said it would not be possible to reintroduce a full timetable 
before then because work rosters were issued beforeAslef called off three 
strikes next week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/southern-rail-strikes-suspended-as-two-sides-agree-to-tuc-talks>
 and lifted an overtime ban.


The company is also facing a 24-hour strike on Monday by members of the Rail, 
Maritime andTransport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> (RMT) union. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fsouthern-rail-to-run-full-train-service-from-tuesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9120a20b73c7c2dbb4cf1849970b25598c558c60%2F0_148_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southern%20rail%20to%20run%20full%20train%20service%20from%20Tuesday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fsouthern-rail-to-run-full-train-service-from-tuesday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southern%20rail%20to%20run%20full%20train%20service%20from%20Tuesday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fsouthern-rail-to-run-full-train-service-from-tuesday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9120a20b73c7c2dbb4cf1849970b25598c558c60%2F0_148_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 An Aslef picket line at London Bridge station. Photograph: Victoria Jones/PA 
The announcement was made before fresh talks between the two sides aimed at 
resolving a dispute over driver-only trains.


Angie Doll, Southern’s passenger services director, said: “Whilst inevitably 
there will be disruption next Monday, the good news is that due to the changes 
we have now fully rolled out, we are now able to run more services on more 
routes serving more passengers, and ultimately we will have fewer cancellations 
and delays.


“Next Monday, some 200 extra trains will be running and several routes will 
have their first service on an RMT strike day.


“The RMT should now recognise that their industrial action is wholly futile. 
They should stop the strikes, get back round the table with us and move forward 
together with us, delivering a better railway for our passengers.”


Southern said it would run more than 70% of its trains next Monday – 10% more 
than it operated on previous conductor strike days.

“This follows the completion by Southern … of its programme to put drivers in 
sole control of the operation of the train, including closing the doors, on 
nearly 80% of routes and the transfer of many conductors to the new onboard 
supervisor role focused exclusively on customer service,” said a statement.

The following routes – previously suspended on an RMT conductor strike day – 
will now operate on Monday. Southern advisedpassengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/southern-rail-credit-card-refund-season-ticket-amex>
 to check its website for the latest information before they travelled.

 * Eastbourne – Hastings. 

 * Chichester – Portsmouth and Southampton. 

 * Lewes – Haywards Heath.

 * Coastway stations (including Bognor, Littlehampton, Eastbourne, Worthing 
and Hastings) will regain a direct service to London.

 * Routes that previously finished early in the evening will run later, and 
from Tuesday Southern plans to operate the normal full timetable.
 