
Locals call Sedona, Arizona, a cathedral without walls. It’s not just the 
landscape – those red cliffs, mesas rearing up against a crisp and empty sky, 
that inspired Hollywood producers of the 1930s and 40s to shoot westerns such 
as Broken Arrow and Stagecoach in the area. Three million tourists a year come 
to this town of barely 10,000, nestled among towering rusty sandstone rock 
formations in the northern Verde valley. Many of these visitors are pilgrims, 
particularly at this time of year, headed to Arizona in search of spiritual 
renewal.
Sedona, Arizona map. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/jan/2017-01-03T15:31:20.html> 
Sedona has no major churches, no relics, no established holy sites. But what 
it does have are “vortexes” – a series of unmarked points around Sedona’s 
various cliffs that locals and visitors alike imbue with new-age significance.

Where that significance comes from – like the actual number of vortexes in 
Sedona, which varies from guide to guide – is subject to debate. Locals cite 
legends about the area’s sanctity to local Native American tribes. However, 
Sedona didn’t become America’s new age capital until the 1980s, when a US 
psychic named Page Bryant identified the vortexes after a vision. These 
vortexes were places where spiritual energy was at its highest point, where you 
could tap into the frequencies of the universe, where you could, by closing 
your eyes, start to change your life. Spiritual seekers across the country 
listened. In 1987, Sedona was host to one of the largest branches of the 
Harmonic Convergence – a new age synchronised meditation – when 5,000 pilgrims 
came to get in touch with the universe at the Bell Rock butte, believed by many 
to be a vortex.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2df6e0f7629967096ef2ba42b3784dd74f01ad66%2F0_327_5088_3052%2F5088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiritual%20Sedona%3A%20the%20Arizona%20town%20bursting%20with%20positive%20vibes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiritual%20Sedona%3A%20the%20Arizona%20town%20bursting%20with%20positive%20vibes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2df6e0f7629967096ef2ba42b3784dd74f01ad66%2F0_327_5088_3052%2F5088.jpg>
 Town and country … Sedona’s mountains and its stores. Photograph: Alamy 
Now, among the juniper trees, you can find strip-malls full of crystal shops, 
aura-reading stations and psychics. AtChocolaTree Organic Eatery 
<http://chocolatree.com/pages/location-hours>, shiva lingams – statues normally 
associated with Hindu temples – stand against the walls; next door, a 
UFO-themed diner called ET Encounter (formerly the Red Planet) serves 
Roswell-themed burgers and old Star Trek episodes play on the TV. Every other 
office along the state route running through town offers a “spiritual tour” of 
the vortexes. The national forests are full of small cairns people have left as 
spiritual offerings. These are regularly removed by forest service rangers in 
order to preserve the site’s ecological integrity.

Many of Sedona’s businesses are also geared towards wellbeing and 
purification, if not enlightenment: the town’s highest-end “hotel”,L’Auberge de 
Sedona <http://www.lauberge.com/stay/> (rooms from $270), which consists of 
luxury cottages and lodges, supplements traditional spa offerings with an 
outdoor “creekside massage”, where guests are invited to dip their feet in the 
river and squelch mud between their toes, washing off the dirt with creek water 
scented with flower petals. My own hotel, theSedona Rouge 
<http://www.sedonarouge.com/> (doubles from $150 B&B), a ranch-inspired 
boutique hotel near Coffee Pot Rock, which towers over western Sedona, offers 
guests morning poolside yoga sessions before their turmeric-tofu breakfast 
scrambles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9c7bb022882af67be743292a8ed1bf70bf27f92%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiritual%20Sedona%3A%20the%20Arizona%20town%20bursting%20with%20positive%20vibes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiritual%20Sedona%3A%20the%20Arizona%20town%20bursting%20with%20positive%20vibes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9c7bb022882af67be743292a8ed1bf70bf27f92%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 A mountain view from a bedroom at the Sedona Rouge hotel 
Near the centre of town, the McLean Meditation Institute 
<http://mcleanmeditation.com/> avoids the language of what owner Sarah McLean 
<http://mcleanmeditation.com/sarah-mclean/> calls the “woos” – those locals who 
take their magic and their crystals a bit too seriously – by offering 
mindfulness and meditation classes that, though influenced by eastern 
traditions, are geared toward the spiritual and the just-plain-stressed alike.

Sedona’s natural beauty induces, if not spirituality, then at least a certain 
awe

When I sit cross-legged in her studio, which overlooks a hiking supply store 
and several Native American-inspired art galleries, McLean identifies my 
neuroses and gives me a few maxims for meditation: focus less on the future and 
on all that work I have to do, and give myself over to awareness of the present.

It’s easy to be sceptical about Sedona. The relentless barrage of wellness and 
self-improvement-focused tourism can border on the cloying (after a 
delicately-spiced breakfast of quinoa and almond milk at ChocolaTree, I find 
myself all but begging a waitress at a nearby downmarket diner to give me the 
strongest, worst-quality filter coffee she can find). My vortex tour with Mark 
Griffon ofSedona Mystical Tours <http://sedonamysticaltours.com/tours/> ($135, 
three hours) – who starts off the morning with a sage cleansing near a 
stone-circle “medicine wheel” he’s assembled himself in his backyard – is at 
times uncomfortably intense, as one of the attendees breaks down into sobs 
during a meditation against a juniper tree called Fred.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95fe88107a4ca506fd57f51b54cdbb203f70a3fd%2F0_147_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiritual%20Sedona%3A%20the%20Arizona%20town%20bursting%20with%20positive%20vibes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiritual%20Sedona%3A%20the%20Arizona%20town%20bursting%20with%20positive%20vibes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fspiritual-sedona-arizona-vortex-wellbeing-new-age-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95fe88107a4ca506fd57f51b54cdbb203f70a3fd%2F0_147_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 Hikers at Palatki Ruins, Sedona. Photograph: Amit Basu Photography/Getty Images
But Sedona’s natural beauty – rearing rust-stained rock faces, orange-dust 
pathways around sage-scented mesas, searing blue skies – induces, if not 
spirituality, then at least a certain awe. My favourite moments there are not 
the guided meditations or the past life readings, but when I can hike, wander, 
explore on my own.

Walking through the yucca strands and mesquite branches, in the rust-and-gold 
shadow of the vortex site known as Cathedral Rock; listening to the sound of 
another traveller’s panpipes on the top of Airport Mesa; sneaking away from a 
tour to close my eyes and feel the scorching sun on my skin, sitting alone with 
a book and (mercifully strong) coffee at the Oak Creek Brewery and Grill 
hearing the creek murmur in the distance – all these provoke a sensation as 
close to mindfulness as any I’d experienced. I don’t know if I am in a 
cathedral. But there are worse ways to spend a Sunday morning.
 