
The government has confirmed state pension will rise by 2.5% in April 2017, as 
a report shows that the “triple lock” promise on payments could push up the 
cost of providing the benefit by more than a third over the next three decades.

From April, pensioners on the new flat rate pension will see their weekly 
payments increase to £159.55 from £155.65 currently, while the old state 
pension will rise to £122.30 from £119.30.

The increase is in line with earnings growth, and also the minimum payment 
promised to pensioners through the triple lock.

This promise, introduced in 2010 by George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jun/22/emergency-budget-full-speech-text>, 
says that each year pensions will rise by whichever is the highest figure out 
of inflation, earnings growth and 2.5%. The pledge is set to continue until 
2020, but in his recent autumn statement the new chancellor, Philip Hammond,
hinted that it could be scrapped after that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-autumn-statement-brill-for-builders-perturbing-for-pensioners>
.


Figures from independent research group Pensions Policy Institute show that if 
it is kept, the cost of providing a state pension will rise from 5.3% of GDP 
currently, to 7.2% by 2046. Without changes to the state pension age, which 
will mean from2028 it can only be claimed at age 67 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/28/pension-age-may-be-about-to-rise-again-says-former-minister>
, the cost would have been another 0.3% of GDP the PPI said.

Commenting on the increase to weekly payments, Tom McPhail, head of retirement 
policy at IFA firm Hargreaves Lansdown, said it was ironic that earnings growth 
had hit the 2.5% figure promised by the government, making the government’s 
promise to underpin the increase redundant.

“There is a fair bet that this time next year, it’ll be inflation hitting the 
highest number,” he said.

He added: “Pensioners can’t continue to enjoy indefinitely a ‘heads I win, 
tails you lose’ guarantee at the expense of taxpayers. A review now looking 
beyond 2020 makes sense.”

McPhail said there were reasons to be cautious in favour of those approaching 
retirement. “Final salary pay outs are about to start diminishing and some are 
arguing that existing private pension inflation proofing should be cut. 
Politicians have to strike a delicate balance but if they take too much away 
from pensioners they could end up sowing the seeds of the next pensioner income 
crisis.”

The PPI’s report, The New Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>
 Landscape, found that both automatic enrolment into pensions and the triple 
lock were set to increase retirement incomes, but increases to the state 
pension age meant over their lifetime individuals would receive less on average.


It found that changes to the system meant that on average pensioners were 
better off that they had ever been, but that those aged between 56 and 60 did 
face lower incomes in retirement than those who have already stopped work. 
Current retirees are more likely to have final salary pensions and to receive 
their state pensions for longer.

 Daniela Silcock, head of policy research at the PPI said: “Looking forward, 
both the ‘triple lock’ and automatic enrolment could significantly increase the 
level of people’s retirement incomes.

“For those nearest state pension age the triple lock has the most immediate 
effect whereas younger individuals may gain most from automatic enrolment.”
 