
This is the story of a lost medieval city you’ve probably never heard about. 
Benin City, originally known as Edo, was once the capital of a pre-colonial 
African empire located in what is now southernNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>. The Benin empire was one of the 
oldest and most highly developed states in west Africa, dating back to the 11th 
century.

The Guinness Book of Records 
<http://www.book-of-records.info/bantam.html#bantam74http://www.book-of-records.info/bantam.html#bantam74>
 (1974 edition) described the walls of Benin City and its surrounding kingdom 
as the world’s largest earthworks carried out prior to the mechanical era. 
According to estimates by theNew Scientist’s Fred Pearce 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg16322035.100-the-african-queen/>, Benin 
City’s walls were at one point “four times longer than the Great Wall of China, 
and consumed a hundred times more material than the Great Pyramid of Cheops”.

Situated on a plain, Benin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/benin> City was 
enclosed by massive walls in the south and deep ditches in the north. Beyond 
the city walls, numerous further walls were erected that separated the 
surroundings of the capital into around 500 distinct villages.

Pearce writes that these walls “extended for some 16,000 km in all, in a 
mosaic of more than 500 interconnected settlement boundaries. They covered 
6,500 sq km and were all dug by the Edo people … They took an estimated 150 
million hours of digging to construct, and are perhaps the largest single 
archaeological phenomenon on the planet”.


Barely any trace of these walls exist today.
 View along a street in the royal quarter of Benin City, 1897. Photograph: The 
British Museum/Trustees of the British Museum 
Benin City was also one of the first cities to have a semblance of street 
lighting. Huge metal lamps, many feet high, were built and placed around the 
city, especially near the king’s palace. Fuelled by palm oil, their burning 
wicks were lit at night to provide illumination for traffic to and from the 
palace.


When the Portuguese first “discovered” the city in 1485, they were stunned to 
find this vast kingdom made of hundreds of interlocked cities and villages in 
the middle of the African jungle. They called it the “Great City of Benin”, at 
a time when there were hardly any other places inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> the Europeans acknowledged as a 
city. Indeed, they classified Benin City as one of the most beautiful and best 
planned cities in the world.


In 1691, the Portuguese ship captain Lourenco Pinto observed 
<http://revealinghistories.org.uk/colonialism-and-the-expansion-of-empires/articles/the-empire-of-benin-and-its-cultural-heritage.html>
: “Great Benin, where the king resides, is larger than Lisbon; all the streets 
run straight and as far as the eye can see. The houses are large, especially 
that of the king, which is richly decorated and has fine columns. The city is 
wealthy and industrious. It is so well governed that theft is unknown and the 
people live in such security that they have no doors to their houses.”


In contrast, London at the same time is described by Bruce Holsinger 
<http://www.historyextra.com/feature/medieval/sin-city-thievery-prostitution-and-murder-medieval-london>
, professor of English at the University of Virginia, as being a city of 
“thievery, prostitution, murder, bribery and a thriving black market made the 
medieval city ripe for exploitation by those with a skill for the quick blade 
or picking a pocket”.


African fractals

Benin City’s planning and design was done according to careful rules of 
symmetry, proportionality and repetition now known asfractal design 
<http://ihuanedo.ning.com/group/healtheducation/forum/topics/fractal-geometry-in-indigenous-yoruba-and-benin-nigerian-architec>
. The mathematicianRon Eglash <https://www.ted.com/speakers/ron_eglash>, author 
ofAfrican Fractals 
<http://homepages.rpi.edu/~eglash/eglash.dir/afractal/afbook.htm> – which 
examines the patterns underpinning architecture, art and design in many parts 
of Africa – notes that the city and its surrounding villages were purposely 
laid out to form perfect fractals, with similar shapes repeated in the rooms of 
each house, and the house itself, and the clusters of houses in the village in 
mathematically predictable patterns.


As he puts it: “When Europeans first came to Africa, they considered the 
architecture very disorganised and thus primitive. It never occurred to them 
that the Africans might have been using a form of mathematics that they hadn’t 
even discovered yet.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-5-benin-city-edo-nigeria-mighty-medieval-capital-lost-without-trace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe883b1d3370e6e896208254c99d11a2004e0d09%2F91_146_2905_3629%2F2905.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%235%3A%20Benin%20City%2C%20the%20mighty%20medieval%20capital%20now%20lost%20without%20trace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-5-benin-city-edo-nigeria-mighty-medieval-capital-lost-without-trace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%235%3A%20Benin%20City%2C%20the%20mighty%20medieval%20capital%20now%20lost%20without%20trace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-5-benin-city-edo-nigeria-mighty-medieval-capital-lost-without-trace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe883b1d3370e6e896208254c99d11a2004e0d09%2F91_146_2905_3629%2F2905.jpg>
 A plaque showing an entrance to the palace of the Oba of Benin. Photograph: 
Alamy 
At the centre of the city stood the king’s court, from which extended 30 very 
straight, broad streets, each about 120-ft wide. These main streets, which ran 
at right angles to each other, had underground drainage made of a sunken 
impluvium with an outlet to carry away storm water. Many narrower side and 
intersecting streets extended off them. In the middle of the streets were turf 
on which animals fed.

“Houses are built alongside the streets in good order, the one close to the 
other,” writes the 17th-century Dutch visitorOlfert Dapper 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Olfert_Dapper>. “Adorned with gables and steps … 
they are usually broad with long galleries inside, especially so in the case of 
the houses of the nobility, and divided into many rooms which are separated by 
walls made of red clay, very well erected.”

Dapper adds that wealthy residents kept these walls “as shiny and smooth by 
washing and rubbing as any wall in Holland can be made with chalk, and they are 
like mirrors. The upper storeys are made of the same sort of clay. Moreover, 
every house is provided with a well for the supply of fresh water”.


Family houses were divided into three sections: the central part was the 
husband’s quarters, looking towards the road; to the left the wives’ quarters (
oderie), and to the right the young men’s quarters (yekogbe).


Daily street life in Benin City might have consisted of large crowds going 
though even larger streets, with people colourfully dressed – some in white, 
others in yellow, blue or green – and the city captains acting as judges to 
resolve lawsuits, moderating debates in the numerous galleries, and arbitrating 
petty conflicts in the markets.


The early foreign explorers’ descriptions of Benin City portrayed it as a 
place free of crime and hunger, with large streets and houses kept clean; a 
city filled with courteous, honest people, and run by a centralised and highly 
sophisticated bureaucracy.

What impressed the first visiting Europeans most was the wealth, artistic 
beauty and magnificence of the city

The city was split into 11 divisions, each a smaller replication of the king’s 
court, comprising a sprawling series of compounds containing accommodation, 
workshops and public buildings – interconnected by innumerable doors and 
passageways, all richly decorated with the art that made Benin famous. The city 
was literally covered in it.

The exterior walls of the courts and compounds were decorated with horizontal 
ridge designs (agben) and clay carvings portraying animals, warriors and other 
symbols of power – the carvings would create contrasting patterns in the strong 
sunlight. Natural objects (pebbles or pieces of mica) were also pressed into 
the wet clay, while in the palaces, pillars were covered with bronze plaques 
illustrating the victories and deeds of former kings and nobles.


At the height of its greatness in the 12th century – well before the start of 
the European Renaissance – the kings and nobles of Benin City patronised 
craftsmen and lavished them with gifts and wealth, in return for their 
depiction of the kings’ and dignitaries’ great exploits in intricate bronze 
sculptures.


“These works from Benin are equal to the very finest examples of European 
casting technique,” wroteProfessor Felix von Luschan 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Felix_von_Luschan>, formerly of the Berlin 
Ethnological Museum. “Benvenuto Celini could not have cast them better, nor 
could anyone else before or after him. Technically, these bronzes represent the 
very highest possible achievement.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-5-benin-city-edo-nigeria-mighty-medieval-capital-lost-without-trace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d1cbd071c1ad0c711c93a010d33d18bbf0e2fcb%2F0_0_953_572%2F953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%235%3A%20Benin%20City%2C%20the%20mighty%20medieval%20capital%20now%20lost%20without%20trace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-5-benin-city-edo-nigeria-mighty-medieval-capital-lost-without-trace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%235%3A%20Benin%20City%2C%20the%20mighty%20medieval%20capital%20now%20lost%20without%20trace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fstory-of-cities-5-benin-city-edo-nigeria-mighty-medieval-capital-lost-without-trace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d1cbd071c1ad0c711c93a010d33d18bbf0e2fcb%2F0_0_953_572%2F953.jpg>
 A drawing of Benin City made by a British officer in 1897. Illustration: 
akg-images 
What impressed the first visiting Europeans most was the wealth, artistic 
beauty and magnificence of the city. Immediately European nations saw the 
opportunity to develop trade with the wealthy kingdom, importing ivory, palm 
oil and pepper – and exporting guns. At the beginning of the 16th century, word 
quickly spread around Europe about the beautiful African city, and new visitors 
flocked in from all parts of Europe, with ever glowing testimonies, recorded in 
numerous voyage notes and illustrations.

Lost world

Now, however, the great Benin City is lost to history. Its decline began in 
the 15th century, sparked by internal conflicts linked to the increasing 
European intrusion and slavery trade at the borders of the Benin empire.

Then in 1897, the city was destroyed by British soldiers – looted, blown up 
and burnt to the ground. My great grandparents were among the many who fled 
following the sacking of the city; they were members of the elite corps of the 
king’s doctors.

Nowadays, while a modern Benin City has risen on the same plain, the ruins of 
its former, grander namesake are not mentioned in any tourist guidebook to the 
area. They have not been preserved, nor has a miniature city or touristic 
replica been made to keep alive the memory of this great ancient city.

A house composed of a courtyard in Obasagbon, known as Chief Enogie 
Aikoriogie’s house – probably built in the second half of the 19th century – is 
considered the only vestige that survives from Benin City. The house possesses 
features that match the horizontally fluted walls, pillars, central impluvium 
and carved decorations observed in the architecture of ancient Benin.

Story of cities #4: Beijing and the earliest planning document in history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/17/story-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history>
Curious tourists visiting Edo state in Nigeria are often shown places that 
might once have been part of the ancient city – but its walls and moats are 
nowhere to be seen. Perhaps a section of the great city wall, one of the 
world’s largest man-made monuments, now lies bruised and battered, neglected 
and forgotten in the Nigerian bush.


A discontented Nigerian puts it this way: “Imagine if this monument was in 
England, USA, Germany, Canada or India? It would be the most visited place on 
earth, and a tourist mecca for millions of the world’s people. A money-spinner 
worth countless billions in annual tourist revenue.”


Instead, if you wish to get a glimpse into the glorious past of the ancient 
Benin kingdom – and a better understanding of this groundbreaking city – you 
are better off visiting theBenin Bronze Sculptures section 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=8849&partId=1>
 of the British Museum in central London.


Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 