
If Baghdad today is a byword for inner-city decay and violence on an 
unspeakable scale, its foundation 1,250 years ago was a glorious milestone in 
the history of urban design. More than that, it was a landmark for 
civilisation, the birth of a city that would quickly become the cultural 
lodestar of the world.


Contrary to popular belief, Baghdad is old but not ancient. Founded in AD762 
by the Abbasid caliph al-Mansur 
<http://archive.aramcoworld.com/issue/196209/builder.of.baghdad.htm> “The 
Victorious” as the new seat of his Islamic empire, in Mesopotamian terms it is 
morearriviste than grande dame – an upstart compared to Nineveh, Ur and Babylon 
(seventh, fourth and third millennium BC respectively).


 Baghdad is a mere baby, too, when compared with Uruk, another ancient 
Mesopotamian urban settlement, which lays claim to beingone of the world’s 
earliest cities <http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/uruk/hd_uruk.htm> and which 
was, sometime around 3,200BC, the largest urban centre on earth with a 
population estimated at up to 80,000. Some think the Arabic title for 
Babylonia, al-Iraq, is derived from its name.

We know a huge amount about the city’s meticulous and inspired planning thanks 
to detailed records of its construction. We are told, for instance, that when 
Mansur was hunting for his new capital, sailing up and down the Tigris to find 
a suitable site, he was initially advised of the favourable location and 
climate by a community of Nestorian monks who long predated Muslims in the area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F586ce4dd1a837a469fbe7c8b11ce6cbd0958c622%2F0_0_1802_1444%2F1802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%233%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20Baghdad%20was%20a%20landmark%20for%20world%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%233%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20Baghdad%20was%20a%20landmark%20for%20world%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F586ce4dd1a837a469fbe7c8b11ce6cbd0958c622%2F0_0_1802_1444%2F1802.jpg>
 An 1883 illustration of early Baghdad 
According to the ninth-century Arab geographer and historian Yaqubi, author of 
The Book of Countries <https://archive.org/details/kitabalbuldan00yaquuoft>, 
its trade-friendly position on the Tigris close to the Euphrates gave it the 
potential to be “the crossroads of the universe”. This was a retrospective 
endorsement. By the time Yaqubi was writing, Baghdad, City of Peace, had 
already become the centre of the world, capital of the pre-eminent Dar 
al-Islam, home to pioneering scientists, astronomers, poets, mathematicians, 
musicians, historians, legalists and philosophers.


This was by far the greatest construction project in the Islamic world

Once Mansur had agreed the site, it was time to embark on the design. Again we 
are told that this was entirely the caliph’s work. Under strict supervision he 
had workers trace theplans of his round city 
<https://classconnection.s3.amazonaws.com/486/flashcards/2449486/png/screen_shot_2013-10-05_at_81144_pm-1418B1B043E771331FB.png>
 on the ground in lines of cinders. The perfect circle was a tribute to the 
geometric teachings of Euclid, whom he had studied and admired. He then walked 
through this ground-level plan, indicated his approval and ordered cotton balls 
soaked in naphtha (liquid petroleum) to be placed along the outlines and set 
alight to mark the position of the massively fortified double outer walls.


On 30 July 762, after the royal astrologers had declared this the most 
auspicious date for building work to begin, Mansur offered up a prayer to 
Allah, laid the ceremonial first brick and ordered the assembled workers to get 
cracking.


The scale of this great urban project is one of the most distinctive aspects 
of the story of Baghdad. With a circumference of four miles, the massive brick 
walls rising up from the banks of the Tigris were the defining signature of 
Mansur’s Round City. According to 11th-century scholarAl Khatib al Baghdadi 
<http://www.academia.edu/4260949/Al-Khateeb_al-Baghdadi_and_His_Work_Tarikh_Baghdad>
 – whose History of Baghdad is a mine of information on the construction of the 
city – each course consisted of 162,000 bricks for the first third of the 
wall’s height, 150,000 for the second third and 140,000 for the final section, 
bonded together with bundles of reeds. The outer wall was 80ft high, crowned 
with battlements and flanked by bastions. A deep moat ringed the outer wall 
perimeter.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F743b87331c3c1ae172f4dc6e74fc53c7fecf2be9%2F0_37_5089_3054%2F5089.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%233%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20Baghdad%20was%20a%20landmark%20for%20world%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%233%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20Baghdad%20was%20a%20landmark%20for%20world%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F743b87331c3c1ae172f4dc6e74fc53c7fecf2be9%2F0_37_5089_3054%2F5089.jpg>
 A street in Baghdad in 1918. Photograph: Print Collector/Getty Images 
The workforce itself was of a stupendous size. Thousands of architects and 
engineers, legal experts, surveyors and carpenters, blacksmiths, diggers and 
ordinary labourers were recruited from across the Abbasid empire. First they 
surveyed, measured and excavated the foundations. Then, using the sun-baked and 
kiln-fired bricks that had always been the main building material on the 
river-flooded Mesopotamian plains in the absence of stone quarries, they raised 
the fortress-like city walls brick by brick. This was by far the greatest 
construction project in the Islamic world: Yaqubi reckoned there were 100,000 
workers involved.


The circular design was breathtakingly innovative. “They say that no other 
round city is known in all the regions of the world,” Khatib noted approvingly. 
Four equidistant gates pierced the outer walls where straight roads led to the 
centre of the city. The Kufa Gate to the south-west and the Basra Gate to the 
south-east both opened on to the Sarat canal – a key part of the network of 
waterways that drained the waters of the Euphrates into the Tigris and made 
this site so attractive. The Sham (Syrian) Gate to the north-west led to the 
main road on to Anbar, and across the desert wastes to Syria. To the north-east 
the Khorasan Gate lay close to the Tigris, leading to the bridge of boats 
across it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84f31ec861ca4334432b4ec46dc05c1f5ba1452f%2F0_186_2953_1773%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%233%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20Baghdad%20was%20a%20landmark%20for%20world%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%233%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20Baghdad%20was%20a%20landmark%20for%20world%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84f31ec861ca4334432b4ec46dc05c1f5ba1452f%2F0_186_2953_1773%2F2953.jpg>
 The last remaining gate of the walls that once surrounded Baghdad. Photograph: 
Mohammed Jalil/EPA 
For the great majority of the city’s life, a fluctuating number of these 
bridges, consisting of skiffs roped together and fastened to each bank, were 
one of the most picturesque signatures of Baghdad; no more permanent structure 
would be seen until the British arrived in the 20th century and laid an iron 
bridge across the Tigris.


A gatehouse rose above each of the four outer gates. Those above the entrances 
in the higher main wall offered commanding views over the city and the many 
miles of lush palm groves and emerald fields that fringed the waters of the 
Tigris. The large audience chamber at the top of the gatehouse above the 
Khorasan Gate was a particular favourite of Mansur as an afternoon retreat from 
the stultifying heat.


I have never seen a city of greater height, more perfect circularity, more 
endowed with superior merits
al-Jahiz 
The four straight roads that ran towards the centre of the city from the outer 
gates were lined with vaulted arcades containing merchants’ shops and bazaars. 
Smaller streets ran off these four main arteries, giving access to a series of 
squares and houses; the limited space between the main wall and the inner wall 
answered to Mansur’s desire to maintain the heart of the city as a royal 
preserve.


The centre of Baghdad consisted of an immense central enclosure – perhaps 
6,500 feet in diameter – with the royal precinct at its heart. The outer 
margins were reserved for the palaces of the caliph’s children, homes for the 
royal staff and servants, the caliph’s kitchens, barracks for the horse guard 
and other state offices. The very centre was empty except for the two finest 
buildings in the city: the Great Mosque and the caliph’s Golden Gate Palace, a 
classically Islamic expression of the union between temporal and spiritual 
authority. No one except Mansur, not even a gout-ridden uncle of the caliph who 
requested the privilege on grounds of ill-health, was permitted to ride in this 
central precinct.

One sympathises with this elderly uncle of the caliph. Unmoved by his 
protestations of decrepit limbs, Mansur said he could be carried into the 
central precinct on a litter, a mode of transport generally reserved for women. 
“I will be embarrassed by the people,” his uncle Isa said. “Is there anyone 
left you could be embarrassed by?” the caliph replied caustically.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad7d69d35c4b959195a8d61b986a145629920bb%2F0_70_2550_1530%2F2550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%233%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20Baghdad%20was%20a%20landmark%20for%20world%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%233%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20Baghdad%20was%20a%20landmark%20for%20world%20civilisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fstory-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad7d69d35c4b959195a8d61b986a145629920bb%2F0_70_2550_1530%2F2550.jpg>
 A crane lifts the statue of al-Mansur after it was hit by an explosion in 
Baghdad in 2005. Photograph: Karim Sahib/AFP/Getty Images 
Mansur’s palace was a remarkable building of 360,000 sq ft. Its most striking 
feature was the 130ft-high green dome above the main audience chamber, visible 
for miles around and surmounted by the figure of a horseman with a lance in his 
hand. Khatib claimed that the figure swivelled like a weathervane, thrusting 
his lance in the direction from which the caliph’s enemies would next appear. 
Mansur’s great mosque was Baghdad’s first. Encompassing a prodigious 90,000 sq 
ft, it paid dutiful respect to Allah while emphatically conveying the message 
that the Abbasids were his most powerful and illustrious servants on earth.

By 766 Mansur’s Round City was complete. The general verdict was that it was a 
triumph. The ninth-centuryessayist, polymath and polemicist al-Jahiz 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/al-Jahiz> was unstinting in his praise. “I 
have seen the great cities, including those noted for their durable 
construction. I have seen such cities in the districts of Syria, in Byzantine 
territory, and in other provinces, but I have never seen a city of greater 
height, more perfect circularity, more endowed with superior merits or 
possessing more spacious gates or more perfect defences than Al Zawra, that is 
to say the city of Abu Jafar al-Mansur.” What he particularly admired was the 
roundness of the city: “It is as though it is poured into a mould and cast.”


Story of cities #4: Beijing and the earliest planning document in history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/17/story-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history>
The last traces of Mansur’s Round City were demolished in the early 1870s when 
Midhat Pasha, the reformist Ottoman governor, tore down the venerable city 
walls in a fit of modernising zeal. Baghdadis have since grown used to being 
excluded from the centre of their resilient capital.

 Just as they had been barred from the inner sanctum of the city under Mansur, 
so were their 20th-century counterparts excluded from the heart of Baghdad on 
pain of death 12 centuries later underSaddam Hussein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/30/iraq.guardianobituaries>. The 
heavily guarded district of Karadat Maryam, slightly south of the original 
Round City on the west bank, became the regime headquarters, the engine room of 
a giant machine carefully calibrated to cow, control and kill using the 
multiple security organisations that enabled a country to devour itself. Under 
the American occupation of 2003 it became the even more intensely fortified 
Green Zone, a surreal dystopia of six square miles in which Iraqis were largely 
unwelcome in their own capital.

Today, after a 12-year interlude, the Green Zone is open to Baghdadis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/baghdads-green-zone-open-to-public-for-first-time-in-12-years>
 again. But as so often in their extraordinarily bloody history, Iraqis find 
they have very little to cheer about as the country tears itself apart. The 
great city of Baghdad survives, but its people are once again engulfed in 
terrible violence.


Justin Marozzi is the author of Baghdad: City of Peace, City of Blood, winner 
of the Royal Society of Literature’s 2015 Ondaatje Prize.Order the book for 
£7.99 (RRP £9.99) atthe Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281599/>.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 