
One of the real pleasures of being your crossword editor is learning something 
new (and even often interesting) almost every day that passes. The setter of 
Quick crossword No 13,906 (3 December) wrote this clue for BASS GUITAR: 'Low 
pitched, electrically amplified six-stringed instrument (4,6)'. Did I not know 
that the bass guitar is a four-stringed instrument, came to cry.

As a matter of fact I obviously didn't, but I was quite ready to admit the 
mistake and to correct it in the archive. However, I thought that, not having 
checked the original clue, I ought to check the correction. As a result I now 
know that, though the overwhelming majority of bass guitars sold and played do 
indeed have four strings, it is also possible to buy a 5- and 6-string version 
(online, if you want,here <https://www.google.co.uk/#q=5+string+bass> or here 
<https://www.google.co.uk/#q=6+string+bass>).

According to the Wikipedia entry for the bass guitar, 8- and 12-string models 
have been built and I am grateful for Perry M. for the further information that 
10- and 15-string versions also exist. Not a lot of people know this.

The outcome of my extensive research was that the readers' editor, in drafting 
the 'Correction and clarification' published in the paper on 5 December, very 
kindly inserted the word 'usually' into the phrase 'Bass guitars have four 
strings, not six'.


Last month I apologised to Reading for the wounding error of allowing it to be 
described as a city in a Paul Cryptic clue for 18 October (No 26,394, 4 down). 
For some inexplicable reason, the largest conurbation in Berkshire, with two 
Members of Parliament, three railway stations and a university, is still just a 
town.

In doing so, I expressed surprise that such an ancient place had not yet 
received civic preferment, when others like Brighton and Hove (in 2000) and 
Preston (in 2002) had done so, asserting that such nouveaux cities did not even 
have a cathedral or an abbey, whereas Reading has a fine abbey, founded by 
Henry I in 1121.

But I made the mistake of adding Chelmsford to that list. So now I now also 
apologise to Chelmsford because, though it did not become a city until 2012, 
its parish church of St Mary the Virgin was upgraded to cathedral status a 
century ago in 1914, when the new Anglican diocese of Chelmsford was carved out 
from the then diocese of St Albans. Not a lot of people know that either.


Here is advance notice that the special Christmas Cryptic, set by Maskarade, 
will be published on Saturday 20 December, with the solutions and the names of 
the winners appearing on Friday 2 January.

And here are two other Christmas/New Year-related cryptic crossword delights. 
First, Eric Westbrook and his team of over 30 volunteers have combined to 
produce another 3D Calendar Puzzle for 2015 in aid of the BBC Children in Need 
Appeal and the RNIB Pears Centre for Specialist Learning. The calendar has a 
cryptic clue for every day of the year, plus competition puzzles for each month 
of the year, leading to someone being crowned the BBC CiNA 3D Crossword 
Champion for 2015. The puzzles have been set by, amongst others, Enigmatist, 
Nutmeg, Pasquale, Puck, Rufus and Tramp from the Guardian and Everyman from the 
Observer. Eric's software guru has also produced a program, free to download, 
that allows totally blind solvers access to the puzzles. Both the puzzle 
calendar and the program can be found athttp://calendarpuzzles.co.uk/index.htm 
<http://calendarpuzzles.co.uk/index.htm>

The second is connected with Araucaria (John Graham). For several years his 
brother, Stephen Graham, has set a cryptic puzzle to raise funds for charity. 
This year, in memory of Araucaria, the proceeds will be going to Médecines Sans 
Frontières. To download the puzzle and to make a donation, go to
https://www.justgiving.com/quiz-2014/ <https://www.justgiving.com/quiz-2014/>

Incidentally, if you read about the Araucaria puzzle (No 26,427) that we 
published on 26 November, the first anniversary of his death, in Alan Connor's 
article in G2 that day or in his crossword blog, a photograph of the grid for 
it that John Graham filled out in pencil while in hospital can be seen by 
clicking on the reference at the bottom left-hand corner ofthe Guardian 
crossword homepage <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords>.


November's Genius (No 137 set by Qaos) was clearly a problem for those of our 
regulars who are not familiar with the concept of a basic 'Caesar cipher' code, 
based on alphabetical letter shifts (see my attempt to explain how it worked 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2014/dec/01/genius-crossword-annotated-solution>
). However, there were 16 correct entries on the first day and 129 by the 
deadline. The first three in were regulars: Dave H, Tony (demon) and PSC from 
Queeensland. But 'id28 … .eu' was hot on their heels.

Congratulations to Marj MacGregor from South Australia, who is the winner of 
the November Genius puzzle.


We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> 
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editoguardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords please
crossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 