
In just under four months, Ban Ki-moon’s 10-year term as secretary general of 
the UN comes to an end. In that time, conflict around the world has intensified,
record numbers of people have been forced to flee their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/20/one-in-every-113-people-uprooted-war-persecution-says-un-refugee-agency>
 – and theUN’s overall spend has nearly doubled, to more than £42bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/what-has-the-un-achieved-united-nations>
. The organisation has come in for much criticism in recent years, not least 
because of the security council’sperceived failure to protect civilians in Syria
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/24/angelina-jolie-un-security-council-syria-refugees>
, and for itslack of action over abuse allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/17/un-gross-failure-sexual-abuse-french-troops-central-african-republic>
 against its own peacekeepers.

Yet there have also been significant achievements during Ban’s tenure, notably 
the adoption of thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
, the blueprint that will shape the development agenda until 2030. He has 
described the goals as: “A plan of action for ending poverty in all its 
dimensions, irreversibly, everywhere, and leaving no one behind.”

Ban also presided over the Paris climate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/world-leaders-hail-paris-climate-deal>
 – a historic pledge by 195 countries to hold global temperatures to a maximum 
rise of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. And in 2011, to boost efforts to 
promote gender equality, expand opportunity and tackle discrimination around 
the globe, he created UN Women.

What do you think Ban Ki-moon will be remembered for? Will it be his attempt 
to hold the world to account with the global goals, or thehalving of child 
deaths inspired by the MDGs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/jul/06/what-millennium-development-goals-achieved-mdgs>
? Or has his term in office been overshadowed by the UN’s failures? We’d like 
to hear your thoughts. Submit a response of 250 words or fewer andwe’ll publish 
the best ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>. Keep 
your response clear and concise, avoiding development or academic jargon. Email 
your response todevelopment@theguardian.com <mailto:development@theguardian.com>
 with “Students Speak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>” in the 
subject line. Please include your name, the country in which you live, and the 
university or college you attend. Submissions close at 6pm BST on 7 October.

 