
Nicola Sturgeon has ruled out holding a second Scottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> referendum this 
year but said another ballot remained “highly likely”.

The first minister suggested she would wait to see the direction of the Brexit 
negotiations. “There is not going to be an independence referendum in 2017, I 
don’t think there is anybody who thinks that is the case,” she told STV News.

The majority of Scottish people voted remain in the EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
, and the Scottish government has already drafted legislation for a second 
referendum vote on independence which it has said it will use if it is theonly 
option to protect Scotland’s place in the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/brexit-may-single-market-scotland-fears>
.

Over the weekend, Sturgeon denied she had been “bluffing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/sturgeon-reiterates-hard-brexit-threat-scottish-independence-vote-referendum>
 about the potential for a second poll but indicated that a soft Brexit, which 
kept the UK in the single market, would be enough to take the referendum off 
the table in the short-term.

“We have to ask ourselves in Scotland: are we happy to have the direction of 
our country, the kind of country we want to be, determined by a rightwing 
Conservative government perhaps for the next 20 years, or do we want to take 
control of our own future?” she told The Andrew Marr Show on BBC One.

Asked if she would anticipate a referendum within five to 10 years, she said: 
“I would think, yes. But let me not get away from this point, I’m putting to 
Theresa May a compromise solution.”

A Number 10 spokeswoman said the Brexit negotiations would focus on the whole 
of the UK and that the Scottish government should abide by the decision in the
2014 independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2014/sep/18/-sp-scottish-independence-referendum-results-in-full>
.

“The prime minister and the government’s position on this issue has long been 
clear, that there was a referendum that was fair, legal and decisive and should 
be respected in 2014 and that the focus in 2017 should be how do the component 
parts of the UK come together to deliver the best possible outcome for the UK 
to leave the EU, and that should be our focus,” she said.

The Scottish Conservative leader, Ruth Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>, said Sturgeon was 
“leaving Scotland in limbo” with her remarks. “If she’s serious about allowing 
Scotland to move on from constitutional navel-gazing, she should ditch her 
draft referendum bill immediately,” Davidson said.

However, other supporters of independence said action needed to be taken to 
keep the door open for another referendum in the future. Scottish Greens 
co-convenerPatrick Harvie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2016/may/04/patrick-harvie-scottish-greens-will-push-the-snp-beyond-their-comfort-zone>
 said: “The first minister may have said that there won’t be a referendum on 
independence this year but legislation must be progressed to give Holyrood the 
option, and it’s welcome that the Scottish government remains committed to 
keeping it on the table.

“This cannot be a quiet time ahead for supporters of independence; although 
the Brexit negotiations will take two years, work must begin now to build 
support and strengthen our case.”
 