
I wasn’t surprised when I wiped out on my first wave. I hadn’t surfed in over 
a decade, but my body remembered the physical sensation before I slipped off my 
board and barrel-rolled under the tide. The familiar aftershock of stinging 
eyes and accidental gulps of salt water, however, were strangely absent. That’s 
because I was hundreds of miles from the ocean, surfing in a freshwater lagoon 
surrounded by Texas cattle ranches.

NLand Surf Park, the first artificial surf park of its kind in North America – 
and the largest in the world – opened last month inAustin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, Texas. (Unfortunately NLand 
closed again for repairs soon after my visit when damage was discovered under 
the lagoon, though it should reopen by the end of the year.)

“People here are dying for waves. It’s exciting for surfing, and for Austin,” 
NLand’s Chris Jones told me when I arrived for a surf session two weeks after 
the park’s opening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd050226d7a64f37a4d0b9b3f8a6585617165c829%2F0_44_900_540%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Surfing%20heads%20inland%2C%20to%20Austin%2C%20Texas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Surfing%20heads%20inland%2C%20to%20Austin%2C%20Texas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd050226d7a64f37a4d0b9b3f8a6585617165c829%2F0_44_900_540%2F900.jpg>
 A begiiner and her instructor ride a wave 
As we approached the water, park officials relayed news that NLand had just 
generated its 10,000th wave.

Surfers have dreamed of expanding surfing beyond the ocean for decades, 
according to Doug Coors, NLand founder and heir to the Coors beer dynasty. 
“Unfortunately,” he added, “all previous attempts failed – water is a tricky 
molecule, so it isn’t a simple proposition.”

At first glance, Austin seems an unlikely site for a surfing mecca. But Coors, 
an engineer by trade, saw in the Texan capital an ideal combination of factors: 
it’s the US’s fastest-growing city, with a booming tech scene and a reputation 
as an innovative bellwether; locals are famously active and outdoorsy; and it 
has more than 300 days of sunshine a year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F087fbebb871aba9aed064fac3208722a5fd73372%2F0_327_2000_1006%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Surfing%20heads%20inland%2C%20to%20Austin%2C%20Texas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Surfing%20heads%20inland%2C%20to%20Austin%2C%20Texas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F087fbebb871aba9aed064fac3208722a5fd73372%2F0_327_2000_1006%2F2000.jpg>
 The surf park’s cafe 
After years of searching for technology to replicate ocean waves, Coors 
partnered withWavegarden, the Spanish engineering company that designed the 
world’s first wave foil, in Snowdonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/01/surfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia>
, Wales. Starting last summer, the team dug a lagoon the size of nine football 
fields, with a capacity for 11 million gallons of water, which could take more 
than 120 surfers at a time. A unique rainwater collection and filtration system 
makes the pool completely self-sustaining even during extreme drought. The 
engineering marvel set in 160 acres of Texas hill country has a surreal, almost 
mirage-like mystique.

“A perfect wave comes in every two minutes, with chances to grab 20- to 
30-second rides,” says Ben, one of several surf guides who moved to Austin to 
work at NLand. “It’s impossible to get that predictability anywhere in the 
ocean.”

NLand’s wave foil bisects the lagoon beneath a pier that doubles as a 
boardwalk for spectators. Imagine a snowplough attached to a gantry, propelling 
a ribbon of waves back and forth, from gentle whitewater to head-high, 
Waikiki-style barrels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a91cf346483d069557da2cd08fc73cc64101c94%2F0_133_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Surfing%20heads%20inland%2C%20to%20Austin%2C%20Texas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Surfing%20heads%20inland%2C%20to%20Austin%2C%20Texas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fnland-surf-park-austin-texas-artificial-wave-machine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a91cf346483d069557da2cd08fc73cc64101c94%2F0_133_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
The consistency of the waves makes it an ideal training space for pros looking 
for a deliberate form of practice, and a risk-free introductory setting for 
apprehensive beginners. And, of course, there are no jellyfish or sharks, no 
undertow, and no jagged coral lurking beneath the waves.

During my one-hour session, I surfed alongside pre-teen sisters in matching 
wetsuits, a world champion wakesurfer, and middle-aged men reviving a former 
pastime as a new exercise regime. Afterwards, whether I was strolling along the 
boardwalk, browsing the surf shop or grabbing a smoothie at the farm-to-table 
cafe, every conversation centred on excited retellings of someone’s moments on 
the water.

Surfing’s popularity shows no sign of abating. Pro legend Kelly Slater debuted 
his own open-barrel wave machine <http://www.kswaveco.com/> this year. Three 
Australian surf parks are in development andSurf Snowdonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/01/surfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia>
 was recently announced as a UK Pro Surf Tour stop, making it the first manmade 
lagoon sanctioned by the competitive circuit. At the 2020 Tokyo Games, surfing 
will become an official Olympic sport – and attract even more followers.

The ocean will always possess an unparalleled majesty, but artificial wave 
proponents hope places such as NLand can inspire previously unreached 
populations.

“Seeing first-timers learn here is the beginning of a virtuous cycle,” said 
Chris Jones. “A whole new generation will be able to say they grew up surfing.”

• Nland Surf Park <http://nlandsurfpark.com/> is currently closed for repairs 
but hopes to reopen by the end of 2016. Sessions from $60
 