
The criticisms of who has been included in the 241 new Oxford Dictionary of 
National Biography entrants of this year (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/12/biography-dictionary-bame-new-entrants>
, 13 January;Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/the-guardian-view-on-the-dictionary-of-national-biography-choosing-who-we-are>
, 14 January) reflects the arguably impossible task that confronts Dr Alex May 
and his small team of colleagues who constitute a research project of the 
Oxford University history faculty and not a vast army of researchers who work 
for Oxford University Press, who publish the Dictionary online three times a 
year, in January, May and September. As Dr May explains, he and his colleagues 
take “advice from a network of around 400 specialist advisers”. He also 
explains that under his editorship there have been “new ‘strands’ of subjects 
who died less recently, in areas including imperial, colonial and Commonwealth 
lives, the impact of people of black and Asian descent on the UK itself, Jewish 
lives, geographers, linguists, and scholars of foreign cultures. These entries 
have both highlighted and extended the global reach of the dictionary, which 
mirrors the place of Britain in an increasingly globalised and interconnected 
world.”

This is an epic undertaking by a small group of researchers, and certainly not 
some sort of glib Google exercise, as Omar Alleyne-Lawler, of Black History 
Month,is quoted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/12/biography-dictionary-bame-new-entrants>
 as suggesting. It might be said of the ODNB researchers that they’re damned if 
they do and damned if they don’t. Patience is a virtue in research, and should 
be for present and future readers of the ODNB. As the famous Guinness advert 
had it: “Good things come to those who wait.”
Bruce Ross-Smith 
Oxford

• When I was a member of the Black and Asian Studies Association in the 1990s 
we raised our concerns about the lack of black and Asian subjects in the Oxford 
Dictionary of NationalBiography <https://www.theguardian.com/books/biography>. 
At that time they only had 17 entries. They recognised the lack of diversity in 
the ODNB, and since that time, along with other “experts”, I have been 
commissioned to write biographies of black and Asian subjects. I have 
contributed about 40 including the composer Amanda Ira Aldridge, second world 
war RAF navigator Ulric Cross, actor Norman Beaton, my adopted aunt Esther 
Bruce (a seamstress from the working classes), and the entertainer Winifred 
Atwell. In some cases this is the only source of information available about 
such figures. Many other black and Asian subjects have been covered by other 
historians who specialise in this field. However, what Oxford University Press 
has not been good at is promoting this wonderful resource about black and Asian 
Britons from history. I have raised this with them. The ODNB is not just for 
the academic elite, it is for everyone, but there is a need for it to be made 
accessible to the wider public, including Britain’s black and Asian communities.
Stephen Bourne
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 