
The Pensions Regulator has warned there are still major hurdles to overcome to 
secure the future of Tata Steel’s UK pension scheme, which is pivotal for 
saving the Port Talbot steelworks in southWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

Tata Steel and trade union leaders have agreed a deal to save 8,000 jobs in 
the steel industry and the Port Talbot steelworks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/tata-steel-commits-to-keeping-port-talbot-open>
, with the Indian company committing £1bn of new investment to its UK business.

However, the deal is reliant on employees agreeing to changes to the British 
Steel pension scheme, which has liabilities of £15bn and 130,000 members.Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel wants to shut the final 
salary pension scheme and replace it with a less generous defined contribution 
scheme. But the company is yet to confirm how it will fund the existing 
benefits, with the scheme at risk of entering the Pension Protection Fund 
(PPF), which would result in a 10% cut to members’ benefits. Steelworkers will 
vote on the changes early in the new year.

The government has reversed plans to change the law so that Tata Steel can 
restructure the scheme by moving it into a new vehicle and shifting the annual 
inflation-linked increase in benefits to a lower CPI measure rather than RPI. 
Instead the government will not interfere in the restructuring and will leave 
it to Tata, pension trustees and the Pensions Regulator.

But the regulator has warned that there is a lot of work to do to resolve the 
problems facing the pension scheme. It has to approve the entry of a pension 
scheme into the PPF or any major changes to pension benefits and a company’s 
commitment to the scheme.As the BHS scandal has demonstrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, the Pensions Regulator has the 
power to pursue companies and individuals if it believes they have dodged their 
commitment to a pension scheme.

A spokesperson for the Pensions Regulator said: “We note the announcement from 
Tata Steel and look forward to seeing more detail from them regarding any 
proposal for the British Steel pension scheme. There are still significant 
issues to be resolved and we will consider any proposals carefully in light of 
their impact upon the 130,000 pension scheme members and PPF levy payers.”

Tata Steel says it is “working separately on a necessary structural solution” 
for the scheme, but critics claim the company has not yet revealed a solution 
that tackles the liabilities behind it.

John Ralfe, a pension consultant, said: “Because major disposals have reduced 
Tata Steel’s creditworthiness, the pension trustees should demand higher 
deficit contributions, so the total annual cash contribution could easily go 
up. Closing the defined-benefit scheme does nothing to address the existing 
£15bn of liabilities.”
 