
In a normal election year, without the dozens of distractions, it would have 
been a jaw-dropping moment. “Do you want to see the court overturn Roe v Wade?” 
Donald Trump was askedduring the final presidential debate. 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/10/19/the-final-trump-clinton-debate-transcript-annotated/?utm_term=.ad82285ea91e>
 His initial answer meandered but then became blunt: “That’ll happen 
automatically, in my opinion, because I am putting pro-life justices on the 
[supreme] court.”

He went on to accuse his opponent, Hillary Clinton, of advocating that babies 
be ripped out of their mother’s wombs just before birth, a bogus claim she 
dismissed as “scare rhetoric”. But come election day, he won and she lost.

The Present review – Cate Blanchett dares to find truth in Chekhov’s trickiest 
play
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/the-present-review-cate-blanchett-antov-chekhov>
Now Trump is bound for the White House and a stage play about Roe v Wade, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/roe-v-wade> the 1973 case at the supreme 
court that firmly established a woman’s right to abortion, is arriving in 
Washington DC, with remarkable prescience. The first night curtain will go up 
just 40 hours before the bellicose billionaire is sworn in as US president.

Playwright Lisa Loomer hopes that, along with the obvious topicality of the 
abortion issue – Roe v Wade isunder unprecedented threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/abortion-rights-under-siege-roe-v-wade-womens-rights>
 from Trump and his future supreme court appointees – her work offers scrutiny 
of the divided states of America, laid bare by a rancorous election that 
pitched blue against red, liberal against conservative, coasts against 
heartland.

Who were Roe and Wade? Jane Roe was pseudonym of 21-year-old bartender Norma 
McCorvey, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/soloish/wp/2016/01/22/the-fascinating-life-of-norma-mccorvey-the-jane-roe-in-roe-v-wade/?utm_term=.55a1837a63ac>
 the plaintiff in the case, a hard-up, hard-living lesbian who wanted to 
terminate her third pregnancy. Henry Wade was the district attorney of Dallas 
County, Texas, who had prosecuted Jack Ruby, killer of Lee Harvey Oswald.

Wade’s office was sued in 1970 by McCorvey, who was seeking to stop the 
district attorney from enforcing a Texas law that prohibited abortion except 
when a woman’s life was at stake. At trial, where one of Wade’s assistants 
argued his case, the law was declared unconstitutional. The case ultimately 
went to the supreme court, which arrived at its era-defining decision by a 7-2 
majority vote.

“It was a landmark case and it was a case very much of its time,” New 
York-based Loomer reflects. “It was a time of black power and women’s lib. I 
think it came very much at the head of a great deal of social revolution in 
America. But it’s been argued ever since in living rooms, in churches, in 
kitchens, in bars, in parking lots, in front of clinics. It’s still argued in 
the courts constantly and it’s about to be argued in a different way and 
perhaps more urgently with the Trump administration.”

The case had a twist that few dramatists would dare invent. In 1995, McCorvey, 
then 47, abruptly quit her job as marketing director at an abortion clinic and
joined an anti-abortion group. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/08/12/us/new-twist-for-a-landmark-case-roe-v-wade-becomes-roe-v-roe.html>
 A born-again Christian, she said she believed that abortion is “killing” and 
“wrong” and opined that American women “have literally been handed the right to 
slaughter their own children”. Her U-turn was quite the PR gift to the 
anti-abortion movement, which has continued to chip away at Roe v Wade, 
although a recent Pew Research poll found 69% of Americans favor keeping it.

Roe, opening at the Arena Stage in Washington 
<http://www.arenastage.org/shows-tickets/the-season/productions/roe/> this 
week, imagines a present-day conversation between McCorvey and her lawyer Sarah 
Weddington who, at the age of 26, argued the case before the supreme court and 
remains steadfastly pro-choice. The women’s divergent journeys come to reflect 
the social rift in America.

“That was the story that felt theatre-worthy to me,” Loomer says. “I could say 
a lot about the divide in the country through the very different stories of 
these two women around Roe v Wade. They are speaking to us this evening and 
telling their very different versions of history. The play illuminates choice, 
the idea of choice in many aspects of our lives in addition to this aspect. I 
think the character of the lawyer makes a very sound case why choice is 
essential.”
 A scene from Roe. Photograph: Jenny Graham 
Loomer tried hard to track down and meet McCorvey but without success, though 
she would like her to see the play some day. She did contact Weddington, who 
read the script. “She has stayed the course fighting for a woman’s right to 
choose since the 70s and she is still fighting for a woman’s right to choose 
even now.”

Loomer was commissioned to write Roe by Bill Rauch, artistic director of the 
Oregon Shakespeare festival, for its American Revolutions: the United States 
History Cycle, a Shakespeare-inspired project to create 37 plays about moments 
of change in American history. Highlights have included Sweat, a drama by Lynn 
Nottage thatbrilliantly captured blue-collar despair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/17/lynn-nottage-sweat-donald-trump-bernie-sanders>
 now widely interpreted as fuelling Trump’s victory, andRobert Schenkkan’s All 
the Way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/08/robert-schenkkan-lyndon-b-johnson-all-the-way-bryan-cranston>
, a riveting piece about the first year of Lyndon Johnson’s presidency, both of 
which also came to Arena Stage.

“It’s uncanny to me,” admits Loomer, who was initially hesitant about the 
idea. “Bill Rauch intended the play be done during the election cycle and that 
it would have an interesting resonance witha woman running for president, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/hillary-clinton-campaign-first-woman-president-2016-election-voters>
 but I think most people in the theatre – not in America – expected a different 
outcome.

“I’m keen to have us listen to each other. I don’t know how to resolve it. I 
think some of the differences that this issue epitomizes are irresolvable, but 
I do still maintain that the first hope, the first best step is to listen. I 
know that a lot of people don’t even want to listen right now and I understand 
that. I understand the pain, the rage, the exasperation on both sides. I still 
think it’s a first step to listen because, unless somebody’s going to secede 
from the union, we’re stuck with each other.”

The bipartisanship of Washington was magnified by Trump’s incendiary campaign 
into one of the most bitterly divisive elections in memory.Class, gender, 
geography and race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/trump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide>
 were intertwined; echo chambers such as Facebook and fake news were blamed for 
creating two mutually exclusive bubbles. After the shock of Trump’s victory in 
the electoral college (and loss in the popular vote), there has been much angry 
debate over who can claim to be the “real America” and whether the two sides 
can rediscover common ground.

What caused this rupture? “I think the color of this country is changing,” 
says Loomer. “That is a very hard thing for the white population to make peace 
with. I think culturally there are people who feel they have been living under 
a very different rule, as I and many of my friends are about to live under a 
very different rule. These other people feel very excluded by some of the 
values that are democratic values that I may have embraced, but they feel it’s 
so against their values.”

She continues: “We have some very different values about what is the role of 
government, do we take care of our brother, who is our brother – can our 
brother be of a different color and of a different religion than we are? It’s a 
pretty profound divide and it’s only exemplified by issues like Roe v Wade.

“With Roe v Wade I wanted to understand why we’re so different, but we can’t 
even talk to each other. In Roe v Wade we have a character who believes that 
this is a matter of the law and it’s about choice and the government should 
make this decision: the federal government should have a law which gives us 
choice. And on the other side, people feel that it’s a personal matter, that 
it’s a matter of religion and morality, and so how do you reconcile those two? 
What one side feels is choice, the other side feels is a license to murder. 
They actually do believe that this is murder.”

Loomer did not vote for Trump and describes herself as pro-choice but the play 
is determinedly even-handed with empathy for both principals.Its seven-month 
Oregon run 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/28/theater/lisa-loomer-abortion-play-roe.html> 
reached voters of different ages, classes and political stripes. “I have never 
had so many letters about a play,” she notes. “People have told me that, during 
the play, they were surprised to find themselves having compassion for ‘the 
other side’ and that, after the play, they were able to talk to friends or 
family members with different points of view for the first time. And I heard it 
from people on ‘both sides’.”

Trump himself, meanwhile, is something of a shapeshifter on this most divisive 
of issues. In the past the New Yorker supported a woman’s right to choose; last 
year he claimed that women who seek abortions should be subject to“some form of 
punishment” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/30/donald-trump-women-abortions-punishment>
 if the procedure is banned in the US, only to quickly recant. His 
vice-president-elect, Mike Pence, signed one of the strictest abortion laws in 
the country as governor of Indiana. Trump is likely to fill the current supreme 
court vacancy with a conservative with little fondness for Roe v Wade.

“I wouldn’t even presume to try to guess what Mr Trump feels in his heart or 
in his mind,” Loomer remarks pointedly. “My one hope is that if he were to come 
to see that play that he would sit with a daughter on either side of him.”

• Previews of Roe begin on 12 January, with opening performance on 18 January, 
running to 19 February in the Kreeger Theater atArena Stage, Washington DC 
<http://www.arenastage.org/>
 