
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is closing two distribution 
centres in a shakeup of its UK operations that will reduce staff numbers by 
about 500.

Britain’s biggest retailer will close warehouses in Welham Green, 
Hertfordshire, and Chesterfield, Derbyshire, as well as overhauling the 
management of its distribution network.

This will lead to 1,015 jobs being cut, including 444 at Welham Green, 207 at 
Chesterfield and 364 in the warehouse management team.

Richard Cousins makes shock departure from Tesco board of directors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/richard-cousins-resigns-tesco-board-directors-compass-group>
However, Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> intends to create 
533 jobs elsewhere in its network, including at warehouses in Reading, 
Middlesbrough and also in Daventry, Northamptonshire. Some of the affected 
staff could find different roles within the company.

The changes are part of an overhaul of Tesco under chief executive Dave Lewis 
designed to revitalise the retailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/14/tesco-dave-lewis-interview-recovery>
 after a slump in sales and profits.

Matt Davies, Tesco’s UK chief executive, said: “As the needs of our customers 
change, it’s vital we transform our business for the future. As part of this we 
are proposing to close two of our distribution centres in the UK. These changes 
will help to simplify our distribution operations so we can continue to serve 
our customers better.

“Our priority throughout this process has been our colleagues and we will 
continue to do all we can to support them at this time.”

The changes will reduce the number of distribution centres that Tesco runs in 
the UK to 23. The company will move its grocery operation at Welham Green to 
Reading, while the majority of its non-food products will be distributed from 
Middlesbrough after the closure of its Chesterfield site.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftesco-1000-jobs-restructuring-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c4e082d043684c3bb3cb03df83906d265131069%2F194_384_2970_1783%2F2970.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20set%20to%20cut%201%2C000%20jobs%20in%20restructuring%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftesco-1000-jobs-restructuring-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20set%20to%20cut%201%2C000%20jobs%20in%20restructuring%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftesco-1000-jobs-restructuring-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c4e082d043684c3bb3cb03df83906d265131069%2F194_384_2970_1783%2F2970.jpg>
 A Tesco distribution plant in Reading, where the supermarket will move its 
grocery operation at Welham Green. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
In addition, Tesco will bring all warehouse operations run by logistics groups 
DHL and Wincanton in-house. This includes withdrawing from a clothing warehouse 
run by DHL in Daventry and moving its operations to a Tesco centre nearby.

Tesco reported a £6.4bn pre-tax loss in 2015, one of the biggest in British 
corporate history, after a fall in sales and the discovery ofa £326m accounting 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/sfo-will-not-charge-former-tesco-boss-over-accounting-scandal>
.

Since then, Lewis, who was hired from Unilever, has attempt to rebuild Tesco 
by cutting prices, introducing new product ranges and improving the 
availability of key products.

However, although like-for-like sales have picked up again in the UK, profits 
have remained stubbornly low as the company invests in cutting prices and 
improving its shops. Tesco recorded a 28% fall in pre-tax profits to £71m in 
its most recent half-year results. In response, Lewis told investors that he 
had an ambition to improve Tesco’s operating profit margin to between 3.5% and 
4% by the end of the decade. It was 2.2% in the last financial results.

Tesco, which employs more than 300,000 people in the UK, is scheduled to 
unveil its trading figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/08/good-christmas-marks-and-spencer-surprise-retailers-festive-sales>
 for the vital Christmas period on Thursday.

James Anstead, analyst at Barclays – one of Tesco’s house brokers – has 
predicted that the supermarket chain will report that sales during the six 
weeks to 7 January were flat on the same period the previous year.

Anstead said: “If our forecasts are correct we expect Morrisons to be most 
pleased with the way in which trading panned out, although we also expect 
further evidence of Tesco’s ongoing momentum.

“We do know that Tesco’s UK business had a relatively strong Christmas period 
last year [2015]. That fact does not necessarily bode well for what Tesco might 
have delivered in December 2016 – especially considering the underwhelming 
showing from the company in the most recent set of market share data.”
 