
Hospitals and GP surgeries have always had a symbiotic relationship and the 
hospital crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/nhs-crisis-hospitals-issue-alert-first-week-january>
 this winter has had a significant impact on the way that we are able to offer 
care to patients in the community.

In our practice, demand has not changed significantly as far as minor 
illnesses are concerned. We had an expectation of winter pressures and planned 
for more urgent appointments across all days of the week (including a Saturday 
shared rota with a hub of other local practices). But what we have seen is a 
significant rise in the complexity of cases – even when compared with a year 
ago.

Patients often turn up for their 10- to 15-minute appointment with several 
complex problems or secondary care related queries. Some practices advise 
patients to discuss one problem per appointment, and this has come under
criticism 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4100110/Doctors-busy-one-problem-appointment.html>
 from the Patients Association for potentially preventing people from raising 
health worries.

With many practices struggling to recruit GPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> and nurses, and running on skeleton 
staff in the face of escalating demand and threats of closure, it is unhelpful 
for patients to see us repeatedly for a few minor complaints when a single 
appointment could sort all the issues.

NHS crisis: 40% of hospitals issue alert in first week of new year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/nhs-crisis-hospitals-issue-alert-first-week-january>
At our surgery, we offer 15-minute appointments for routine problems that are 
booked in advance and 10 minutes for the on the day urgent problems. It is 
unusual to finish consultations within these times. Most days I will admit one 
or two sick patients into hospital – sometimes the decision to admit is clear 
cut, on other occasions it’s more complicated. Ultimately, it comes down to the 
patient’s best interests and their wishes, and the hospital being able to offer 
assessments and treatments that we cannot in the community. But increasingly, I 
am having to factor in long waits at hospital and the scarcity of beds in my 
decision. This week it took over 24 hours for my patient to be admitted from a 
care home to the hospital. Another patient, Dorothy, is in her 80s and usually 
well and independent in her warden-controlled flat. Then she became acutely 
confused, unable to walk and began hallucinating – there was also the 
possibility of a head injury from a fall but we were not able to corroborate 
this. I discussed her case with a hospital specialist and an assessment and a 
CT scan of the head was recommended via A&E. I called for an urgent ambulance. 
They too were inundated with emergencies and unable to hand over patients 
promptly through bottlenecks in A&E, medical admissions units and the wards. It 
was nine hours before Dorothy arrived in A&E. Her head scan was normal but it 
was another 12 hours before she was moved to a surgical ward as an “outlying” 
medical patient. Both she and her daughter who accompanied her were exhausted 
and upset.

Faced with worryingly high occupancy rates, many hospitals are admitting 
patients to non-specialty wards. In our area there are more than 100 patients 
on non-medical wards. This poses its ownrisks 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3616843/>, with overstretched 
staff caring for more patients than safe thresholds allow.

Dorothy was discharged three days later, still confused, frail and unable to 
manage in her own home. There were no step-down or intermediate care beds to 
speak of and her daughter struggled to care for her. I had few options – she 
needed more help but I did not feel that she would be any better in hospital 
given current pressures. But a social care assessment would take days to 
arrange. I asked therapid response team 
<http://briscomhealth.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Rapid-Response-Patient-Guide.pdf>
 to support her until things improved. They too were working well above their 
capacity but agreed to take her on their caseload for a few days.

There are daily pressures to discharge patients like Dorothy to make way for 
new admissions. It is not surprising that with an ageing, frail population 
there are often no quick fixes. I am now seeing more failed discharges, with 
patients ending up in a crisis at home and unable to cope. Some hospital 
discharge summaries have clear instructions to offer supportive or end-of-life 
care, and not to readmit. For some patients this is appropriate – for others 
less soso as there are no new avenues being offered as an alternatives to 
admission. With overstretched GPs and community nursing as well as social care 
in disarray, the government is abandoning the most vulnerable in our society.

Last week, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/theresa-may-nhs-crisis-doctor-surgeries>
 blamed GPs for this “non-crisis”, claiming that NHS funding has been more than 
adequate – an assertion vehementlydisputed by the head of NHS England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-england-chief-executive-simon-stevens-funding-theresa-may-public-accounts-committee>
, Sir Simon Stevens.

Despite the government’s misinformation on so many fronts, it is clear that 
today’s NHS is no longer resourced properly to adequately care for our sick 
population. And there is also another crisis unfolding – one of poor morale and 
retention ofNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> staff, who are forced 
by chronic underfunding to either work in an environment where patient care is 
compromised within primary and secondary care, or to leave the profession. But 
it would seem that like the other “human crisis”, the government is in denial 
about this. too.
 