
Is Christianity ceasing to matter in the US? The question might seem absurd in 
the light of statistics that show a country which still publicly respects 
religion to an extent difficult for a European to imagine. Fewer than a third 
of all Americans admit that they seldom or never go to church. There isonly one 
member of Congress 
<http://www.pewforum.org/2012/11/16/faith-on-the-hill-the-religious-composition-of-the-113th-congress/>
 who claims to have no religion, and every single congressional Republican 
identifies as a Christian except for two Orthodox Jews. But there are good 
reasons to suppose that these figures are misleading, and the role of 
Christianity as part of the social and political convulsions of the country 
today is changing and diminishing in important ways.

Traditional American Christianity was shaped by British experience in the 17th 
and 18th centuries: it was Protestant, patriotic, and providential, but not 
much concerned with doctrine. The rejection of any religious establishment 
opened the way for competition between individual churches and then produced 
the extraordinary organisational and theological creativity that distinguished 
the US from all previous Christian societies. America seemed tosome observers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/24/religion-books-review-god-society>
 to provide the unquestioned future of religion in a globalised world. 
There was, and is, a church for every possible niche, from Unitarian 
Universalists to the Westboro Baptists.

The price of this exuberance was doctrinal incoherence. If there is a 
Christianity for everyone, Christianity can mean almost anything, and this has 
effects that ripple out far beyond believers. A religion that is responsive to 
the pressures of the market will end up profoundly fractured, with each 
denomination finding most hateful to God the sins that least tempt its members, 
while those sins that are most popular become redefined and even sanctified. In 
the end, a market-driven religion gives rise to a market-driven approach to 
truth, and this development ultimately eviscerated conservative Christianity in 
the US and left it the possession ofhypocrites and hucksters 
<http://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2016/june-web-only/whos-who-of-trumps-tremendous-faith-advisors.html>
.

There were churches on both sides of the civil war, and churches on both sides 
of the civil rights struggle. Martin Luther King observed that America was 
never more segregated than on a Sunday morning. These racial divisions carried 
over and even deepened in the culture wars of recent decades. White evangelical 
churches defined themselves against a coastal elite. The strategy was 
electorally successful for decades, but at a high price. It is absolutely clear 
from the presidential election results that white evangelical Protestants voted 
overwhelmingly for Donald Trump, but they could not deliver the popular vote. 
The Catholic church in the US is increasingly Hispanic. Pope Francis has come 
close todeclaring that Mr Trump is not a Christian at all 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/11/06/europe/pope-walls-us-election-trump/> – a 
Christian should build bridges, and not walls, he said last year.

Meanwhile, the close identification of evangelical Christianity with the 
Republican party, and with the rejection of evolution, climate science and 
sexual equality, has repelled young people and may have accelerateda long trend 
of decline <http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/684202> between 
generations that looks inexorable. More than a third of Americans under 50now 
say they have no religion 
<http://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/religious-tradition/unaffiliated-religious-nones/>
. Some even call themselves atheists, long the most distrusted minority in the 
US, who now outnumber Mormons. Change is going to come.
 