
With the freeze of winter just arriving, many runners are struggling with the 
icy cold and the darkness. They dig in nonetheless, racking up what miles they 
can bear in the few hours of light they have. For many, the alternative seems 
even less attractive.

This year is the bicentenary of the treadmill. I wrote in my book, Footnotes 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/1108162/footnotes/>, about its invention in 
1817 by William Cubbit and how it came about as a solution to a set of problems 
raised by the needs of a reformed penal system that wanted to punish prisoners 
heart and soul without actually killing them. Only through a peculiar twist of 
fate is it now the mainstay of our cardio fix in the gym.

In the two centuries since its invention, little about the treadmill has 
changed. But if I ran a fitness empire, I’d want it to be able to do so much 
more for runners.

In recent years, the discipline of environmental psychology has emerged, 
seeking to explore and explain the impact that environments have on our 
wellbeing. It has shown that nature is good for us in innumerable and sometimes 
surprising ways. Green spaceslower crime rates 
<https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/c193/288fe4adb92b01ffe2c0b7f2be7fbaece62b.pdf>
; having a plant in a patient’s roomshortens post-operative recovery times 
<http://hortsci.ashspublications.org/content/44/1/102.full>; and looking on to 
a green spaceincreases workplace productivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/10/office-beautiful-pretty-views-employees-productive>
 andrestores our ability to concentrate 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attention_restoration_theory> faster than 
anything else.

Proximity matters, too. How close we are to green spaces has an impact on 
their potency, ranging from a “a view” (through a window or a picture) to 
having immediate access (being on a bench in a park) to being in a green space 
and interacting with it (gardening, climbing a tree). While emulating nature is 
not as effective as being in it, many trials show that this still has a 
substantial impact on our psychological andphysiological response systems 
<http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02225.x>. So, 
what can we do to bring some of it back?


The easiest option is to use pictures or videos. On an evolutionary level, we 
are thought to subconsciously perceive urban environments as more stressful 
because we cannot see access to traditional sources of food, shelter or water. 
To decrease stress levels, we certainly don’t want to be looking at the bare 
walls of a gym. So, why not load up a running video instead?Outside Interactive 
<http://www.outsideinteractive.com/> offers a tablet app that plays Steadicam 
footage of routes and races from all over the world, and can even sync to the 
speed of your run. If you want the rewards associated with “green exercise”, 
choose a “green”route.


But this stimulates only one sense. We need virtual reality to satisfy the 
others, too. The Outside Interactive run-alongs include natural, ambient 
sounds, but if you go for a free option (such as anonline video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xzTQkHT_dng>), play some natural sounds to 
trick your brain into relaxing. My dream treadmill would also be whisper-quiet, 
but it is tough to get the noise levelsfrom a grim-gym experience 
<https://youtu.be/3P9ydWcrtQo> in tune with a Venice run 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1eRdzXHV0fA&feature=youtu.be>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-treadmill-is-200-this-year-high-time-it-got-a-makeover%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9755ca6b6a6036b64e1c8fe99bd6f73bd1dde13d%2F0_299_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20treadmill%20is%20200%20this%20year%20%E2%80%93%20%20high%20time%20it%20got%20a%20makeover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-treadmill-is-200-this-year-high-time-it-got-a-makeover%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20treadmill%20is%20200%20this%20year%20%E2%80%93%20%20high%20time%20it%20got%20a%20makeover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-treadmill-is-200-this-year-high-time-it-got-a-makeover%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9755ca6b6a6036b64e1c8fe99bd6f73bd1dde13d%2F0_299_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 Iya Valley, Japan, in autumn Photograph: Alamy 
It’s not all about audio and video, either – we also have to reward the other 
senses that are occluded when we run indoors. Recent research from Japan 
focuses on the potency of forest environments, particularly their odour. 
Plants, as part of their defence, emit substances called phytoncides 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phytoncide> (it’s why, say, garlic and pine 
trees have such a distinctive smell). These can lower ourblood pressure 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15649280> and stress levels 
<http://forest-therapy.net/healthbenefits.html> and may even aid in the 
prevention of some cancers. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20074458> So, 
our ideal treadmill will be loaded up to waft restorative scents at us, too.


If you like to feel your runs, treadmills are horrible to run on barefoot – 
the rubber belts give you horrendous heat blisters and pin-sharp static shocks.
Woodway <http://www.woodway.com/> has replaced the traditional belt with slats 
that don’t burn, and, if you are concerned about your ecological footprint, 
they even have one that isn’t motorised – it runs onball bearings and gravity 
<http://www.woodway.com/products/curve-trainer>. 


The effects of green spaces on us are so potent and innate that they bypass 
our feelings. Saying you prefer an urban to a natural run is a bit like your 
kids claiming they don’t like drinking water: it doesn’t matter if you like it 
or not, it’s still good for you.


Our bodies are wired in complex, subtle and miraculous ways to be rewarded by 
outdoor exercise, so we should think more carefully about what we are freely 
giving up when we step on to the belt indoors. It’s important to remember that 
the sensual occlusion of the treadmill was never intended to help you with your 
exercise; it was supposed to break prisoners who had committed heinous crimes.


However, with a bit of virtual reality, we can get surprisingly close to the 
benefits that outdoor running provides. Adding a few plants in the room, maybe 
even a bit of wispy grass that occasionally brushes against your legs (haptic 
feedback from the environment is more immersive), would surely make a 
near-perfect indoor running experience, particularly when faced with the dark, 
cold and rainy outdoors – although, if I’m honest, even that sometimes has its 
charms.


Vybarr Cregan-Reid is a writer and academic. He is the author of Footnotes: How
Running <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/running> Makes Us Human, 
published by Ebury Press.
 