
The last few weeks have been all about the NHS crisis, but new figures 
published today reveal the stark cash situation facing schools in England. 
Forty nine out of every 50 schools,according to research by the Association of 
School and College Leaders and the Secondary Heads Association 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-38615599>, will see a real-term per pupil 
funding fall between now and 2020; some schools lose up to 17% of their per 
pupil funding. That is the sharpest cut to schools’ budgetssince the 1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/15/secondary-schools-sharpest-cuts-funding-since-1970s-thinktank>
. The scale of today’s problem was illustrated last month by theNational Audit 
Office 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Financial-sustainability-of-schools.pdf>
, which showed the average secondary academy is in the red by more than 
£350,000.

Education lacks the immediate warning lights of health: hospitals being forced 
to divert ambulances, cancel cancer operations and treat patients on trolleys 
in corridors. But these funding pressures are no less damaging than those 
facing the health service. They jeopardise the significant progress made in 
recent decades:nine out of 10 schools are now rated as good or outstanding 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-38077217>. Without a sensible settlement 
inequalities will widen. Most notably, there is huge geographic imbalance in 
school quality.Children living in London have a far better chance of attending 
a good school than in Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/ofsted-chief-michael-wilshaw-links-divide-in-education-to-malaise-behind-brexit-vote>
, where almost half of schools are inadequate or “require improvement”. In the 
northern powerhouse of Manchester the figure is one in three. This is a 
fundamental issue for social mobility.

Learning is not a matter of chance. A critical ingredient is the quality of 
school leadership and teaching.Yet there is a national headteacher shortage and 
a teacher recruitment crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/26/english-schools-struggling-to-recruit-headteachers-research-finds>
. Some of the areas facing big cuts in per-pupil funding are those that are 
already struggling with school quality and which find it hardest to attract 
quality leaders and staff. What seems obvious to all is that the government’s 
schools improvement policy is floundering. This is partly because it is built 
on a market-based set of principles that lack oversight, transparency and 
accountability. The basic idea is that poor-performing schools would be taken 
over by high-performing multi-academy trusts: educational jargon for private – 
in this case charitable – organisations running chains of schools. But it is 
not clear whether there are enough high-performing trusts in the market. The 
last chief inspector of schools, Sir Michael Wilshaw, raised doubts aboutthe 
quality and performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/15/few-multi-academy-trusts-good-enough-improve-schools-says-sir-michael-wilshaw>
 of the largest academy chains last year. The worry is plain: there simply 
aren’t enough good large trusts to take on failing schools.

So there is a real risk that inadequate schools will be left to languish for 
years, with disastrous and lifelong consequences for the children who attend 
them. Ofsted has only recently started inspecting academy trusts as a whole, 
and the government lacks a strategy to improve poorly performing academy 
trusts. With no data available, this is a huge deficiency in its vision for 
schools, which is predicated on multi-academy trusts acting as the engine to 
drive up standards across the school system. Moreover, the government’s 
wrong-headed reforms have dismantled local democratic oversight of the school 
system – despite claiming to be in favour of devolution. Local councils’ roles 
in overseeing the delivery of education have been eroded to almost nothing. 
Instead, accountability sits between governors of academy trusts – many of whom 
are lay volunteers – and just eightregional schools commissioners 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/schools-commissioners-group/about> 
appointed by the education secretary, each responsible for thousands of schools.

Ministers risk replicating the disaster of their NHS reforms in the 
educational shakeup: wasting time and energy on a structural reform while 
cutting back on cash and failing toattract talent 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-38172256>. Instead of coming up with 
political wheezes such as grammar schools, it should focus on what’s going 
wrong with its current reforms. The government might argue that it can’t afford 
more cash. But it cannot defend the irrational and unverifiable schemes it is 
currently implementing.
 