
A degree of mystery attends the buildup to my meeting with Abel Tesfaye, the 
26-year-old Ethiopian-Canadian who for some time now – ever since his stealth 
emergence as a recording artist in Toronto in 2010 – has been making varied, 
often exceptional, ever more popular music under the assumed name ofthe Weeknd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-weeknd>. It is early November. He has a 
new album that’s nearly finished, a follow-up to last year’s 3.6m-sellingBeauty 
Behind The Madness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/28/the-weeknd-beauty-behind-the-madness-first-listen-review-65-minutes-of-bleak-brooding-beauty>
, and at breathtakingly short notice I have been summoned to Rotterdam, where 
Tesfaye is due to sing a track from the new record atthe MTV European Music 
awards <http://tv.mtvema.com/video/the-weeknd-starboy/pjy2gq>, for a rare 
interview.

I was told, flying in, to expect some sort of audience around midnight. Later, 
if Tesfaye went out partying after the gig. But orders change and I arrive at a 
hotel in Rotterdam in the early evening, a few hours before he’s due on the MTV 
stage. From the lobby, Tesfaye’s bodyguard,“Big Rob” Feggans 
<http://www.m-magazine.com/posts/25-celebrities-big-rob-the-body-guard-is-friends-with-57090/photos/25-celebrities-big-rob-the-body-guard-is-friends-with-90606>
, whose nickname holds up, escorts me into a lift. Up a few levels, Feggans 
leads the way along a corridor and at the end of it knocks on a door, summoning 
out another member of the Weeknd’s entourage. This man emerges to take two 
brisk strides across the hallway and knock on another door. There’s a plate of 
done-with chicken on the floor outside Tesfaye’s room. We wait beside it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f35fd8ebfedcda65d4c5e718d51a784b487b084%2F553_42_1990_1666%2F1990.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f35fd8ebfedcda65d4c5e718d51a784b487b084%2F553_42_1990_1666%2F1990.jpg>
 With Prince at the American Music awards 2015. Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty 
Images 
It’s an appropriately enigmatic way to be taken to meet a composer of 
genre-smushing R&B, whose output – especially in 2011, when the then 
21-year-old made a trilogy of precociously brilliant mixtapes – has always 
assumed extra heft from his personal mystique. For a time, at the start of his 
career, nobody knew what he looked like. His interview shyness created a sense 
ofPrince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince>-like obscurity. When I 
first saw Tesfaye perform live, at a taping ofLater… With Jools Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/apr/15/later-with-jools-holland-bbc2>
 in 2012, he showed up trenchcoated and dreadlocked, and mesmerised the studio 
witha performance of Wicked Games <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t9MsAc9EySc>
, a madly profane song about love, or rather, about “motherfucking love”.

As a lyricist, Tesfaye makes arguably the best use of that m-word since Snoop 
Dogg <https://www.theguardian.com/music/snoopdogg>. He’s also been about as 
prolific a writer (and as expert at mining his life for material) asTaylor Swift
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift>, blessed with a Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen>-like ability to establish 
concrete worlds inside songs, expressing along the way a sexual confidence (at 
least in his narrative persona) that might renderRihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna> or R Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/r-kelly> wallflowers by comparison. But 
unlike most artists who make it in the mainstream – all at once last summer, 
the Weeknd had three huge hits,Can’t Feel My Face 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KEI4qSrkPAs>, The Hills 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzTuBuRdAyA> and Earned It 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xe_iCkFsQKE>, from the Fifty Shades Of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey> soundtrack – a cloying 
misanthropy hangs over this music.

In the stories the Weeknd tells, falling in love is “shit” or “pointless”: 
women are seduced “often/Often/Girl I do this often 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JPIhUaONiLU>”. A troubling murmur of misogyny 
in the lyrics sometimes gets very audible indeed (“House full of pros that 
specialise in the ho-ing”), though a counterargument could be made that Tesfaye 
seems to think men are no great shakes, either. As a narrator, he is frequently 
the Other Guy (“He’s what you want/I’m what you need 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PGCVhhUxnp8>”), a brilliant charmer who might 
nonetheless try to persuade girls out of their clothes by queasier means (“Take 
a glass…You wanna be high for this <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sX9DgavXiN4>
”). He writes a lot about drug use. If love or affection is admitted to, it 
will generally be a love felt under the influence, as inthe recent single 
Starboy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=34Na4j8AVgA>, a collaboration with 
Daft Punk <https://www.theguardian.com/music/daft-punk> that broke global 
streaming records on its release in September.

His lyrics paint a vivid picture of a man, and not an especially easy one, and 
outside his hotel room in Rotterdam, I start to imagine the worst for our 
interview. Tesfaye sat behind a screen, perhaps, or in a turned-away chair. 
Conversation in riddles, or in monosyllables.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D34Na4j8AVgA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D34Na4j8AVgA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D34Na4j8AVgA&media=>
You’re not quite what I was expecting, I tell Tesfaye, who with a, “Come, 
come” has brought me inside his room and directed me to sit on the bed. We’ve 
shaken hands a few more times than custom dictates, and now he is fussing at 
the minibar, fetching water and apologising for changing the hour of the 
interview. “I wanted us to have space for a proper conversation,” he says. 
While he tries out perches around the room – other side of the bed, windowsill, 
wheely chair, armchair – I get a good look at him. He is stocky, 5ft 7in, his 
arms buried almost to the elbow in the pockets of a hoodie, with a youthful, 
big-cheeked, bearded face under a dark baseball cap. Tesfaye lifts it off to 
show his newly shorn hair. The dreadlocks came off a few weeks ago, he explains 
in a soft voice, on the set ofthe video for Starboy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=34Na4j8AVgA>. Sleeping was getting difficult, 
and in a more general way he missed being able to wear anonymising hats. Able 
to hide under a cap for the first time in years that day, he says, “I think I 
felt a single tear come down my cheek.” He laughs, and again when making 
reference to his height (“Thinking about putting lifts in my sneakers”). In 
apparent reference to hison-off girlfriend 
<http://perezhilton.com/2016-11-10-bella-hadid-the-weeknd-break-up-split#.WDctbDaLRdA>
, the modelBella Hadid <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/bella-hadid>, who 
is 6ft in heels, he adds, “Guess I’ve been hanging out with too many 
supermodels.”


I explain that, although I’ve been listening to his music on and off for 
years, I know very little about him, other than what seems to be confessed to 
in the songs. Why don’t I put forward a few things that, from the lyrics, I 
think I know to be true, and you tell me if I’m right?

“Sure.”

The mind of a 19-year-old is very different from that of a 26-year-old. You 
grow, experience more, meet better people

One. You’re supremely self-confident.

He thinks. “Uhhh… in the music, yes.”

And in life?

“I mean, we’re all insecure, aren’t we? I’m not walking around like I’m macho 
man or anything.” Writing lyrics, Tesfaye says, “is like an escape sometimes. 
You see what’s going on in the real world. And sometimes, you go into your own 
world, where you create what’s going on.”

Two. You bloody love your drugs.

Tesfaye pops his eyebrows, nods half a dozen times and says eventually that he 
“dibbles and dabbles and whatnot”. Everything in moderation, he insists. “When 
I had nothing to dobut make music, it was very heavy. Drugs were a crutch for 
me. There were songs on my first record that were seven minutes long, rambling 
– whatever thoughts I was having when I was under the influence at the time. I 
can’t see myself doing that now.”

Three. How to put this: you have a complicated relationship with women.

“Yeah.” The nodding again. “Uh. Yeah. I mean… in life… what relationship is 
easy?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a5568cac79056b1d7ad849d8d74d91f78390e51%2F0_108_2813_3151%2F2813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a5568cac79056b1d7ad849d8d74d91f78390e51%2F0_108_2813_3151%2F2813.jpg>
 At the O2 Arena in November 2013. Photograph: Gus Stewart/Redferns 
This seems a cop-out. Does he ever listen back to a lyric of his, for 
instance, and find it callous? “Oh, for sure.” But Tesfaye says the things that 
might make him wince tend to have been written when he was younger, greener. 
“The mind of a 19-year-old is very different from the mind of a 26-year-old. 
You grow. You get into better relationships. You experience more, meet more 
people, better people. But when you’re in a dark hole, at an earlier point in 
your life – you write about the mindset you’re in at that moment.”

But say you’re out somewhere, with your girlfriend, or a female friend, or a 
favourite aunt, and one of those tracks comes on the speakers. Would you want 
to apologise? “I don’t think I’d ever apologise for music I make, no,” Tesfaye 
says. “But there are regrets in my life, of course. And you write about it.” 
Was there ever a squeamishness in having your mother hear some of these lyrics? 
“For sure. Definitely. But at the same time I think she was just happy I wasn’t 
dead, wasn’t in jail.”

There was a chance of that? “Dead or in jail?” He puffs out a breath, meaning 
yes.

He grew up in Scarborough, a suburb of Toronto, the only child of Ethiopian 
immigrants who separated shortly after he was born, in 1990. Tesfaye was close 
to his mother. “A great mom, very protective, very cultured.” His maternal 
grandmother was around, but otherwise Tesfaye’s mother “was by herself. She was 
working three, four jobs. Single-mother jobs. The way you see in the movies.”

He has a habit of reaching for film references to illustrate his points. (He 
once likened his youth to the film “Kids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/19/kids-film-larry-clark-skateboarding-culture-new-york-east-coast-supreme>
without the Aids 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/02/magazine/can-the-weeknd-turn-himself-into-the-biggest-pop-star-in-the-world.html?_r=1>
”, and tells me his writing method is aUsual Suspects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/04/how-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne>
-like borrowing and repurposing of detail.) He says there’s a simple reason for 
this: he was raised in front of a screen. “I had to learn everything from TV.” 
He remembers extreme loneliness. “I didn’t have a father figure in the house. 
No boys around. Just me and my mom.” He longed for a sibling. “But I didn’t 
want a sister, I wanted abrother. And then…” Tesfaye snorts. “You realise you 
can’t have that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F845c9d9318f359de1644a2d80627030983f825de%2F659_0_1473_1584%2F1473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F845c9d9318f359de1644a2d80627030983f825de%2F659_0_1473_1584%2F1473.jpg>
 With on-off girlfriend model Bella Hadid. Photograph: Mike Coppola/Getty Images
His best friend at school was another Scarborough kid called La Mar Taylor. 
They smoked weed and discussed films and music. In 2007, at 17, they talked 
each other into leaving school. “What movie am I thinking of,” he asks, “where 
he just quits?”

American Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/jan/28/4>? “Yes. Where 
he just” – Tesfaye clicks his fingers – “drops everything. Some people can’t do 
it, whatever it is, whether it’s leaving home, quitting a job, dropping out of 
school. And they’ll never know. But for me it was one of those things. I didn’t 
think about it. I did it.” They decided to leave home, too. Tesfaye remembers 
the day he dragged his mattress out of his room and with Taylor’s help threw it 
in the back of a van.He once described his mother watching this moment 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/02/magazine/can-the-weeknd-turn-himself-into-the-biggest-pop-star-in-the-world.html?_r=0>
 with “the worst look anyone could ever have. She looked at me like she had 
failed.’’

The life plan the two boys had constructed was vague. They went on benefits 
and rented a one-bedroom apartment in Parkdale, a suburb slightly nearer 
Toronto. They spent what they had on drink and drugs (ketamine, cocaine, MDMA, 
mushrooms, cough syrup), and otherwise kept themselves going on food lifted 
from supermarkets. They threw parties and pursued women and, if Tesfaye’s 
lyrics are to be taken as read, sustained this sometimes by robbing strangers 
of their shoes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKEI4qSrkPAs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKEI4qSrkPAs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKEI4qSrkPAs&media=>
When he discusses this period now, Tesfaye makes it sound bleak, a terrible 
risk. “I could have ruined my whole life by dropping out of school. The 
consequences might have been horrible.” But he keeps saying he was in a “dark” 
place at the time, in a “dark hole”. Only on drugs, he thought, could he feel 
like himself. (FromThe Hills: “When I’m fucked up/That’s the real me.” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzTuBuRdAyA>) When I ask if he ever sought 
treatment or therapy, he twitches and looks at me as if I’m making a joke in 
bad taste. “No. Definitely not. I think that’s more when you’re privileged, you 
know? Going to a therapist is not something you do when you’re growing up as a 
street kid in Toronto.” He wriggles in his seat. “Sorry, bro.”

When he was 18, there was some sort of near-miss with the law. He won’t go 
into details, but admits to spending nights in jail. As a glimpse of where life 
might be heading, it was “bad enough for me to smarten up, to focus”. He 
expands: “A lot of people don’tget that second chance. But around that age, you 
usually get one second chance after a slap on the wrist. And you either take 
the experience and think, ‘This is it, final straw’, or you don’t. And the next 
move after that? It’s yourentire life. You become who you become because of the 
next move you make.”

He moved out of the Parkdale apartment and bounced around from girlfriend’s 
place to girlfriend’s place. He got a job folding clothes at anAmerican Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> store. And he started 
writing music, initially with the thought that existing pop stars would buy his 
material. “I was very insecure about my voice,” he says. But with encouragement 
from Taylor and others, he started using his vocal on tracks. Drugs were no 
longer a tool only to party, but to keep him awake for five nights in a row 
while getting a song just right.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf3f6a6eca272acc9318158c22dbdba8a5440b14%2F1016_327_2699_2612%2F2699.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf3f6a6eca272acc9318158c22dbdba8a5440b14%2F1016_327_2699_2612%2F2699.jpg>
 With Ed Sheeran at the Grammy awards in February. Photograph: Kevin 
Mazur/WireImage 
He chose a stage name, slicing an “e” out of “the Weekend” to avoid a clash 
with an established Canadian band, and in October 2010, while working in the 
stockroom, three of his tunes went on YouTube. By December, they’d become 
popular enough locally to be played for the enjoyment of customers on the shop 
floor. “I was working my whole life on those songs. That’s how I phrase it to 
myself. Even if I wasn’t working on them, I was working on them.”

If you offered even established musicians the Weeknd’s story of steady 
progression, over the next few years, I expect they’d take it: three neat acts 
in which the shirt-folder and street kid ascends with minimal faff and 
compromise from hero of the Toronto underground, toRepublic Records 
<http://www.republicrecords.com/artists/> signee and darling of the critics, 
then mainstream star. Therewere bumps, Tesfaye says. He talks about a gig at 
Coachella in 2012 
<http://respect-mag.com/2012/04/video-the-weeknd-live-coachella-2012-full-set/>
, which was meant to be a grand, here-I-come statement to the industry – a gig 
he botched, he says, because he was hammered. “Plastered,” he says, explaining: 
“Hennessy.”

I couldn’t go back home to my mother without being something. I probably would 
never have gone back empty-handed

The studio album that followed in 2013, Kiss Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/12/the-weeknd-kiss-land-review>, 
was not quite the seller it was expected to be, and this probably accounted for 
Tesfaye’s drift towards a more accessible, chartier sound in the album that did 
sell, 2015’s Beauty Behind The Madness, whichwent triple platinum 
<http://www.riaa.com/gold-platinum/?tab_active=default-award&ar=The+Weeknd&ti=Beauty+Behind+the+Madness#search_section>
 and featured collaborations with acts includingLana Del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lana-del-rey> and Ed Sheeran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ed-sheeran>. He also duetted with Ariana 
Grande <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g5qU7p7yOY8>, and if team-ups such as 
these felt distant from those tortured, drug-smudged tunes that first defined 
the Weeknd’s sound, the results were still kind of great. (I for one would not 
have wanted to miss Framlingham’s Sheeran sing gravely about street life in 
their duetDark Times <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_nPeJuRet34>.)

With a hit record to his name (“Got that out of the way,” he jokes), Tesfaye 
now runs a small record label, XO, and has a deal to be thepost-David Beckham 
face of H&M 
<http://www2.hm.com/en_gb/life/culture/inside-h-m/the-weeknd-teams-with-h-m-on-curated-mens-collection.html>
, and a bodyguard in “Big Rob” whom he inherited fromBritney Spears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/britneyspears>. He is rich and influential; 
in acknowledgment of his status here in Holland, someone at MTV or at his label 
has laid out for hotel suites in Rotterdam as well as in Amsterdam, in case 
whim lures the entourage back there tonight. A private jet idles on airport 
tarmac, waiting to fly him back home to Los Angeles. During the summer, he was 
in a positionto donate $250,000 to the Black Lives Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/11/the-weeknd-black-lives-matter-beyonce-jay-z-drake>
 (though he expressly does not want to talk about this). Back in Canada, his 
mother, once hurt so badly, has a new place and a new car.

Do you think that, having wounded your mother as deeply as you did, a form of 
motivation emerged from it? That you’d better make something come from it? “A 
hundred per cent,” Tesfaye says, seeming distracted. He gets out of his chair 
and moves to the windowsill. Downtown Rotterdam is lit up brightly behind him. 
He bows his head so I can’t see his eyes under the peak of his cap.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff78d354cab8de316a2575731ffd02e369b6873d7%2F0_157_3648_4864%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff78d354cab8de316a2575731ffd02e369b6873d7%2F0_157_3648_4864%2F3648.jpg>
 At Radio 1’s Big Weekend in May. Photograph: Mike Lewis Photography/Redferns 
“How about this,” he says, after a while. “I couldn’t ever go back home 
without being something. I probably would never have gone back home if… That 
was definitely a big motivation. To get back home, and not empty-handed.”

Earlier in the afternoon, I’d watched as he performed at a rehearsal for the 
MTV awards. It was an odd experience, all the performers and extras for the 
night’s show mixed up together on the arena floor, so thatGreen Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/greenday>’s road crew mingled with a chamber 
orchestra and a Trump lookalike, andKings Of Leon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kingsofleon> strolled among 30 backing 
dancers wearing red dresses and blindfolds. The Weeknd’s bit had him appear out 
of what looked likehalf a giant golf ball 
<http://tv.mtvema.com/video/the-weeknd-starboy/pjy2gq>, and from this position 
he sang a version of Starboy that, at MTV’s request, omitted the swearing.

In his hotel room, I ask: how much would I have to pay you – Tesfaye 
interrupts: “To play you some new music?” He looks off to the side – the former 
hustler calculating, perhaps, how much the Guardian will be squeezed for. I was 
going to ask how much would I have to pay him to sing the filthy version of his 
song at the awards tonight.

Tesfaye cackles. For a few seconds, I can see he’s tempted. Then he sighs and 
says no. “It’s someone else’s house, you know?” We do listen to some new music, 
though. At no charge, he plays me a few tracks, including a second 
collaboration with Daft Punk, I Felt It Coming. He says he’s trying to decide 
whether to position this song as the album’s big closer. Sweetly, the guy with
4.25m Twitter followers 
<https://twitter.com/theweeknd?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 and an industry at his feet asks what I’d advise.

Though swearing has been nipped from tonight’s version of Starboy, the song’s 
glaring reference to cocaine use will remain in place. Last summer, Tesfaye 
managed an even cheekier act of hiding his drugs in plain sight when he released
Can’t Feel My Face <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KEI4qSrkPAs>. (The face in 
that song was numb for a reason.) Even as his old misanthropy has been husked 
from his music, drugs have remained elemental to the work, both as subject 
matter and, as Tesfaye eventually acknowledges, as fuel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d8afa732fe5a067a248a6ffa6aadcd941b70f51%2F564_190_1564_1637%2F1564.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weeknd%3A%20%E2%80%98Drugs%20were%20a%20crutch%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fthe-weeknd-abel-tesfaye-interview-music-tom-lamont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d8afa732fe5a067a248a6ffa6aadcd941b70f51%2F564_190_1564_1637%2F1564.jpg>
 At the Juno Awards in April. Photograph: George Pimentel/Getty Images 
Having earlier dismissed his use as moderate dibbling and dabbling, he tells 
me: “I’ll be completely honest with you. The past couple of albums, I do get 
back to that.” He means drugs as a crutch. “Even on this new album. You have 
writer’s block. And sometimes you’re like, I can’t do this sober.” He recalls 
how, back in February,he decided to call off a summer tour 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/weeknd-pulls-out-rihannas-anti-7617650>
 in Europe to write the new record. “I cancelled it and something happened to 
my inspiration. I guess it was the weight on my shoulders. I’d cancelled a tour 
– a lot of money. I had these ideas, but I couldn’t put them on wax. If you 
were a psychologist, you’d probably tell me there was stress in my life, taking 
away from my work.”

So what happened? “I had to get that little jump.” In the studio, out came the 
weed, the Hennessy, probably a few more things. “And the ball started rolling. 
And then I didn’t need it any more.”

I ask if there’s a dark version of all of this, a version where at some point 
he’s not ablenot to turn to drugs. “Right now, I feel in control,” Tesfaye 
answers, frankly. “Where it takes me after, I don’t know.”

We’ve been chatting and listening to music for a while – “vibing out” as 
Tesfaye calls it. But it’s getting late and I’m aware that he’s due on the MTV 
stage at 10pm. It’s gone eight, and when I point out the time, he says, “Shit!” 
But he doesn’t make any obvious effort to move, either. He seems to have 
enjoyed himself, opening up in a manner, he says, that he hasn’t before. “I 
look at the room,” he says. “And I think: this is a story. This is a song.”

So what now, I ask – does he make a note of it? Work it up later? “Just keep 
it in my head.” You hear a melody develop, too? “Yeah, of course. And the next 
morning, if the idea’s good enough, I’ll remember it. If it doesn’t stay in the 
mental archive, it wasn’t meant to be.”

Even though tonight you might go out and get plastered? “Yeah.”

You’ll have lost so much music this way.

“I’ve lost so much music,” he says, sheepishly. All those potential extra hits 
and Grammys, “gone!” he says.

• Starboy is out now on XO/Island Records.
 