
Tristram Hunt’s decision to resign from parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
 to become director of the Victoria and Albert Museum is bad news for Labour, 
but good news for Britain’s arts sector. Following the recentresignation of his 
parliamentary colleague Jamie Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
, it is a worrying symptom of the health of the opposition and could send 
discouraging signals to some voters about how talented Labour MPs see the 
party’s future.

Hunt’s appointment presents an exciting opportunity for the arts world. 
Together with the appointment of Maria Balshaw, who is set tobecome the Tate’s 
first female director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/tate-to-name-maria-balshaw-as-new-director-replacing-nicholas-serota>
, it marks a new generation of leadership at Britain’s leading cultural 
institutions.

Hunt joins a burgeoning and confident sector that has asserted its importance 
to British identity, economic growth and civic life in the last two decades. In 
recent years, national museums have put on innovative exhibitions that have 
reached unprecedented levels of popularity, fromDavid Bowie at the V&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
, to theBritish Museum’s Vikings exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/feb/27/british-museum-vikings-show-nordic-noir-longboat>
. The National Theatre has produced a series of hit productions, such asWar 
Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/17/national-theatre-to-end-war-horse-despite-runaway-success>
 andThe Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/03/curious-incident-dog-review>, 
that have transferred to the West End and toured the country; and Britain is 
still a great centre of film-making.

But the arts sector faces some potentially tricky headwinds following 
Britain’s vote to leave the EU. Like many economic sectors, it relies on 
Britain’s reputation for openness to attract international talent; it will be 
hurt if the rest of the world perceives Britain turning inwards as a result of 
Brexit. And the Brexit vote highlighted the cultural gap between the liberal 
arts establishment and the wider country; according toone of its member surveys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/creative-industries-key-to-uk-economy>
, 96% of members of the Creative Industries Federation voted to remain in the 
EU. On both sides of the Atlantic, the arts have benefited from patronage from 
the Washington and Westminster political establishments. From Tony Blair to 
David Cameron, and Bill Clinton to Barack Obama, modern arts and culture have 
been embraced as part of the liberal political zeitgeist. In the US, a stark 
new divide has opened up, perhaps best illustrated by president-elect Donald 
Trump’sstruggle to secure any significant artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/trump-inauguration-music-performances-beach-boys>
 to play at his inauguration on Friday.

In the UK, Theresa May is less of a known quantity than her predecessors for 
the arts. A regular attender of the Proms, she is an active consumer of the 
arts. But will Britain’s arts world feel the chill of the strong attack on the 
liberal elite she made in her speech to the Conservative party conference last 
year? There is no doubt the arts sector could do more to respond to the charge 
that for too long it has been too elitist, inaccessible and lacking in 
diversity. The Arts Council has long been criticised for being too London 
focused in the way it distributes funding, withstark gaps in per-capita funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/nov/05/arts-spending-london-bias> 
between London and elsewhere. The sector also has a major diversity problem: it 
remains too male and pale.

On a superficial level, Hunt’s appointment does nothing to challenge that. But 
as a former MP from Stoke he brings something different to one of Britain’s top 
arts institutions: insights and experiences from outside the London liberal 
arts elite. He has shown in the pasta willingness to challenge the arts 
establishment’s received wisdoms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/06/tristram-hunt-entrance-fees-museums>
. Maria Balshaw certainly brings something different, having been a key figure 
in the regeneration of Manchester’s thriving cultural scene. Together, they 
could be just the shake-up the arts world needs.
 