
Stand outside a north London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> private 
school when the bell rings at the end of the day and it soon becomes apparent 
how much some parts of the capital have changed in only a few decades.

Scything through the chill of a January afternoon comes the chatter of excited 
children. But these children are not speaking English or French or German. They 
talk in languages that come from far further afield.

“Thirty years ago, your average private school was solidly middle class,” said 
Robert Barrington, executive director of the UK chapter of Transparency 
International, an anti-corruption organisation. “Now a high percentage, 50% or 
more, will be children from overseas, countries like China and Nigeria.”

A similar picture emerges a few miles south of the leafy streets of Hampstead 
and Highgate down in Harley Street. The waiting rooms of the UK’s leading 
fertility clinics, orthodontists and cosmetic enhancement consultancies play 
host to wealthy families from the Middle East and the former Soviet bloc. From 
private schools to private healthcare, from Mercedes dealerships to 
Michelin-starred restaurants, the capital has benefited from a massive influx 
of foreign money.

A Deutsche Bank analysis in 2015 of the UK’s balance of payments data  
<https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3036316/Special-Report-9-Mar-2015-2.pdf>
suggested that since the mid-1970s much of this money has come from one country 
in particular. The bank’s report noted: “There is strong evidence that a good 
chunk of the UK’s £133bn of hidden capital inflows is related to Russia.”

It appears more than a coincidence that much of the money has washed up 
following a concerted effort aimed at enticing the super wealthy to live in the 
UK. Eight years ago, in return for investing £2m, foreign investors were 
offered a “golden visa” allowing them to live in the UK. After five years they 
qualified for permanent residency.

Analysis by Transparency International shows that, out of the 3,048 visas 
granted since the scheme began in 2008, 60% were awarded to Chinese and Russian 
nationals.

Amid widespread disquiet that the wealthy were being allowed to buy their way 
into the country, the programme was quietly scrapped. But the lucky 
millionaires and billionaires who bought their way into the UK remain, their 
wealth and web of influence growing.

At its most visible level, the effects of this massive cash injection from 
abroad can be seen in the capital’s booming property market. Prices in super 
prime parts of central London have soared due to the billions of pounds of 
investment pouring in from Hong Kong, Qatar and Russia.

This has transformed the complexion of some of London’s most desirable areas. 
Few of the multimillion-pound properties on Bishop’s Avenue near Hampstead 
Heath, guarded by private security firms and laden with CCTV cameras, boast 
British-born owners. Belgrave Square, home to stucco-fronted mansion blocks in 
London’s exclusive SW1 postcode, is now known to locals as “Red Square”, 
because of the number of Russian oligarchs who now live there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F052e1ccd7d6070f5cdd6f126ea2ac67ec10f765d%2F0_490_2000_2498%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F052e1ccd7d6070f5cdd6f126ea2ac67ec10f765d%2F0_490_2000_2498%2F2000.jpg>
 Belgrave Square in London, now known as ‘Red Square’ because of the number of 
Russian oligarchs who live there. Photograph: Oli Scarff/Getty Images 
New buildings are not immune to the trend, either. Recent high-rise 
developments, such as 1 Blackfriars, 1 Tower Bridge and 190 Strand, are said to 
be attracting sizable interest from overseas investors.

The foreign-fuelled buying frenzy has led to a rippling-out effect. 
Neighbouring postcodes have seen prices spiral upwards, with the result that 
even relatively affluent families are being pushed to theperiphery of the 
capital and beyond, according to 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/website-archive/newsAndMedia/news/archives/2016/08/Londons-wealthiest-familes-feel-they-are-being-pushed-out-of-elite-neighbourhoods.aspx>
 research by the LSE.

The glut of funds flowing into the UK can be viewed as a sign of confidence in 
its economy and confirmation that it is one of the most attractive countries in 
the world in which to live. But, while much of the foreign money inflating 
property bubbles and private-school fees will have come from legitimate 
sources, there are grounds to suspect that some has been acquired through the 
proceeds of corruption.

Gulnara Karimova – the daughter of the late, former Uzbek dictator Islam 
Karimov, described in leaked US embassy cables as the “single most hated 
person” in Uzbekistan – is believed to have owned several flats in Belgravia 
worth millions of pounds. Karimova, who is alleged to have pocketed hundred of 
millions in bribes for allowing telecoms firms access to the Uzbek market, has 
been linked to the properties through a company in the British Virgin Islands.

James Ibori, a former governor of one of Nigeria’s oil-producing states, was 
jailed after admitting stealing £160m over eight years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/apr/17/nigeria-governor-james-ibori-sentenced>
, spending some of the stolen money on six houses in London – including a 
Hampstead mansion – and putting his children through elite private schools.

The campaign group Global Witness highlights the example of Maxim Bakiyev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/14/kyrgyzstan-president-atambayev-maxim-bakiyev>
, the playboy first son of a former president of Kyrgyzstan, who has been 
convicted in absentia of using his position to steal from the Kyrgyz people. 
Kyrgyz court decisions implicate Bakiyev in the embezzlement of millions of 
funds from the Kyrgyz state, illegally privatising public land and selling off 
state energy firms for a fraction of their value.

Bakiyev Jr, who denies all of the allegations made against him, and claims 
that they were politically motivated, lives in a £3.5m Surrey mansion that 
boasts a library, cinema and bar. Documents show the property was bought by a 
Belize-registered company, Limium Partners.

Of course, using offshore entities to buy property can be a legitimate tactic. 
Many buyers will use such methods to guard their addresses for reasons of 
personal security. One risk analyst hired by blue-chip firms to vet potential 
employees said he now feared the pendulum had swung too far against people from 
countries linked to money laundering. “Many people looking to access the UK 
from places like Russia are being rejected outright for bank accounts or visas 
because no one wants to be seen dealing with them; they just don’t think it’s 
worth the risk any more.”

Still, the fact that the corrupt seek to launder money through the UK property 
market, and in particular London, should be no surprise, experts agree. The 
capital boasts a vast army of seasoned PR professionals who are skilled in 
“reputation laundering” – helping dubious individuals enhance their social 
standing by ensuring that they are invited to the important parties and 
fundraisers, and that they donate to the right charities, thinktanks and art 
galleries.

London is also one of only half a dozen or so global cities – the others being 
Dubai, New York, Shanghai, Beijing and Hong Kong – that are not just attractive 
places to buy, but, crucially, have the professionals needed to facilitate 
complex financial transactions.

An analysis by the National Crime <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> 
Agency describes the vital role these professionals play in fuelling 
corruption, both intentionally and unintentionally: “The skills and knowledge 
of a variety of professionals, such as accountancy service providers, the legal 
profession, estate agents, and trust and company service providers, are used by 
organised criminal gangs for sometimes complex money-laundering activity. They 
assist, wittingly or unwittingly, in creating complexity through actions such 
as setting up networks of corporate structures, acquiring assets to store 
illicit funds and providing anonymity for the criminal. Their involvement very 
likely gives transactions an appearance of respectability.”

Typically, the service providers will acquire a property for their wealthy 
foreign client via a UK-registered company, specifically a limited liability 
partnership that is not required to reveal the names of its ultimate owner. 
While the involvement of a UK company gives the transaction the patina of 
respectability, inspection of its accounts will reveal that its shareholders 
are anonymous companies based in tax havens that are under no obligation to 
reveal their ultimate beneficiaries.

A database created by Private Eye confirms that more than 100,000 UK land 
titles are registered <http://www.private-eye.co.uk/registry> to anonymous 
companies in British overseas territories such as the Turks and Caicos Islands, 
as well as other notorious secrecy havens such as the Seychelles, Liechtenstein 
and the Marshall Islands.

Significantly, the database shows that it is not just London property buyers 
who want to remain in the shadows. The vogue for secrecy is spreading across 
the UK. Titles bought up by anonymous companies in tax havens include those 
registered to addresses in Canterbury, Wigan, St Albans, Bradford, Harrogate, 
Stratford-upon-Avon, Luton and Cardiff.

A particular secrecy hotspot is Surrey. The database reveals that properties 
worth tens of millions of pounds in Guildford, Runnymede, Woking, Elmbridge, 
Virginia Water and the Mole Valley are now owned by a bewildering variety of 
trusts in Jersey, the British Virgin Islands and the Isle of Man.

Establishing who is behind these trusts is often impossible. Analysis by 
Transparency International and Thomson Reuters was unable to identify the real 
owners of more than half of 44,022 land titles owned by overseas companies. 
Nine out of 10 of the properties were bought via tax havens. However, the 
analysis was able to establish that almost 1,000 of the titles were owned by 
Peps (“politically exposed persons”), powerful individuals identified as having 
political influence and who constitute the greatest corruption risk, according 
to Transparency International.

For those helping Peps launder their reputations and their money, the rewards 
can be lucrative. The International Monetary Fund assesses that the value of 
illicit wealth laundered globally per year is between 2% and 5% of GDP, which 
suggests the total laundered through the UK could be anything up to £90bn.

Much of the money being laundered has come from assets plundered from the 
former Soviet bloc countries and African states. A wave of privatisations in 
the 1990s saw the illegal transfer of billions made from the corrupt sale of 
mining rights, telecoms contracts, gas and oil concessions.

More recently, following the Arab spring, deposed dictators and their cronies 
have siphoned off hundreds of millions of pounds of their countries’ assets, 
much of which is believed to have been recycled through the UK’s property 
market. One notable example was that of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi’s son, Saadi, 
who was found to havediverted Libyan state funds  
<https://www.globalwitness.org/en/archive/10m-house-expensive-london-suburb-recovered-libya/>
to buy a £10m house in Hampstead via a British Virgin Islands company, Capitana 
Seas Ltd.

But despite requests from a number of Arab states for assistance in recovering 
their stolen assets, the UK’s system for identifying and countering money 
laundering has been found wanting.A 2015 government review  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-publishes-anti-money-laundering-assessment-and-commits-to-action-plan>
noted that there were “significant intelligence gaps, in particular in relation 
to ‘high-end’ money laundering” and that “the intelligence picture in other 
areas – such as high value dealers, gambling, and new payment methods – is 
mixed”. It went on to decry “the effectiveness of the supervisory regime in the 
UK” and warned that “the law enforcement response to money laundering has been 
weak for a long time”.

Experts now believe that the City is at a tipping point. “The risk for the UK 
is that the City becomes known as the world’s centre of illicit finance and 
dirty deals, and there are plenty of competitors who would relish the UK 
getting stuck with such a label,” Barrington said. “That might make it easier 
to attract dodgy investments – but harder for the UK to sign trade deals that 
include financial services, not least securing passporting rights to the EU.”

Ultimately, though, it is not just the City that will suffer if corruption 
goes unchecked. A failure to get to grips with the problem also has security 
and geopolitical implications.

“The tools that the corrupt use to stash their cash in the UK, such as 
anonymous companies and the use of professional gatekeepers, are also used by 
terrorists so there’s an argument for clamping down on this that goes beyond 
tackling corruption,” said Eleanor Nichol, who leads on Global Witness’s No 
Safe Haven campaign.

The Observer recently reported how four UK-registered firms were allegedly 
used to funnel millions of euros inbribes to an Italian politician 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/31/bribery-claims-azerbaijan-pipeline>
, Luca Volontè, in return for his help in quashing a report criticising 
Azerbaijan’s human rights record. One of the firms, Metastar, now dissolved, 
was operated by two companies in Belize which controlled a network of 
companies, including Armut Services.

Documents filed in Latvia allege that Armut helped siphon off $230m of funds 
paid by the hedge fund, Hermitage Capital Management, to the Russian treasury. 
The scandal centred on the Klyuev Group, an organised Russian criminal gang 
that has allegedly stolen at least $800m from the Russian people with the 
connivance of Kremlin officials.

Sergei Magnitsky, a lawyer working for Hermitage, blew the whistle on the 
scandal and ended up in prison in Russia on what his lawyers insist were 
trumped-up charges. It is alleged that Magnitsky was tortured while in prison, 
where he died as a result of being denied urgent medical care.

Stung by criticism that it had been slow to appreciate the UK’s epic role in 
facilitating money laundering, David Cameron’s government bared its teeth last 
year and committed to a public register of foreign companies buying UK 
property. But a call for evidence on the issue has not even begun and it seems 
unlikely that the register will materialise until the second half of next year 
at the very earliest, giving the UK’s kleptocrats much-needed time to get their 
affairs into order.

Meanwhile, a criminal finances bill  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/properties-seized-assets-corrupt-cash-crackdown-criminal-finances-bill-tax-haven>
going through parliament will allow the courts to issue “unexplained wealth 
orders” that require foreigners to prove their assets have been acquired with 
legitimate funds or risk having them seized. But a Home Office impact 
assessment predicts that the new powers will not be employed in the first year 
they come into operation and will then be used only about 20 times a year 
thereafter.

“The government’s impact assessment for the legislation has laid out 
extraordinarily unambitious estimates for the use of unexplained wealth orders 
that fail to match the scale of the problem that our research highlighted,” 
Barrington said. “It’s vital that once law enforcement authorities get these 
tools, they aren’t simply left to gather dust in the toolbox.”

Organisations that campaign for action against Britain’s tax havens have also 
expressed astonishment that the bill is notably silent on how the government 
intended to bring the likes of the British Virgin islands and Jersey to heel. 
While the havens are committed to creating private registers that can be shared 
with law enforcement agencies, they will not need to keep public registers – 
something that campaigners say is vital if civil society is to hold the corrupt 
to account.

“This seems a bizarre and dangerous omission,” said Toby Quantrill, principal 
economic justice adviser at Christian Aid. “Only recently, it was reported that 
almost 3,500 individuals and companies in the Panama Papers are probable 
matches for suspected criminals, including terrorists, cybercriminals and 
smugglers. The uncomfortable truth is that nearly half the companies named in 
the Panama Papers were registered in the British Virgin Islands – a UK tax 
haven. How much more alarming evidence do ministers need before they insist on 
a clean-up of the UK’s backyard?”

Fears that Theresa May’s government is going soft on tackling corruption are 
mounting. Alarm bells began to ring after a December deadline for the 
introduction of a new national anti-corruption strategy came and went without 
anything materialising. A Cabinet Office spokeswoman said: “The government 
remains committed to the anti-corruption strategy, which will be published in 
due course.”

But this reassurance does little to placate anti-corruption experts who fear 
the strategy’s remit is being deliberately curtailed so that it will not extend 
to Westminster.

“The speculation is that the draft strategy has reached a sticking point where 
progressives are arguing for a world-class strategy with high standards, and 
others are favouring a minimalist fig-leaf,” Barrington said. “One of the tests 
for which side has won will be whether UK political corruption is included in 
the strategy. Quite apart from what the British public will find credible, the 
UK will hardly be taken seriously in fighting corruption globally if it does 
not address some of the most scandal-ridden areas of British public life.”

However, Nigel Kirby, deputy director of economic crime at the National Crime 
Agency, insisted that the UK was moving in the right direction. “The NCA views 
high-end money laundering as a top-tier threat to the UK. It is a complex 
problem that will be tackled over several years, not overnight.”

He said that recent innovations, such as the formation of the joint financial 
analysis centre and the joint money laundering steering group, were “pioneering 
examples of partnership work” between the financial sector and law enforcement 
agencies. “As a result, our understanding of the threats and our ability to 
disrupt them are increasing, to the benefit of both public and private 
sectors,” he said.

Others, though, point to the contrast between the UK’s response to corruption 
and that of the US, which has introduced the hard-hitting “Magnitsky law” 
barring named individuals suspected of corruption from entering the country.

Now there is pressure from a cross-party coalition of MPs and peers for the UK 
to introduce a Magnitsky law of its own, one that would allow organisations 
such as Global Witness to apply for court orders to freeze assets suspected of 
having been acquired through corruption.

But the prevailing political wind is against such measures. At a time when new 
trade alliances are being sought, the government appears keen to open doors to 
those with money, not close them. It is a strategy that could backfire.

“There might be some short-term gain through getting into bed with corrupt 
regimes if we are desperate for trade deals and inward investment,” Barrington 
said. “But it will be followed by a long, long period of pain as the UK is shut 
out of other key markets, competitors use it as an excuse to out-manoeuvre the 
City, and unpredictable changes in foreign governments randomly tip favoured 
kleptocrats out of power. Theresa May’s government now has a clear choice to 
make: high or low standards with regard to corruption?”

How that question is answered will have consequences not just for the estate 
agents of Surrey and the private schools of north London, but everyone.

James Ibori
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e037f42b40f5e5bec44a6de0903ff95be53b8c0%2F785_89_2103_2628%2F2103.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e037f42b40f5e5bec44a6de0903ff95be53b8c0%2F785_89_2103_2628%2F2103.jpg>
 James Ibori. Photograph: Metropolitan Police/PA 
James Onanefe Ibori, 57, was the governor of Delta state in Nigeria between 
1999 and 2007. A former cashier at a Wickes DIY store in Middlesex, he used his 
government position to embezzle millions of pounds that were laundered through 
a network of offshore trusts. In 2012, following a laborious process to bring 
him to trial, Ibori was sentenced to 13 years in prison by Southwark crown 
court after admitting 10 counts of conspiracy to defraud and money laundering. 
Assets recovered by investigators included a £2.2m house in Hampstead, a 
property in Dorset, a fleet of armoured Range Rovers and a Bentley Continental 
GT. Ibori was released from prison before Christmas awaiting a deportation 
hearing.

Gulnara Karimova
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febeeefe24fde307933e14cf76c12fdda709f673d%2F164_352_1718_2148%2F1718.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febeeefe24fde307933e14cf76c12fdda709f673d%2F164_352_1718_2148%2F1718.jpg>
 Gulnara Karimova Photograph: Yves Forestier/Getty Images 
The glamorous, larger-than-life first daughter of the late Uzbek dictator 
Islam Karimov has not been seen in public for a couple of years and is rumoured 
to be dead, supposedly having been poisoned. Before her disappearance, she 
rubbed shoulders with celebrities (duetting on a pop song with Gérard Depardieu 
on one occasion), but was deeply unpopular in her native country. In 2015, an 
investigation by the Organised Crime and Corruption Reporting Project reported 
that she had receivedmore than $1bn in bribes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/24/gulnara-uzbekistan-daughter-corruption>
 from Scandinavian and Russian telecoms companies seeking access to the Uzbek 
market. Before her disappearance, Karimova was also under investigation in 
Uzbekistan on charges of corruption. She has denied any wrongdoing. Karimova 
owned a string of properties around the world, including flats in London’s 
Belgravia, purchased through a company based in the British Virgin Islands.

Maxim Bakiyev
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffee02ef94e69898db9cf84bde1f6a0d39f8f622f%2F220_0_1485_1856%2F1485.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffee02ef94e69898db9cf84bde1f6a0d39f8f622f%2F220_0_1485_1856%2F1485.jpg>
 Maxim Bakiyev. Photograph: Vladimir Pirogov/Reuters 
Youngest son of the former president of Kyrgyzstan, Kurmanbek Bakiyev, Maxim 
has applied for asylum in the UK, claiming charges against him in his native 
country (where he has been sentenced in absentia to 25 years in prison for 
corruption) are politically motivated. He was rumoured to have been the richest 
man in Kyrgyzstan before a 2010 uprising saw his family ousted from power. A 
Belize-based company linked to Bakiyev junior bought him a £3.5m mansion in 
Surrey on his arrival in the UK. A British businessman who alleges that Bakiyev 
ordered his assassination launched legal proceedings for compensation against 
him last year. A judge dismissed the claims, saying the evidence was 
“implausible.”

Saadi Gaddafi
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3651727343678748ebfc3a9402e80dfdf9cf5f8%2F0_4_1500_1874%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20dark%20side%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20gold%20rush%3A%20how%20corruption%20crept%20into%20our%20suburbs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcorrupt-money-crept-britain-property-kleptocrats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3651727343678748ebfc3a9402e80dfdf9cf5f8%2F0_4_1500_1874%2F1500.jpg>
 Saadi Gaddafi. Photograph: Mahmud Turkia/AFP/Getty Images 
The third son of former Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi, 43-year-old Saadi was 
formerly the commander of Libya’s special forces and was accused of giving the 
order to fire on protesters during the country’s civil war in 2011.

Following the toppling of the Gaddafi regime, £12bn of funds held in the UK 
were frozen and an attempt was made to seize assets suspected of having been 
bought with money stolen from the Libyan people.

These assets included a £10m house in Hampstead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/02/libya-acts-seize-gaddafi-house-london>
, which Gaddafi bought in 2010 via a British Virgin Islands company called 
Capitana Seas Ltd. In 2014, Gaddafi was extradited from Niger to Libya, where 
he is alleged to have been tortured.
 