
This year began with good news: the KLF, the duo formed in 1987 by Bill 
Drummond and Jimmy Cauty, and also known as the Justified Ancients of Mu Mu, 
were returning after a 25-year hiatus. The joy was short-lived. News of the 
comeback centred ona mediocre YouTube collage featuring the duo’s previous 
videos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1snD2zm1pBQ>, which turned out to be 
something someone had compiled for a 2015 book talk. Drummond himself rained on 
the whole parade, saying: “Jimmy and I have always remained very close but we 
have no plans to reform the KLF or exploit our back catalogue in any way.”

His quote, it turns out, was a feat of semantic nuance. Within 24 hours, a 
photograph of a chanced-upon bill poster appeared on social media, confirming 
that the Justified Ancients of Mu Mu (not the KLF) were working on new material 
(rather than exploiting their back catalogue), and that it would be unveiled on 
23 August.

The poster was spotted by a journalist who, the Quietus website noted 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/21514-klf-jamms-to-return-slam-film>, also 
happened to be Drummond’s manager. Official confirmation came soon after, with a
tweet from Cauty <https://twitter.com/jamescauty/status/817011297539813377>.
Jimmy Cauty (@jamescauty) 
The Information is @K2PLANTHIRE <https://twitter.com/K2PLANTHIRE>
 <https://twitter.com/jamescauty/status/817011297539813377> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/jamescauty/status/817011297539813377> 
Those suffering from renaissance fatigue may ask why the world needs another 
early-90s band staging a return, but it’s not just that there had never been a 
band like the KLF. It’s that, in the 25 years since their disappearance, nobody 
else has come up with anything that matches the duo’s extraordinary career.

Over the course of just five years, they pioneered sampling with two albums 
(as the Justified Ancients of Mu Mu), released seminal rave and ambient house 
albums as the KLF, launched a spinoff girl-band called Disco 2000, scored an
international hit as the Timelords <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bdTELokKfCk>
, wrote a book, made a crop circle, issued various stand-alone singles, 
compiled two compilation albums, shot a film (and composed its soundtrack) and 
recorded an unreleased thrash-metal album. They also found time to dress up as 
giant ice-creams and in robes and horns. They were unique, even in an era when 
eccentricity was more valued than it is now.

The KLF were self-managed and owned their own label, KLF Communications. It 
meant they could indulge in the flights of fancy that conventional managers or 
labels might have vetoed. For example, in 1991, when the band’s “Stadium House” 
trilogy ofWhat Time Is Love? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OjL5uCMv9OM>, 
Last Train to Trancentral <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=frIUgilfsWA> and 3am 
Eternal <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h0D449MmZ4I> were worldwide chart 
hits, the band swerved the usual conventions of a sanitised press showcase. 
They invited the world’s mediato a Scottish island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2006/aug/12/filminspiredtravel.scotland> 
where passports were confiscated, participants were dressed in billowing yellow 
robes and the event climaxed with the explosion of a 60ft wicker man.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3dGj9h8ggCc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3dGj9h8ggCc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3dGj9h8ggCc&media=>
 KFL – American Whate Time Is Love? 
Were the band sometimes taking the piss? Absolutely, and it looked and sounded 
spectacular. When the time came to rework What Time Is Love? for the US market, 
their behaviour bordered on trolling:America: What Time Is Love? was a 
nine-minute, stadium house, techno-metal extravaganza featuring Glenn Hughes, 
once of Deep Purple. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JzNKXTAi658> The first 90 
seconds explained how, 1,000 years previously, the Justified Ancients of Mu Mu 
had discovered America, 500 years before Columbus. (The NME decided Single of 
the Week would not suffice, and declared the song Single of the Millennium.) 
After being asked to contribute a track to a compilation album organised by CND 
they delivered What Time Was Love? an explosion, followed by 99 seconds of 
post-nuclear rumbling.

Even the band’s self-destruction was extraordinary. At the 1992 Brits (where 
they sent a motorcycle courier on to the stage to collect their Best British 
Group award), the KLF performed a thrash-metal version of 3am Eternal, fired 
blanks into the audience from a machine gun and closed with the declaration: 
“Ladies and gentlemen, the KLF have now left the music business.” They then 
dumped a dead sheep bearing the message, “I died for you – bon appetit,” at one 
of the aftershow parties. (Piers Morgan wrote, huffily, that the Brits proved 
the KLF were “pop’s biggest wallies”.) Three months later, they formally 
announced their demise via a back-page ad in the NME.

Because they owned their own music, their farewell was more final than most – 
their entire back catalogue was immediately deleted and remains commercially 
unavailable – but the following years saw further activity. In 1993, they 
re-emerged as the K Foundation, recorded a mashup of Que Sera Sera and Happy 
Xmas (War is Over) with the Red Army Choir 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMDdXdguo_4>, and sabotaged that year’s Turner 
prize with the K Foundation award, in whichthey gave £40,000 (double the Turner 
prize money) <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/sep/08/art10>to the 
Turner winner, Rachel Whiteread, for being the “worst artist of the year”. In 
1994, theyfilmed themselves burning £1m on the Scottish island of Jura 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=InZydV39hb8>; three years later, they 
rebranded as 2K for a one-off 23-minute performance at the Barbican in London.

All of which does rather suggest that, were the KLF to return in 2017, they 
might choose to do so with something a little more exciting than a YouTube 
upload. The duo have remained busy, but individually: Cauty is currently 
touring a Banksy-goes-Airfix art installation calledThe Aftermath Dislocation 
Principle <https://jamescauty.com/work/the-aftermath-dislocation-principle/>, 
while Drummond has delivered a steady, super-stylised stream of books, events 
and even his own brand of paint.

Last year closed with Drummond discussing the legacy of punk. Punk, most would 
argue, is a cautionary tale of how some explosive musical moments, however 
exciting, should probably be left in the past. On the other hand,Bradley Walsh 
was the biggest-selling new British artist of last year 
<http://www.musicbusinessworldwide.com/biggest-british-debut-album-2016-hang/> 
andRag’n’Bone Man <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L3wKzyIN1yk> is being touted 
as the saviour of this year. Yes, 2017 needs the KLF. And if not the KLF, at 
the very leasta KLF.
 