
1. Film: Young Frankenstein (1974) <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0072431/>


We may have lost Gene Wilder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/11/gene-wilder-remembered-by-kelly-lebrock-film-actor-friend-obituary>
 last year, but the sheer joy of his comedy lives on in this endlessly 
rewatchable treat which he co-wrote with director Mel Brooks. The scene in 
which Wilder’s Dr Frederick Frankenstein and Peter Boyle’s Monster perform 
their top-hat-and-tails rendition of Puttin’ on the Ritz is quite simply one of 
the funniest things I have ever seen, while Madeline Kahn, Marty Feldman and 
Teri Garr are all at the top of their game.Mark Kermode, chief film critic

2. TV: RuPaul’s Drag Race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/07/rupaul-drag-race-10-best-moments-logo>


A perfect concoction of dazzling costumes, bitchiness, and heartwarming 
stories of people overcoming adversity. It’s a bit likeThe Great British 
Bake-Off, replacing the choux pastry and mild innuendo with outrageous 
challenges and X-rated runway shows. As a bonus, celebrity guest judges range 
from Jackie Collins to Olivia Newton-John to Moby. Kathryn Bromwich, 
commissioning editor

3. Radio: Knowing Me, Knowing You, episode 6 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007jvc2>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae1b73730cbd0fbdbbde4329fc9abad25460cbc2%2F0_194_2880_1620%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae1b73730cbd0fbdbbde4329fc9abad25460cbc2%2F0_194_2880_1620%2F2880.jpg>
 Steve Coogan as Alan Partridge in Knowing Me, Knowing You, 1994. Photograph: 
Nils Jorgensen/Rex Features 

Before Alan Partridge <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge>
 became a TV hero, he was a radio one, and my friend Louise and I used to 
listen toKnowing Me, Knowing You tapes in the car. Every episode is brilliant, 
but the end of the very last one, in which Lord Morgan of Glossop dies, is my 
favourite. Alan covers his head in a “Pringle shroud” and then lists motorway 
services during the minute’s silence… I laugh until I cry every time.Miranda 
Sawyer, radio critic

4. Books: Ladybird Books for Grownups Series, by Jason Hazeley and Joel Morris 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=ladybird+book+of&order=relevance&dir=desc>


I’m normally fairly allergic to “high concept” humour and had resisted the 
outlandishly popular Ladybird series for adults until I foundHow It Works: The 
Mum <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-it-works-the-mum.html> in my 
Christmas stocking. The books are an ironic, retro update of the Ladybird books 
of the 70s British childhood, but instead of explaining big ideas to small 
people they explain in-jokes and states of being –The Hipster, The Mid-Life 
Crisis, Mindfulness – to adults. And I have to admit, they are very funny. 
Often gratifyingly dark, too I’ll leave you with my favourite page fromThe Mum:

“This is a mum.

A mum has two very important jobs to do. One is to look after her children.

The other is to do everything else as well.” Lisa O’Kelly, literary editor

5. Music: Blue Pepper by Duke Ellington 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VdB7gaTigRw>


Even those who find jazz forbidding might find Duke Ellington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/duke-ellington>’s Blue Pepper hard to resist. 
Imagine theBatman theme, only soused in serotonin – a lurid blast of joy, 
almost unsophisticated in its sassy, brassy excess. It is a mystery how this 
slinky breakbeat has not been sampled to death, and how the trumpeter doesn’t 
fly around the room like an uncorked cartoon balloon when he hits the high 
notes.Kitty Empire, pop critic

6. Art: Jeremy Moon, Hoop-La, Tate Britain 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/moon-hoop-la-t12240>


Hoop-La is pure merriment. The blue discs fly like a juggler’s balls, but 
never drop because the red holds them forever aloft – a wonderful sight gag 
achieved entirely by the optical offsetting of shape against primary colours. 
Moon was a great comedian: in theory this is poker-faced 60s abstraction, in 
practice this big painting is instant humour. Laura Cumming, art critic

7. Football: Jürgen Klopp’s goal celebrations 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=emtdaL6uB2k>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dae21a47f898df4576a4de04fbeca0f8004f65f%2F26_0_1790_1074%2F1790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dae21a47f898df4576a4de04fbeca0f8004f65f%2F26_0_1790_1074%2F1790.jpg>
 Photograph: Phil Noble/Reuters 

The Liverpool manager is a ray of sunshine in a game now ruled by money. His 
childlike enthusiasm, best witnessed during his exuberant goal celebrations or 
his frank and funny interviews (asked to sum up his team’s 3-0 victory against 
Manchester City, Klopp simply replied: “Boom!”), is both charming and 
infectious. Philip Adams, chief subeditor

8. Music: Dimitri from Paris’s remix of Prince’s I Wanna Be Your Lover 
<https://soundcloud.com/radio-hotel-djs/prince-i-wanna-be-your-lover-dimitri-from-paris-re-edit>


Music is the most sure-fire way to banish a bad mood and Dimitri from Paris 
remix of Prince’s I Wanna Be Your Lover never, ever fails. MS

9. Social media: daily quotes on Twitter



My Twitter timeline often gets overwhelmed by grim news stories, 
spittle-flecked rants and swivel-eyed spats. So accounts that simply tweet a 
classic comedy quote each day become like little rays of social media sunshine. 
So sign up for daily doses ofVictoria Wood <https://twitter.com/VictoriaQOTD>, 
Alan Bennett <https://twitter.com/bennett_diaries?lang=en>, Father Ted 
<https://twitter.com/fathertedspeak?lang=en>, Alan Partridge 
<https://twitter.com/politicalap> and Super Hans 
<https://twitter.com/newsuperhans> from Peep Show. There, that’s better. 
Michael Hogan, writer

10. Music: Perpetual Motion People by Ezra Furman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/05/ezra-furman-perpetual-motion-people-review-outsider-not-acquired-taste>


Songs about depression, anxiety and body dysmorphia may not sound particularly 
happy-making, but putting on this album by gender-fluid folk musician Ezra 
Furman guarantees an instant good mood. Peppered with insanely catchy melodies, 
every song could be a single, but particular standouts for rainy days are 
Ordinary Life and Lousy Connection. KB

11. Online: Hideaway music video by Kiesza (2014)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnoz5uBEWOA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnoz5uBEWOA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnoz5uBEWOA&media=>
Watch the video for Hideaway by Kiesza. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vnoz5uBEWOA> 

There’s something about the communal energy of synchronised dance scenes that 
always lifts my spirits. This video has it all: the subversive thrill of street 
dancing, the audacious single take, the body-snapping references to classic 80s 
moves, and the throwback sound of 90s house (another form of ecstatic 
togetherness). Joyous.Sarah Donaldson, deputy editor

12. Books: Where the Wild Things Are by Maurice Sendak 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/where-the-wild-things-are-281340.html>



The image of naughty Max in his wolf suit, howling at the moon with a gang of 
shaggy-haired, goggly-eyed monsters, always makes me smile. Sendak’s little 
hero perfectly encapsulates the human impulse to let loose and run riot, while 
the story rejoices in the power of a child’s imagination. I cherish my 
dog-eared childhood copy so I was delighted when my dad called my rather boozy 
wedding reception five years ago a “wild rumpus”. Imogen Carter, commissioning 
editor

13. Music: Nothing But Flowers by Talking Heads 
<https://play.spotify.com/track/3tLolIaNbQSoIv6Usvhboh>


I had to have my wisdom teeth yanked just as the Naked album came out, and had 
this song on repeat like continuous morphine throughout the ordeal. Its 
coruscating mirth still gets me going – hypermalls returned to meadows, 
capitalism reversed: Eden in Trumpland – and those wonderful surging rhythms 
always raise my spirits. Laura Cumming, art critic

14. Film: Singin’ in the Rain (1952) 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0045152/videoplayer/vi2086470681?ref_=tt_ov_vi>


Doo-doo-doot doo
Doo-doo-doo-doo-doot doo dee
Doo-doo-doo-doo-doot doo
Doo-doo-doo-doo-doot doo

Are you singing yet? And how are you feeling? Stanley Donen and Gene Kelly’s 
1952 musical simply fizzes with joy. And no one summed it up better than the 
Observer’s former film critic, the late Philip French 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philipfrench> who, when writing about a 
work that transformed his world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/nov/26/features.philipfrench>, promised 
that: “If I were the Minister of Health, I’d see that chemists were well 
stocked with cassettes ofSingin’ in the Rain and encourage doctors to prescribe 
it for depressed patients.” Jane Ferguson, editor

15. Music: Washboard Sam <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=llS9uQ54e4A>


In an attempt to find common musical ground between us, my father bought me 
the complete works of American bluesman Washboard Sam (aka Robert Clifford 
Brown). Over the years, nothing has proved a more reliable pick-me-up than 
slapping Who Pumped the Wind in My Doughnut? on the stereo and turning 
everything up to 11. That rude, raucous rattle just makes the world seem better.
 MK

16. Online: Carpool Karaoke 
<http://www.cbs.com/shows/late-late-show/video/89009432-B0EA-947D-EDC4-DCA3CA38E9A0/madonna-carpool-karaoke/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0eff283c4a77b99a9b0973abbcedf372823e98e5%2F0_0_2000_1270%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0eff283c4a77b99a9b0973abbcedf372823e98e5%2F0_0_2000_1270%2F2000.jpg>
 Adele with James Corden for Carpool Karaoke on The Late Late Show. Photograph: 
CBS Photo Archive/Getty Images 

When James Corden took over as host of CBS’s Late Late Show two years ago, the 
little-known Brit needed a killer feature to win over viewers. Boy, did he find 
one. Carpool Karaoke is an ingeniously simple format – celebrities ride shotgun 
and sing along to the radio – which has become a viral phenomenon and just been 
sold to Apple. The sight of A-listers such as Adele, Madonna or Justin Bieber 
joyously belting out their own hits while Corden conducts a cheeky interview is 
always an infectiously uplifting 10-minute treat. MH

17. Place: Port Sunlight, Merseyside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jul/11/lets-move-port-sunlight-cheshire>


For all-round happiness, I recommend Port Sunlight, the model village built by 
Lord Leverhulme for the employees of his soap-making business on the Wirral 
between 1899 and 1914. First, take a stroll, admiring the some 900 listed 
buildings available for your delectation. Then duck into the Lady Lever Art 
Gallery, dedicated to the memory of the magnate’s wife. It’s full of wonderful 
pictures, but I’m especially fond of the portraitJeunesse Doree (1934) by 
Gerald Brookhurst. What a face! What a cardigan! I could look at it all day. 
Rachel Cooke, writer and critic

18. Music: Pata Pata by Miriam Makeba 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lNeP3hrm__k>


Growing up in South Africa, I didn’t listen to much Miriam Makeba: too obvious 
and ever-present a national soundtrack, perhaps. Now, this exuberant, 
syncopated slice of vintage township jazz – the title is Xhosa for “touch 
touch”, and that buttery rhythm demands some hands-on dancing – is a go-to: as 
warming and cheering a sonic memento of home as any I know. Guy Lodge, film 
critic

19. TV: The West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/23/west-wing-show-seventeen-people-tv-analysis>


Despite so much recent TV glory, I still hanker after The West Wing. Insanely, 
ambitiously, utopianly, it gave us a glimpse of how politicscould actually 
work, if ever shorn of God or niggling boyish greed. The adjective Orwellian is 
savagely misused: this was the society he would have wanted. And then dissected.
 Euan Ferguson, TV critic

20. Podcast: Adam and Joe 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02l57gq/episodes/downloads>


Cornballs! Buckles! Maybe you shouldn’t be living heeeeeere! If you’re not 
familiar with these catchphrases, rectify that by delving into Adam Buxton and 
Joe Cornish’s podcasts, which compress their cult 00s radio shows on Xfm and 
6Music into hour-long packages of free‑wheeling waffle that’ll make you double 
up laughing on the bus. They even reunited for a Christmas special recently, 
available on iTunes. MH

21. Music: Channel Orange by Frank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/15/frank-ocean-channel-orange-review>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F658a9ae523a5af57e698fcdbeac3710726aed40c%2F0_163_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F658a9ae523a5af57e698fcdbeac3710726aed40c%2F0_163_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Frank Ocean performing at the Pemberton Music and Arts festival, 2014. 
Photograph: Andrew Chin/FilmMagic 

There is nothing happy-making – for me, at least – about my teenage son’s 
grime and hip-hop playlist pounding through the floorboards of his room at 11 
o’clock at night. However, he knows how to get round me: just playFrank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean>. I absolutely love him, 
especially anything from 2012’sbrilliant Channel Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/11/frank-ocean-channel-orange-review1>
. Thinkin’ Bout You, Lost and Forrest Gump are tracks guaranteed to bring some 
sunshine to the greyest of days. LO’K

22. Film: Holiday (1938) <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0030241/>


Bringing Up Baby and The Philadelphia Story get more exposure, but this is the 
most blissfully perfect of all Cary Grant-Katharine Hepburn pairings. Airy and 
joyous, wise but seemingly written on a champagne buzz, this story of two 
society misfits finding saucy sanctuary in each other is everything a romantic 
comedy should strive to be.GL

23. TV: BoJack Horseman <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/70300800> (Netflix)


This animated series for grownups about the stupidity of fame plumbs depths of 
bleakness that take your breath away. But, oh, the jokes! The series’ nihilism 
comes hand-in-hand with quite exquisite silliness. “I’m the only albino rhino 
gyno I know,” notes one character, deadpan. “Oh great,” says his date, eyeing 
the bottle he has just ordered, “you’re also a wine addict.”KE

24. Music: Prince of Peace by Pharoah Sanders 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkAqreTNYc8>


I’m not a believer, and musically I’m drawn to melancholy not rapture. Yet the 
deeply spiritual sound pioneered by John Coltrane in the 1960s, exemplified by 
his protege Pharoah Sanders’s soaring collaborations with vocalist Leon Thomas 
(see alsoThe Creator Has a Master Plan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QZ6lB7FKxi8>), transcends such matters, 
leaving this heathen in a state of bliss. PA

25. Film: The Intouchables (2011) 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1675434/videoplayer/vi59285529?ref_=tt_ov_vi>


This film broke French box-office records and the scene in which 
larger-than-life Omar Sy playing an unlikely carer takes to the dance floor to 
divert cultured paraplegic (Francois Cluzet) is unbeatable. Kate Kellaway, 
writer and critic

26. Books: I Want My Hat Back by John Klassen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/video/2011/sep/07/hatback-trailer>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc529ee4abda0199510e1e25208e40854800e9682%2F0_208_1200_632%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20happy%20list%20%E2%80%93%2030%20cultural%20gems%20to%20brighten%20dark%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2F30-the-happy-list-upbeat-cultural-gems-singin-in-the-rain-carpool-karaoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc529ee4abda0199510e1e25208e40854800e9682%2F0_208_1200_632%2F1200.jpg>
 Photograph: Walker Publishers/Jon Klassen 

There’s a special kind of delight in reading a funny picture book with a kid, 
and this deliciously deadpan tale of a bear on the trail of his lost hat is 
irresistible. The witty dialogue and illustrations are full of hidden meaning, 
and the outrageous denouement always has us shrieking. A masterclass in comic 
timing.SD 

27. Place : Kirkby Lonsdale, Cumbria <http://www.kirkbylonsdale.co.uk/>


Take a trip to Kirkby Lonsdale, on the edge of the Lake District, find St 
Mary’s Churchyard, and then follow the signs toRuskin’s View 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=ruskin%27s+view+turner&newwindow=1&espv=2&biw=1639&bih=1161&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjHzIXi5rzRAhVmIcAKHR2jAB4Q_AUIBigB#imgrc=DMy_ZaW8xjvRLM%3A>
. Below you is the Lune Valley, abidingly green and gorgeous. Painted by Turner 
in 1816, this is the vista John Ruskin described as “one of the loveliest views 
in England, therefore in the world” – and who, honestly, could disagree? RC 

28. Music: Prelude to 110 or 220 / Women of the World by Jim O’Rourke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/18/jim-o-rourke-simple-songs> 


Beyonce’s Who Run the World (Girls) 
<http://www.vevo.com/watch/beyonce/run-the-world-(girls)/USSM21100926> is hard 
to beat for a blast of poppy female empowerment. But it’s O’Rourke’sIvor Cutler 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xUlixFMpUw> cover, delivered as a soothing 
incantation with ecstatic orchestral bursts – “Women of the world take over / 
’Cause if you don’t the world will come to an end / And it won’t take long” – 
that always makes me feel hopeful, like the world is full of possibility.IC

29. Book: The Rubaiyat by Omar Khayyam 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rubaiyat-of-omar-khayyam.html> (1048-1131)


Translated from the Persian by Edward FitzGerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/dec/29/poem-week-edward-fitzgerald>
 (1859 edition)
The Rubaiyat is steeped in melancholy and yet its rhymes intoxicate: “Awake! 
for morning in the bowl of night/has flung the stone that puts the stars to 
flight,/and lo! the hunter of the east has caught/the sultan’s turret in a 
noose of light.” KK

30. Music: Green Grow the Rashes by Michael Marra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Io-n-WIcj_M>


A rare and grand and lovely man. And a Burns song that still thrills with its 
modernity. Listen, lasses, to the lyrics: world, translate them, it’s not that 
hard.EF
 