
EastEnders: every Christmas knees-up and punch-up – ranked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/23/eastenders-every-christmas-knees-up-and-punch-up-ranked>
Walford has never been rated on TripAdvisor as the best place to find a happy 
new year. Yet even byEastEnders’ own standards 2017 got off to a particularly 
tragic start with the death of double fun-bomb Ronnie and Roxy Mitchell. Like 
Aunty Peggy before them, these two summed up the classic spirit of East End 
womanhood: glamorous, hard as freshly Shellaced nails, but vulnerable, too. 
They kept the faaa-mily bond by bowing out together after Ronnie and Jack’s big 
fat country wedding.

The big day began with Shirl hurling her hen-night skinful into the Queen Vic 
toilet, while Mick Carter munched a bacon bap. “What a beautiful start of a 
wedding day,” he ruminated, while the rest of the Square held out little hope 
for a happy ever after. Phil, with his head like a deflated Wonderbra cup, was 
bedridden after a liver transplant, but sent a sports car for the bride-to-be. 
“It’s like that film, innit?” mused Honey. “Thelma And Louise.” By this time 
there were so many bad omens it would have been a miracle if Ronnie and Roxy 
made it to the fancy country house for the ceremony. But they did, looking as 
resplendent as ever. “I think my boobs are going to come out,” worried Roxy, 
unaware that they were already hoisted so close to her nostrils, viewers would 
be forgiven for thinking Phil and Grant had already turned up to the nuptials.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe932e7e56d370bb442a5a8c348333e95a7fd1786%2F0_14_1604_962%2F1604.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20soaps%3A%20EastEnders'%20wedding%20wrecker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20soaps%3A%20EastEnders%27%20wedding%20wrecker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe932e7e56d370bb442a5a8c348333e95a7fd1786%2F0_14_1604_962%2F1604.jpg>
 Toyah (Georgia Taylor) returns to Coronation Street. Photograph: ITV 
With the reception in full swing, R’n’R took to the dancefloor with the same 
aplomb they displayed when they tumbled off the easyJet and into the Queen Vic 
10 glorious years ago. In a touching homage to the early days, they pulled the 
same classic dance moves and sprayed their guests with soda syphons. Clearly in 
the mood for trouble, Ronnie grabbed two bottles of champagne and summoned Roxy 
to the pool. “This isn’t just the end of an era, it’s the beginning of a new 
one,” said Ronnie. “Don’t look back.” Pertinent words indeed. Hammered, giggly 
and pondering a new start, Roxy dived into the swimming pool and… didn’t come 
back up. As Ronnie realised her sister wasn’t surfacing she dived in to save 
her. Sadly, Ron’s cumbersome wedding dress wasn’t suitable swimwear and they 
drowned together in an eerie scene. Let’s hope they’re dancing on that great 
glittery podium in the sky. It’s what they would have wanted.

Why are there no care workers in Coronation Street?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2017/jan/11/why-are-there-no-care-workers-in-coronation-street>
In more jolly sisterly news, Coronation Street hailed the return of Our Toyah. 
That’s Toyah Battersby to you, who was last seen heading off for the bright 
lights of London 13 years ago. Wait. Who? “Leanne’s sister,” explained Tracy. 
“No, stepsister. Whatever. Some barm pot. She was one of them, you know, soap 
dodgers, always banging on about the ozone.” Well, she did arrive in her 
pyjamas, having left her husband. “It’ll be fine,” soothed Leanne. “People get 
stressed out at Christmas, don’t they?” “Especially if they’re called 
Battersby,” Nick helpfully replied.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38ae812e43f96606f370af1e2a3d44a1cd3344da%2F0_171_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20soaps%3A%20EastEnders'%20wedding%20wrecker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20soaps%3A%20EastEnders%27%20wedding%20wrecker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38ae812e43f96606f370af1e2a3d44a1cd3344da%2F0_171_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Cameron Campbell (Cameron Moore) and Leela Lomax (Kirsty Leigh-Porter) in 
Hollyoaks. Photograph: Graham Morris 
All hell broke loose on the Battersby-Barlow front with Leanne’s squeeze Nick 
rowing with Peter over a Bros tape. Yes, really. He mistook it as Peter’s 
attempt to win back Leanne, who’s now faking happy families with Nick. Cue a 
Christmas Day brawl on the cobbles, the highlight of which was Nick sending 
Peter flying into Gail’s front garden. Peter then retaliated by lobbing prized 
gnome Mr Tufty at his assailant’s head. There was a bigger bombshell ahead as 
Peter slipped off to a hotel to meet his secret lover, who was revealed to be 
not Leanne but… Our Toyah. Sweet, soapy intrigue, played out in screeching 
style.

Over in Hollyoaks, Leela Lomax (stick a “The Very Miss” in front of that and 
you’ve got yourself a cracking drag queen name) was like the Virgin Mary of 
soaps when she went into labour over Christmas. Only without the virgin bit. 
She was still in her wedding dress as the sprog was two months early. 
Tellingly, her baby was a different race to her serial-killer husband-to-be 
Cameron. So, er, who’s the daddy then?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeb9da3bf348536bfd5323d8b06b3d58d6564041%2F0_39_2008_1205%2F2008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20soaps%3A%20EastEnders'%20wedding%20wrecker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20soaps%3A%20EastEnders%27%20wedding%20wrecker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmonth-in-soaps-eastenders-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeb9da3bf348536bfd5323d8b06b3d58d6564041%2F0_39_2008_1205%2F2008.jpg>
 Moira Dingle (Natalie J Robb) gets behind the wheel in Emmerdale. Photograph: 
Andrew Boyce 
Finally to Emmerdale, where Moira did what all villagers who are having a hard 
time do: boozed it up and nearly killed someone. She mowed down current village 
hotpot Pete (whom she’d also been sleeping with, which isn’t exactly 
conventional as she’s his half-brother’s mum) while she was sozzled. In happier 
news, crumple-faced patriarch Zak Dingle dumped his bit on the side Joanie and 
went back to be-apronned wife Lisa. If the thought of watching their love 
scenes conjures up an image of two sheep who’ve spent too long in the dip, look 
away now. It’s not an image you can unsee.
 