
Less than a fortnight ago, the day after Manchester City’s 5-0 demolition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/pep-guardiola-bigger-london-stadium-helped-manchester-city>
 of West Ham United away from home in the FA Cup, the Sun produced one of the 
more inspired back pages of the season in honour of the performance. “MC 
Hammer!” the main headline screamed, accompanied by a picture of David Silva 
complete with speech bubble reading: “You can’t touch this.”

It all seemed completely in order. Pep Guardiola’s side had just made the most 
emphatic of statements to restore some of the belief that went missing in the 
new year fixtures, when defeat at Anfield was followed bythe various 
controversies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/17/manchester-city-bacary-sagna-fa-charge-instagram>
 surrounding the narrow win against Burnley. A manager who had been sourly 
defensive in a television interview after the latter was now all smiles and 
sunny confidence, promising his side would be all the better for the luxury of 
a full week to prepare for their next game at Everton.

Manchester City set to announce Gabriel Jesus is eligible to face Tottenham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/18/manchester-city-gabriel-jesus-eligible>
As you may have heard, that plan did not go as well as might have been 
expected. Everton were pretty good, thoroughlydeserving of their 4-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/everton-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, but City were woeful again, failing in at least three major departments and 
ending up barely recognisable as the side who trounced West Ham. First, they 
failed to take advantage in the period in the first half when they were on top, 
missing two or three decent chances to open the scoring. That can happen to 
anyone but City need to work out why Sergio Agüero is not getting on the end of 
more of their best chances. He is the best finisher at the club by a mile and 
the sight of Silva or Raheem Sterling squandering presentable opportunities 
only reinforces the fact.

Second, wet paper bags have offered more resistance than the City backline in 
recent weeks. When Romelu Lukaku opened the scoring it was Everton’s first 
attempt on target and it went in, a pattern that has become established in 
previous games, not least when the same player did the same thing to City at 
the Etihad. It is not all Claudio Bravo’s fault, although a compilation of the 
goalkeeper’s greatest saves this season would be on the short side, but when 
City make a mistake in defence it often leads to them being opened up 
completely. Unchallenged near the penalty spot, Lukaku could not miss.

Third, City heads tend to drop when they go behind. That did not happen 
immediately after Lukaku’s goal, though it did when Kevin Mirallas added a 
second at the start of the second half. It is not quite true there is no 
character or fight in the squad – City came from a goal behind to beat Arsenal 
in December – but they were never close to pulling themselves back into the 
game at Goodison and by the end they looked as though they could not wait to 
get off the pitch.

Guardiola was asked the usual question about whether title hopes had 
disappeared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-rules-out-title-race>
 and for the first time he mumbled that they might have. It was an unnecessary 
point to make anyway, he seemed to feel. Champion teams do not fall to 
four-goal defeats in such a shambolic manner, certainly not to opponents 
outside the top six with little else to play for other than seventh position.

And so the story moves on to City’s next top-six encounter, which happens to 
be this Saturday at home toTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur>, who happen to be on a 
six-match winning run. Lots of top-six teams seem to have put together long 
sequences of wins this season (even Manchester United managed it until being 
held by Liverpool at the weekend) but City’s own six-match winning sequence in 
the league – right at the start of the season in case you are having difficulty 
recalling it – was ended by Spurs with a workmanlike 2-0 victory at White Hart 
Lane at the beginning of October.

It is tempting to suggest City have not been the same since, though that would 
barely cover their wild fluctuations in form and efficiency. They have 
certainly not managed the same consistency. The best run they have put together 
is three successive wins in December, one of which was against Arsenal, though 
that mini-recovery was in response to their dreadful performance in losing 4-2 
at Leicester City, not to mention several of their players losing their heads 
in defeat by Chelsea the previous week. Guardiola must be struggling like 
everyone else to make sense of City’s season. On the one hand a side who can 
beat Barcelona must be doing something right, yet there is always the sneaking 
suspicion Barcelona are the one team Guardiola ought to know how to beat, 4-0 
hiding at the Camp Nou notwithstanding. It is teams such as Leicester and 
Everton, Middlesbrough and Southampton that Guardiola has lost ground against 
this season.

Spurs have had their wobbles too but Mauricio Pochettino has been sounding 
more and more bullish about the league since going out of the Champions League, 
and with good reason. Spurs were the sidewho ended Chelsea’s attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 at a record sequence of wins, after all, and since then they have been on a 
run of their own. Their six successive victories have been put together by 
scoring 19 goals and conceding three. The last stat is possibly more important 
than the first.

Spurs can defend. They can keep a clean sheet against a side as strong as 
Chelsea and they can hang on to leads once they have gone in front. They will 
be no pushover at the Etihad, though at this stage no one has a clue which 
version of City they will be up against. Will it be the side picked off so 
professionally by Chelsea, or the one who kept their composure when going a 
goal down to Arsenal? The one thing that can be said is the Etihad has not been 
quite the fortress City fans would wish in recent seasons; it is not an arena 
that seems to inhibit title rivals or top-six opponents.

What has happened to Pep Guardiola’s project at Manchester City?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-everton-problems>
Leicester and Liverpool enjoyed themselves at City’s expense last season, 
Chelsea were decisive winners this time, and apart fromthe 3-1 victory over 
Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
 Guardiola’s players have rarely hit the heights on their own turf.

This could be the weekend to do it. If Spurs secure a seventh victory they 
will most likely have wind in their sails for the rest of the season, just as 
Leicester did last year, and a sixth Premier League defeat would leave City a 
lot to do just to finish in the top four. Scintillating as the 5-0 win at West 
Ham was, it was against a side with a few problems and it was only the FA Cup.

The time has come for City to make a similar statement in the league – they 
can no longer afford to keep handing the initiative to their opponents. This is 
crunch time for Guardiola too. He has already been through more mood swings 
than Basil Fawlty and simply cannot allow Pochettino to use Saturday’s game to 
further his claim to be the smartest young coach around. It was always agreed 
this was going to be an engrossing Premier League season, with half a dozen 
exceptional managers battling for the top-four places. Yet even for one of the 
most successful in history, no one said it would be easy.
 