
For anyone who is really concerned about keeping their thoughts private there 
is only one piece of reliable technology: write with a pen on paper, and burn 
what you’ve written when you’re done. For the rest of us, who want to get 
things done, there is an inevitable trade-off which we still don’t entirely 
understand. We now carry with us everywhere devices that give us access to all 
the world’s information, but they can also offer almost all the world vast 
quantities of information about us. The sense of personal integrity and 
boundaries that seems self-evident is actually the product of particular social 
arrangements which are profoundly affected by technology even though it doesn’t 
determine them. Technological change could move us towardsour better selves 
<http://events.doctorswithoutborders.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=donorDrive.personalCampaign&participantID=3834>
 orour worse ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/italy-grapples-with-suicide-of-woman-taunted-over-online-sex-video>
, but things can’t stay as they are.

To go online is to descend into a world as transparent as an aquarium – and 
this aquarium is full of sharks. The newly discoveredvulnerability in 
WhatsApp’s procedures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-backdoor-allows-snooping-on-encrypted-messages>
 is only the latest in an apparently unending succession of moments of 
unintended transparency.

It would be a mistake to see these problems as primarily technological because 
that would suggest that their solutions would be technological, too. In fact, 
the preservation of personal privacy and collective security online is a 
political and social task as much as it is one for the very few experts who 
understand the ramifications of mathematical magics like public key 
cryptography. Technological solutions will only work within a legal and 
political context, and the real threats to privacy come not from vulnerable 
widgets but weak laws, careless users and feeble oversight. TheWhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> encryption scheme is proof 
against anyone who does not control or threaten the company’s own networks, 
which is something only a government could do. But sufficiently ruthless 
governments would not hesitate to do so if they had the opportunity. And 
against sufficient ruthlessness and physical power, technology is ultimately no 
defence. Although we can use schemes of encryption that are mathematically 
impossible to crack, so long as the password is known to anyone it can be 
tricked or even tortured from its holder.

Adding to this problem is the increasingly permeable border between state and 
non-state actors. When the FBI could not crack the iPhone used in the San 
Bernadino shootings, it turned toa private firm in Israel 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-38607670>, which could. But that company 
has in turn now been hacked, and meanwhile many of the devices designed for use 
by law enforcement, which can suck all the information out of a captured mobile 
phone, can now be bought freely over the internet 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/backroom-trading-phone-cracking-devices-is-sketchy-as-hell-cellebrite>
 by any private company – or mafia outfit.

These threats can seem very distant. It’s easy to suppose that you will never 
come to the attention of a hostile state apparatus. On the other hand, the 
commercially motivated attacks on privacy pervade the whole of the internet, 
and in fact fund most of it today. Websites routinely collect as much 
information as they can about the users and then sell it on to data brokers for 
use in personally targeted advertising campaigns.Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> (which, incidentally, owns 
WhatsApp) has built its entire titanic empire on this trade. Even when this 
data is anonymised, the protection is leaky, and in any case, someone who knows 
everything about you except your name is in a much stronger position than one 
who knows your name but nothing else.

But the real danger comes when these two kinds of loss of privacy combine so 
that the knowledge gained for commercial ends is used for political 
manipulation too. It is in the interests of advertisers to short-circuit 
rational thought and careful consideration, but it is even more in the 
interests of demagogues to do so. Against this we must rely on moral and 
intellectual defences much more than the supposed magic of advanced technology.
 