
It’s the most important, meaningful and – for many – anxiety-provoking day of 
your life. You’re going to experience the rare privilege of being at the centre 
of the action as a new life begins. Added to this, you may well be naked and 
somewhat indisposed. Who would you choose to be with you? Someone you know and 
trust? Or a total stranger? It’s a no-brainer, isn’t it?

And yet a report 
<https://www.nct.org.uk/sites/default/files/related_documents/Support_Overdue_2017.pdf>
 published today by the National Federation of Women’s Institutes (NFWI) and 
childbirth charity the NCT has shown, yet again, that this most obvious of 
human needs is simply not being met for women. Rather than being accompanied by 
a familiar and trusted figure, most women (88%) surveyed did not know their 
midwife when they went into labour or gave birth. Of these women, 12% said this 
made them feel alone and vulnerable, and 6% said they felt unsafe. Comments 
were made comparingtreatment to that of cattle, and like being on a conveyor 
belt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/17/uk-midwife-shortage-report-red-flag>
.

One solution women could opt for – an independent midwife –has also just been 
removed

The report also highlights that as many as 50% of women are experiencing 
so-called “red flag events” in their labour – situations which are seen as 
warning signs of understaffing, such as women having to wait more than 30 
minutes for pain relief, or more than an hour to receive the stitches they need.

Midwife shortages have long been highlighted; the last estimate by the Royal 
College of Midwives in 2016 suggested that3,500 
<https://www.rcm.org.uk/news-views-and-analysis/news/birth-rate-rise-%E2%80%93-%E2%80%983500-midwives-needed%E2%80%99>
 more were needed to meet the rising birth rate. And the impact of shortages 
reaches far beyond red flag events. The effect of not being able to establish a 
relationship with your midwife begins long before you are in stirrups waiting 
for stitches: research has shown, for example, that women who know their 
midwife are24% less likely to experience pre-term birth 
<https://www.rcm.org.uk/sites/default/files/Continuity%20of%20midwife-led%20care.pdf>
, and are 16% less likely to lose their baby during the pregnancy.

Knowing your midwife also means you are more likely to have a vaginal birth, 
and less likely to experience interventions such as forceps or episiotomy. And 
women who experience continuity of care repeatedly reporthigher levels of 
satisfaction <https://www.gtc.ox.ac.uk/images/stories/academic/skp_report.pdf>, 
an increased sense of agency and control, and more positive birth experiences. 
After the birth, as the NFWI/NCT report highlights, almost one in five women 
are not seeing a midwife as often as they need to, let alone one with whom they 
have a relationship. This is a vital yet neglected time for maternal mental 
health.

We know this – all of this – and have done for some time. We know that 
relationship-based care is better for women, and we know that we need many more 
midwives to raise services up to this standard. We also know that this is what 
midwives themselves want, with many feeling burnt out by a system that – as one 
person who had left after 30 years in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> anonymously told me – demands that 
they are “with computer”, rather than, “with women”.

UK midwife shortage leaves women feeling like cattle, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/17/uk-midwife-shortage-report-red-flag>
Indeed, the recent Maternity Review 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/national-maternity-review-report.pdf>
 highlighted “continuity of carer” as one of the key priorities in improving 
birth. And yet, in the current system, it seems to be harder and harder to come 
by. Women who I meet via my organisation, the Positive Birth Movement 
<http://www.positivebirthmovement.org/>, often report fragmented care 
experiences in which they have to repeat their histories to each new midwife, a 
situation which is at best frustrating, and at worst dangerous. Getting the 
birth you want in the setting you wish for can also be a tough battle: home 
births can be denied due to lack of staff, midwife-led units closed or full, 
and higher-risk women such as those with twins or breech babies left feeling 
they have limited options in a system that is over-stretched and depersonalised.

One solution women could opt for, and which I chose for my own second and 
third births, has also just been removed: the option of an independent midwife. 
These self-employed midwives with huge expertise in normal birth, can – for a 
fee – attend you personally at every step of your pregnancy, birth and 
postnatally, in your own home. However, this week the Nursing and Midwifery 
Council has ruled that the insurance arrangements of these midwives – the 82 
members of Independent Midwives UK – are insufficient and haseffectively shut 
them down overnight 
<https://www.nursingtimes.net/news/professional-regulation/nmc-accused-of-disruption-to-midwives-in-indemnity-dispute/7014834.article>
, with many of their clients being left without a midwife. The charity
Birthrights has said that the decision 
<http://www.birthrights.org.uk/2017/01/birthrights-criticises-nmc-for-independent-midwives-decision/>
 “directly jeopardises the health and safety of the women it (the NMC) is 
supposed to safeguard”.

NHS England has today offered assurance that the Better Births initiative 
<https://www.rcm.org.uk/better-births-initiative>, now being rolled out in 
pilot schemes following the recommendations of the Maternity Review, will 
provide women with “access to a small team of midwives for continuity 
throughout pregnancy, birth and postnatally”. We can live in hope, but right 
now, this level of care – which both women and midwives want and deserve – 
seems a long way off, and conveyor-belt care, or worse still, being treated 
like cattle, is more likely.

• This article was amended on 18 January 2017 to clarify that the NMC’s ruling 
related only to the insurance arrangements of the self-employed independent 
midwives who are members of Independent Midwives UK.
 