
Long before 1970s sexploitation comedies such as Eskimo Nell 
<https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/eskimo-nell/> and Come Play With Me 
<http://www.videodetective.com/movies/come-play-with-me/812920> brought bawdy 
humour and copiousT&A 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=T%20and%20A> to the commercial 
theatres of Britain, the country’s smut industry comprised an informal economy 
of club impresarios, carneys and photographers. Their work was part of a long 
lineage of stag films, 8mm home movies, mondo and nudist documentaries, and 
filmed stripteases exhibited to select audiences of men via cinema clubs or on 
private reels. Often produced on zero budget and distributed through a network 
of magazine subscriptions and black market retailers, these motion pictures 
were mostly disposed of or forgotten in short order.


The BFI’s new collection, The Pleasure Principle 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/collections/the-pleasure-principle/>, the most recent 
addition to its massive Britain on Film online initiative, has digitised more 
than40 such examples of reclaimed erotica. Their duration spans from the late 
19th century to the advent of home video, often seen as signalling the death of 
the softcore genre. Divergent in style and fetish but tame in imagery (at least 
by later hardcore standards), the collection provides a fascinating history of 
Britain cinema’s evolving and often transgressive relationship with the body.

“In Britain, we have always been slightly ashamed of our sexual impulses,” says
BFI <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi> curator Vic Pratt, who organised the 
film collection. “The British as a nation were culturally, perhaps, more 
inclined to laugh at sex, or mock it, or make a smutty innuendo, rather than 
address it head-on. I think this has always been reflected in the way we have 
produced our erotic or sex cinema here.”

Some of The Pleasure Principle’s earliest silent examples, such as A Victorian 
Lady in Her Boudoir 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-victorian-lady-in-her-boudoir-1896/> 
(1896) and Nude Woman by Waterfall (1920), bear out this observation, revealing 
female models in a modest petticoat or in brief flashes of toplessness using 
highly choreographed, if not pictorialist, tableaux. Such innocuous images were 
far from the full-frontal nudity and genital penetration shown in American and 
European “stags” of the era.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYDw4z1PIJoQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYDw4z1PIJoQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYDw4z1PIJoQ&media=>
The 1907 sight gag reel Merry Moments in France similarly removes any 
lubricity from its Folies Bergère-inspired cabaret, allowing the patrons only 
to drink and then cavort off-screen with the hostess. Other post-first world 
war artefacts such as The Uncharted Sea (1928) andThe Irresponsibles 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-irresponsibles-1929/> (1929), both 
produced by British Instructional Films, an “educational” studio closely linked 
to government and imperial interests, are little more than propaganda shorts on 
the ruinous lifestyles of promiscuity and feminism.

A slightly later example in the collection, Action in Slow Motion 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-beauty-in-brief-1955/> (1943) provides the 
first extended nudist scenario, with a woman frolicking on the beach in 
real-time and then at a more sensual, half-speed. “It’s very innocuous 
material, but the fact that there is moving nudity would have been considered 
quite dangerous,” Pratt says. So much so that a certified disclaimer prefacing 
the film warns its content is “expressly for ‘Artists and Students’ and failure 
to comply with this condition will make exhibitor liable to penalties imposed 
by the authorities.” The more risquéBeauty in Brief 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-beauty-in-brief-1955/> (1955), traced to 
the anonymous Pin-Up Productions, is an early instance of a glamour film, in 
which the model is recorded disrobing and trying on various outfits for a 
“hidden” camera.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_1V1FjLGYfo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_1V1FjLGYfo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_1V1FjLGYfo&media=>
“These kitschy cheesecake films were about as extreme as you could get,” Pratt 
says. “They would never have been submitted to the censors. They were 
advertised in the backs of newspapers or ‘glamour’ magazines. So you would 
write off for these films, which would probably be sent in plain, brown 
wrapping, or they would be bought discreetly from the nearest dirty bookshop.”

The restrictive limitations over the production of erotic films through the 
war era were both juridical and logistical. Victorian-era legislation including 
the Obscene Publications Act of 1857, which famously compared pornography with 
poison, still provided the framework for censorship during the first decades of 
British film exhibition.

The British Board of Film Censors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/mar/13/filmcensorship.seanclarke> 
(BBFC), founded in 1912, a full two decades before Hollywood’sHays Code 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/film/id/592022/>, assumed the role of arbiter 
by requiring that all motion pictures be reviewed and certified prior to 
release. Added to which, 35mm film stock ensured that the recording and 
projection of films was prohibitively expensive to all but large, commercial 
studios and cinemas. These restrictions were only changed with the 
liberalisation of obscenity statutes and the developments of 16mm and then 8mm 
movie cameras and projectors, which proliferated by the late 1950s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbritish-erotic-cinema-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa861b86bb2bba7d7ad05009c9b276e2a0053c155%2F230_62_1472_883%2F1472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sex%20files%3A%20a%20history%20of%20erotic%20films%20from%20slo-mo%20frolics%20to%20romping%20stags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbritish-erotic-cinema-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sex%20files%3A%20a%20history%20of%20erotic%20films%20from%20slo-mo%20frolics%20to%20romping%20stags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbritish-erotic-cinema-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa861b86bb2bba7d7ad05009c9b276e2a0053c155%2F230_62_1472_883%2F1472.jpg>
 A still of Strip! Strip! Hooray!!!, 1932. Photograph: BFI available on BFI 
Player 
One of the first commercial motion pictures to break the BBFC’s strict nude 
“barrier” was not British, but rather an American film on the subject of 
naturism. Naturist, or nudist, films had enjoyed occasional popularity with 
American audiences since the 1930s, but the Garden of Eden (1954) established 
the financial and legal viability of the genre in the US, and in UK theatres by 
1958.

“Breasts and buttocks, but not genitalia [would be accepted] provided that the 
setting was recognisable as a nudist camp or nature reserve,” wrote BBFC 
censors in response to the new wave of erotic pictures that capitalised on the 
T&A craze. The online collection includes an amusing 1957 episode of Out of 
Step hosted by Daniel Farson who interviews (mostly) clothed men pontificating 
on the aesthetic and ethical merits of nude women.

The new, permissive climate inaugurated by nudist films encouraged a larger 
diversification of erotic styles and personal artistry. Film-makers such as 
Harrison Marks, Arnold Miller and Stanley Long, as well as media impresarios 
such as Paul Raymond and Tony Tenser and models includingPamela Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/may/19/pamela-green-obituary> and 
June Palmer used naturism as an opportunity to further push the boundaries of 
censorship with depictions of stripteases and naked stage revues, mondo 
documentaries and horror-exploitation. Marks’Xcitement! 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-xcitement-1960/> (1960) casts girlfriend 
and co-publisher Green in a very erotic striptease, whileVampire 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-vampire-1964/> (1964) uses the Gothic 
stock character to seduce a bare-breasted damsel. Both short films were 
produced and sold alongside Marks and Green’s Kamera magazine, a popular series 
of nude portfolios originating in 1957.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiYDkVMu_oR4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiYDkVMu_oR4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiYDkVMu_oR4&media=>
Green, who became the face (and the body) of the 60s nudie cutie, would also 
have a starring turn in Michael Powell’s thrillerPeeping Tom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peeping-tom> (1960), the most controversial 
entry in the BFI collection. As the legend now goes, the film’s press 
screenings, which preceded fellow Brit Alfred Hitchcock’s American slasher 
Psycho (1960) by three months, were met with excoriations from critics. The 
Spectator reported it as “the sickest, filthiest film I remember seeing”, while 
the London Tribune memorably suggested that “the only really satisfactory way 
to dispose of Peeping Tom would be to shovel it up and flush it swiftly down 
the nearest sewer”. The film’s narrative of a serial killer who stalks Soho’s 
smut industry and records snuff films of his victims (including a bare-breasted 
Green) realised the very nightmare of sex and violence that threatened English 
social mores.

The explosion of Soho’s nightclub industry (members’ only strip clubs were 
reported to number 200 in 1960 according to the Spectator) and the burgeoning 
flickers of youth culture supplied a modish style for erotic image-makers. The 
popular Miller-directed “mondo” docs, London in the Raw (1964) and Primitive 
London (1965), which were “part tit-show, part satire, part tabloid editorial” 
according to the writer Iain Sinclair, highlighted the voluptuous glamour of a 
new decade fascinated by fashion and sexual spectacle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbritish-erotic-cinema-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fa6161f269b61f1ef372430f3febc852cf2d573%2F221_91_1474_884%2F1474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sex%20files%3A%20a%20history%20of%20erotic%20films%20from%20slo-mo%20frolics%20to%20romping%20stags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbritish-erotic-cinema-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sex%20files%3A%20a%20history%20of%20erotic%20films%20from%20slo-mo%20frolics%20to%20romping%20stags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbritish-erotic-cinema-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fa6161f269b61f1ef372430f3febc852cf2d573%2F221_91_1474_884%2F1474.jpg>
 A still of From Stags to Stardust, 1977. Photograph: null/BFI available on BFI 
Player 
London in the Raw is a sort of psychogeographic dérive of the Soho underworld 
complete with a harem of topless showgirls and strippers; but it also features 
various slice-of-life sequences (many of which are scripted performances) in 
brothels, casinos and other dens of iniquity. Still, as Sinclair so aptly 
recognises, for all of Miller’s images of sex and frivolity, the narrative 
formula is more indebted to John Betjeman than Michelangelo Antonioni.

Whatever countercultural pretensions Miller’s films held for audiences would 
be swiftly supplanted by the more iconoclasticRepulsion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/03/repulsion-review> (1965), Blow-Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/23/my-favourite-film-blow-up>
 (1966) andTonite Let’s All Make Love in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/nov/22/artsfeatures7> (1967). When 
Antonioni captured the unprecedented image of young actress Jane Birkin’s pubic 
hair in Blow-Up, the pornographer’s sly game of hide-and-seek was finally 
exposed – and the so-called “golden age” of erotic cinema would soon follow.

As an alternative history of British film-making, The Pleasure Principle 
finally recognises the aesthetic contributions of the home-movie models and 
backroom peddlers who plied their erotic wares in secret. These louche relics 
still manage to provoke and titillate a n internet-era society struggling to 
come to terms with its own overexposed sexuality.

• The BFI’s collection The Pleasure Principle 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/collections/the-pleasure-principle/> is live now. 
Erik Morse is the author of Bluff City Underground: A Roman Noir of the Deep 
South.
 