
Two years ago Chelsea quit her job as a pharmacy technician to play video 
games.

“I went to work one day and I was like, ‘I would actually be making more money 
if I had stayed at home and kept playing video games than coming here,’” she 
says. That week she handed in her resignation.

Chelsea is one of a growing number of Australian women making a living from 
Twitch.tv <https://www.twitch.tv/>, a live-video streaming platform that allows 
people from all over the world to watch one another play games. It’s also a 
social network: chat rooms are embedded into user pages next to video streams, 
allowing the broadcaster and audience to interact in real time. Going by the 
username Xminks, Chelsea has become renowned for her skills in Call of Duty – 
so much so that playing it online has become her bread and butter. Every night 
about 10pm she turns on her webcam, chats to some of her 330,000 followers and 
gets to work.

Gamergate: the internet is the toughest game in town – if you’re playing as a 
woman | Charlie Brooker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/20/gamergate-internet-toughest-game-woman-enemies>
Twitch has somehow escaped becoming a household name despite its phenomenal 
popularity: the company claims it has 9.7 million active users on its site 
every day and more than 2 million streamers a month. Amazon saw its potential 
in 2014 andbought it for $970m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/26/amazon-buys-video-streaming-website-twitch-1bn-dollars>
, even though the decision left many business commentators scratching their 
heads at the time.

The company doesn’t only deal in online interactions: it also livestreams some 
of the world’s biggest video game tournaments, in which professional gamers 
compete in stadiums in front of thousands of people and millions of online 
viewers. Audiences for game tournamentsroutinely surpass those of mainstream 
television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/15/esports-mainstream-media-bbc-sky-dota-2-league-of-legends>
 – yet somehow the scene manages to retain the illusion of being a subculture.

While a tiny number of gamers become tournament megastars, more garden-variety 
streamers make their money through fan donations and sponsorships. Popular 
streamers are offered the option of partnering with Twitch to install a 
subscriptions feature on their page, which gives users the opportunity to pay a 
fee of US$4.99 a month to the streamer’s channel.Twitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitch>, of course, takes a slice, but 
half the subscription fee goes directly to the streamer and most users 
subscribe to support their favourite gamers.

“It becomes a base salary for streamers, instead of just relying on tips, 
which one month could be $100, which next month could be $4,000 – you never 
know,” says Mia. She is a relative newcomer to the world of livestreaming. 
Although she has been playing games since she was kid, she only discovered 
Twitch about 18 months ago, through an online friend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf7a720612c57282d72e72767ae448bf232ce5df%2F0_71_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20women%20who%20make%20a%20living%20gaming%20on%20Twitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20women%20who%20make%20a%20living%20gaming%20on%20Twitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf7a720612c57282d72e72767ae448bf232ce5df%2F0_71_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Like much of the online world, streamers and their followers are often 
anonymous. Photograph: Jan Johannessen/Getty Images 
“I didn’t have gamer friends … and it’s not something that you would just 
stumble across,” she explains. “When I found Twitch and saw that so many people 
have all these friends and were doing amazing things and sharing their 
experience together, I just really wanted to get on board.”

Mia, whose screen name is SeriesofBlurs, dived straight in. “I was working my 
normal full-time job and then I would come home and start streaming straight 
away … and then go to midnight and then repeat,” she says.

She knew very quickly that she wanted to become a full-time streamer, but 
building up a following while holding down another job was hard. Then there 
were the social implications. “I would constantly be having to defend it, not 
only to my friends, who were like, ‘Why aren’t you coming out?,’ but to myself 
as well, because I had a lot of self-doubt.”

Being a professional gamer sounds like a dream come true and an increasing 
number of Australian women are making it their profession – many of them using 
Twitch as a platform, making anywhere between the equivalent of the minimum 
wage to hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.

Whether or not it can be a decades-long career, though, remains to be seen. 
While there are numerous men whose live gaming careers seem not to be hampered 
by their age, the number of women over the age of 30 visible in the gaming 
sphere is comparatively low.


Growing up in a girls’ school, it wasn’t really common to be into video games
Mia 
“It depends on the game,” says Chelsea. “I’ve seen some Sim City and 
Civilisation games, and I’ve seen older women there, but it’s very rare.”

Kat, whose username is Loserfruit, is another high-profile Australian gamer 
with about 240,000 followers on Twitch. “It is a dream job,” she says. “It’s a 
lot of money for playing games. It is a dream. So it would be kind of hard to 
go away from that. So I would like to be doing it as long as possible until I 
burn out. But I am open to and I’m exploring other things as well.”

Like much of the online world, streamers and their followers are often known 
only by their first name or chosen on-screen handle. This semi-anonymity is 
both a boon and a burden for female gamers. Harassment often comes via a 
pseudonym. At the same time, to protect themselves, some women deliberately 
keep their personal details, such as their surname and location, even their 
age, out of the equation. Guardian Australia is using only first names and 
screen handles in this piece for that reason.


Mia, Chelsea and Kat are positive about their career choice. “As long as I 
keep putting effort in, I foresee that I could do it for the next five or 10 
years at least,” says Chelsea.

Mia says: “At the end of the day, I’m doing what I love.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf15d15b7263a85ccfeb1ce0337654aca71bf3ec%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20women%20who%20make%20a%20living%20gaming%20on%20Twitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20women%20who%20make%20a%20living%20gaming%20on%20Twitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf15d15b7263a85ccfeb1ce0337654aca71bf3ec%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
 Chelsea gaming and livestreaming on Twitch. The lights behind her computer 
monitors allow the people following her to watch her as she plays. Photograph: 
Tony Lewis for the Guardian 
How gaming became a boys’ club

Surveys over the past couple of years suggest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/17/women-video-games-iab> 
that, far from being a tiny minority in a male-dominated industry, women make 
up at least half of the gaming population. But despite being among a growing 
number of visible, high-profile women in professional gaming, all the women 
Guardian Australia spoke to had something else in common, too: a sense of 
isolation.

The gaming industry markets itself unequivocally as a boys’ club. As a 
consequence, women’s entry into this space is accompanied by dangerously loaded 
assumptions from a chunk of their male audience.


“I feel like being a gamer has always isolated me,” Mia says. “Growing up in a 
girls’ school, it wasn’t really common to be into video games.”


Chelsea remembers having similar feelings. “I would always be so excited for 
my friends to leave so I could sit down at my computer and play games all 
night,” she says.

Why my dream of becoming a pro gamer ended in utter failure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/28/my-dream-to-become-pro-gamer-ended-in-utter-failure>
She didn’t tell her friends about her gaming at first. “It was a thing that I 
kept on the lowdown. It wasn’t so much shame, it’s just I felt like [they] 
wouldn’t understand it the way that people who play the games do.”

Kat says: “I had a few good girlfriends that did play games in high school but 
they kind of grew out of it. And I guess that was the thing: they grew out of 
it and I never did.”

It was boys who introduced Kat to gaming. “I had boy cousins, older boy 
cousins, and you just can’t help it. If they’re playing it, you want to play 
too.”

But if half the gaming population is female, how could a generation of female 
gamers grow up knowing so few other women who play?

“It’s no accident that most video game retailers plaster their walls with 
promotional posters for action games, shooters and war games,”writes Tracey Lien
 <http://www.polygon.com/features/2013/12/2/5143856/no-girls-allowed> in a 
piece for the online magazine Polygon.

Lien explains how in 1983, the video game market spectacularly collapsed, 
largely as a result of being flooded with sub-par product. An industry that 
was, until then, largely gender-neutral, and included many women at both the 
executive and development levels, began scrabbling around for a way out of a 
financial hole. Lien writes that after the crash, “the game industry’s pursuit 
of a safe and reliable market led to it homing in on the young male. And so the 
advertising campaigns began. Video games were heavily marketed as products for 
men and the message was clear: no girls allowed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85c2b68af498d2fbe2ea43c945827c37d8162011%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20women%20who%20make%20a%20living%20gaming%20on%20Twitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20women%20who%20make%20a%20living%20gaming%20on%20Twitch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwomen-make-living-gaming-twitch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85c2b68af498d2fbe2ea43c945827c37d8162011%2F0_0_2362_1575%2F2362.jpg>
 Every night about 10pm in Australia, Chelsea turns on her webcam, chats to 
some of her 330,000 followers and gets to work. Photograph: Tony Lewis for the 
Guardian 
The Australian game developer Leena Van Deventer argues that the effects of 
this gendered mass marketing is most obvious in the current generation of 20- 
and 30-something gamers. “Women have always been there,” she says. “Women were 
instrumental in the birth of games and tech but our generation is still very 
much dealing with the hangover of being told it’s not for us and the result 
that has had in our institutions and in our culture.”

In other words, if a generation of women grew up thinking they didn’t know any 
female gamers, it was because they had been cowed into silence by a culture 
that repeatedly told them games were not for them.

Nowhere is this more obvious than in the development of Gamergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/11/gamergate-a-brief-history-of-a-computer-age-war>
 – a largely anonymous online harassment campaign, involving rape and death 
threats, which focused on discrediting a number of women in the gaming 
community, including the developersZoe Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/11/gamergate-a-brief-history-of-a-computer-age-war>
 andBrianna Wu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/17/brianna-wu-gamergate-human-cost>
 and the criticAnita Sarkeesian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/15/anita-sarkeesian-feminist-games-critic-cancels-talk>
. It demonstrated, more than anything, that there are deep pockets of vitriol 
in the gaming world reserved especially for women.

There are some weird things that streamers get asked to do, like sending 
panties
Kat 
“Women’s appearance plays a bigger role [in their success] than their actual 
gameplay,” Chelsea says. “Whereas men’s appearance, it does not matter if their 
gameplay is amazing.”

And when it comes to making money, there are added expectations. “I was really 
worried about getting donations because of what would be requested,” Kat says. 
She started streaming while she was at university studying journalism. Her 
connection was low quality – “I don’t even know how people saw me through the 
pixels” – but it was enough to allow her to build a strong following which 
resulted in some very generous donations.

“There are some weird things that streamers get asked to do, like sending 
panties – people email and ask for that,” she says. “Or like, pictures of their 
feet in exchange for money.”

‘All of a sudden I’m a cam girl?’

The women on Twitch don’t see themselves as pornographers or sex workers – far 
from it – but that doesn’t mean there aren’t audience members who feel they are 
owed more than witty banter and good gameplay, particularly if they are handing 
over cash.


“The way some people treat you because you’re a woman on the internet is 
disgusting,” Kat says. “They think they can just give you money and expect 
certain things or just say something in chat and expect something – for you to 
take your clothes off and that sort of stuff. There are people who actually 
think that’s how it works.”

I have a legit career as a gamer and you can’t take me seriously as a gamer?
Mia 
It’s no secret that porn is one of the primary drivers of technological 
innovation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2002/mar/03/internetnews.observerfocus>
, but there are a striking number of structural similarities between Twitch and 
some forms of online pornography. And it is women who bear the brunt of the 
association.

“I had one of my friends make a joke about me being a cam girl and I got 
really, really offended about it,” says Mia. “Not because I think there’s 
anything wrong with [being a cam girl], but what I am doing is very different … 
Like, I have a legit career as a gamer and you can’t take me seriously as a 
gamer? You see me on camera and all of a sudden I’m a cam girl?”

The fact that Twitch now seems to be borrowing features from porn-site 
architecture only increases the association. New features on Twitch called 
“cheers” – animated emojis purchased by viewers as tips and sent as chat 
messages – closely resemble functions on the webcam porn platform Chaturbate, 
in which livestreaming video performers are paid through tips, and use apps to 
set tip goals and associated “rewards”.

But there are points of resistance. At a platform level, Twitch does give 
users some control, allowing streamers to ban abusive or unwanted users from 
interacting with them in chat. And, in 2014,the company banned both male and 
female users from appearing topless on cam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/29/twitch-lays-bare-policy-naked-sexually-suggestive-users>
 or dressing “suggestively”, in what might arguably be a corporate intervention 
into a culture of expectation – or perhaps, a move to protect its brand.

At a grassroots level, though, women streamers have started banding together 
to help each other navigate the volatile space of online gaming.

“It’s really important to me to try to help [other streamers] out,” Chelsea 
says. “Because I know it’s super hard when you first start and it’s really 
overwhelming.”

Gaming goes pro: meet one of Australia's top League of Legends teams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/11/gaming-goes-pro-meet-one-of-australias-top-league-of-legends-teams>
Sometimes it is surreptitious. “There’s definitely like, a secret girls’ club, 
where we all just know each other and we’ve always kind of lurked each other’s 
stream,” says Kat.

For those interested in a ready-made community, there’s Widget 
<http://widgetau.org/> – a not-for-profit feminist organisation with more than 
650 members, set up to support women in games, development and technology. 
Established in 2013 and operating mainly through a Facebook group, Widget 
provides everything from moral support to fundraising assistance for members 
experiencing domestic violence and financial hardship.


But some women just do it the old-fashioned way: by seeking out kindred 
spirits.

“We call it a stream team,” Mia says. “And basically it’s four girls from all 
over the world and if we need advice or something weird is happening, which 
occasionally it does, we just ask each other … we’re just there for each other.”

 