
“I always said you should never trust a bank with property, or a property 
developer with money,” says Peter Rees. The former chief planner of the City of 
London should know about such things, having presided over the results of both. 
Over the last 30 years, he has ushered in a menagerie of their monuments, from 
the Gherkin andCheesegrater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jun/16/cheesegrater-leadenhall-building-richard-rogers>
 to theWalkie-Talkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2012/dec/12/walkie-talkie-fenchurch-street-architecture>
 and Heron Tower, during which time he has seen a significant shift in the 
balance of power. “When I arrived in the job in the 1980s, the big banks were 
in control of London,” he says. “But now it’s the big house-builders. We’ve 
gone from being ruled by Barclay’s bank to being controlled by Berkeley homes.”


Left unchecked, the banks went off the rails in spectacular fashion, as they 
sprayed money into the great mortgage mirage. And now property developers have 
been allowed to follow suit. Fuelled by the dazzling wealth of investors from 
Russia, China and the Middle East, who they turned to when the banks stopped 
lending, their steroidal schemes are causing irreparable harm to our cities.

Across the country – and especially in superheated London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, where stratospheric land values beget 
accordingly bloated developments – authorities are allowing planning policies 
to be continually flouted, affordable housing quotas to be waived, height 
limits breached, the interests of residents endlessly trampled. Places are 
becoming ever meaner and more divided, as public assets are relentlessly sold 
off, entire council estates flattened to make room for silos of luxury 
safe-deposit boxes in the sky. We are replacing homes with investment units, to 
be sold overseas and never inhabited, substituting community for vacancy. The 
more we build, the more our cities are emptied, producing dead swathes of 
zombie town where the lights might never even be switched on.

Developers have bounced back from the crash with bigger plans than ever 
before, acquiring vast areas of land with the ambition to operate like the 
great estates of yore. Framed with the cuddly terminology of “long-term 
stewardship” and “adding value”, they are merely mimicking those aristocratic 
fiefdoms, recasting the city as a network of privatised enclaves. The landed 
families of Grosvenor, Portman and Cadogan have been joined by a breed of 
corporate giants like Lend Lease, CapCo and Ballymore. The latter is overseeing 
the £2bn transformation ofNine Elms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/nov/11/nine-elms-south-bank-regeneration>
 into a high-security zone of luxury flats around the new American embassy, 
that will apparently “draw inspiration from the attractive residential and 
commercial estates which evolved over time in cities like New York and Boston”. 
CapCo is building its £8bn kingdom across a 30-hectare swathe ofEarls Court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/earls-court-project>, while Lend Lease is 
rulingElephant and Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gallery/2010/mar/26/elephant-castle-housing-estate-heygate-redevelopment>
, Argent is reshaping Kings Cross, and most of Victoria is now controlled by 
Land Securities. The list goes on.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410862252906%2F4a6ec409-e787-4eed-91f7-9c1149061760-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410862252906%2F4a6ec409-e787-4eed-91f7-9c1149061760-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A view of the Nine Elms redevelopment, which is getting a £2bn transformation 
into luxury flats. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
They have been accompanied, and often outbid, by a newer kind of international 
development force, supercharged by the untold riches of sovereign wealth funds, 
national pension funds and the gushing pump of petrodollars. The Qataris, who 
bailed out the Shard and snapped up the Olympic Village, have been joined by 
the growing appetite of Malaysian and Chinese investors. Malaysian consortium 
SP Setia acquired Battersea power station for significantly more than its 
competitors could muster, while China’s recent property supermarket sweep 
includes such sites as Wandsworth’s Ram Brewery and a £1bn deal for the Royal 
Docks. These inflated land deals, with foreign buyers ready to pay over the 
odds, are spawning a new form ofequally oversized and exclusive developments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/jul/15/china-town-aedas-architecture-giant-london>
.


Bankers have faced our collective wrath, but what about developers? The 
economy goes in fickle booms and busts, cycling merrily through bubbles and 
crises, but cities, built in concrete and steel, generally stay put. What we 
are making now, we will all have to live with for a very long time. The 
iniquities of the banking crash have been intricately unpicked, but the wilful 
destruction of the places where we live and work remains something of a 
mystery. We may rant and rage againstugly additions to the skyline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/29/top-10-worst-london-skyscrapers-quill-odalisk-walkie-talkie>
, but what of the mechanisms that are allowing it to happen? How did it come to 
this?


The principal reason can be traced to the fact that awarding planning 
permission in the UK comes down to a Faustian pact. If the devil is in the 
detail, then the detail isSection 106 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/8/section/106> of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990, a clause which formalised “planning gain”, making it 
in the local authorities’ interests to allow schemes to balloon beyond all 
reason, in the hope of creaming off the fat of developers’ profits for the 
public good.


Introduced as a negotiable levy on new development, Section 106 agreements 
entail a financial contribution to the local authority, intended to be spent on 
offsetting the effects of the scheme on the local area. The impact of a hundred 
new homes might be mitigated by money for extra school places, or traffic 
calming measures. In practice, since council budgets have been so viciously 
slashed, Section 106 has become a primary means of funding essential public 
services, from social housing to public parks, health centres to highways, 
schools to play areas. The bigger the scheme, the fatter the bounty, leading to 
a situation not far from legalised bribery – or extortion, depending on which 
side of the bargain you are on. Vastly inflated density and a few extra storeys 
on a tower can be politically justified as being in the public interest, if it 
means a handful of trees will be planted on the street.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410862905760%2F0d085106-9735-4f95-80ff-3dc4f9302cf9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410862905760%2F0d085106-9735-4f95-80ff-3dc4f9302cf9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 China’s recent property sweep includes a £1bn investment in London’s Royal 
Docks. Photograph: HayesDavidson 
“Council chief executives will allow schemes to be pumped up as much as they 
can go before they get political push-back from councillors,” says one planning 
officer from a London borough that has suffered from a recent a spate of 
towers. “And the worst schemes happen when there is no political resistance at 
all.”

It is a system that is all too open to political pressure, given that any 
officer who advises against a new development can be conveniently framed as 
“anti-growth”, heartlessly preventing a promised tidal wave of new public 
amenities from flooding into the borough. Based on negotiation and discretion, 
the result is entirely down to the individual planning officer’s ability to 
squeeze out as good a deal as they can get, a battle that all too often ends in 
the developer’s favour.


The results of such botched bargaining can be seen sprouting up across 
London’s “regeneration” hot-spots, such as Elephant and Castle, where the 
council is attempting to transform the maligned mess of the roundabout into an
“exciting destination” 
<http://www.southwark.gov.uk/info/200183/elephant_and_castle>. With shimmering 
golden fins rising into the skies, the 37-storey tower ofOne the Elephant 
<http://www.onetheelephant.com/> promises to “set new standards for 
contemporary London living”. It is one of the flagship projects by Australian 
developerLend Lease 
<http://www.lendlease.com/emea/united-kingdom/projects/elephant-and-castle-regeneration>
 in the £3bn transformation of the area. But take a closer look, and it seems 
the new standards it is setting comprise an impressive ability to avoid 
providing any affordable housing at all. Such second-class accommodation would 
of course require its own“poor door” 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/uk-politics/2014/07/london-development-without-poor-door>
 entrance and circulation and, according to a council report: “The cost of 
construction would increase with the introduction of a further lift, as well as 
separate access and servicing arrangements.”


Bypassing Southwark’s requirement for 35% affordable housing – which would 
have meant around 100 units – Lend Lease has instead contributed £3.5m in lieu 
towards the construction of a community leisure centre next door, which will 
cost £20m to build. A triumph for the public good, you might think, until you 
realise that the equivalent cost of building 100 affordable units would have 
been around £10m, three times what the developer paid. Pressure group35 Percent 
<http://35percent.org/> – which campaigns for the borough-wide policy of 35% 
affordable housing to be enforced in Elephant and Castle – estimates that, in 
the six biggest schemes in the area, developers haveavoided paying £265m 
<http://www.35percent.org/blog/2014/04/15/the-elephants-new-ivory-towers> in 
off-site affordable housing tariff payments required by policy. And of the 
4,282 new homes being built, just 79 will be social rented (ie. managed by 
registered providers for those on low incomes).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Foct%2F30%2Ftottenham-hotspur-new-stadium-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F10%2F29%2F1383048602820%2FTottenham-Hotspur---stadi-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tottenham%20Hotspur%20get%20new%20stadium%20but%20local%20businesses%20lose%20out%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Foct%2F30%2Ftottenham-hotspur-new-stadium-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tottenham%20Hotspur%20get%20new%20stadium%20but%20local%20businesses%20lose%20out%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Foct%2F30%2Ftottenham-hotspur-new-stadium-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F10%2F29%2F1383048602820%2FTottenham-Hotspur---stadi-016.jpg>
Video: the local business view of Tottenham Hotspur’s planned new stadium. 
The same story is repeated the other side of town, where Haringey awaits the 
momentous arrival of Tottenham Hotspur’snew £400m football stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2013/oct/30/tottenham-hotspur-new-stadium-video>
. This bulbous mothership was promised to bring 200 new homes, half of which 
would be “affordable”, and an abundance of public benefits to the area. But, 
once again, the affordable component has beenmysteriously waived 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/spurs-given-green-light-to-drop-affordable-homes/6520463.article>
, replaced with 285 flats for solely private sale, while the Section 106 
contribution has been reduced from an agreed £16m to just £477,000 – a token 
contribution towards transport improvements.


The system has spawned a whole industry of S106 avoidance, with consultancies 
set up specifically to help developers get out of paying for affordable housing 
at all scales of development.Section 106 Management 
<http://www.s106management.co.uk/>, set up by solicitor-turned-developer Robin 
Furby, is one such company that offers a service to small-scale developers, 
promising “to establish the profitability of your project and thereby reveal 
unviable Section 106 obligations”. Its website displays a list ofcase studies 
<http://www.s106management.co.uk/case-studies> proudly showing how much they 
have helped developers dodge, and boasting of planning permissions achieved 
“without any contribution towards affordable housing” at all, saving “tens, if 
not hundreds of thousands of pounds”.

So what exactly does it mean when a property developer pleads poverty? “If the 
profit margin for your scheme is pushed to below 17.5% by Section 106 payments, 
you should talk to us,” says the website. Other consultants promise to 
safeguard 20% profit margins and upwards, before any Section 106 contributions 
are even considered. If a scheme is declared “unviable”, it simply means “we’re 
not getting our 20% profit so why should we bother”.


The power of the policy to leverage affordable housing has been further eroded 
since the introduction of community infrastructure levy (CIL) in 2010. A 
non-negotiable fixed-rate tax on new development, CIL was intended to introduce 
more transparency and give developers a level of certainty about how much they 
would be expected to contribute towards infrastructural improvements. But, in 
reality, it has provided another excuse to dodge Section 106 obligations. A 
further change to the town planning actlast year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/section-106-affordable-housing-requirements-review-and-appeal>
 has made Section 106 agreements renegotiable, allowing review and appeal of 
all existing obligations, in a misguided attempt to promote growth – which 
simply makes it easier for developers to wriggle out of their promises, as 
happened in Tottenham and elsewhere.


“Not surprisingly, developers are now even keener to renegotiate the S106 
after they’ve got planning permission, finding they can’t negotiate the CIL,” 
says Peter Rees. “In most cases, they manage to prove that they can no longer 
afford to pay for the affordable housing that they agreed – it’s simply ‘not 
viable’ any more.” One planning officer puts it succinctly: “There has never 
been a worse time to give schemes consent, in terms of securing public benefit.”


In all cases, how developers prove what they can afford to pay for comes down 
to the dark art of “viability”. The silver bullet of planning applications, the
viability appraisal 
<http://www.hlf.org.uk/HowToApply/goodpractice/Documents/HE_DA_VA_Guidance.pdf> 
explains, through impenetrable pages of spreadsheets and fastidious appendixes, 
exactly how a project stacks up financially. It states, in carefully worded 
sub-clauses, just why it would be impossible for affordable housing to be 
provided, why the towers must of course be this height, why no ground-floor 
corner shop or surgery can be included, why workspace is out of the question; 
indeed, why it is inconceivable for the scheme to be configured in any other 
form. Presented as a precise science, viability is nothing of the sort; it is a 
form of bureaucratic alchemy, figures fiddled with spreadsheet spells that can 
be made to conjure any outcome desired.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410864695622%2Fc73fef9c-217a-4ef7-896e-bfcd93e4344b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410864695622%2Fc73fef9c-217a-4ef7-896e-bfcd93e4344b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 London’s ‘Cheesegrater’ building is at the forefront of the City of London’s 
planned cluster of tall towers. Photograph: Oli Scarff/Getty Images 
“Councils just don’t have the expertise to challenge viability reports,” says 
one senior planning officer. “We can’t argue back.” Instead, they can 
commission viability assessments, produced by the same consultants that work 
for developers, to determine whether the report is accurate – but not to 
propose an alternative. The figures may well stack up, but it doesn’t mean the 
scheme could not be designed in a different way, which would still guarantee 
the developer’s 20% profit margin.


“You only have to modify one of the variables very slightly to get completely 
different outcome,” says one planning consultant. “You can very easily go from 
something being rip-roaringly viable to completely unviable by tweaking 
something very modestly. If a planner doesn’t understand that, they’re not 
going to do very well.”


Evidence suggests that is all too often the case, judging by the number of 
planning officers’ reports that diligently conclude a scheme would simply be 
unviable if it was obliged to fulfil the policy objectives. With calculations 
often undisclosed for reasons of commercial confidentiality, councils are 
forced to blindly accept the developers’ figures as the ultimate de facto 
truth, allowing their own policies to be flagrantly breached.


“I’ve never been confident in reports that I’ve received on viability,” says 
one planning officer, describing how the big property consultancies operate as 
something of a cabal, with one wary of challenging another’s figures. “Every 
consultant that’s advising a local authority is hoping to advise a developer 
tomorrow. If they put the boot in on a big development scheme, they simply 
won’t be hired again.”


A relatively new field, viability has been given increasing weight by the 
government’sNational Planning Policy Framework 
<https://www.theguardian.com/local-government-network/2012/mar/27/reaction-nppf-publication-greg-clark>
, introduced in 2012, which slashed 1,300 pages of policy down to 65, as part 
of the coalition’s triumphant bonfire of red tape. The NPPF introduced a 
“presumption in favour of sustainable development”, which sounds innocuous 
enough – but as Rees points out, “the definition of ‘sustainable’ has nothing 
to do with green issues or energy at all. It means one thing: commercially 
viable.”


Immune from public scrutiny, viability assessments have rightly come under 
fire for clouding the accountability and transparency of what should be a 
statutory public process. Their confidentiality is closely guarded, in order to 
preserve developers’ trade secrets, but where the sale of public assets is 
concerned, there is increasing pressure for the books to be opened.

 Southwark’s Heygate Estate is to be replaced by a redevelopment with far 
fewer social-rented homes. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
One such case recently ended in victory for housing campaigners, when after 
two years of fighting, which culminated at a tribunal, Southwark Council was 
ordered to disclose the viability assessment produced by Lend Lease over its 
controversial redevelopment of theHeygate Estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/nov/04/bailiffs-death-knell-heygate-estate>
. The 15-year project is seeing more than 1,200 mainly social-rented homes on 
the post-war estate replaced with over 2,300 units, only 25% of which will be 
classed as affordable, with just 79 flats for social rent. Many leaseholders 
were subject to compulsory purchase orders so low they have been forced to move 
to the far reaches of outer London, their decent-sized two-bed flats valued at 
under £150,000, while the new homes of “Elephant Park” will be sold for prices 
reaching £420,000 for a one-bed apartment.


The figures explaining why this was the only feasible way to develop the site 
were safely locked away in the viability appraisal, which Southwark fought 
tooth and nail to keep secret. The borough has been particularly keen to keep 
financial details under wraps since it accidentally disclosed it had sold the 
entire nine-hectare site for just £50m, having spent £44m on moving residents 
out – while estimating its gross development value at £990m.


“Without some commercially sensitive information remaining private, developers 
could simply refuse to work with councils, leaving boroughs without the housing 
and regeneration we all need,” says a spokeswoman for Southwark Council. The 
borough brought a legal challenge against a decision by the Information 
Commissioner’s Office last year ordering the council to disclose the full 
details of the viability report, after a freedom of information request was 
denied. Southwark argued that full disclosure would “damage regeneration”, 
while Lend Lease, in a defence that verged on farce, pleaded the human right to 
“peaceful enjoyment of its possessions”, arguing that disclosing the viability 
assessment would amount to “unjustified interference with this enjoyment”.


The tribunal concluded that the information must be disclosed, stating that 
“the importance … of local people having access to information to allow them to 
participate in the planning process outweighs the public interest in 
maintaining the remaining rights of Lend Lease”. It sets an encouraging 
precedent for campaign groups battling similar situations elsewhere, from 
Greenwich Peninsula to Earls Court – where the information commissioner has 
supportedfurther disclosure of viability assessments 
<http://ico.org.uk/~/media/documents/decisionnotices/2013/fer_0491596.ashx> on 
gargantuan regeneration schemes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410863364305%2F87cf09cc-7a9b-4f26-a772-9775dd11186f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410863364305%2F87cf09cc-7a9b-4f26-a772-9775dd11186f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A scale model of London on show at this year’s Mipim international real estate 
fair in Cannes, France. Photograph: Valery Hache/AFP/Getty Images 
The Heygate decision comes after increased scrutiny of Southwark council’s 
cosy relationship with Lend Lease, followingreports in Private Eye 
<http://allpeoplesparty.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/private-eye-southwark-council-developers.png>
 of perks enjoyed by Peter John, the Labour leader of the borough, at the 
expense of the Australian giant. From a pair of £1,600 Olympic opening ceremony 
tickets to a £1,250 trip to the lavish Mipim property fair in Cannes, these 
sponsored outings were reported to have joined a lengthy list from the previous 
year of Proms tickets and dinners at the Ivy, paid for by at least 10 other 
companies.

Developers getting into bed with local authorities might usually happen behind 
closed doors, but at Mipim the conspicuous chumminess wasproudly on show along 
the Croisette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/14/anger-cannes-property-fair-councils-developers-mipim>
 for all to see. In the wake of headlines decrying public money being spent on 
councils attending the champagne-soaked jamboree, their private “development 
partners” have been more than willing to step in and foot the bill. With a 
borough’s presence at Mipim costing up to £500,000, developers happily pay for 
glistening city models, trade show booths and yachts, where cakes iced with 
their logos are handed out by mayors. More than 20 local authorities took part 
this year, with developers sponsoring everything from a “Croydon on the beach” 
cocktail party to an entire “Manchester bar”, where public-private 
relationships could be cemented by free-flowing booze.


“The boroughs might be proud that they’re not here at the public’s expense,” 
says housing campaigner Jake Freeland, who held a protest in Cannes this year. 
“But that’s precisely the problem. They’re in the pockets of the investors, and 
they’ve come here to sell off our city.”


Developers have long thrown parties and funded foreign trips as a way of 
lubricating their plans through the system, but the quest for permissions now 
extends into the statutory planning process itself, through the rise of deals 
known asplanning performance agreements 
<http://planningguidance.planningportal.gov.uk/blog/guidance/before-submitting-an-application/planning-performance-agreements/>
. Introduced to help fast-track large, unwieldy schemes through the system, 
PPAs see the applicant pay for a new dedicated position in the council’s 
planning team to focus solely on their application, guaranteeing a faster 
turnaround and a better “bespoke” service.


Capital and Counties Properties (Capco) paid over £2m to Hammersmith and 
Fulham council under a PPA to have its£8bn redevelopment of Earls Court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2013/nov/21/earls-court-project-community-benefits-capital-and-counties>
 assessed, while similar deals were reached for Westfield and Hammerson’s £1bn 
plans for another mega-mall in Croydon, as well as Argent’s £2bn redevelopment 
of King’s Cross.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410864012991%2F98191f51-87ed-4bca-9084-c84d333610a2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410864012991%2F98191f51-87ed-4bca-9084-c84d333610a2-1020x612.jpeg>
 The £8bn redevelopment plans for Earls Court extend across an area of 30 
hectares. Photograph: Jo Blason 
“There’s nothing wrong with planning performance agreements,” says one 
planning officer. “It’s just like allowing people to travel club class. You pay 
for a better service.” Quite whether club-class planning should be offered by a 
statutory pubic service is questionable, but developers have few qualms about 
throwing money at an authority, spitting out as many applications and fees as 
are necessary to see a project through. “We pay vast sums of money to have 
things determined quickly,” says the director of one major development company. 
“We pay the planner’s salary, cover their lawyers’ fees and everything, but we 
wouldn’t expect preferential treatment. It’s not a bribe.”


Under the coalition’s localism agenda, the wheels for private-sector 
encroachment into public planning have been further oiled, with the 
introduction of neighbourhood plans. Presented as a means of empowering 
communities, they have in fact left the door wide open for canny developers to 
move in, host a few community coffee mornings with felt-tips and post-it notes, 
and engineer a plan to their own advantage. There is no requirement for those 
who draw up the plan to even reside in the neighbourhood and, although they 
need a 50% “yes” vote at referendum, there is no requisite minimum turnout.


But such a tactic would require at least cursory engagement with the community 
and the council, something which many developers are increasingly choosing to 
bypass altogether. Since the introduction of the NPPF, there has been a sharp 
rise in the number of planning applications won on appeal, as many applicants 
choose to go straight to the inspectorate, conscious of the new “presumption in 
favour” of development.


Rather than being the last resort option, after negotiations with the local 
authority have broken down, the process of planning by appeal has become a 
tactic in itself. One developer is particularly candid on the matter: “Planning 
decisions are so often the result of political wrangling at committee anyway,” 
he says. “Why would you waste months negotiating something to get the planning 
officer on side, when they can’t guarantee delivery at planning committee?” On 
appeal, it comes down to a battle between planning lawyers, the judgement often 
determined by who can afford the best representation. When the Rolls Royce 
legal team of the private developer meets the quivering case officer of the 
emasculated public sector, its not hard to guess the outcome.


Developers with bigger ambitions are choosing to bypass the local authority in 
a different way, by going straight to the top and playing for a “call-in” – 
waving their schemes under the nose of the mayor of London or secretary of 
state. Such a situation has emerged at Mount Pleasant in north London, where 
the Royal Mail Group has proposed a fortress-like scheme of 700 flats,only 12% 
of which will be affordable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/jan/29/boris-johnsons-abuse-of-planning-power-is-an-assault-on-democracy>
. The site straddles the boundary between Camden and Islington, both of which 
have a target of 50% affordable housing.Boris Johnson 
<http://www.islingtontribune.com/news/2014/aug/mount-pleasant-development%E2%80%88mayor-boris-apologises-claims-right-decide>
 ignited local fury when he called the scheme in earlier this year to be 
determined by his planning team, describing it as a “beautiful design … and a 
wonderful place to live” before the local boroughs had even turned it down.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410864478979%2Fa03c5f56-ccef-4432-8a36-e553c73a00b9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410864478979%2Fa03c5f56-ccef-4432-8a36-e553c73a00b9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Royal Mail Group has proposed a fortress-like scheme of 700 flats on its 
Mount Pleasant site. Photograph: Matt Dunham/AP 
“It is hardly surprising that the mayor has called this in,” says Duncan 
Bowie, lecturer in planning at the University of Westminster. “The mayoral 
planning process is based entirely on achieving the maximum number of housing 
units on any given site, aimed at selling to an international market. The 
London-wide target of building 42,000 new units per year is predicated on a lot 
of very high density developments that don’t even comply with the mayor’s own 
policies on density.”


The same thing happened at Convoys Wharf in Deptford, where a £1bn proposal 
for 3,500 units (of which just 15% will be affordable), in the form of three 
towers rising up to 40 storeys, was called in by the mayor after the Hong-Kong 
based developer wrote a blustering letter complaining of planning delays. The 
scheme was approved in April, against the advice of the local authority and the 
cries of heritage groups.


“It’s common practice to play the mayor off the borough,” says one senior 
planning officer. “We recently had one vastly oversized scheme that we’d spent 
months trying to tame, then we had a meeting with the GLA planning team, and 
their first response was ‘why not make it taller?’” Driven by tick-box housing 
targets, the GLA merrily rubber-stamps whatever comes its way, yet most of 
these schemes are doing nothing to help the housing crisis, given the fraction 
of “affordable” homes they include are still out of reach of most, at up to 80% 
of market rent.


“Developers have quickly latched on to the fact that, even if they can’t get 
local authorities to approve schemes, they can get them through the mayor or 
the government,” says Peter Rees. “The bigger the better. And they know that 
they’ll happily allow towers to be built outside designated clusters.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410879277344%2Fd4befa19-3c6f-4a58-9d84-e2b9940f3a19-1020x392.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410879277344%2Fd4befa19-3c6f-4a58-9d84-e2b9940f3a19-1020x392.png>
Click here to see our interactive graphic of how Vauxhall is changing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2014/mar/london-skyline-changing-now-future-pictures>
As deputy prime minister, John Prescott personally approved both the Shard and 
the Vauxhall Tower, the latter against the decision of the planning inspector 
and after strong warnings from his advisers that it “could set a precedent for 
the indiscriminate scattering of very tall buildings across London”. How right 
they were. With a 50-storey shaft already on the skyline, the council was in no 
position to refuse further skyward ambitions. The GLA, keen to seem 
“strategic”, quickly declared the area a “cluster”, beckoning in a thicket of 
towers andopening the floodgates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/mar/29/london-skyline-lack-of-consultation>
 for the emerging Dubai on Thames. A wall of glass stumps is beginning to 
sprawl along the river from Wandsworth and Battersea to Nine Elms and Vauxhall 
– and beyond.


“It is an absolute fiasco,” says Mark Brearley, professor at Cass Cities 
<http://www.thecass.com/news-events/2014/april/cass-cities-snowball> and former 
director of Design for London. “It is the outcome of not really taking much 
notice of plans and being fairly relaxed about negotiating the best outcome, 
and not placing too many obligations on developers. Nothing hangs together as a 
result, nothing makes sense at ground level. As a piece of city it’s a farce.”


A similarly galumphing form of urbanism is appearing across London, from the 
gauntlet of City Road toStratford High Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/21/london-2012-olympics-architecture-legacy>
. Many of the worst offenders are the result of our slippery two-stage planning 
system, in which general outline permission can be given, while further details 
are postponed to a later “reserved matters” application. In a system based 
entirely on negotiation, it is a fair way of allowing developers to test the 
water and see what they can get away with, before spending money on detailed 
work. Yet it also allows crucial elements, like ground-floor uses, the location 
of entrances, the nature of materials and even massing and bulk, to slip 
through the net, allowing designs to be watered down to pale imitations of what 
had been agreed. And the hands of the local authority are hopelessly tied.


“Once an outline permission is granted, it makes it very difficult for us to 
refuse a scheme further down the line,” says one officer. In Stratford City’s
“International Quarter” <http://www.tiqstratfordcity.com/>, part of the 
promised spoils of the Olympic legacy, consented tower proposals have recently 
gained a substantial number of extra storeys. Similarly in Wandsworth, a 
proposed pair of towers have put on a growth spurt and lost their planned mix 
of uses, reverting entirely to high-end flats.

Conditions that have been agreed are relentlessly renegotiated at reserved 
matters stage. Good architects are employed to win outline planning, then 
ditched for a cheaper alternative; high-quality materials are substituted for 
flimsy plastic panels – all in the name of viability.


Just like the banking crisis, the problem of botched urban development has 
long been encouraged by a system that is open to exploitation and all too 
susceptible to careless regulation. But it is also not something that can be 
easily fixed. “There’s only so much mileage in vilifying developers or 
planners,” says Brearley. “Making cities is imperfect and messy, and has been 
for thousands of years. But we should be able to do better than this.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410864120409%2F851b640f-7a52-4321-9fb9-67c04df9527e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20property%20developers%3A%20how%20they%20are%20exploiting%20planning%20authorities%20and%20ruining%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftruth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410864120409%2F851b640f-7a52-4321-9fb9-67c04df9527e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Proposal for ‘phase 3’ of Battersea Power station’s redevelopment, by 
architecture firms Gehry Partners and Foster + Partners. Photograph: Gehry 
Partners 
It comes down, he thinks, to the fact the UK planning system is overly reliant 
on individual negotiation between private developer and public servant, which 
is usually far from a level playing field. “It makes a very opaque and 
confusing system that relies on having people that are very sophisticated at 
brokering deals,” Brearley adds. “And those people will generally settle in 
places where they’ll earn more money. The people negotiating on behalf of the 
public are simply not sophisticated enough.”

One former planning officer is frank about the reality of the imbalance in our 
confrontational system. “If you throw enough resources at a planning 
application, you’re going to manage to tire everyone out,” he says. “The 
documentation gets more and more extensive, the phone calls get more frequent 
and more aggressive, the letters ever more litigious. The weight of stuff just 
bludgeons everyone aside, and the natural inclination is to say, ‘Oh yeah okay, 
I’ve had enough of this one,’ and just let it through. It’s like a war of 
attrition.”

And it is a war in which the side representing the public interest has been 
systematically drained of expertise. The number of architects employed in the 
public sector has fallen from over 60% to less than 10% over the last 30 years, 
while planners have been relegated to third- and fourth-tier officers, with 
some boroughs contracting the service out altogether. As part of the Farrell 
Review into architecture and the built environment,a “Plan First” initiative 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/news/ed-vaizey-urged-to-steer-top-planning-graduates-into-local-authorities/5070296.article>
 has been proposed, by GLA regeneration manager Finn Williams, on the model of 
Teach First, to try to lure the best graduates into planning. But it faces an 
uphill struggle to overturn the years of neglect and transform a system that is 
fundamentally anti-plan-making.

“To this day our planning system is the wrong way around,” says Rees. “It 
evolved to protect the countryside from the encroachment of the towns, rather 
than to make the cities better. It isn’t about building great places, it’s 
about protecting non-places.” And in the process, it has allowed our cities to 
cannibalise themselves and become those non-places it set out to protect.

Bullied and undermined, planning authorities have been left castrated and 
toothless, stripped of the skills and power they need to regulate, and sapped 
of the spatial imagination to actually plan places. As one house-builder puts 
it simply, “The system is ripe for sharp developers to drive a bulldozer right 
through.” And they will continue to do so with supercharged glee, squeezing the 
life out of our cities and reaping rewards from the ruins, until there is 
something in the way to stop them.

• Read more on the London skyline debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/london-skyline-debate>
 