
Rusty keys jangle as Jürgen Naumann searches for the right one. He has 15 on 
one bunch, 25 on another. The last caretaker of the Red Army’s former 
headquarters inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, he has 
access to all the buildings in what was once known as the Forbidden City – and 
remains a restricted area 23 years after the last Russian troops left for good.

“You get to know the keys over the years,” Naumann says. But it still takes a 
while to locate the right one. A dull click, and the door creaks open to reveal 
a dimly lit hall with marble tiles. Naumann’s footsteps echo across the empty 
space as he switches on the electricity, illuminating two panoramas: one 
showing Soviet Moscow, the other Alexanderplatz in East Berlin, two huge photos 
from a world that no longer exists.

Once home to as many as 75,000 Soviet men, women and children, Wünsdorf – 
located about 25 miles from Berlin – was the high command for Soviet forces in 
Germany and the biggest Soviet military camp outside the USSR. But it also had 
shops, schools and leisure facilities, and was known as “Little Moscow”, with 
daily trains going to the Soviet capital.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0b9b118d26beb241c2ddf949b5b96d30691c61f%2F0_33_4887_2932%2F4887.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0b9b118d26beb241c2ddf949b5b96d30691c61f%2F0_33_4887_2932%2F4887.jpg>
 Juergen Naumann in the former Soviet theatre at Wünsdorf. Photograph: Ciarán 
Fahey 
After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the reunification of Germany and 
the dissolution of the Soviet Union, it was only a matter of time before the 
Russian soldiers would be called home. Nevertheless, when the order came for 
troops and their families to withdraw, it still came as a shock to many of its 
inhabitants, who had come to think of Wünsdorf as home.

“It was a mad rush, withdrawal,” recalls Naumann, who was working at the time 
as a watchman collecting financial deposits from local businesses. “In 
Sperenberg [an airfield, near Wünsdorf], the shop boss was sitting in the 
office crying bitterly. She had two small kids. I asked, ‘What’s wrong?’ She 
had just received word that she had to go back toRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> the day after the next. Talk about 
short notice!”

Uncertainty contributed to the chaos. Soldiers had no idea where they were 
going, or whether they’d get accommodation. Some pooled money and bought buses 
so their families would have some shelter, while helicopter squadrons stripped 
the insides of their helicopters for the same reason.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54d4b686514cc2ab3d9dd461ac9d83da625d6b71%2F0_238_5105_3062%2F5105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54d4b686514cc2ab3d9dd461ac9d83da625d6b71%2F0_238_5105_3062%2F5105.jpg>
 Allied prisoners of war exercising at Wünsdorf in 1915. Photograph: Alamy/Bain 
News Service 
When they departed after the final military parade, they left a vast site 
littered with 98,300 rounds of ammunition, 47,000 pieces of ordnance, 29.3 
tonnes of munitions and rubbish, including chemicals, waste oil, old paint, 
tyres, batteries and asbestos. Shops were left full of electronics, radios, TVs 
and fridges. Families were in such a hurry they couldn’t take everything. 
Houses were full of domestic appliances. Even pets were left behind.

The pattern repeated itself throughout East Germany. No country outside the 
USSR had more Soviet troops: an estimated 380,000 soldiers and 180,000 
civilians, spread across 1,062 urban and rural locations, when the union 
collapsed in January 1991.

They left behind a legacy of abandoned ruins. Near Wünsdorf alone, Sperenberg 
Airfield is still abandoned, as are airfields at Rangsdorf, Oranienburg and 
Schönwalde, while military camps at Jüterbog, Kummersdorf, Vogelsang, Bernau, 
Krampnitz, Grabowsee and elsewhere still await new purpose.

Most of the buildings in these former quasi-urban camps are off-limits, simply 
rotting from neglect. Authorities have bigger fish to fry: a host of East 
German enterprises went out of business after the wall fell, leaving a trail of 
vacant factory and office buildings across the country’s cities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c3d2cd36aac1f57201cb28c192c908755924787%2F0_161_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c3d2cd36aac1f57201cb28c192c908755924787%2F0_161_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 One of two Lenin statues to be found in Wünsdorf. The other stands in front of 
the Soviets’ main headquarters building. Photograph: Ciarán Fahey 
Wünsdorf’s military history began long before it became a Soviet garrison 
town. The whole area was militarised after the German Empire was formed in 
1871. During the first world war, Germany’s first mosque was built here, for 
Muslim POWs – many of whom were coerced into fighting for Germany.

In 1935, Wünsdorf became headquarters for the Wehrmacht, the German Armed 
Forces. The Nazis’ entire second world war campaign was guided from the 
Zeppelin underground communications bunker at Wünsdorf, providing direct 
contact through telex to the fronts at Stalingrad, France, Holland and even 
Africa.

The Nazis’ buildings were of such strong construction, with walls over a metre 
thick, that they proved very difficult to damage – a fact evidently appreciated 
by the Soviets after the SS had fled. After sufficiently damaging the bunker 
complexes to make them unsuitable for military use according to the Potsdam 
Agreement, the Soviets settled in.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ed2a2d7c63bb03fd87b881c537a141f2f27588%2F0_79_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ed2a2d7c63bb03fd87b881c537a141f2f27588%2F0_79_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The abandoned swimming pool in Wünsdorf. Photograph: Ciarán Fahey 
They immediately provided a boost to the local economy, and relations with the 
East Germans were good, even if locals usually needed special permission to 
enter what later became known asDie Verbotene Stadt – the Forbidden City.

“There were also illegal ways in,” says Naumann, who remembers how soldiers 
were bribed by East German consumers to be allowed in to shop at the new 
miniature city’s stores. “There were some things you couldn’t get outside. A 
lot was cheap, because the Soviets didn’t pay VAT. So cigarettes were cheap, 
schnapps was cheap.

“You could get in but, of course you had to be careful to be back out again 
punctually. So if you went in in the morning you had to be out by around 4pm at 
the latest. Anyone who missed it had bad luck. You’d be held for 24 hours and 
made to peel potatoes for the troops.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1088ae0627f420f695ecad2ac47253b22936736%2F0_79_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1088ae0627f420f695ecad2ac47253b22936736%2F0_79_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Soviet artwork in Wünsdorf. Photograph: Ciarán Fahey 
Soviet soldiers and their families also left the garrison, to go shopping, 
eating or socialising in nearby Zossen. “They could party no problem,” Naumann 
says. “You just had to be careful. When there was ski jumping at New Year’s – 
the Russian athletes were still good at the time – you had to be careful when 
you spoke, not to go against them. You had to find a middle way, or they’d get 
offended pretty quickly. But it never lasted long. It was actually quite 
normal, just that they spoke Russian.”

When the Soviets handed the Forbidden City back to the federal government, the 
buildings fell into bureaucratic neglect. Weather has also taken its toll. 
Naumann is now the only person left, taking care of an area he estimates to be 
around 200 hectares. His job now is to check for damage caused by heavy rain or 
unwanted visitors, and to arrange for repairs. A co-worker helps out in the 
mornings.

“Companies come in that I have to oversee, or investors to look at the place. 
It’s not lonely,” he says. “But yeah, there could be a little more going on at 
times. It’s fine. Sometimes there’s lots to do, you don’t know where to start.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f16f8f27b3468670f154aab6c780116cf01e2f%2F0_163_5239_3144%2F5239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f16f8f27b3468670f154aab6c780116cf01e2f%2F0_163_5239_3144%2F5239.jpg>
 A stairway in the Haus der Offiziere main building. Wünsdorf was a military 
camp for the German empire, the Nazis and then the Soviets. Photograph: Ciarán 
Fahey 
After so many years in their service, Naumann has formed a bond with the old 
buildings. He speaks enthusiastically of the architecture dating back to the 
German empire, the workmanship, and the enduring quality of the main building’s 
wooden roof, now more than 100 years old.

“I don’t want to say you fall in love with it, but I’m the type who has more 
of a thing for older buildings,” he says. “You form a certain connection, and 
there’s a connection with the architecture.”

For now, the abandoned city plays host to video artists, wedding photographers 
or camera buffs with a penchant for abandoned buildings. Photographers can make 
appointments to visit for a small fee.

“When you get a ‘thank you’ from visitors for looking after the place, that 
it’s so well preserved, then you’re also a little bit proud,” Naumann says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80f08f191a4b57924b21214e7afab153d9f7c32f%2F0_155_5119_3072%2F5119.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forbidden%20City%3A%20inside%20the%20abandoned%20Soviet%20camp%20of%20W%C3%BCnsdorf&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fforbidden-city-inside-abandoned-soviet-camp-wunsdorf-east-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80f08f191a4b57924b21214e7afab153d9f7c32f%2F0_155_5119_3072%2F5119.jpg>
 A monument to a Soviet soldier stands watch through the trees at Wünsdorf. 
Photograph: Ciarán Fahey 
He imagines a small university could provide an ideal use for the buildings, 
particularly with the old swimming pool beside the main building and the 
theatre opposite.

The government’s regional development company is looking for suitable 
investors to bring the remaining buildings back to life. In the meantime, 
Wünsdorf also receives visits from former soldiers or guests retracing their 
old steps.

One woman who had performed as a child in a theatre for the Soviet soldiers 
came back years later to find the old stage where she danced.

 Another man told Naumann that he’d worked in the communications bunker for 
the Nazis, where he had struck up a relationship after exchanging messages with 
a German woman in Stalingrad at the other end.

Is the 'Moscow experiment' over?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/08/is-the-moscow-experiment-over-gorky-park-sergei-kapkov-alexei-navalny>
“They always communicated through telex at night when there was nothing going 
on. He said he tried to find her after the war but he couldn’t find her 
anymore. Probably killed or something, you don’t know,” Naumann says. “He 
himself sat in the bunker to the end. He sent the last telex to Berlin: that 
the Russians were there now.”

Russian soldiers have returned, too, including one former commander who 
brought her daughter. The commander stood on the stage again, took pictures and 
breathed it all in.

“A few of them told me that a Russian soldier is compelled once in his 
lifetime to go back to where they once served and fought. Many soldiers go back 
to Afghanistan to visit and see something where they once served,” Naumann 
recalls. “There was a soldier here, a Russian bear of a man – he broke out in 
tears.”

We stop in the former fencing hall.

“Think about it. The fencing hall!” he says. “There were soldiers running 
around here with sabres once, practising, training. You just have to imagine 
it, everything that’s happened here.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 