
Philip Hammond threatened in his interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/philip-hammond-suggests-uk-outside-single-market-could-become-tax-haven>
 with the German newspaper Welt am Sonntag to turn Britain into a low-tax 
offshore sweatshop, although he expressed a personal preference for a European 
model of social organisation. Just how distant his preference is from his 
threats is clear from some recent developments in Europe: the French have 
passed a law limiting the use of email out of hours;the Dutch and Finns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/state-handouts-for-all-europe-set-to-pilot-universal-basic-incomes>
 are thinking about a universal basic income, and in Swedenthe city of 
Gothenburg 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/21/business/international/in-sweden-an-experiment-turns-shorter-workdays-into-bigger-gains.html>
 is evaluating an experiment that allowed care workers in an old people’s home 
to work six-hour shifts instead of eight-hour ones for the same full-time pay 
and benefits.

The idea has been tried on a small scale elsewhere in Sweden 
<http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/observatories/eurwork/comparative-information/national-contributions/sweden/working-time-in-the-european-union-sweden>
 many times over the last 10 years, but almost always at “creative” or 
desk-based jobs. Dedicated physical work, as is involved in a care home, seems 
an entirely different category. Successive scandals at Amazon,Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/sport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions>
, and similar places have accustomed us to the idea that a modern economy is 
distinguished by the most sophisticated possible exploitation of the workers 
who actually move things (or even humans) around by those who manipulate 
algorithms and exhort the rest of us to productivity.

The Swedish experiments suggest that there is a better way, and a better 
perspective to think about this than simply productivity, narrowly considered. 
They represent more than a victory for unionised labour and its allies inthe 
endless struggle 
<http://nordic.businessinsider.com/swedens-latest-six-hour-work-day-experiment-was-a-complete-failure-2016-8/>
 against capital. At the moment the experiment is justified on the grounds that 
the workers who had to work less felt less stressed and reported sick less 
often. They would, wouldn’t they? It still cost their employers extra money to 
replace them, and it’s not clear that there is the political will, in Sweden or 
elsewhere, for taxpayers to contribute further to the wellbeing of council 
employees. But there are other ways to look at the matter, starting with 
asking: what is the purpose of work?

The question worth asking is not whether shorter hours made the workers feel 
better, but whether it caused them to do their jobs better. In the case of 
creative industries, the answer is obvious, and to some extent measurable: 
there really is a limit to the amount of time that can productively be spent on 
sustained intellectual effort every day. Once that is exceeded, more work 
produces less worthwhile product. Some of the things necessary to fill a long 
working day, like meetings and email, actually erode the capacity to produce 
anything valuable. This isn’t surprising. Professional athletes have to be 
careful not to overtrain. Why not professional athletes of the mind and the 
imagination? Teachers and social workers burn out. There need be no shame in 
this: people are not machines, and work that demands inner resources demands 
also that they be given time to be replenished.

But care work, too, makes demands on the intellect, the emotions, and the 
capacity for attentiveness, which are hard to measure but go far beyond the 
physical. Anyone who has looked after small children understands this and knows 
that it would be almost impossible to keep up periods of intense engagement for 
as much as eight hours. Old people are not less demanding, deserving, or less 
in need of attention. If they are propped up in front of a television screen 
and left to vegetate for hours this isn’t productivity but institutionalised 
meanness and indifference.

In practice, and by long, bad tradition, every kind of health work is 
associated with crushingly long hours. The doctor on call and the A&E nurse can 
both work to the point of impaired judgment far beyond exhaustion, sustained 
only by the knowledge that they are desperately needed. In this country, at the 
moment, we can hope for no more than a very slight amelioration of these 
conditions. But the European experiments suggest that there might be a 
radically different and better way in some other future far from Brexit Britain.
 