
If you are Russian, chances are you spent your childhood Christmases watching 
the 1952 animation of The Snow Maiden on television. This beautiful film is 
based on Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov’smuch loved opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/mar/14/artsfeatures5>, which in turn 
takes its story (based on a Russian fairytale) from Alexander Ostrovsky’s 1873 
play. It is barely known outside Russia but it is as popular as Cinderella or 
Hansel and Gretel are in the UK.

The Snow Maiden is a teenage girl with a heart of ice whose very existence 
offends the Sun-God. Only when she learns to love, as her heart melts, will the 
Sun-God be appeased and so bring about the arrival of summer. Like so many folk 
mythologies, it’s a tale of a rite of passage to adulthood but also a myth 
about sacrifice enabling fertility. It’s the universal myth of the Rite of 
Spring, which has long fascinated artists from Hans Christian Andersen to Igor 
Stravinsky. It is also an example of opera’s recurring fascination with the 
person – usually a woman – who finds a love so strong that they are willing to 
die for it. That’s at the heart ofLa Traviata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/16/la-traviata-giuseppe-verdi-opera-victorian-love-and-sex>
 and La Bohème. The story also has much in common with A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream, the great English celebration of the coming of summer and the rekindling 
of love.

But The Snow Maiden is also a great nationalist opera – the sacrifice of the 
girl is demanded by the Tsar to ensure healthy harvests for the whole nation. 
Rimsky-Korsakov’s opera premiered in 1882 – a time when emerging nations across 
Europe were using their opera houses to construct and celebrate national 
identities. Theatre artists and musicians were active contributors to debates 
around identity.Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> combined 
stirring choral music with historical or mythological subjects to place the 
nation on stage.


In that age of nationalism, opera became a communal art form, engaging with 
fundamental questions about what unites us and what matters to us.Opera’s 
greatest titans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/20/glyndebourne2013-roger-parker-verdi-falstaff-wagner-meistersinger>
, Verdi and Wagner,wrote works that created the myths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/26/nationalists-operas-patriotism-verdi-wagner>
 and anthems around which new nations could coalesce. Opera can still have that 
function today, but only if everyone is invited to see their stories on stage.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fthe-snow-maiden-opera-north-rimsky-korsakov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127e2d7b3598964f38549db186f49d2e5abe7802%2F0_0_4504_3100%2F4504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Snow%20Maiden%3A%20reinventing%20a%20Russian%20folk%20opera%20for%20modern%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fthe-snow-maiden-opera-north-rimsky-korsakov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Snow%20Maiden%3A%20reinventing%20a%20Russian%20folk%20opera%20for%20modern%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fthe-snow-maiden-opera-north-rimsky-korsakov%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127e2d7b3598964f38549db186f49d2e5abe7802%2F0_0_4504_3100%2F4504.jpg>
 Moored in Russian culture … a modern-day Parade of Snow Maidens in Moscow. 
Photograph: Artyom Geodakyan/Tass 
The Snow Maiden was written at a time of Russian nationalism and is moored in 
Russian culture, rituals and customs. If we presented it in Leeds in the same 
way as it is staged at Christmas in Moscow it would seem nostalgic for a world 
which never really existed. So instead we are trying to get to the heart of the 
myth to uncover what it says about the tortuous path to adulthood, about the 
agony and ecstasy of first love, about weddings, marriages and the miracle of 
new life.

Alasdair Middleton has translated the text into English, replacing some of the 
original’s folksiness with a tighter focus on the feelings of teenagers falling 
in love for the first time. Snow Maiden herself is transformed from the magical 
fairy of the original into a 15-year-old struggling with and eventually 
overcoming emotional repression. This works because opera speaks a universal 
language – and because growing up in Russia is not so different from growing up 
in Yorkshire.


A Man of Good Hope review – exhilarating musical tale of a Somali refugee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/14/a-man-of-good-hope-review-exhilarating-musical-tale-of-a-somali-refugee>
Opera is an art form that has defined itself around a narrow European canon. 
And yet despite this, the most international theatres in the UK are probably 
opera companies. The art form that triumphed in the age of nationalism has been 
transformed into a great form of international exchange. Last autumn, the South 
African Isango Ensemble brought to London A Man of Good Hope,an opera based on 
the story of a migrant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/14/a-man-of-good-hope-review-exhilarating-musical-tale-of-a-somali-refugee>
’s journey across the national and cultural barriers that divide Africa. Music 
was the most powerful way to represent the worlds through which the boy passed 
and to allow the audience to connect directly with a story that affects us all. 
Music is a passport, it transcends borders.


Combining the universal power of music with the political and narrative power 
of theatre, opera has the potential to be the art form of our global age. But 
first we must reassess the boundaries of the canon and how we bring it to life 
in a multinational and multilingual world. Not only do we need to look far 
wider for the artists and stories of opera’s future, we also need to make tough 
choices about which works still speak to us and how best to perform them. 
Puccini’s masterpieces, for instance, offer so much that is universal but it is 
surely no longer possible to perform Madama Butterfly or Turandot without 
questioning the composer’s perspective on race. We need to translate for today.

 Heather Lowe and Aoife Miskelly in rehearsal for The Snow Maiden at Opera 
North. Photograph: Tom Arber 
Today, any notion of national culture is far more complex than it was a 
century ago. Manchester United tracksuits are fashion statements in Siberia and 
you can buy authentic Russian folk costumes in Leeds. Almost every major 
European city is full of people from across the world (more than 170 languages 
are spoken in Leeds alone). We need to engage with this new reality and look 
with genuine curiosity at the world around us, or risk retreating into an 
imagined nostalgia. And we need that curiosity now more than ever as we seek to 
navigate the seismic economic, political and cultural shifts ahead. We need 
artists and culture that builds connections within and between communities.


There is huge value in finding resonance in culture that has survived and 
thrived over centuries. This is what Alasdair Middleton has done in his new 
translation of The Snow Maiden, which speaks with the freshness of a musical 
rather than the pastoral of grand opera. Similarly radical re-authorings of 
classic texts are happening regularly in theatre to ensure that our stages 
represent our communities. And it is happening in ballet, asAkram Khan’s 
brilliant reimagining of Giselle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/02/giselle-akram-khan-review-english-national-ballet>
, set amid a contemporary world of migrant workers, last year illustrated. If 
it happens in opera, we will release four centuries of cultural treasures, all 
created in such different contexts from our own but with so much to offer to us 
as citizens of the world today.


 * John Fulljames’s production of The Snow Maiden for Opera North opens at 
Grand theatre, Leeds, on 21 January and tours until 24 March 
<https://www.operanorth.co.uk/productions/the-snow-maiden>.  