
The question of what constitutes an independent artist in 2016 is a slightly 
vexed one. Is it still someone signed to an independent label, or have advances 
in technology changed the traditional definition? What is an independent label 
anyway? Does a small label financially supported by a major, but left free to 
make its own A&R decisions count, or are they just lapdogs of the evil music 
industry? In a world whereJme <http://www.boybetterknow.com> can make the 
charts, apparently without any of the traditional blandishments of the music 
industry – “no label, no manager, no publisher, no PR”, ashis Twitter biog 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/JmeBBK?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 boasts – are the truly independent artists the ones who go it entirely alone, 
self-producing and releasing everything they do? If you self-release your music 
with the aid of a bit of cash from another source – YouTube or a streaming 
service, or sponsorship from a drink or clothing company – does that compromise 
your claim to independence?

You could argue about it for hours, but perhaps it’s best to say that, in 
2016, independence is something less to do with your financial arrangements or 
means of distribution than with a certain spirit. The artists in the list below 
veer about wildly in terms of commerciality: it’s not too much of a stretch to 
imagine Abra or Lil Yachty in the Top 40, a little harder to picture the same 
thing happening to Anenon’s improvisation-based blend of electronica and jazz, 
or indeed, Cabbage’s recent EP Uber Capitalist Death Trade.
Spotify link 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/spotify-embed/embed.html> 
But the one thing they have in common is that they don’t sound like people who 
have been told what to do by other people who think they know what makes music 
successful. In that sense, they are at odds with the kind of artists you tend 
to find in the BBC Sound Of polls or the Brit Critics’ Choice shortlist: the 
big-hitters that major labels have decided are going to make them a lot of 
cash. A lot of that music sounds like the result of extensive market research, 
with literally inevitable results: it plays it safe, closely resembling stuff 
people are already buying. So this year’s hotly tipped alt-rock band sounds 
remarkably like last year’s most successful alt-rock band. This year’s big new 
singer-songwriters sound remarkably like last year’s big singer-songwriters, 
influence of wafty electronica and all. This year’s pretender to the mainstream 
pop throne seems to have used exactly the same songwriters, producers and 
Auto-Tune settings as the star they are trying to knock off their perch.

You can’t blame big record labels for playing it safe – these are tough times 
for the music business – but caution leads to ossification: if you are looking 
for a reason why huge swathes of the charts sound remarkably homogenous – as if 
you could swap the names of the artists responsible around and no one would 
really notice – then there it is.

Perhaps the commercial success of Skepta’s chart-topping, Mercury-winning 
Konichiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/skepta-konnichiwa-review-boy-better-know-album-of-the-week>
 – an album that self-evidently hasn’t been focus-grouped into existence – 
might cause a rethink of this approach. Perhaps not. Either way, in the 
meantime, here are 50 new artists, independent in the sense that they are 
acting on impulse and instinct; doing what they want, rather than what they are 
told.

Alexis Petridis
Abra interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/abra/embed.html>  
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian. Hair & makeup: Maria Asadi using MAC 
Cosmetics 
In one long, breathless rush, Abra <https://soundcloud.com/darkwaveduchess> is 
telling me the story of the teenage rock band she was once a part of. “It was 
with my ex and all his roommates and it wascrazy,” she recalls. “When we would 
fight it was always, like, ‘Band practice is off! Band practice is on!’ But our 
shows were really good, super intense and passionate, and I had this really 
good chemistry with the guitarist – whowasn’t my boyfriend – and so …” She 
clocks my surprise and laughs: “I know, right? We didn’t play many shows!”

Speaking to Abra is an almost completely different experience to listening to 
her music. On record she can be raw and unflinching, putting her emotions on 
the frontline over a skeleton of minimalist electro-R&B. It is music that 
chimes with her mysterious online persona, in which she styles herself as the 
“Darkwave Duchess” and refuses to reveal her real name or age. Yet here she is 
now, giggling away through stories of acid trips and teenage distress, with 
precious little guard up.

Getting a grip on just who Abra is can be tricky because it seems to have 
taken her some time to work it out too. Growing up as the daughter of church 
missionaries, she spent formative years in south London, New York and Atlanta, 
living a displaced life in which “music, art and books were the only constant”. 
Her strict religious upbringing meant that listening options were reduced to 
Christian music – in church, she would often cry at the stacked harmonies – or 
old folk songs, which inevitably left her feeling like something of an outsider 
among her peers. “I couldn’t bring up Scarborough Fair to someone in my 
third-grade class,” she laughs. “They weren’t listening to that!”

Yet she accepts now that these unique influences shaped her sound today, which 
absorbs old and modern influences, from gospel to avant-R&B via Chicago house, 
Britney Spears and smooth 80s pop. Just listen to the stunning CRYBABY, or 
indeed any song from this year’s mini-album PRINCESS, and you will likely be 
floored by the mix of 808 rhythms, chiming synths and soulful topline melodies. 
It is music full of nods to the past that nevertheless sounds thoroughly modern.

There are two musical events that seem to have greatly shaped Abra’s career. 
The first was while suffering depression as a teenager, when she would sit on 
her bed crying and listening to the radio. “One day, the station 94.9 was 
playing Christmas songs and I said to myself – I know this sounds cheesy – but 
I said: ‘If there’s anything out there that believes I’m worth a damn, I just 
need a sign!’ And then this record came on. I just connected with it so much, 
it was beautiful and I wanted to be able to make something that beautiful.”

That record was Peter, Paul and Mary’s A Soalin’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H4NjrBcn0PA>, and it prompted Abra to pick up 
a guitar and spend weeks learning it. Soon she had mastered all kinds of songs, 
and her aptitude for cover versions – from Radiohead’s All I Need to Waka 
Flocka Flame’s No Hands – bore fruit when the YouTube videos she posted under 
the nameHurricane Gabrielle 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLhrFwpdiV46Pkaij8xlRN4iyTP389LIFg> 
began going viral. She progressed to writing her own material but wasn’t 
convinced she was on the right track until a hallucinogenic experience finally 
showed her the light.

“I accidentally triple-dosed on acid,” she says, somewhat casually. “Later 
that night, I had time to listen to my music and reflect. I realised that I’d 
been hiding myself away and that the only part of me I showed to people was the 
sad side. This music that was supposed to show me that I was worth a damn 
wasn’t even makingme feel better.”

She resolved to stop writing what she dismissively calls “sad-girl shit” and 
work on showcasing her steelier, more independent side. Hooking up with 
Atlanta’s misfit enclaveAwful Records <http://awfulrecords.com> only encouraged 
her further. Home to outsider hip-hop artists such as Father, Slug Christ and 
Archibald Slim, and with ties to Drake and Makonnen, the DIY collective 
persuaded her to stop working with her then-producer and follow her own path. 
“They gave me the confidence because they’re fiercely independent,” she says. 
“Slug Christ makes his own beats, produces, mixes, masters … does it all, and 
that’s the first time I’d seen any of that. I loved being around them. And I 
got into a lot of trouble with them, too.”

What kind of trouble?

“Oh, all kinds. Things blew up really fast and there was this sense of 
invincibility in the air around everyone, this feeling that we could do 
everything, so wedid everything, you know? Messing with drugs and living a fast 
life … it got kind of reckless for a little bit, but I feel we’ve all reached 
equilibrium now. We don’t go back there, but we can look back with a lot of 
stories to tell.”

To this day, Abra’s set up remains pretty DIY. PRINCESS was recorded, as was 
her previous albums Rose and BLQ Velvet, on a laptop in her bedroom closet – 
just her, a £40 USB mic, a Midi keyboard and Logic. Yet the results are 
anything but dashed off. Abra says she spent weeks agonising over CRYBABY, 
trying to work out what was too much, and what wasn’t enough. In general, 
though, she sticks to a simple rule: “Build it from the ground up and when I 
feel like I get goosebumps from hearing it, I’m done.”

With so many different emotions, genres and personalities thrown into her 
music, it has been a source of frustration to Abra in the past to see her music 
labelled simply as R&B, something she says only happens because she is a black 
female singer. These days, though, she is more relaxed about it, partly because 
she has accepted just how important an influence R&B has been to her (“I 
respect so many people in R&B and wouldn’t be where I am without it”) and 
partly because she is finally at peace with who she is as an artist, and where 
she is going.

“At the end of the day, you’re the ones putting the labels on,” she laughs. 
“I’m the one making the content, so I’m doing OK.”Tim Jonze

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CI1g4dnDtao>
Jorja Smith interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/jorje/embed.html>  
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian. Makeup: Carol Lopez Reid. Stylist: 
Connor Williams 
Before her schedule was full of actual press requests, Jorja Smith 
<https://soundcloud.com/jorjasmith> used to concoct them. “When I worked at 
Starbucks back in Walsall, I’d do fake phone interviews in the stockroom to 
pass the time,” she says. Perhaps cautious about seeming diva-ish, she quickly 
adds: “It was good, though. I met some great people there.” After another brief 
stint as a barista when she relocated to London at the end of 2015, the 
19-year-old is now concentrating on music full time, as one of the country’s 
most talked about unsigned acts. Having studied classical singing, piano and 
oboe – eventually giving up the latter after she forgot to breathe during a 
lesson and passed out – Smith wrote songs in her bedroom before putting some 
online and bagging a management deal at 16.


However, it was this year that things really blew up, when she melded Dizzee 
Rascal’s Sirens with a haunting 80s piano sample and her own stirring, timely 
lyricism to tell the story of a youngster caught up with the police. “I 
literally just wroteBlue Lights <https://soundcloud.com/jorjasmith/blue_lights> 
sitting on my bed. I didn’t think it would be that big,” she says. Since then, 
Smith has shown the versatility of her simultaneously fragile and powerful 
vocals with tracks including a drum’n’bass/reggae collaboration with Cadenza 
and Dre Island, and a Henry Purcell-inspired R&B track with Irish rapper 
Maverick Sabre, with a debut four-track EP to follow imminently.

Although she has had a typical Gen Z trajectory, she is an old soul who seems 
largely unconcerned with fame: she is not too into social media, watches little 
TV – bar documentaries – and chart pop largely passes her by (she collapses in 
giggles when she accidentally attributes a Jay Sean song to Justin Bieber). 
Plus, she has no plans to put the record labels out of their misery quite yet. 
Where does she see herself in the future? “Very happy. With a smile on my 
face.” Out of the mouth of an X Factor wannabe, it might sound glib, but from a 
striking, unpretentious talent, it is just what you hope to hear.Hannah J Davies

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meP1neJrguw>
The Garden 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/garden/embed.html> 
Wyatt and Fletcher Shears, the twin brothers from Californian who make up the 
Garden <https://thegardentwins.com>, have noticed something about their shows. 
“The majority of our crowd is under 21,” Wyatt says. “I don’t know why. I’d 
like to be able to appeal to everyone, to make universal music. Our lyrics 
speak about the future and to the youth, and maybe someone in their late 20s 
and early 30s can’t identify with that.”

He shouldn’t fret. What makes the Garden so exciting is the sense that they 
are the generation gap brought to life: what they do is so captivatingly 
youthful that you almost want older people to hate them. Wyatt plays bass, 
Fletcher drums, and – accompanied by some triggered effects and beats – they 
play something that sounds like 50 different genres and none at all, with the 
velocity of hardcore and the angularity of post-punk fighting their way through 
most clearly.

“For us, the whole idea of genre is pointless,” Wyatt says. “It can be useful 
if you like a certain kind of artist, and they’re classified with people who 
sound like them. But we aren’t classified with anyone who sounds like us. It’d 
be interesting for the future to be less genre classified.”

Though they have recorded plenty of music – and, really, what’s not to love 
about a 16-track, 18-minute album calledThe Life and Times of a Paperclip 
<https://thegardenmusic.bandcamp.com/album/the-life-and-times-of-a-paperclip-lp>
? – you are best off catching the Garden for the first time live. Wyatt, who 
might be dressed as an Elizabethan jester, performs ballet pirouettes around 
the stage between vocal lines; halfway through the set, Fletcher – in 
zombie-deathmask paint when I saw them in September – hurdles his drum kit and 
they perform a hip-hop interlude, while they somersault and tumble around each 
other. “Wyatt and I used to go to a lot of shows, and it’s not super-fun to 
watch bands stand there and do nothing,” Fletcher says. “We enjoy playing like 
a jester would, entertaining the crowd; you want to do whatever your body says. 
You get into it uncomplicatedly.”

Prepare to be amazed. One way or the other. Michael Hann

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DTNcrUBCqXk>
Show me body 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/showmebody/embed.html> 
In the war against gentrification, hardcore punks Show Me the Body 
<http://showmethebody.com> are taking the fight outdoors. “The last show we 
played in New York was on the street,” says bassist Harlan Steed. “A lot of the 
great venues are shutting down, so lately we’ve found thatfinding our own space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/13/show-me-the-body-alternative-guide-to-new-york-cmj-2015>
 to play our shows is really more ideal for us.”


The concept is simple enough. At short notice, the trio will set up a gig in a 
public space – an underpass, a backstreet, a square – spread the word and 
perform either to completion or until the police shut them down. “You’ve got to 
be smart about it,” explains vocalist Julian Cashwan Pratt. “You’ve got to not 
put too many bands on the bill, only have one or two artists. You go to Home 
Depot that day and rent a generator. If you return it that same day, it only 
costs 60 bucks.”

It’s this sort of homespun ingenuity that has marked Show Me The Body as one 
of the most distinctive DIY bands around. Part of Letter Racer – a collective 
that also features avant-garde rap group Ratking as well as artists and 
designers – they have taken the sense of community and anti-commercialism that 
marked out the hardcore scene of the 80s and updated it for an age where genre 
lines have begun to grow blurry.

Sonically, their work reflects the complex cacophony that makes up 
21st-century New York. Debut albumBody War 
<http://www.nme.com/reviews/album/reviews-various-artists-16506> is a 
bewildering slew of warring sounds: deafening hardcore breakdowns, shards of 
industrial noise, hip-hop and, most curiously of all, the haunting, discordant 
tones of a banjo. Lyrically, they are no less confrontational, Cashwan Pratt’s 
nervy, barked hip-hop rhymes reflecting a society where police brutality is 
chillingly routine and property is increasingly in the hands of a moneyed few.

“We have a war over space all the time here. People are getting kicked out of 
their homes, venues are closing,” Steed explains. For a band rebelling against 
this status quo the situation is stark. “If you’re doing something that’s 
actually for young kids who don’t have a lot of money, and for a scene that 
isn’t about making money, it’s going to be difficult,” he adds.

Still, Show Me the Body are up for the fight. In recent months they have taken 
their uprising global, including putting on one of their free public shows in 
another rapidly gentrifying area –Dalston in east London 
<http://www.thefader.com/2016/08/17/show-me-the-body-london-show>. For Cashwan 
Pratt the objective is clear. “Keep going, make more music, organise more kids. 
That’s the goal.”Gwilym Mumford

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eBhaYi8tXzc>
Neverlan clan 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/neverlan/embed.html>  
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Neverland Clan <https://soundcloud.com/neverlandclan> are not just the world’s 
gnarliest boyband. They are a way of life. “It’s a thing of not growing up,” 
the group’s Ryan Hawaii says of their manifesto. “Never forgetting your youth 
and always wanting to put yourself first in terms of what you want to do and 
your dreams. I am 21 and with the pressures of having to work; [Neverland Clan 
is] about not allowing that to corrupt what you want to do. Being free. Living 
for yourself and your own happiness.”

Just as Odd Future tore a hole through the new boring with their cartoonish 
artistry and anarchy, Neverland Clan are DIY superheroes preparing to disrupt 
from the underbelly of the UK hip-hop scene. Mostly based in south-east London, 
they are a community of creatives in their teens and early 20s, thriving in a 
microcosm of musicians,designers <http://neverlandclan.bigcartel.com/>, 
illustrators and videographers. At the helm are Ryan, Daniel OG and Omelet (a 
nickname given because of his head, which is apparently egg-shaped). Their 
tastes include Slipknot, trip-hop, R&B and rap, but their sound is always 
playful and raw; a reflection of their friendships and the scrappy backdrop of 
their home studio.

“Everything is in-house. We do all our own designs for merchandise,” says 
Omelet. “Making the best out of – not a crappy situation – but not the best. We 
haven’t got access to big studios or an engineer who mixes it all. We all had 
to learn. None of us went to music school or anything.”

Their arrival is part of a fresh way of thinking; the self-sufficient, 
positive mindset of Generation Z, who we are often told are doomed. In spite of 
the circumstances, they are determined to create, says Ryan. “We’re young, and 
our fans might be a bit younger. So we’ve gone through what they’re going 
through. Nowadays, you come out of school, you’re told to go to university, but 
people who go to university come out with first-class degrees and they’re 
struggling to find jobs. Why not do something that you can enjoy for the rest 
of your life? It’s letting people know you can do whatever you want. You can be 
smart. Don’t be stupid.”Harriet Gibsone

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1RoNWAUPY3k>



Anenon


Brian Allen Simon is the producer, multi-instrumentalist and founder of the 
Non Projects record label, whose releases lurk in the uncategorisable, 
avant-garde section of the record store. The musician, who specialises in sax,
makes songs <https://soundcloud.com/anenon> that weave together classic 
experimental traits and sharp cultural trends – wiry electronics, jazz, 
improvisation, cinematic string sections and spooky ambient sonics. His clean, 
cathartic2016 album Petrol <https://anenon.bandcamp.com/album/petrol> was 
released this year by Friends of Friends Music, a creative hub for 
forward-thinking Los Angeles artists.HG

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/anenon/once>



Bad Breeding


A solitary bleak tower block is featured on Bad Breeding’s SoundCloud page 
<https://soundcloud.com/badbreeding>; a nod to the council estates of Stevenage 
from where the punk group hail. There is a sense of commuter-belt boredom and 
frustrated fury tugging its way through each of their spiky songs, too. The 
less said about them the better, however: they claim to be keen to avoid “the 
viral litter and meretricious trends that develop online, which only go to 
showcase the kind of cultural zero we’ve reached as a society”.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qFQZlYVefxo>



Beatrice Dillon


The supreme British exponent of the idea that dance music can grab you by the 
hips and frontal lobe simultaneously,Beatrice Dillon <http://www.dillonwork.com>
 is a producer, DJ and ethnomusicologist witha global purview of funk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/22/beatrice-dillon-favourite-tracks>
. DJ sets feature African chants rubbing against dub techno to create 
time-expanding, grin-stretching polyrhythms; her own tracks are minimal techno 
without the bad drugs and even worse jeans, as crisp and fresh as a melon 
medley.Ben Beaumont-Thomas

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0xzaRDN1hDA>



Belly Squad


Unlike Section Boyz’s glossy rap, tailored to a US market, the rap, grime and 
afrobeats crewBelly Squad <https://soundcloud.com/bellysquad>, from east and 
south London, keep their feet grounded on British soil. Genre-hopping and 
always full of adolescent energy, their tunes are packed with melody and 
mischief –Banana 
<https://soundcloud.com/bellysquad/belly-squad-banana-prod-by-ga-bellysquad> 
being the epitome of their infectious, albeit overtly phallic-focussed, 
choruses.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q8dxRaGOjwI>



Berhana
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7efcf6bb648cdf17c0e33ce884eb7eed0a49c2c1%2F0_0_5413_2997%2F5413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7efcf6bb648cdf17c0e33ce884eb7eed0a49c2c1%2F0_0_5413_2997%2F5413.jpg>
 Berhana Photograph: Record Company Handout 
The soulful suburban eeriness of Frank Ocean’s Super Rich Kids floats through 
this pastel-huedR&B singer/rapper <https://soundcloud.com/berhana>’s 
self-titled EP. Already ordained as the next great thing by online arbiters of 
quality, the Atlantan of Ethiopian heritage has a Hype Machine No 1 hit on his 
hands with the slacker soul ballad Janet, and has a handful of other lost, 
lonely grooves dedicated to self-discovery and twentysomething existentialism.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CNq5jdNfD-c>



Big Thief


A surprise indie success story, these virtual unknowns 
<http://www.bigthief.net> were snapped up by Saddle Creek this year. Fans of 
barbed balladry in the vein of Angel Olsen and Sharon van Etten should enjoy
Masterpiece, <http://saddle-creek.com/store/711> an album rich with singer 
Adrianne Lenker’s sorrowful, stewed-in storytelling. The Brooklyn group have 
been out on the road in the US with Kevin Morby, Eleanor Friedberger, M Ward 
and more. They have new fans in Wilco’s Jeff Tweedy and were named NPR readers’ 
No 1 new band of 2016.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oacUgWXrqwc>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfa3e1269c65adaf36e788480161876cf067fc6a%2F0_83_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfa3e1269c65adaf36e788480161876cf067fc6a%2F0_83_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Brooke Sharkey 
Brooke Sharkey


Not yet 30, Brooke Sharkey <http://brookesharkey.co.uk> already has more than 
a decade’s worth of performing across the UK and Europe under her belt and a 
very accomplished second album inWandering Heart 
<http://www.folkradio.co.uk/2016/10/brooke-sharkey-wandering-heart/>. File her 
under folk if you have to, but her distinctive sound and strong narrative 
skills bring to mind Regina Spektor, French chanteuses such as Juliette Greco 
(her own French upbringing means she sings in both languages) or even Tom Waits 
– a live highlight is her stripped-back version of The Briar and the Rose. The 
sparse fragility of Sharkey’s music and her intimate delivery mean that it 
gives up its charms slowly, but very surely.Imogen Tilden

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=90FtZ9rtgVk>



Cabbage


The stench of Fat White Family’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/14/fat-white-family> squat rock 
still lingers in the air, but the aptly namedCabbage 
<https://ahcabbage.bandcamp.com>, from Mossley in Manchester, are up for 
ousting their place as Britain’s premiere scuzzy stars. Decked out in camo and 
fans ofGG Allin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GG_Allin> – AKA the Charles 
Manson of rock – their mission is to launch an “idiosyncratic, satirical attack 
in the form of discordant neo post-punk”.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9hah4_gj-Bs>



Compton White


His moniker might conjure images of an all-American country showman, but 
Compton White <https://soundcloud.com/comptonwhite> is really Lloyd Whittle, a 
producer who grew up between London and the Isle of Wight. He makes cockney 
pirate radio interludes and tracks with titles such as Hounslow, and his 
self-titled debut EP was a masterclass in anything-goes electronica: flitting 
between hyperactive sampledelica and beautifully unsettling dissonance in the 
vein of Arca. And like all the most captivating dance-music makers, Whittle is 
also a master of nostalgia, evoking the elusive transcendence of the clubbing 
experience.Rachel Aroesti

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/sweetboyrecs>

Delroy Edwards
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0942d61d0a9b1b6f914d4e0208be6e4fc34be1%2F0_16_1206_724%2F1206.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0942d61d0a9b1b6f914d4e0208be6e4fc34be1%2F0_16_1206_724%2F1206.jpg>
 Delroy Edwards 
Sure, it might be easy to be independent if your dad is Hollywood 
character-actor legendRon Perlman <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ron_Perlman>, 
but while most privileged Los Angelenos give themselves over to EDM and DUIs,
Delroy Edwards <https://soundcloud.com/delroy-edwards> takes the road less 
travelled. His early work was ferociously analogue techno, modulating into 
prettily jacking – and still ferociously analogue – house. His new album, 
Hangin’ at the Beach, meanwhile, is a series of miniatures, where no-fi 
coldwave gets obscured under a smear of sewer gunge. He has a great label, too, 
in LA Club Resource.BBT

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/delroy-edwards/club-use-only>



Dexta Daps


Dexta Daps <http://www.dextadaps.com> grew up listening to dancehall 
heavyweights such as Shabba Ranks, Bounty Killa and Elephant Man. Now his own 
music is inescapable in Jamaica. So much so that when MIA visited the Caribbean 
island recently, she was so profoundly drawn to his sound that she enlisted the 
golden boy of dancehall for her album,Aim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/01/mia-aim-review-vital-artist>. 
With the genre infiltrating so much modern pop, now has never been a better 
time for Daps to evolve into a global star.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ExQPYxiI5DU>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd12d94949027eccb716a9ff88261f7eeae3fff3b%2F0_1386_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd12d94949027eccb716a9ff88261f7eeae3fff3b%2F0_1386_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Elf Kid 
Elf Kid


Grime’s renaissance doesn’t look like abating any time soon; still in his 
teens,Elf Kid <https://soundcloud.com/elfkid> hails from south London and, 
alongside Novelist, is part of the Square crew. His track Golden Boy is already 
one of the anthems of 2016, a frenetic blur of boasts pasted on to a speeded-up 
sample from Amerie’s 1 Thing. “I want a Mobo, Oscars after that,” is among the 
masterplans he rattles off, and as long as he is travelling at this pace, who 
would dare try to stop him?TJ

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8GtVUkyzvhU>



Elysia Crampton


Elysia Crampton <https://soundcloud.com/eande> is one of a hyper-cosmopolitan 
new wave of artists who address the interconnection – and also, paradoxically, 
the rootlessness – of digital culture. A trans Bolivian-American woman, her 
albumAmerican Drift 
<https://soundcloud.com/blueberry-recordings/sets/american-drift-by-elysia-crampton>
 considered the shared pigmentation of skin and soil; her new one, Demon City, 
is told from the perspective of the severed limbs of an 18th-century Bolivian 
revolutionary. The high concepts are tethered with beautiful music that blends 
Latin pop rhythms such ashuancayo with ambient synths and rap-production 
bombast.BBT

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4s3FIBlBLy8>



Eat Fast


Fuzz, noise, garage and grunge; the Newcastle four-piece 
<https://soundcloud.com/eatfastmusic> formerly known as Eat (they changed names 
after an 80s alt-rock group going by the same name threatened legal action) put 
out their debut EP on their own label earlier this year. Since then, both 6 
Music and Radio 1 have given them many spins – which isn’t bad for a band who 
recorded the vocals and guitars in their bedrooms and the drums in one of their 
dad’s kitchens. Eat that, Eat.HG

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/eatfastmusic>



Estrons
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca8487768322b2d6aad14fa18b23e9e1ea19003e%2F0_162_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca8487768322b2d6aad14fa18b23e9e1ea19003e%2F0_162_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Estrons 
This rising Welsh rock band <https://soundcloud.com/estrons>’s lead single is 
a baptism of fury: I’m Not Your Girl was written by singer Tali Källström after 
overhearing two men bragging about women they had slept with – it quivvers with 
a collision of testosterone, fear and, as the frontwoman herself says, “that 
cesspool of crap surrounding teenage emotions that still exist in your 20s and 
30s”. They have toured with fellow febrile punk newcomers Slaves and Dilly 
Dally, and their debut EP,She’s Here Now 
<https://soundcloud.com/estrons/sets/shes-here-now-e-p>, is out this month. HG

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/estrons>



Etta Bond


A skinhead soul princess living in London, Etta Bond 
<https://soundcloud.com/etta-bond> has managed to swerve the industry shackles 
often imposed on young female singers. Discovered online and starting out as a 
guest vocalist on a Wretch 32 track in 2011, she has gone on to release a 
string of EPs and singles, and along with sometime collaborator Chris Loco, has 
been left alone to make lurching late-night R&B, empoweringneo-soul 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xoatubMzv8M> and bonkers club pop aimed at 
rousing a Bacardi Breezer-fuelled riot.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c8-knIeFldo>



Forth Wanderers


Forth Wanderers <https://soundcloud.com/forth-wanderers>’ frontwoman Ava 
Trilling is just 18 – impressively, she has already nailed the tough but 
irresistibly melancholy vocal style that makes this New Jersey outfit such an 
alluring proposition. The band make slow-burn indie that recalls the gorgeous 
haze of Mazzy Star through the prism of lo-fi DIY punk – and despite having 
recently signed to two labels (Marathon in the UK and Father/Daughter in the 
US), the group hold the principles of the latter very close to their heart.RA

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tzAAwo5tHOU>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad1e05dd0dcacb2ba79843a65ad2bc668dad1c43%2F0_55_1152_691%2F1152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad1e05dd0dcacb2ba79843a65ad2bc668dad1c43%2F0_55_1152_691%2F1152.jpg>
 Francis and the Lights 
Francis and the Lights


The biggest pop stars out there are also the best talent-spotters: namely, 
Kanye West and Drake. Californian musicianFrancis Farewell Starlite 
<https://soundcloud.com/francisandthelights> has worked with both, but he is 
not the sort of scrappy trap pretender they tend to pull up. Instead the 
California musician makes minimal, plaintive pop not dissimilar to zeitgeisty 
French outfit Christine and the Queens. See his recent collaboration with Kanye 
and Bon Iver,Friends <https://soundcloud.com/francisandthelights/09-friends-2>, 
for proof of his glitchy and effortlessly spine-tingling charms.RA

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wScYn10D2vo>



Gaika


This Brixton-born artist’s music lurks at the murkier end of some of the most 
exciting genres of the moment, from grime to trip-hop to dancehall.Gaika 
<https://soundcloud.com/gaikasays> recently released an EP called Spaghetto on 
Warp that combined the distinctive rhythms of the latter with a darkly 
industrial aesthetic to brilliantly unsettling ends. Previously a member of 
rowdy Manchester rap crew Murkage, Gaika now aims to subvert black masculinity 
with his performance art-style videos and studiously disruptive beats.RA

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/gaikasays/sets/spaghetto-ep>



Galcher Lustwerk

When he appeared with his mixtape 100% Galcher in 2013, Galcher Lustwerk 
<https://soundcloud.com/galcher-lustwerk> became an instant obsession in 
underground dance circles. Just as “deep house” was becoming a catch-all 
signifier for bland minor chords to have on in the background while you gazed 
soulfully at an Ibiza sunset, here was someone reinventing it as sexily 
laser-focused rap music. Remixes and side projects since have only been 
diverting, but his DJ sets are sublime and he has the potential for a truly 
mindblowing second album.BBT

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HxMLzZmZE3I>



Ill
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3fed738942f7181eb2d210defe2bcb1588cd0a7%2F0_0_2144_1286%2F2144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3fed738942f7181eb2d210defe2bcb1588cd0a7%2F0_0_2144_1286%2F2144.jpg>
 Ill 
Manchester group Ill <http://www.weareill.com> believe “in the power of 
disobedient noise”. Formed in 2012 and self-releasing their grotty, wild, weird 
and frenzied music, they started life with ambitions to sound like the Fall or 
Can, but instead bulldozed towards female-fronted post-punk along the lines of 
LiLiPUT and Kleenex. Self-described “evil pop” makers, the riot grrrl aesthetic 
lives on in their music – fiercely political and with a penchant for waggling 
dildos on stage and in videos.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xmml7MBikXk>



Jamie Isaac


Part of the DIY south London community spearheaded by King Krule, 22-year-old 
Jamie Isaac <https://soundcloud.com/jamieisaac> is from Croydon. His intimate 
debut album Couch Baby sounds like misty-eyed Chet Baker burbling from the 
speakers of a laptop in a dark, stuffy bedroom. Although a former Brit school 
graduate, he prefers low-key lounge jazz to zealous jazz hands and very much 
exists within modern pop “sad lad” scene.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTfYmEwefkY>



Kablam


DJ and producer Kablam <https://soundcloud.com/ka-blam> – Kajsa Blom – was 
born by the Swedish west coast and relocated to Berlin in 2012. Her music is a 
brutalist concoction of the sledgehammer and the spiritual. A former DJ and 
resident of Berlin’s famous Janus party, she was named by Mixmag and Fader as 
one of the most essential artists of 2016. For her avant-garde club music she 
makes an unrelenting mix of sounds and textures, that, if it weren’t so radical 
and imaginative, would be nothing but a racket.HG

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/ka-blam/closed>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4fb1d6f2d2256e47412983faa81b060e213d78%2F0_192_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4fb1d6f2d2256e47412983faa81b060e213d78%2F0_192_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Kadhja Bonet 
Kadhja Bonet


LA songwriter Kadhja Bonet <http://kbonet.com> clearly has reservations about 
belonging in the modern era – her smooth soul voice and flute-adorned 
productions place her more firmly in the 70s, alongside the likes of Minnie 
Riperton or, during folkier moments, Vashti Bunyan. Intimacy is key here: 
Bonet’s voice is delicate and pure, yet she has enough confidence to place it 
high up in the mix. And it’s the classically trained musician who makes this 
call – she took on writing, arranging and production duties for her thoroughly 
DIY debut mini-album The Visitor. She also performed most of the instruments, 
too, just in case you were worried she might be slacking.TJ

Listen on Soundcloud 
<https://soundcloud.com/fatpossum/kadhja-bonet-nobody-other>



Kelsey Lu


A modern-day flower child and free thinker from Charlotte, North Carolina, 
Kelsey Lu <https://soundcloud.com/kelseylu> is a classically trained 
instrumentalist whose style is so sophisticated she turns something otherwise 
irksome into an elegant artform: take playing a loop pedal, or her video for 
Dreams, in which she pirouettes in a desert while wearing leather chaps. She 
has recently collaborated with Blood Orange and Kelela, supported Grimes and 
Florence and the Machine, and she counters spiritual, celestial 
classical-crossover soundscapes with pertinent political messages.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eJ9nmbN5rd4>



Kodie Shane
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffedb23a85f17156bdfbc9c8e76209f2fe8ababde%2F0_282_4267_2560%2F4267.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffedb23a85f17156bdfbc9c8e76209f2fe8ababde%2F0_282_4267_2560%2F4267.jpg>
 Kodie Shane 
At the risk of isolating the uninitiated/anyone over the age of 15, rapper 
Kodie Shane <https://soundcloud.com/kodieshane> is one part of Lil Yachty’s 
Sailing Team. Which essentially means she is part of the new school of 
colourful, cartoonish rap. Fetty Wap’s Trap Queen has a lot to answer for: the 
Atlanta-born artist’s music is a weird amalgam of peppy pop sounds, Auto-Tuned 
vocals and limitless energy.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDaiY0bHIPM>



Lil Yachty


Splice Drake’s melodious mextrosexual rap with the new school of sing-song 
Atlantan hip-hop and garnish with the kind of post-ironic irreverence that 
marks out a new generation of fiercely modern musicians, and 19-year-oldMiles 
Parks McCollum <https://soundcloud.com/770rd>’s arch and gloriously inane sound 
is what you get. Lil Yachty’s debut mixtape, Lil Boat, was both gratifyingly 
poppy and deeply weird and, like any respectable future-facing pop star, he has 
got the visuals to go with it: the brilliantly bizarre video to 1 Night 
features kittens, badly Photoshopped memes and Disney singalong lyrics.RA

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=251cxou3yR4>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F131c604fb4ae9864e7688de82aa8c6f65e75c802%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F131c604fb4ae9864e7688de82aa8c6f65e75c802%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Mitzki Photograph: Ebru Yildiz 
Mitski


Mitski Miyawaki <https://mitski.bandcamp.com>’s Your Best American Girl, from 
her album Puberty 2, is a brilliant dissection of feeling “half-Japanese, 
half-American but not fully either”. It is also a deconstruction of an alt-rock 
scene inhabited mostly by white males. Its video features Mitski violently, 
passionately kissing her own hand. A perfect balance of silliness and 
seriousness – just what the lo-fi guitar star and queen of self-inspection does 
best.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u_hDHm9MD0I>



Moses Sumney


The experimental guitar textures that form the backdrop of Moses Sumney 
<https://soundcloud.com/mosessumney>’s self-released EP Lamentations might 
place him firmly leftfield. Yet the fractured, underwatery sound has been 
incorporated into mainstream releases this year, on everything from Frank 
Ocean’s Blonde to Radiohead’s A Moon Shaped Pool (whose title describes 
Sumney’s sound pretty well). Not that Sumney is guitar-fixated – there are 
inventive vocal arrangements and a big enough dose of sadboy electronica here 
to sate the appetite of James Blake fans.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9dhBNQ25fqE&feature=youtu.be>



Nadia Rose
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb94a81703ec29be0ed801f696beabe74010cff04%2F0_1501_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb94a81703ec29be0ed801f696beabe74010cff04%2F0_1501_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Nadia Rose 
There’s making a statement, then there’s Nadia Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/25/nadia-rose-british-rapper-boom-station-squad>
’s Skowd. The 22-year-old Croydon rapper’s recent music video – more than 1m 
views – features her and her squad storming down a street with the sort of 
confidence and bravado that would terrify Taylor Swift and the Victoria’s 
Secret model troupe. Not your average ode to friendship, it is a celebration 
rather than schmaltz, brimming with humour and charisma – a new Missy Elliott 
in the making.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ns_0zp00UQk>



Noname


Chance the Rapper featured the skills of Chicago’s Fatimah Warner on his 2013 
breakthrough mixtape, Acid Rap. Now under the spotlight as the solo starNoname 
<https://soundcloud.com/noname>, her melodic, woozy rap often sounds as if it 
is recorded on a mangled cassette tape. Her mixtape Telefone is full of breezy, 
glistening synths, like a surreal soundtrack to a chintzy 80s American sitcom.HG

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/noname/sets/telefone>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bba9f2f043fb4c08eb903c4bdebd8c501ac6eb7%2F0_169_3742_2244%2F3742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bba9f2f043fb4c08eb903c4bdebd8c501ac6eb7%2F0_169_3742_2244%2F3742.jpg>
 Obongjayar 
Obongjayar


Who would have ever guessed that Norwich would have so much to say about the 
sound of 2016? First Let’s Eat Grandma emerged with their twisted fairytale 
pop, and now there’sObonjayar <https://soundcloud.com/obongjayar>, whose sonic 
journey has absorbed influences from his birthplace of Nigeria as well as the 
Norfolk city he called home for a while. He currently lives in London, although 
from the likes of Creeping – which, with its dank claustrophobia, is 
reminiscent of Roots Manuva – he positions himself squarely as an outsider in 
the capital.TJ

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=chWm2OOw8U4&feature=youtu.be>

Oliver Coates


Also known as “Radiohead’s secret weapon”, indie cellist Oliver Coates 
<https://soundcloud.com/ollycoates> has a CV full of admirable feats: a Massive 
Attack collaborator who has tweakedSquarepusher 
<http://www.olivercoates.com/index.php/listenwatch/squarepusher/> and Boards of 
Canada songs, he is a classical crossover artist who goes way beyond Clean 
Bandit’s approach of pairing sugary pop with strings. Aside from the release of 
the album Up Stepping and programming a weekend of“deep minimalism” 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/deep> at the 
Southbank Centre, his work for Radiohead formed the basis of tracks onA Moon 
Shaped Pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/08/radiohead-a-moon-shaped-pool-review>
.HG

Listen on Soundcloud 
<https://soundcloud.com/platform/oliver-coates-timelapse-boiler-room-debuts>

Pinegrove


Fans of early Wilco, Built to Spill and Bright Eyes should enjoy New Jersey 
four-piecePinegrove <https://soundcloud.com/pinegroveband>. Creating 
country-tinged indie rock (with subtle emo undertones, if subtle emo is at all 
possible), their buzz is as slow building and steady as their sound: based on 
word-of-mouth in the US, their album Cardinal shifted more than 2,000 copies in 
its first week before they had even been on a national tour.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hWOBMGEDO6E>

PWR BTTM


Drummer Liv Bruce and guitarist-vocalist Ben Hopkins – the duo behind PWR BTTM 
<http://pwrbttmband.com> – started writing music in college three years ago in 
New York. They paint their faces with glitter/gold/makeup/whatever – adornments 
that enhance their music’s buoyancy – and are part of a wave of artists taking 
issues of queerness and sexuality to the masses. Their aim is to not only 
spread joy, but “bring elements of performance and drag artistry into DIY 
culture” – a scene that has been predominantly straight and serious until now.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KX_tBWLmr1s>



Ray BLK
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7242500d8f34af25fa5001d94671095d18b4c8c9%2F346_1268_5332_3199%2F5332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7242500d8f34af25fa5001d94671095d18b4c8c9%2F346_1268_5332_3199%2F5332.jpg>
 Ray BLK 
New York may have Jay Z and Alicia Keys’s Empire State of Mind – but south 
London’s got My Hood, a soaring celebration ofRay BLK 
<https://soundcloud.com/rayblk>’s home borough featuring socks and sliders, 
full English breakfasts, fried chicken, mopeds and a cameo from Stormzy. On 
5050, meanwhile, she samples the Cardigans’ Lovefool, but wrings frustration 
and fury from its cutesy, keening lyrics. You get the impression she won’t take 
no for an answer.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4V3iyojYJ38>



Ricky Eat Acid


Cult Baltimore producer Sam Ray is a prolific artist who works under multiple 
names. He has played in a folk band (Julia Brown) as well as an indie rock band 
(Teen Suicide) but his current moniker,Ricky Eat Acid 
<https://soundcloud.com/rickyeatacid>, reaches giddy sugar highs; all the 
warmth and artistry of the Avalanches, the intricacy and sophistication of 
instrumental hip-hop and, at its most intense, the synth surges of EDM. Some 
songs also come with arrangements from composerOwen Pallett 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Owen_Pallett>. HG

Listen on Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/terrible-records/01-hey-615>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b1d2e698c38c81e46d373c77d95e2fbabda124%2F0_219_4838_2904%2F4838.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b1d2e698c38c81e46d373c77d95e2fbabda124%2F0_219_4838_2904%2F4838.jpg>
 Sarasara: Photograph: Michel Jocaille. Ruff: Stéphane Laurent Marcel Artworks 
Sarasara


Not only does Sarasara <http://sarasaramusic.com> share a record label with 
Björk, as well as an alien, future-facing aesthetic, but this French 
producer-singer has a passion for wiring tech into her tunes, too. A coder 
whose former occupation was a project manager for an apps company, her music is 
robotic: pitting African instruments against squelching, mutant machine beats. 
Her debut, Amorfati, also features co-production from the official authority on 
oddball creations, Matthew Herbert.HG

Watch on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL9O7wneEla6UVNBtnqJVHB9PQfkjPHwjo>

Sex Swing


Londoners Sex Swing are an underground supergroup including members who have 
lived through a plane crash and a lighting bolt. Their talents stretch beyond 
mere survival however: the space/kraut/noise/psych rock group churn out 
grinding, gnarly sounds spliced with the almighty squall of a saxophone. Beware 
their artwork forKarnak <https://sexswing.bandcamp.com/album/sex-swing>: it 
will have you retching quicker than you can say Traveling Wilburys.HG

Listen on Soundcloud 
<https://soundcloud.com/sex-swing/sex-swing-night-time-worker>
Future 50 playlist 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/spotify-embed/embed.html> 
Sheer Mag

Sheer Mag <https://soundcloud.com/sheer-mag> do not sound like your idea of 
what a DIY band should sound like – instead of shouting over atonal noise, you 
can hear big chunks of Lynyrd Skynryd and Thin Lizzy dropped into the middle of 
their sound. They are resolutely unafraid of what are usually referred to by 
rock critics as “duelling guitars”, but underground is what they are. They put 
their music out on Bandcamp, with 7in singles emerging on tiny independent 
labels, and their songs don’t deal with boozin’ it up in honky tonks, but with 
the problems caused by gentrification. Punk as hell, but something you can hold 
lighters aloft to as well.MH

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOt774ekroI>



Sona Jobarteh


Kora virtuosity has, for centuries, been a male preserve, an ancient tradition 
handed down from father to son exclusively in griot families.Sona Jobarteh 
<http://www.sonajobarteh.com> boldly and brilliantly goes where many of her 
male relatives and ancestors have gone before and is making an international 
name for herself as a virtuosic player of the 21-stringed west African harp. 
She is an accomplished composer and a graceful and passionate singer whose 
debut, Fasiya, mixes her African heritage with European sounds and strong and 
rousing lyrics to create immediately accessible music of charm and grace.IT

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oToZfPGMMBY>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F233abb666fb975f7f3f37e45d050d2a92a81cc9a%2F0_204_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F233abb666fb975f7f3f37e45d050d2a92a81cc9a%2F0_204_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
 Photograph: Carys Huws 
Steven Julien


Formerly operating under the alias FunkinEven, electronic pioneer Steven Julien
 <https://soundcloud.com/funkineven> outed his new guise for the release of his 
2016 album Fallen. Julien continues to shape and inspire the underbelly of the 
music world, whether he is working with Róisín Murphy, sewing the splendour of 
his wonky funk in the Royal Opera House or in disused prison cells in Bristol. 
Flecks of thumping techno, Chicago house and old school hip-hop reverberate 
throughout his skittish soundscapes.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://soundcloud.com/funkineven/sets/steven-julien-fallen>



Tayla


Birmingham newcomer Tayla <https://soundcloud.com/iamtayla>’s debut single 
Call Me Danger is a 90s R&B ode to self-celebration. Or, according to the woman 
herself, “going out, having your look on point, feeling killer sexy and having 
the attitude to back it up”. The 23-year-old one-woman TLC recently performed 
her debut show at London’s cult queer club night Sink the Pink in front of 
3,000 club kids dressed as mermaids. Fame only gets more bizarre from here.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ntH4hRsbRHs>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a88fc7dea705cdd4b2273c1e5f944e07c023846%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%2050%3A%20the%20rising%20music%20stars%20to%20look%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a88fc7dea705cdd4b2273c1e5f944e07c023846%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Tunji Ige 
Tunji Ige


Tunji Ige <http://tunjiige.com> was at university when he joined the Brain 
Bandit collective and recorded his debut The Love Project from his dormitory. 
The self-produced rapper-singer from Philadelphia has since scaled starrier 
heights; as well as being a Soundcloud smash, with tracks reaching 3m plays, he 
has also cameoed on Christine and the Queens’ 2015 song No Harm Is Done. A 
potential successor to Drake or Kanye’s throne, he is, in his own words, 
“post-backpack, post-swag rap, the end of trap, and it’s not wack”.HG

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zggKgEWJmSI>



Venom Prison


Venom Prison <https://soundcloud.com/venomprison>’s debut album, Animus, 
arrived in October, and the one thing you could be sure of was that it was not 
aimed at crossover success: the outer edges of metal and hardcore combine 
brutally, and with extreme precision. It’s not really a surprise that the 
adjectives used to describe them include “hellish”, “violent” and “horrific”, 
all used approvingly. What is surprising is that their singer is a woman, 
Larissa Stupar. You would, genuinely, never guess it from her terrifying roar.MH

Watch on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q9I-oL2ffds>



Abra – Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian. Hair & makeup: Maria Asadi 
using MAC Cosmetics

Jorja Smith – Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian. Makeup: Carol Lopez 
Reid. Stylist: Connor Williams

Neverland Clan – Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
 