
The latest series of The Great British Bake Off is now under way – and with it 
the Guardian’s accompanyingweekly live blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/live/2016/aug/24/the-great-british-bake-off-2016-episode-one-live>
. The aim is to provide as-it-happens commentary for those watching the 
programme – the show doesn’t take itself terribly seriously, so lends itself to 
a bit of tongue-in-cheek observation that is lightweight and fun.

I’ve been liveblogging television for the Guardian for eight years – I’ve also 
joined viewers for Strictly Come Dancing, The X Factor, The Apprentice and 
Eurovision among other programmes – and Bake Off is probably the most 
challenging. The action moves surprisingly fast, particularly in the early 
weeks when there are many bakers in the tent, and three challenges to cram into 
an hour-long show. In week one there were 12 drizzle cakes, batches of jaffa 
cakes and mirror-glaze cakes to get through, each with multiple twists 
(technical bakes excepted). In this week’s instalment the bakers produced 264 
iced biscuits in just the first round – before we got anywhere near their 
complicated, sometimes disastrously so, gingerbread structures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwrite-ingredients-liveblogging-great-british-bake-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60446c97f116492ecbb13f5c56bafed83a5b971b%2F0_226_4290_2575%2F4290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20write%20ingredients%3A%20liveblogging%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwrite-ingredients-liveblogging-great-british-bake-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20write%20ingredients%3A%20liveblogging%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwrite-ingredients-liveblogging-great-british-bake-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60446c97f116492ecbb13f5c56bafed83a5b971b%2F0_226_4290_2575%2F4290.jpg>
 This year’s action gets under way in the Bake Off tent. Photograph: Tom 
Graham/BBC/Love Productions 
Oddly, the The X Factor and Strictly Come Dancing are often easier to live 
blog, even though the action is live, because the format is more structured and 
predictable. I can also do more preparation in advance – for Strictly I’ll note 
ahead of time which dance each couple is doing, and their song choice for that 
week. The challenge with Strictly is the sheer length of the Saturday live 
show: it can be more than two hours in the early weeks, which is a really long 
time to be writing at top speed without a break.

Great British Bake Off gets flying start with jaffa cakes of doom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/24/great-british-bake-off-flying-start-jaffa-cakes-doom>
It’s nice to think that most of the readers come to the GBBO live blog for my 
witty commentary, but I’m very aware that the icing on the cake is the comment 
box, which is packed weekly with baking wisdom and hilarious observations, and
is truly a joy to read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/live/2016/aug/24/the-great-british-bake-off-2016-episode-one-live#comment-81826650>
.

For me, the comment box community is what makes liveblogging special, perhaps 
because that’s where I first contributed to the Guardian. In 2007, I was a 
regular commenter on some of the early TV live blogs, and a fortuitous 
encounter with the then media editor gave me the opportunity to pitch for a job.

I am a copywriter by trade, with no journalism training, so it was a simple 
case of seizing the moment. I never imagined I’d still be doing it nine years 
later, and still loving every minute by minute.
 