
Most young Australians undertake unpaid work experience as part of their 
education or training, to maintain welfare entitlements or simply to improve 
their job prospects. But those from more disadvantaged backgrounds are less 
likely to have those opportunities and those on placements associated with 
government benefits enjoy their experiences less.

These are some of the key findings from our new report 
<https://www.employment.gov.au/news/unpaid-work-experience-australia-report-december-2016>
, funded by the commonwealth Department of Employment.

We also found that unpaid internships or placements may involve significant 
costs for those who undertake them.

Turnbull targets Labor's 'shameful' opposition to youth work experience plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/turnbull-targets-labors-shameful-opposition-youth-work-experience-plan>
The research, the first of its kind in this country, surveyed 3,800 people 
aged 18 to 64 about work experience. It specifically excluded volunteering, 
such as at a church, charity or club.

Who does unpaid work experience?

In our study, more than half of participants aged 18 to 29 had recently taken 
part in unpaid work experience. A quarter of those aged over 30 also had at 
least one placement.

But our results show there are some who have trouble accessing unpaid work 
experience. We found that young Australians (18 to 29 years old) from lower 
socioeconomic backgrounds (as defined by parents’ highest level of education) 
were less likely to have taken part.

The results also show that people living in a capital city were more likely to 
have undertaken internships or placements than those living elsewhere. 
Participation rates were also higher for men compared with women.

Employers could exploit unemployed on unpaid work experience, say unions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/06/employers-could-exploit-unemployed-unpaid-work-experience-unions>
Unpaid work experience extends beyond traditional student 
<https://books.google.com.au/books?id=hX-TCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA302&lpg=PA302&dq=Kramer,+M+%26+Usher,+A+(2011).+Work-integrated+learning+and+career-ready+students:+Examining+the+evidence.+Toronto:+Higher+Education+Strategy+Associates&source=bl&ots=Cn3FJEAUEv&sig=D6QeO65T4fmVlloc2Cm-TLfYdPM&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj7scqjrazPAhUGNJQKHTQjDsYQ6AEIJDAB#v=onepage&q=Kramer%2C%20M%20%26%20Usher%2C%20A%20(2011).%20Work-integrated%20learning%20and%20career-ready%20students%3A%20Examining%20the%20evidence.%20Toronto%3A%20Higher%20Education%20Strategy%20Associates&f=false>
 placements in medicine,nursing 
<https://www.hwa.gov.au/sites/uploads/Clinical-Training-2012.pdf> and teaching, 
and internships in professional fields such ascreative industries 
<http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/70008/1/70008.pdf>, law and finance. Our research 
revealed work experience in a wide range of professional, intermediate and 
entry-level roles across many industries.

Of those undertaking unpaid work experience, 36% reported that their most 
recent period of unpaid work experience lasted over one month. A similar 
proportion (37%) had undertaken a single placement, while 26% had two such 
experiences. One in five participants had undertaken five or more episodes in 
the past five years.

Reasons for participating in unpaid work experience

About half of all unpaid work experience occurred in connection with a formal 
course of tertiary or VET study or secondary schooling. This is unsurprising, 
given the emphasis that education providers and employers now place on
work-integrated learning 
<https://www.ncver.edu.au/publications/publications/all-publications/work-based-learning-and-work-integrated-learning-fostering-engagement-with-employers>
. But this means half of all arrangements occur outside of education or 
training curricula.

In our survey, people also completed unpaid work experience because: they were 
required to do so to maintain Youth Allowance or Newstart payments, they were 
part of an unpaid trial during a recruitment process, it was unpaid training 
after an offer or employment, or for some other reason.

The fact that so many young people did this sort of work experience for some 
other reason indicates that many placements are being self-organised by 
students or jobseekers outside formal course requirements, or that 
organisations are establishing internships and recruiting participants for 
their own purposes.

This is significant because unpaid internships or placements like this may 
breach minimum wage laws 
<https://theconversation.com/are-unpaid-internships-unlawful-60197> unless they 
are connected to an authorised course of education or training, or do not 
involve productive work.

Benefits and costs of participating in unpaid work experience

Consistent with previous studies 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/joec.12010/abstract> that highlight 
the benefits of increasedworkplace exposure 
<http://digitalcommons.wcupa.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1002&context=mark_facpub>
, participants in our study were highly satisfied with their unpaid work 
placements.

They reported developing skills and knowledge, improving employment and career 
prospects, and improving their networks. Unpaid work experience also helped 
them decide whether that field of work was suitable.

The people who were most satisfied with unpaid work experience were those who 
did it as part of study. Those who were least satisfied did their unpaid work 
experience as a requirement of Youth Allowance or Newstart or for “other 
reasons”.

Our study showed 27% were offered paid employment by the host organisation 
after the period of unpaid work experience. Those who were in unpaid trials or 
training, or arrangements associated with Youth Allowance or Newstart, were the 
most likely to receive an employment offer.

Our data doesn’t tell us whether these jobs were sustained or short-lived. Nor 
does it give any clear indication as to whether taking part in work experience 
actually improves the chances of finding a job.

Our research revealed a variety of costs associated with unpaid work 
experience. For example, more than a quarter of respondents reduced their hours 
of paid employment to take part in unpaid work and 20% organised and paid for 
their own insurance. These costs may mean some can afford to access this work 
experience while others can’t.

More than one in 10 respondents paid money to a broker, agent or directly to 
the host organisation to take part and one in four had to travel longer than 
one hour to attend. Among the study participants, 17% lived away from their 
usual home to take part.

Professions such as politics, journalism, law and finance are dominated by 
those from privileged backgrounds. This isnot only because existing social 
networks promote opportunities 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/365765/State_of_Nation_2014_Main_Report.pdf>
 but because wealthy families can afford to support their children while 
undertaking work experience. In our survey, young people from high 
socioeconomic backgrounds were more likely than other young people to say that 
they cut back their paid work hours, paid for their own insurance, travelled 
for more than an hour or lived away from home.

In most areas, Australian women are getting a much worse deal than men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2015/feb/27/in-any-area-australian-women-are-getting-a-much-worse-deal-than-men>
What this means for policies on employment

In May 2016, the Australian government announced a $840m youth jobs PaTH 
(Prepare-Trial-Hire) program 
<https://www.humanservices.gov.au/corporate/budget/budget-2016-17/job-seekers/youth-jobs-path-prepare-trial-hire>
. The policy includes skills training and access to voluntary internships of 
four to 12 weeks for jobseekers under 25. It also provides a bonus youth wage 
subsidy paid to organisations that go on to employ young jobseekers.

Given how widespread unpaid work placements have become, the policy may 
provide much-needed resources to host organisations to support better learning, 
career and employment outcomes for participants.

But the government could learn from how education institutions structure their 
unpaid work experience placements. The involvement of an education institution 
provides a learning framework and support around unpaid work placements that a 
government-led initiative may struggle to emulate. Educational institutions may 
also be supervising or screening placement opportunities to ensure they provide 
a positive learning environment.

The socioeconomic gap for access to unpaid work experience we identified will 
widen if unpaid work becomes more common or a de facto prerequisite for 
securing ongoing employment, so governments should address this. This could 
include scholarships or additional support for low-income participants in 
particular.

• Damian Oliver is the deputy director of the centre for management and 
organisation studies at UTS business School, University of Technology, Sydney; 
Andrew Stewart is John Bray professor of law at the University of Adelaide; 
Anne Hewitt is an associate professor of law and the University of Adelaide; 
and Paula McDonald is professor of work and organisation and ARC future fellow 
at the Queensland University of Technology. This article was originally 
published onthe Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/how-to-pick-an-ethically-raised-ham-this-christmas-69640>
, part of theGuardian Comment Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/guardian-comment-network>
 