
1. Upside Down <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UnO41-rKUsc>

It’s difficult now to imagine just how outré the Jesus and Mary Chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jesus-and-mary-chain> would have sounded in 
1984, and how incongruous they would have been among the Thompson Twins and Nik 
Kershaws of this world. It was a desire to hear the Shangri-Las and 
Einstürzende Neubauten on the same record that drove them to form in the first 
place, and they were quickly fulfilling that ambition with Upside Down, their 
debut single. Indeed, the screeching, uncompromising feedback juxtaposed 
against Jim Reid’s placid murmur still grabs you by the throat, even 33 years 
on.

The Jesus and Mary Chain on Psychocandy: ‘It was a little miracle’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/26/jesus-and-mary-chain-psychocandy-live-interview>
“Britain in 1984 was fucking boring,” said Creation boss Alan McGee. “I like 
ABC, but that was as exciting as it got: Martin Fry and his gold lamé suit. 
Then we found the Mary Chain.” The Reid brothers from East Kilbride had been 
recommended by his pal Bobby Gillespie – who would soon step into the breach as 
the band’s drummer – and while McGee was lukewarm about them at first, he 
became convinced of their genius when they pitched up in London to perform 
live, though their avalanche of feedback at that gig turned out to be a mistake 
rather than a calculation. While the Mary Chain’s importance in the evolution 
of alternative rock is sometimes downplayed these days, Upside Down was a 
landmark single, the cacophonous first appearance of one of the 1980s’ most 
important and influential acts. “Everything hasn’t been done,” Jim Reid told 
the Face. “No one has ever made a record remotely like Upside Down.”

2. Just Like Honey  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7EgB__YratE>

The band’s debut album Psychocandy (1985) was a surprise to many, not just 
because of its influences but because of the depth and maturity of the 
songwriting. It may not be unusual these days to hear bands borrow from the 
Ronettes at the same time as from the Velvet Underground and Hank Williams, but 
in 1985 it was as radical as it was unprecedented. On Just Like Honey, the Mary 
Chain managed to combine these influences, as well as a splash of psychedelic 
sunshine pop, on a song written under overcast Glaswegian skies that are also 
somehow reflected in the music. If that sounds complicated, it actually isn’t: 
they took all those musical forces and united them with consummate ease. The 
simplicity of the sound was also reflected in the aesthetic – with their fuzzy 
hair and black threads, they gave off an air of cultured menace, like 
characters in a Jean-Luc Godard film. William Reid had intended to make Just 
Like Honey much faster, but his brother talked him into slowing it down. “Jim’s 
like, ‘No, bring that down a bit,’ and I was like, ‘No, Jim. No, Jim. You don’t 
know,’” he told Goldmine magazine. “He was like, ‘Please, please, please, just 
bring it down a bit.’ He was right. He was totally right.” Whether they agreed 
on anything again is a moot point.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7EgB__YratE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7EgB__YratE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7EgB__YratE&media=>
3. Some Candy Talking <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oIIdLAQ3nvc>

Anyone still expecting the wheels to fall off – even after the excellent 
reception Psychocandy received – was confounded when the Jesus and Mary Chain 
released the Some Candy Talking EP in 1986. The lead track, which was even more 
dreamily narcotic than previous releases, suggested there was no shortage of 
great tunes. Radio 1 DJ Mike Smith apparently blacklisted the song because of 
the drug reference in the title (which Jim Reid has always denied), but the 
record was never outright banned, because the BBC had cottoned on that such 
bans usually sent a record racing up the charts (a la Relax or Je T’Aime (Moi 
Non Plus)). Even with only minimal airplay, it reached No 13 in the UK singles 
chart.

Some Candy Talking was Bobby Gillespie’s swansong. The Reids used a drum 
machine for recording purposes on future projects, drafting in sporadic 
replacements for live shows. First up was John Moore. “Bobby was very nice,’ he 
told Zoe Howe in the biography Barbed Wire Kisses. “He said, ‘It’s not really 
that difficult, the main thing you’ve got to do is duck when the bottles start 
flying.’ He was so right.”

4. April Skies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OPPP3BXurHk>

In the Britpop era it was expected that “indie” bands would appear on Top of 
the Pops, but in the mid 1980s such outings still seemed strange and anomalous. 
The Jesus and Mary Chain signed to Blanco y Negro – a subsidiary of Warners – 
but it was still a jolt to the system when they landed in the Top 10 and were 
invited on the flagship BBC music show. For a period in 1987, the Mary Chain 
were bona fide pop stars, appearing on the cover of Smash Hits, and as 
recognisable to striplings taping the Top 40 off the radio as to the more 
earnest, NME-reading demographic that made up their fanbase. April Skies is a 
staggeringly confident slab of dark pop, which, while denuded of earsplitting 
feedback and thus more commercial, still exhibits a whiff of danger and the 
promise of “making love on the edge of a knife”. The consensus says Psychocandy 
is the masterpiece, but the Darklands LP, with April Skies and the tenebrous 
and gorgeous title track, has the better songs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPPP3BXurHk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPPP3BXurHk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPPP3BXurHk&media=>
5. Sidewalking  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bSnuMVTxYPg>

In 1988, the Reids exhibited an unforeseen influence – hip-hop – on 
Sidewalking. The standalone single, which reached No 30, sampled the drumbeat 
from Roxanne Shanté’s Roxanne’s Revenge (part of the infamousRoxanne Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/13/utfo-roxanne-wars> with the Real 
Roxanne). At first, the band were unsure whether to put it out under a 
pseudonym, or even release it at all, given the break from their customary 
sound, but on the advice of Geoff Travis, they eventually released Sidewalking 
under their own name. It was the right call, because while the rhythm track was 
out of left field, it is every inch a Mary Chain classic. In fact the song 
heralded a more US-friendly sound, which they’d explore further on the album 
Automatic.

6. Head On <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eGp47YwDZ48>

It’s fair to say Automatic, with its calculated appeal to audiences stateside, 
was not to the liking of all of the band’s original fanbase. But the driving 
and pulsating Head On, with its rockabilly guitars and chorus reminiscent of 
Springsteen’s Born to Run, was the standout track for most. Musically, it’s 
pulverising, and lyrically it’s emphatic too: “Makes you want to feel / Makes 
you want to try / Makes you want to blow the stars from the sky.” The Pixies 
certainly thought so – their cover on Trompe le Monde is arguably more famous.

7. Almost Gold  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zGCjpkewg5g>

If, on Automatic, the Mary Chain had attempted to ingratiate themselves in the 
US, tracks such as Reverence on Honey’s Dead (“I wanna die just like Jesus 
Christ / I wanna die just like JFK”) were surely intended to antagonise. 
Thankfully, not everything on Honey’s Dead is designed to cause offence, with 
Almost Gold proving the baggy-tinged jewel in the crown. “Almost Gold is nearly 
an Aztec Camera title,” wroteStuart Maconie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stuartmaconie> in the NME at the time, 
“and it’s not far from an Aztec Camera song, with its glowing Caledonian 
country feel.” It was certainly a far cry from the band who played 15-minute 
sets, caused riots in polytechnics up and down the country, and were banned 
from several British TV shows. Nevertheless, the reflective, mature sound 
suited them.

8. Snakedriver  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ncmCTvJoyDQ>

In 1994, Brandon Lee’s last movie, The Crow, hit cinemas. Lee had been killed 
eight days before the end of filming, shot by a defective blank. While there 
was plenty of hype surrounding the movie, undoubtedly the best thing about it 
turned out to be the soundtrack, which had a heavyweight Cure contribution 
(Born), a Joy Division cover that didn’t suck (Nine Inch Nails’ take on Dead 
Souls), and a searing, swaggering, vintage Jesus and Mary Chain.

Snakedriver is as recalcitrant but effortlessly cool as anything they’ve 
produced, while William Reid’s gift for manipulating feedback was never better 
exemplified. “I’ve got syphilitic hetero friends in every part of town,” snarls 
Jim Reid. “I don’t hate them but I know them / I don’t want them hanging 
around.” The song had been released the previous year on the Sound of Speed EP, 
the last classic EP from the band.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DncmCTvJoyDQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DncmCTvJoyDQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DncmCTvJoyDQ&media=>
9. Sometimes Always <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WdAcS4c0-Qk> 

In 1994, the Jesus and Mary Chain got a second wind with Stoned & Dethroned. 
Unbeknown to many, the band had hitherto maintained a “professional attitude” 
in the studio by keeping their noses clean, but during the Stoned & Dethroned 
sessions they began checking out the local pub opposite their Drugstore 
recording studio in London’s Elephant and Castle. “There was a guy who dealt 
drugs behind the bar,” Jim Reid told me in a 2011 interview, “so it was all 
fucked up after that.”

Professional or not, the album was not only a return to their finest form, but 
something of a change in direction. The country tinge that had always been 
there came to the fore, while the sumptuous Hope Sandoval duet Sometimes Always 
sounds like long-lost treasure from the canon of Lee Hazlewood and Nancy 
Sinatra. At the time, William Reid had started an affair with Sandoval that 
would eventually end his marriage. “I was in love with Hope, but it was the 
unhappiest time in my life,” he would say later. “It was like horrible, 
horrible, horrible.” Ironically, through his most difficult period, he would 
write with the utmost clarity.

10. Cracking Up <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lHhz9_R2L7E>

For their sixth album in 1998, the Mary Chain were dropped by their label and 
ended up returning to Creation. Munki is often unfairly overlooked and the band 
were terminally unfashionable by this point. “The fact we made that record and 
it still sounds good today is quite an amazing thing,” said Jim Reid in 2011. 
“I couldn’t stand the sight of my brother, and he couldn’t stand the sight of 
me. We made that record under incredibly stressful conditions, but it sort of 
ended up being a great record.”

Blanco y Negro decided there were no hit singles and passed, but Cracking Up, 
from its opening Duane Eddy-style riff, through the frantic tambourine, to the 
doomy piano notes at the conclusion, would deserve to land higher than No 35 in 
any chart in a more just universe. It was a titular cry for help, documenting 
the disintegration of the siblings’ relationship and William Reid’s mental 
state. It would have been a fitting finale, but 2017 promises a new album. 
Perhaps there might be a happy ending after all.
 