
So the prime minister believes there is such a thing as society, and that it 
may require some help from the state. Building a “shared society” was the idea 
outlined by the prime minister in aspeech to the Charity Commission 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/the-shared-society-prime-ministers-speech-at-the-charity-commission-annual-meeting>
 last week. It sounds a bit early-Cameron/Hilton and, given how their “big 
society” idea went, it was a bold way to frame Theresa May’s domestic agenda.

Which is why it is worth considering. May made it clear in her speech that 
working with charities, campaign groups and social enterprises is key to the 
agenda. This is right, but then David Cameron’s team tried the same trick and 
failed to carry it off. The big society ended in a calamity of gagging clauses, 
bad relations between commissioners and delivery organisations and mutual 
mistrust. May’s government needs to do better.

She has made a decent start. Following a concerted campaign by the Association 
of Chief Executives of Voluntary Organisations (Acevo) and others, May has 
alreadydropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/02/ministers-ditch-anti-lobbying-proposals-for-charities-and-universities>
 the previous government’s gagging clause – a spiteful, self-harming doctrine 
that prevented charities in receipt of government grants from giving policy 
advice to government based on vulnerable people’s experiences.

The test of the next few months will be whether she has the will to maintain 
this momentum

She has announced a large government intervention in mental health, and her 
reference to Black Mental Health UK as a campaign group that “exposes 
injustices in the way black people with mental ill health in particular are 
treated, and ensures politicians take action to put things right” is as 
eloquent a meditation on the crucial importance of charitable campaigning as 
one might hear anywhere.

The test of the next few months will be whether she has the will to maintain 
this momentum. There are several issues that can be quickly put to bed. 
Consider the question of the second, equally harmful gagging law around 
elections and campaigns:the Lobbying Act 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/lobbying-act>. 

Lord Hodgson has offered some useful recommendations to mitigate its excesses; 
she should not delay on implementing them. There is the pressing issue of 
charity governance: a critical mass of badly managed organisations would kill 
the “shared society” in its cradle. At present, the government has neither the 
clout, the funding or the top-level personnel to help with this.

There are yet bigger tests of courage ahead, none more so than public service 
reform. The newWork and Health Programme 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/CBP-7845> is 
due. Will this be another vestige of the poisoned relationship between state 
and society, which sacrifices community action while boosting the dividends of 
private sector juggernauts? Or will it mitigate the worst excesses of corporate 
super-delivery agencies while providing a way to catch potential abuses? The 
results are in soon – we shall see.

Disabled jobseekers facing dramatic fall-off in support
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/22/disabled-jobseekers-facing-dramatic-fall-off-support>
The big society idea ultimately became a millstone around Cameron’s neck. His 
beleaguered officials felt obliged to shoehorn it into every appearance, every 
statement. It also failed because, fundamentally, civil society in all of its 
belligerent, ingenious glory became his government’s archenemy.

Its eccentricities were seen as impossibilities. Its shortcomings were fatal 
flaws. May’s version must shake out this attitude of frustration and cynicism. 
It will take a lot of work and perhaps a considerable suspension of disbelief 
from both sides. But it will be a welcome relief that this prime minister has 
promised to be a “supporter” and “champion” of the sector at a time when it 
feels it has few friends among the political classes. And so her post-Cameron, 
post big-society vision is not doomed; not by a long shot. Not yet, anyway.

Asheem Singh is the outgoing chief executive of charity leaders network Acevo. 
He tweets@robinasheem <http://www.twitter.com/robinasheem>. 

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.



 