
The obvious thing to say about Theresa May’s decision to allow herself to be 
seduced by the glamour of a Vogue fashion shoot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-to-become-first-pm-on-the-cover-of-american-vogue>
 is that it looks irreducibly terrible. Tone-deaf, self-indulgent, frivolous – 
whatever the angle, not one of them is flattering.

This is the narrative: not even Annie Leibovitz, mistress of digital 
manipulation, can restore dignity to a prime minister who chooses to take part 
in a fashion shoot while presiding over a car-crash nation. A leader anxious to 
look as if she is in touch with herjust-about-managing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/just-about-managing-pontypool-south-wales-poverty-post-industrial-truth-britain>
 fellow citizens wrestling with austerity and Brexitwill be pictured flaunting 
clothes that will certainly not be available in your average Marks & Spencer.

It’s no defence that the idea was conceived in the pre-Trump era – maybe even 
in the heady days when it must have seemed a reasonable bet that by the time 
the pictures appeared in April, Hillary Clinton would have joined May herself 
and Angela Merkel in a trilogy of female power unprecedented in the history of 
the western world.

If that had been the appeal (and who can but mourn its loss) then the smart 
thing to do on 9 November, immediately after the call to Trump Tower, would 
have been an urgent email to the editor’s office in New York.

Now it seems likely that on her first visit to Washington as prime minister, 
she will have prepared the ground for her encounter with a man notorious for 
reducing women to objects by presenting herself on the pages of American Vogue 
as, well, an object.

Theresa May to become first PM on the cover of American Vogue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-to-become-first-pm-on-the-cover-of-american-vogue>
And that is not the end of it. Even more damaging is that her decision to 
submit before the eyes of the world to the narcissism of fashion could easily 
become one of those defining moments: like Margaret Thatcher in the tank turret 
looking like a cross between Boudicca and Lawrence of Arabia, this one 
misjudgment might easily become a signifier of all that is flawed in her prime 
ministerial style. Here is a woman already perceived to lack strategic nous, a 
prime minister with no mandate from the electorate, a politician who, even if 
she says the right thing, carries on doing the wrong one.

Where was the sage advice that it would not be a good look for soft-focus 
images of the prime minister to be in the news at the start of a financial year 
that will remove many hundreds of pounds in tax credits and housing benefit 
from the incomes of many thousands of families? What part of a wise prime 
ministerial strategy might include juxtaposing austerity with an appearance in 
the pages of the global handbook of conspicuous consumption?

And yet, while all that is true, she is on to something important. First, 
British fashion is big business and the US is a big market. That is at least 
part of the reason why American Vogue’s British editor,Anna Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/06/anna-wintour-who-is-the-real>, 
was made a dame in the New Year honours.

Second, fashion is on to a trend: the world has just got serious about 
politics. Last month Teen Vogue had a smash hit with a blistering leader about 
DonaldTrump “gaslighting” the country 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/donald-trump-is-gaslighting-america> (to 
gaslight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/the-archers-domestic-abuse-gaslighting-sanity-abusive-relationship>
, it helpfully explains, is to psychologically manipulate a person to the point 
where they question their own sanity), which far outstripped the second 
most-read feature of the year, onthe right way to apply glitter nail polish 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2016/12/teen-vogue-politics/510374/>
.

A generation ago, UK media strategists realised Woman’s Hour and the Jimmy 
Young Show <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/jan/16/broadcasting.bbc> 
were a more effective way of reaching ordinary voters than the broadsheets and 
political TV. But this is something different. After Brexit and Trump, voters 
who for years rarely had cause to trouble a polling station have become 
passionate. The business of fashion magazines is spotting trends – and this 
year, at least, politics is fashion.

That is not the same as saying that fashion is politics. Yet it is slowly 
becoming so, as the business of how women in power express their political 
personalities goes mainstream. Leibovitz, the portraitist who did the American 
Vogue shoot with May at Chequers, is always interested in women and power and
the power of women <http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2008/10/annie_excerpt200810>
. She has rescued the Queen from nation’s grandmother status and returned her 
regal presence. She takes Hillary Clinton and Michelle Obama, both regulars in 
American Vogue (Obama has been on three covers) and makes them softer, and more 
traditionally feminine, than people would expect from their public presence as 
representatives and associates of power.

Clinton was open about the conflicting pressures of power and appearance, and 
compromised by adopting the invisible androgyny of the Angela Merkeltrouser suit
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/jun/08/hillary-clinton-wardrobe-matters-but-not-fashion-perspective>
. But May has never conceded her interest in fashion to the demands of 
political convention. She set out to normalise the idea of serious women being 
serious about fashion too. She was in the pages of British Voguebefore she had 
even been elected an MP 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/gallery/theresa-may-political-life-in-pictures>.

She has developed style as a form of political communication. Where her male 
colleagues might brief select correspondents to trail a policy development, May 
declares her intent with a fashion statement that is often flashier than what 
she eventually says. Where she is cautious politically, she is bold (at least, 
fashionistas might mutter, by Maidenhead standards). Like the vicar, the 
vicar’s daughter dresses for the job. In a world where political debate is 
conducted by tweet, a fashion shoot in Vogue might be read as a manifesto. If 
the prime minister has a future, it will need to be a good one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Ftheresa-may-vogue-smart-fashion-statement-prime-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb29efccbdcce3f7d9bf362beb7386ad90585d3d8%2F0_117_3021_1812%2F3021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Vogue%20shoot%20is%20a%20smart%20fashion%20statement%20%7C%20Anne%20Perkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Ftheresa-may-vogue-smart-fashion-statement-prime-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Vogue%20shoot%20is%20a%20smart%20fashion%20statement%20%7C%20Anne%20Perkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Ftheresa-may-vogue-smart-fashion-statement-prime-minister%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb29efccbdcce3f7d9bf362beb7386ad90585d3d8%2F0_117_3021_1812%2F3021.jpg>
 ‘May’s decision could easily become one of those defining moments, like 
Margaret Thatcher in the tank turret.’ Photograph: Jockel Fink/AP  