
On the surface, everything looked perfectly normal. In the summer of 2015, 
Perry Beeches academy in Birmingham hired a local business to undertake a 
health and safety audit. By the end of autumn, it had paid £5,000 to Lampsato 
Ltd, run by a woman called Lynda Scotson.


But there was a catch: Scotson happened to be the wife of one of the school’s 
directors. He had been on the committee that approved the contract.

The set-up proved lucrative for Scotson’s company; over the next few months, 
the school paid out a further £15,000, until the conflict of interest was 
eventually reported and an investigation launched. In December 2016, a 
governmentreport 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/573319/Investigation_report_Perry_Beeches_The_Academy_Trust_December_2016.pdf>
 (pdf) found the school in breach of official rules and detailed serious 
financial impropriety.

This is not a unique case. Across the country, academies have been plagued by 
allegations of financial impropriety, conflicts of interest and even corruption.

Brexit may pull political focus from education, says new Ofsted chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/09/brexit-political-focus-education-ofsted-chief-amanda-spielman-schools>
Unlike schools under local authority control, academies are responsible for 
their own financial management. Although this means that developing good 
corporate relations is essential, many have ended up without a proper framework 
for transparency and accountability. A 2014report 
<https://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/Education/Conflicts-of-interest-in-academies-report.pdf>
 (pdf) for parliament claimed that “conflicts of interest are common”, adding: 
“There is a broader sense that the academy system lacks transparency.”

Meanwhile, the Public Accounts Committee said it was concerned 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/cmpubacc/1063/1063.pdf>
 (pdf) that “individuals with connections to both academy trusts and private 
companies may have benefited personally or their companies may have benefited 
from their position when providing the trust with goods and services”.

Shrouded in secrecy

There is no shortage of evidence for this. Two years ago, an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/12/taxpayer-funded-academy-paying-millions-private-firms-schools-education-revealed-education>
 by the Guardian found that academy chains had paid millions to private 
businesses run by the schools’ directors, trustees and their relatives. 
Examples included the Grace Academy Trust, which had paid more than £1m to or 
through various companies with links to Lord Edmiston, who set up the trust.

The Griffin Schools Trust was also thrust into the spotlight after it emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/11/owing-2m-durand-academy-state-school-in-south-londonto-be-stripped-of-management>
 that it paid more than £700,000 to a consultancy firm owned by its chief 
executives. And last week it wasreported 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/exclusive-ps53-million-bill-related-party-transactions>
 that another academy trust paid nearly £600,000 to a company whose directors 
included two of its trustees.

Some academy schools lack even the most basic transparency provisions. In 
November, the Department for Education opened an investigation into 19 
academies that had allegedly broken transparency rules. They hadapparently 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-37620007> failed to publish a register of 
financial interests covering trustees or senior leaders. The DfE now says: “We 
have contacted all the trusts we identified as non-compliant and a majority of 
these are now meeting our requirements. We are working with the remaining 
trusts to ensure they are fully compliant.”

The true number of academies breaching transparency rules may be far higher – 
these findings were only based on a sample of 100 schools. In fact, those 
failing to publish a register of interests include some of the largest 
multi-academy trusts (Mats). One Mat with more than 60 schools admitted its 
“oversight” to the Guardian, adding: “This is being corrected as soon as we 
possibly can.”

But Chris McGovern, the chairman of the Campaign for Real Education 
<http://www.cre.org.uk/>, says it is far too easy for academies to get away 
with poor transparency. “The whole system is a secret world; it is shrouded in 
secrecy,” he says. “It’s not transparent, it’s a green light for corruption.”

Of course, poor transparency doesn’t necessarily mean a school has had 
improper financial dealings. But it’s a barrier to accountability – keeping 
parents, teachers and authorities in the dark about where the academy’s money 
is going. McGovern explains: “Behind the closed doors of a trustees’ meeting, 
it’s so easy for trustees to support each other, and therefore to award 
contracts to people they know.”

Unethical practices

Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers 
union, blames the string of financial controversies on “the mushrooming of 
academy and free school systems, without proper checks and balances”.

“There’s a steady stream of questionable or downright unethical practice 
coming out of some academies and Mats,” she says. “That’s including companies 
becoming sponsors of academies and then using them as a cash cow. If 
unscrupulous people want to make money out of free schools and academies, there 
are still too many opportunities to allow them to do so.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fteacher-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffinancial-transparency-schools-academies-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14a8e470d5f9a91eb11dcebbdcaec12d246cf3fe%2F0_53_3250_1950%2F3250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There's%20trouble%20with%20transparency%20in%20the%20UK's%20academies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fteacher-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffinancial-transparency-schools-academies-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%27s%20trouble%20with%20transparency%20in%20the%20UK%27s%20academies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fteacher-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffinancial-transparency-schools-academies-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14a8e470d5f9a91eb11dcebbdcaec12d246cf3fe%2F0_53_3250_1950%2F3250.jpg>
 Michael Gove oversaw a huge expansion of the academy system that critics say 
left schools without a proper framework for transparency. Photograph: John 
Stillwell/PA 
Although academies enjoy lots of financial freedom, they are still subject to 
public standards of accountability. So their relationships with private 
businesses should be no less secretive than those of community state schools or 
other public bodies. However, many appear uneasy about financial transparency.

A freedom of information request to Mats by the Guardian highlighted how 
varied the approach can be. Asked for details of any payments they made last 
year worth more than £5,000, most quickly responded with the supplier 
information. But others questioned the need for transparency, or refused the 
request altogether.

One school replied claiming that it was “unhelpful, inconsiderate and, in my 
view, unnecessary” to ask to view the school’s finance data. Dozens more 
refused to release the records on grounds of commercial sensitivity.

McGovern says this reflects a wider lack of transparency in the academy system 
when it comes to business dealings. “It’s not the right of the headteacher to 
say you shouldn’t have the information, or to question why you want the 
information,” he says. “The number one priority for public confidence is 
transparency.”

Should universities take control of schools? The government thinks so
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/nov/30/should-universities-take-control-of-schools-the-government-thinks-so>
Fixing the system

Both McGovern and Bousted believe that allowing local authorities to have 
greater power over financial management could help clean up the system.

“Local authorities could have an important role to play in terms of the 
administration of schools,” says McGovern, adding that the government’s 
academisation programme could have simply removed local authorities’ power over 
the curriculum, rather than also removing their management role. “Local 
authorities should be given the powers to intervene if they have evidence that 
a school is starting to fail – either educationally or on financial probity.”

Other voices have called for a ban on academies handing any contracts to firms 
linked to trustees or senior staff. Kevin Courtney, general secretary of the 
National Union of Teachers, told the Times Education Supplement: “The best 
solution is surely to outlaw them, both to prevent actual cases of wrongdoing 
and to remove concerns about how such contracts are awarded.”

However, so long as financial mismanagement continues, it will be teachers and 
pupils who suffer the consequences. “Because there aren’t enough checks and 
balances – and because there isn’t anything like enough early intervention – 
things can get to a bad state before anything is done about it,” Bousted says. 
“And during that time, morale suffers. Teachers notice that they’re not getting 
the resources they need.”

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 