
Theresa May’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 on Tuesday was the government’s first informative announcement on what the UK 
will look like after Brexit.


A customs union with the EU has been ruled out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/brexit-weekly-briefing-goodbye-single-market-and-customs-union>
 so the UK can negotiate trade deals with countries outside the EU. This hard 
Brexit would mean that, after we leave, the UK will trade with the EU and the 
rest of the world under World Trade Organisation rules, until it has negotiated 
its new trade deals. That is unless we make an interim agreement with the EU 
before we leave, which would also need to be approved by the WTO. However, we 
still could not make trade agreements with countries outside the EU before 
Brexit without the EU’s approval.

The EU continues to be our biggest trade and investment partner. Exiting the 
single market without any other trade deal with the EU in place would mean a5% 
cost disadvantage 
<https://internationalbanker.com/finance/brexit-impossibly-complex-task-uks-new-trade-negotiators/>
 for UK manufacturers, who would face import taxes in the EU.


EU referendum: how would Brexit change VAT and import duties?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/22/eu-referendum-brexit-change-vat-import-duties>
The UK’s main exports are in business-to-business, professional and financial 
services. Leaving the single market would reduce the size of the market 
available to these exporters, for reasons such as loss of mutual recognition of 
standards. For example, lawyers’ directives that allow solicitors to cross 
borders temporarily or permanently under theirUK title 
<https://www.lawgazette.co.uk/analysis/eu-withdrawal-at-what-price-for-lawyers/68469.article>
, and the likely loss of the financial services’ EUpassport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/london-city-eu-passport-brexit>
. While May’s negotiating position is for us to keep that right – to provide 
financial services across borders – the EU principle is that if you leave the 
union you lose that privilege, so it will be a tough negotiation.

Few trade agreements in the world have managed to remove the barriers to 
services trade, because it requires trade partners to commit to harmonisation 
of standards in product, services and labour markets. If a future customs 
agreement with the EU is to maintain comparable levels of market access for 
service exports, the UK must prioritise getting mutual recognition of standards 
from the EU.

May has committed to incorporating EU law into UK law after Brexit to enable a 
smooth transition. After this, the UK will decide which rules it wants to keep. 
As such, for a temporary trade agreement, our standards will match the EU’s. 
For a permanent agreement, we will need new commitments based on new laws. This 
will be a hard and typically take several years, or even decades.

The speech did reveal that the government will work on getting an interim 
trade agreement with the EU. This is the best path forward. A temporary 
agreement would ease uncertainty among businesses and would buy the UK time to 
work out a permanent settlement.

However, it is unlikely that the UK could reach a temporary deal before the 
date set for us to leave the EU. As such, it is likely that the temporary deal 
could follow an existing model like that of Norway.

Immigration 

The Brexit speech has laid out the government’s intentions – it will not 
compromise on control over EU immigration to get single market access. This 
clarity is welcome, but the speech could have done away with many of the 
Eurosceptic claims that lack verifiable evidence. This includes those comments 
regarding the economic impact of immigration – there is little hard evidence 
<http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/brexit05.pdf> that EU immigrants put 
pressure on schools and wages.

Even if we negotiate several trade deals with the rest of the world, it will 
be a long, arduous task to make up for the reduced trade and investment from 
the single market. And we would still need to resolve difficult issues, such as 
worker visas or investment disputes procedures, issues that slowed the EU in 
trade deals with large economies like the US, China or India.

Many questions were left unanswered for small firms. It is likely that post 
Brexit they are going to find it even harder to participate in international 
markets and to get access to government funds.

The prime minister’s speech suggested the UK would use tax concessions to 
prevent businesses from leaving, but the link between tax concessions and 
economic growth is tenuous. And it comes at the risk of exacerbating economic 
inequality and of putting in place an industrial strategy that provides special 
favours to particular firms.

This would go against the spirit of the Brexit vote, and the prime minister’s 
promise to reverse the years of economic neglect that have divided the country.

Swati Dhingra is an assistant professor at the department of economics at the 
London School of Economics, researching international economics, globalisation 
and industrial policy. She is co-author of the recent“Life after Brexit” 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/news/archives/2016/02/Life-after-Brexit-new-LSE-report-on-UKs-options-outside-the-EU.aspx>
 report by LSE’s centre for economic performance.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 