
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> will aim to 
strike a defiant tone in her upcoming Brexit speech on the risks to the rest of 
the EU of giving Britain a raw deal, echoing the combative approach taken by 
the chancellor.

In a speech by the prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
 on Tuesday that will be watched closely in EU capitals, Downing Street is keen 
to impress that there are potentially lucrative economic opportunities 
elsewhere, weeks before the UK isexpected to trigger article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/may-says-she-will-reveal-brexit-plan-before-triggering-article-50>
.

 Philip Hammond, in an interview with German newspaper Welt am Sonntag, warned 
that Britain would“do whatever we have to do” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/philip-hammond-suggests-uk-outside-single-market-could-become-tax-haven>
 to regain competitiveness and appeared to accept that the UK was prepared to 
become a tax haven if necessary.

The chancellor was responding to a suggestion that “the impression on the 
European continent is that your government sees the future business model of 
the UK as being the tax haven of Europe”.

Hammond said “most of us who had voted remain would like the UK to remain a 
recognisably European-style economy, with European-style taxation systems, 
European-style regulation systems etc. I personally hope we will be able to 
remain in the mainstream of European economic and social thinking. But if we 
are forced to be something different, then we will have to become something 
different”.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said the comments suggested the threat of 
“some sort of trade war” with Britain’s EU partners, and accused Hammond of 
wanting to turn the UKinto a bargain basement economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/jeremy-corbyn-you-are-not-henry-viii-theresa-may-brexit-deal-commons-vote>
. “It really doesn’t seem to me to be a very sensible way forward,” he said.

Brexiters in the cabinet believe the government would be better placed to 
reach ambitious trade dealswith countries outside the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/uk-to-begin-talks-with-new-zealand-on-post-brexit-trade-deal>
, including the US, if it were not tied into existing arrangements.

The pound hit a fresh 31-year low in the wake of reports on May’s speech, 
falling below $1.20 in trading on Sunday night. One analyst warned that 
sterling will go on a market “roller-coaster” following claims that the UK will 
seek a hard Brexit.


So far, EU leaders have been united in saying there will be no “cherry 
picking” of legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/uk-will-have-under-18-months-to-negotiate-deal-says-eus-brexit-broker>
, suggesting that May will not be able to imposestrict limits on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/17/theresa-may-obsessed-with-controlling-immigration-says-vince-cable>
 while retaining theeconomic benefits of EU membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/theresa-may-declines-to-rule-out-paying-eu-for-single-market-access-brexit>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Feus-brexit-negotiator-cherry-picking-is-not-an-option-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU's%20Brexit%20negotiator%3A%20%E2%80%98Cherry%20picking%20is%20not%20an%20option%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Feus-brexit-negotiator-cherry-picking-is-not-an-option-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%27s%20Brexit%20negotiator%3A%20%E2%80%98Cherry%20picking%20is%20not%20an%20option%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Feus-brexit-negotiator-cherry-picking-is-not-an-option-video&media=>
EU’s Brexit negotiator: ‘Cherry picking is not an option’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/06/eus-brexit-negotiator-cherry-picking-is-not-an-option-video>
In his interview on Sunday, the chancellor reiterated the government’s view 
that the Brexit vote was a signal that voters would like to seetougher controls 
on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/poorer-voters-worries-immigration-fuelled-brexit-vote-study-finds>
. “We are aware that the message from the referendum is that we must control 
our immigration policy,” he said.

Hammond’s intervention came after Mark Carney, the Bank of England governor, 
told the Treasury select committee thegreatest risks to financial stability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/mark-carney-signals-bank-of-england-may-raise-forecast-for-uk-economy>
 from an unruly Brexit were for other EU members.

The prime minister’s speech at Lancaster House in London on Tuesday will be 
analysed carefully in financial markets for signs that thegovernment has 
abandoned the idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/brexit-may-single-market-scotland-fears>
 of remaining in the single market. Sterling fell sharply afterMay’s party 
conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-consigns-cameron-to-history-in-populist-speech>
 in October, in which she appeared tosignal a hard Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
. The pound, which hit a31-year low against the dollar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/13/pound-flash-crash-traders-sterling-dollar>
 after the referendum, will be under further pressure if May rules out staying 
in the single market.

There has been no decision about whether to publish a document setting out 
May’s approach to Brexit negotiations or let the prime minister’s speech stand 
as the plan, as she promised to MPs.

Over the weekend, the Brexit select committee, chaired by the Labour MP Hilary 
Benn, but including the key leave-campaigning Conservatives Michael Gove and 
Dominic Raab, called for the government topublish a formal white paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/brexit-committee-demands-transitional-deal-and-parliamentary-vote>
 setting out its priorities for when talks begin.

The government is awaiting the result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/government-brexit-supreme-court-theresa-may-article-50>
 of the supreme court appeal onwhether it must consult parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/supreme-court-brexit-10-things-learned-royal-prerogative-henry-viii>
 before triggering article 50, beginning the formal divorce process with the 
EU. A verdict is expected within a fortnight.

May is likely to emphasise Britain’s enthusiasm for pressing ahead with 
negotiating trade deals with countries including the US.

In his interview, Hammond said the Brexit vote was not a sign that Britain has 
chosen to take a more isolationist stance and rejected the comparison with the 
forces that swept Donald Trump into the White House.

“I can’t speak for what is going on in the US, that is a different political 
movement. But in my judgment, it would be a mistake to read the Brexit vote as 
being part of the same strand of thinking that has formed in the US. If you 
look at the media and the reporting during the Brexit referendum campaign, 
there was no anti-trade rhetoric. It was the exact opposite,” he said.
 