
When I started working as a journalist in my native city of Donetsk I never 
imagined that war would come to town, until the day it did.

In the spring of 2014 tanks and pro-Russia separatists showed up on the 
streets of the city, which was quickly turned into the capital of the 
self-proclaimedDonetsk People’s Republic  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/19/ukraine-donetsk-pro-russia-militants>
(DPR).

I was a news editor at Donbass, the largest newspaper and website in the city 
and responsible for a dozen reporters covering local news. We reported on the 
governor’s weekly press conferences, the construction of a new hockey arena, 
several scandalous crimes a year – that was our journalistic routine. It felt 
like nothing unexpected could happen.

Then it did. Within days my neighbourhood had become a battlefield between the 
separatists and the national army and my newspaper was forced to suspend its 
activities, but this was an international news story so I was offered work as a 
fixer, thenas a reporter for the New York Times 
<http://query.nytimes.com/search/sitesearch/?action=click&contentCollection&region=TopBar&WT.nav=searchWidget&module=SearchSubmit&pgtype=Homepage#/alisa+sopova/>
.

My office dresses were replaced by a flak jacket and helmet. I saw people 
fighting, surviving – and dying. My colleagues and I often found ourselves 
under fire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthink-reporting-on-trump-is-hard-try-being-a-journalist-in-donetsk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff896df457c3895e435139111a5d8f13ca52bd3e5%2F0_204_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Think%20reporting%20on%20Trump%20is%20hard%3F%20Try%20being%20a%20journalist%20in%20Donetsk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthink-reporting-on-trump-is-hard-try-being-a-journalist-in-donetsk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Think%20reporting%20on%20Trump%20is%20hard%3F%20Try%20being%20a%20journalist%20in%20Donetsk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthink-reporting-on-trump-is-hard-try-being-a-journalist-in-donetsk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff896df457c3895e435139111a5d8f13ca52bd3e5%2F0_204_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
 Alisa Sopova in the DPR. 
I quickly came to realise that the biggest challenge for journalists was not 
the physical danger, but the moral and emotional dilemmas posed by covering 
events in your homeland.

Should you write about corruption in the national army, knowing that your 
story will be distorted by the Russian propaganda machine and used against your 
country? How do you balance opinions about the conflict while your brother, a 
Ukrainian soldier, is imprisoned and tortured by the insurgents (a situation my 
colleague faced)?

These are the complicated but real choices that Ukrainian journalists still 
face. It’s easy to be a person of principle in a peaceful and democratic 
environment, but as soon as the situation gets personal journalists are told 
that “truth above neutrality” must prevail. However, that “truth” is never 
simple.

My house in Donetsk was shelled by government forces. They were retaliating 
because an hour earlier rebels, who were trying to use my family as a human 
shield, had shelled government forces from my backyard. Journalists in DPR 
mention only the first shelling. Ukrainian journalists mention only the second. 
Being neutral, you have to report on both. I did and never regretted it.

While staying in Donetsk, I was in constant fear of being arrested by the 
rebels for working with foreign media. While the threat of arrest was lower on 
the Ukrainian side, officials had a similar attitude towards journalistic 
neutrality.

In May 2016 the website Mirotvorets, which translates as Peacekeeper, the 
unofficial mouthpiece of Ukraine’s interior ministry, published a list of more 
than 4,000 journalists who had applied for accreditation to report from the DPR.

“We consider it necessary to publish this list because these journalists are 
cooperating with the militants of the terrorist organisation,” the website 
said. Among the “collaborators” were dozens of journalists from the Associated 
Press, Agence France-Presse, BBC, Reuters, al-Jazeera, and the New York Times.

While it’s difficult for international media to be branded as terrorist 
sympathisers, the real impact was on local journalists trying to cover the 
conflict on both sides.

Many of us had subsequent accreditation denied, and some were directly 
threatened about their coverage. Among the people hounding us were many of our 
former colleagues who had become soldiers of the disinformation war, putting 
“patriotism” above objectivity.

I am currently on a journalism fellowship in the US and believe the experience 
in Donetsk can provide some lessons for covering the Trump presidency. In times 
of fierce debate wherejournalism is under attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/18/american-media-journalism-donald-trump>
 it is encouraging to see colleagues asking complex questions and constantly 
interrogating how the country became so polarised.

Journalists in the US have a responsibility beyond their nation. Thousands of 
my colleagues in post-Soviet countries, not to mention the developing world, 
look to them as a model.

It was an American newspaper that gave me the opportunity to objectively cover 
the conflict inUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>, and it is 
imperative that journalists in theUS are able to maintain their instinct to 
come out of this crisis stronger, wiser and to continue to provide a blueprint 
for dealing with ethical dilemmas. The world still needs a good example.

A version of this article originally appeared on Nieman Reports 
<http://niemanreports.org/articles/when-war-comes-home/> 
 