
Outdoor air pollution has grown by 8% around the world in the last five years, 
according to new data by the World Health Organization <http://www.who.int/phe>
. Some of the world’s biggest cities have significantly high pollution levels.

Take New York, for example. A recent NYU study 
<http://nypost.com/2015/03/05/nyc-air-could-kill-you-doctors/> looked at the 
health of 300,000 residents and concluded that individuals living in zipcodes 
with higher concentrations of pollution – as measured by the Environmental 
Protection Agency – had a 24% higher chance of having artery constriction.


The ethical Christmas gift guide: what to get those who love to give back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/16/ethical-gift-christmas-feminist-environment>
Now, a New York City-based designer thinks he might have the solution. To the 
awareness problem, at least. Nikolas Gregory Bentel recently released a new 
line of long-sleeved shirts calledAerochromics 
<http://aerochromics.com/research>, which change colors according to pollution 
levels in the air. The shirts are priced starting at $500.

“Aerochromics is a statement on the rapid deterioration of the our world’s air 
quality,” Bentel says. “Air quality is only one small part of the larger 
spectrum of the pollution that we are slowly seeing taking hold of our planet.”

The shirts are available in three black-and-white designs, and took Bentel one 
year to develop. The shirts track different pollutants – carbon monoxide, 
particulate pollution and radiation – and work similarly to a household carbon 
monoxide detector. Chemical salts turn carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide, and 
that oxidation process transforms the color of the shirts. If carbon monoxide 
levels fall and oxygen levels increase, the colors change again.

While countless smartphone apps 
<http://appcrawlr.com/ios-apps/best-apps-pollution-index> can tell you 
pollution levels, Bentel argues that rather than turning to phones, tablets and 
computers that have to be carried around, apparel can do more than just be a 
fashion statement. “The shirt forces the user to be aware of pollution levels 
constantly,” he says. “I wanted to apply this tech to an object that was 
already being used without hesitation every day and was visible from any 
direction.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQyBomZzJzPQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQyBomZzJzPQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQyBomZzJzPQ&media=>
To test particle pollution – one of the biggest concerns for cities with low 
air quality – Bentel’s shirts use two sensors placed in the front and the back. 
A micro-controller in the shirts’ collar activates heat pads, changing the 
shirts’ colors from black to spotted.According to the Environmental Protection 
Agency <https://airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=aqibasics.aqi>, anything above 51 
on the Air Quality Index (AQI) is a “moderate” health concern. Aerochromics 
shirts go into effect at 60, slowly shifting to the black-and-white pattern. 
But as the AQI escalates, reaching 160, or “unhealthy”, the shirts’ complete 
pattern becomes apparent.

A different version of the Aerochromics shirt changes permanently when exposed 
to radiation. Exposure of gamma or electron beam radiation causes dyes in the 
shirt to change color. Once the shirt is exposed to significant amounts of 
radiation, it remains in that color and pattern.

Funded personally through income from his design studio in Queens, 
Aerochromics is not Bentel’s first venture. He also createdRipley 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2016/01/18/ripley-kit-nikolas-gregory-studio-excrete-customised-poo-jewellery/>
, a ring that gets its oxidized finish by going through a person’s digestive 
system; Data Arbitrage <http://www.dataarbitrage.org/>, a program that floods 
the market with fake social media accounts to dilute data resale values; and
Higher Tides <http://highertidesrealty.com/>, a fake real estate company that 
claims to help buyers find real estate that would retain value post the impact 
of climate change.

Considering this background in art meets activism, it’s unclear who, exactly, 
these shirts are targeting. Bentel says he has a “stream of customers”, but 
refused to provide any more information, or access to them. However, he 
promises the cost of the shirts will fall in the future, making them more 
reasonably priced. “This was my first product run for the shirts so I wanted to 
be sure there was a demand before bringing down the cost,” he says.

Bentel also says a number of academic institutions and commercial companies 
have also reached out to him about the shirts, but withheld names. “I am not 
too interested in selling a lot of the clothing,” Bentel says. “The online shop 
is secondary to the concept. I see Aerochromics first as a statement.”

So is it business or is it art? “This seems like a novel type of clothing line 
that might, because of the novelty, become fashionable,” says Mark Jacobson, 
professor of civil and environmental engineering at Stanford University.

Why aren't more big brands designing clothes for people with disabilities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/13/mainstream-brands-not-designing-clothes-people-disabilities-fashion-school-students>
Aerochromics isn’t the first project to blend environmental concerns with 
technology and fashion. In 2011, two New York City students designedsweatshirts 
<http://nienlam.com/tagged/warningsigns/> that changed color when met with high 
levels of carbon monoxide. More recently, Kasia Molga, a British artist and 
designer who suffers from asthma, premiered a new line of wearable technology 
that responds to air quality. The project, titled Human Sensor 
<http://invisibledust.com/artists/kasia-molga/>, made its debut in Manchester, 
England’s industrial hub, as models paraded around the city in the futuristic 
designs, illustrating how pollution levels change.

But, for all the efforts to raise awareness, Aerochromics doesn’t actually 
offer any practical solutions. The shirts are made with conventional cotton, 
not organic cotton, which has been criticized by environmentalists 
<http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/about_freshwater/freshwater_problems/thirsty_crops/cotton/>
 for harsh use of pesticides and insecticides, a type of chemical pollutants.

Whether Bentel’s shirts will change the dialogue on urban pollution remains to 
be seen. “It makes people more aware of the pollution around them,” Jacobson 
concedes.

In particular, he points to the air pollution and carbon monoxide shirts. If 
these change color when exposed to cigarette smoke, which contains both 
ingredients, it could be a deterrent to smoking as well. “It might make smokers 
more cognizant of the pollution they are inflicting on non-smokers,” Jacobson 
says.
 