
Poprad, Slovakia

Take one small city with a heart of medieval mitteleuropean quaintness at the 
foot of magnificent, snowy mountains. Then add an open-air spa where everyone 
has year-round fun, be it quietly relaxing in hot pools or screaming down water 
slides. The happy result is Poprad in Slovakia. Its historic centre, Spišská 
Sobota, is not huge, but its baroque architecture places it firmly in an old 
and very central part of Europe.Vino and Tapas 
<https://www.facebook.com/vinotapaspoprad/> on leafy Sobostské Square does 
great-value fine dining; for accommodation, Pension Sabato 
<http://www.sabato.sk/en> (doubles from €60 B&B) has a lovely garden at the 
back.

Be sure to venture beyond the old town to discover the highlights of other 
districts, notably chocolatierBon Bon 
<https://www.facebook.com/%C4%8Cokolat%C3%A9ria-Bon-Bon-in-Poprad-1664989967100325/>
 on Dominika Tatarku, over the river near the station, and thePodtatranské 
<http://slovakia.travel/en/podtatranske-museum-poprad> historical museum on 
Partizánska Street further west. Best of all is the quick, cheap public 
transport to the High Tatra mountains, with cable car connections for skiing or 
just enjoying spectacular panoramas. Starý Smokovec is the main village. Back 
in town, the spa,Aquacity <http://www.aquacity.sk/aquapark-cenniky/>, is hugely 
popular with locals (family day ticket €52). Those whose idea of enjoying cold 
weather is a long lounge in an open-air hot pool before breakfast can even stay 
here (doubles from €119, including spa access).
• Wizz Air <https://wizzair.com/#/> flies to Poprad from Luton from £44 return

Baden-Baden, Germany
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f42ee5158f7bd0d7cc3929397c5258d2f9e6ce8%2F0_0_5121_3414%2F5121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f42ee5158f7bd0d7cc3929397c5258d2f9e6ce8%2F0_0_5121_3414%2F5121.jpg>
 The Friedrichsbad Roman-Irish baths. Photograph: Alamy 
So good they named it twice? Actually the double title is to distinguish it 
from all the other Badens around Europe – the name just means “to bathe”. 
Nevertheless this spa town has venerable traditions of immersion, and celebrity 
visitors ranging from the Roman emperor Caracalla to Queen Victoria and 
Victoria Beckham and the England Wags at the 2006 World Cup. In the 19th 
century, when fragile health was a life’s work for the idle rich, the place was 
packed with aristocrats drawn by the promise of salvation in the waters, and 
diversion in the casino. (Fyodor Dostoyevsky lost a small fortune there in 
1867.)

The town remains perfectly set up for easygoing entertainment and is lovely in 
winter, with the warm waters great for easing chilly bones. Lichtentaler Allee 
is a lovely landscaped ribbon of gardens that threads its way across town; 
visitors can sip the allegedly curative waters in the Trinkhalle, or just sink 
into them at Friedrichsbad Roman-Irish Baths (basic three-hour experience €25). 
Mark Twain said he lost track of time in 10 minutes and the entire world in 20. 
(He also said Baden was an inane town, “filled with sham, and petty fraud, and 
snobbery” - which seems harsh when he also claimed it cured his rheumatism.)

There are plenty of upmarket restaurants offering specialities such as beef 
cheeks in pinot noir.Osteria Stromboli <http://www.osteria-stromboli.de/> is a 
decent budget alternative, with homemade pasta from €6.90.Café Konig 
<https://www.chocolatier.de/kh_koenig.php> on Lichtentaler Strasse is where Leo 
Tolstoy drank coffee 20 years before he recycled his Baden-Baden experience in 
Anna Karenina. For budget stays, theyouth hostel 
<http://baden-baden.jugendherberge-bw.de/de-DE/Portraet> north of town has dorm 
beds from €21.80. Otherwise the centralHotel Etol <http://www.hotel-etol.de/> 
(doubles from €110 B&B) is a reliable bet. In winter, or in fact in any season, 
the nearby Black Forest national park has lots of activities to offer, 
including trekking, but also a classic drive along the Schwarzwald Hochstrasse, 
route 500.
• Ryanair <https://www.ryanair.com> flies from Stansted to Baden-Baden from 
£30 return

Sarajevo, Bosnia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e6be39fc8124ee248462edcf4eaeb8b80cb2a7d%2F0_350_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e6be39fc8124ee248462edcf4eaeb8b80cb2a7d%2F0_350_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Bazaar in Sarajevo’s old town. Photograph: Izzet Keribar/Getty Images 
In this cruel world, Sarajevo is a reminder that bad things can turn out 
better. This once magnificent bastion of integration and multicultural 
splendour has risen from the ashes of the 1992-96 siege and is now a 
flourishing metropolis and fascinating destination. Narrow alleyways in 
Baščaršija, the old town, are packed with good cafes and decent well-priced 
accommodation. Hostels such asBalkan Han <http://www.balkanhan.com/index.php>, 
The Doctor’s House <https://www.facebook.com/thedoctorshousehostel/> and Franz 
Ferdinand <https://franzferdinandhostel.com/> have dorm beds from €11, doubles 
from €32.

Highlights are the restored town hall, a masterpiece of fin de siècle Moorish 
fantasy, plus Svrzo’s House, a dignified museum recalling the atmosphere of 
18th-century Sarajevo. More up-to-date, and no less evocative, is the Tunnel 
Museum, a section of the passageway that kept the city alive during the dark 
days of the war. For dinner,Cakum-pakum 
<https://www.facebook.com/Cakum-pakum-441566675894572/> is something of a 
legend for its homeliness and well-priced stuffed pancakes. As befits a Winter 
Olympics location, there’s skiing and snowboarding in Bjelašnica, 20 miles to 
the south-west. Jahorina to the south-east is good for off-piste action.
• Eurowings <https://www.eurowings.com> flies from Stansted and Heathrow from 
£140 return

Åre-Östersund, Sweden
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9591aac6e087d9052b1e36f70fd7efd9dfc33549%2F0_0_3769_2671%2F3769.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9591aac6e087d9052b1e36f70fd7efd9dfc33549%2F0_0_3769_2671%2F3769.jpg>
 City Hall in Östersund. Photograph: Getty Images 
Bayeux is not the only place for 900-year-old tapestries; the Överhogdal 
Tapestries, now housed in the northern Swedish town of Östersund, were 
rediscovered in a church about a century ago. These Viking weavings at the
Jamtli Musuem <http://www.jamtli.com/english/>, (free entry) reveal, in 
extraordinary detail, a world that was just beginning to adopt Christianity. 
Not that Östersund is lacking in modern attractions: it also has contemporary 
art galleries, and the ski centre of Åre, Sweden’s only world-class downhill 
slopes, is nearby. If skiing isn’t your thing, there are loads of 
family-friendly activities in the Winter Park: ice-sculpting sessions, skating, 
sledging or lying back in a deck chair sipping hot chocolate.

For snacks and cakes, locals head to Wedemarks <http://wedemarks.se/> or 
Törners <https://www.facebook.com/T%C3%B6rners-Konditori-177811595565308/> 
bakeries, both in the small pedestrianised centre; for more serious dining,
Fäviken <http://faviken.com/>, one of the world’s great – and remotest 
–restaurants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/dec/04/magnus-nilsson-chef-faviken-restaurant-jamtland-sweden>
, is 50 miles away, deep in the wilds. Here chef Magnus Nilsson has made rustic 
Scandinavian cuisine into an unlikely success story. There are rooms at Fäviken 
(£215 B&B) for those happy to book months in advance, but closer to town (eight 
miles away) and great value isSorbygarden B&B 
<http://www.sorbygarden.se/Logi.html> (doubles from £69 B&B). Cosy Hotel Emma 
<http://www.hotelemma.com/english/29558.html> (doubles from £75 B&B) is a more 
central alternative. Skiers could try Hotel Åregarden in the centre of Åre 
(doubles from £119). A new easyJet flight from (11 December) makes the area 
more easily accessible from the UK – apologies to those Stockholmers who used 
to keep it as a secret winter bolthole.
• EasyJet <http://easyjet.com> flies from Gatwick to Åre-Östersund from £72 
return

Poznan, Poland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb468fcbca3cb08ac349c61f594c995eabc70ec1%2F0_0_5293_3543%2F5293.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb468fcbca3cb08ac349c61f594c995eabc70ec1%2F0_0_5293_3543%2F5293.jpg>
 Poznan’s town hall ‘looks like a wedding cake crossed with a lighthouse’. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Bombed to bits in the second world war but rebuilt and rejuvenated, Poznan is 
an energetic student town with great bars and cafes for cosying up on chilly 
winter days. The heart of it is Stary Rynek, the old market square, surrounded 
by colourful merchants’ houses now mostly devoted to eating and drinking. The 
best cafes, however, are a short walk away from the main tourist drag:Piece of 
Cake <https://www.facebook.com/PIECE-OF-CAKE-152185514869102/> (Zydowska 29) 
does excellent coffee too, andBrisman 
<https://www.facebook.com/BrismanKawowyBar/> (Mickiewicza 20) is a brilliant 
little bar decorated with Star Wars memorabilia. For dinner,Ratuszova 
<http://ratuszova.pl/en/> (mains from £7) is right in the centre and good for 
Polish specialities.

Those on a budget could just fill up from delis and patisseries: Poznan does 
several special cakes, most famously the St Martin’s croissant (rogale 
marcińskie), an 81-layer concoction that is a meal in itself. Staying with the 
patisserie theme, the town hall which dates back to the 13th century looks like 
a wedding cake crossed with a lighthouse. It was here that Heinrich Himmler’s 
infamous Posen speeches were recorded in 1943, revealing Nazi plans for the 
“final solution”. Today, the building is a museum and the clock outside is the 
big attraction: every day at noon a herd of mechanical goats appear and stage a 
battle.

For accommodation, Hotel Puro <http://en.purohotel.pl/poznan> (doubles from 
£70) is smart and central with a retro feel. A good budget choice is theVery 
Berry Hostel <http://www.very-berry.pl/en/> up the road (dorm beds from £6, 
doubles from £15, breakfast £2). Winter visitors can escape the cold for a 
while in the huge tropical greenhouse at the city’s botanical garden, Wilson 
Park.
• Wizzair <https://wizzair.com/#/> flies to Poznan from Luton and Glasgow from 
£52 return;Ryanair <https://www.ryanair.com> flies from Stansted, Bristol, 
Liverpool and Edinburgh from £35 return

Zagreb, Croatia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8a50845384b7e2de49c50de604f23be503161f2%2F0_0_5400_3600%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8a50845384b7e2de49c50de604f23be503161f2%2F0_0_5400_3600%2F5400.jpg>
 Skating in Zagreb, with King Tomislav statue in the background. Photograph: 
Alamy 
One of Europe’s youngest capitals, Zagreb is also one of the most fascinating, 
with attractions including the extensive Hrelić flea market, plus musuems 
covering everything from archaeology to broken relationships. The quirkiness 
extends to the food – try prosciutto-wrapped frogs (£11) atDidov San 
<http://www.konoba-didovsan.com/>, or eggs in chilli sauce at Mundoaka 
<https://www.facebook.com/mundoaka.streetfood/>. For traditional Croatian 
dining, the homelyTač <http://www.restac.hr/> (restac.hr) on a nondescript 
suburban street is hard to beat. Drinking coffee is something that Zagreb 
specialises in:Café u Dvoristu <https://www.facebook.com/cafeudvoristu/> (Jurja 
Žerjavića 7/2) and Finjak <https://www.facebook.com/caffe.bar.finjak/> (Vlaška 
78) are both popular with locals. Tkalčićeva Street is the busiest for bars and 
restaurants: don’t miss štrukli, sour cream and cheese-stuffed pastry that can 
come either baked or boiled.

There are plenty of decent hostels, but those after a bit more style will enjoy
Art Hotel Like <http://www.arthotellike.hr/hr/> (doubles from £60). In winter, 
Zagreb comes alive: Zrinjevac park teems with Christmas decorations and, it 
seems, half the city’s population. There’s an ice rink at the railway station 
and unusual Christmas shopping on Tomićeva and Bogovićeva streets. Zagreb has 
good connections to Sljeme, for skiing or snowboarding right next door to the 
city. To just drink in mountain scenery, take a bus to the lovely village of 
Samobor.
• British Airways <http://www.britishairways.com/> flies from Heathrow from 
£100 return

Tromsø, Norway
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f3fe912e3f3260889c1cd3839b4b41735d0df5f%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f3fe912e3f3260889c1cd3839b4b41735d0df5f%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 The northern lights over Tromsø. Photograph: Alamy 
Want to see the northern lights? My hot tip is to live in hope, but expect 
nothing. The best chances are had in northerly destinations away from the 
coast. Tromsø fits the former category nicely: it’s about as far north as you 
can get in mainland Europe on a budget airline. It lies on an island in a 
fjord, so is not exactly inland, but almost. The city has plenty to entertain 
those waiting for the aurora: good cafes – tryAunegården 
<https://www.facebook.com/aunegarden/> (Sjøgata 29) or Riso mat & kaffebar 
<http://www.risoe-mk.no/> (Strandgata 32) – and a couple of interesting museums 
(war in theForsvarsmuseum <http://www.tromsoforsvarsmuseum.no/english.html>, 
and the Arctic and Antarctic in thePolarmuseet <https://uit.no/tmu/polarmuseet>
). For dinner, a 26 bus then a cable car upMount Storsteinen 
<http://fjellheisen.no/en/fjellstuarestaurant/> (fjellheisen.no) with its cafe 
and restaurant offers a great view (and possibly some aurora).

In town, young people hang out on reindeer hides on the terrace of the Raketten
 <https://www.facebook.com/raketten1911/> kiosk on Erling Bangsunds Plass, 
where the hot dogs are excellent. Another small but fun spot isHuken Pub 
<https://www.facebook.com/hukenpub/>, which does burgers and jacket spuds of 
generous proportions. There are plenty of warm efficient hotels, but for a bit 
more character try the self-explanatory Bed&Books guesthouse (doubles from £90, 
bedandbooks.no) A trip into the wilds is easily arranged: there is 
whale-watching in the fjord right into February some years, plus dog-sledding, 
skiing and, for those who wish, coach trips that chase the northern lights.
• Norwegian <http://www.norwegian.com/> flies from Gatwick from £190 return, 
or via Oslo from Manchester

Ljubljana, Slovenia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa133b71cacc95b016dc4c6ef588a77886dcce6fe%2F0_141_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa133b71cacc95b016dc4c6ef588a77886dcce6fe%2F0_141_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
The former home of president-elect Trump’s current wife, Ljubljana is a lively 
place – 50,000 students ensure that – and very green (it is the2016 European 
Green Capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/02/ljubljana-slovenia-guide-hotels-bars-restaurants-city-break>
), with traffic restrictions leaving the banks of the Ljubljanica river a great 
strolling and cafe zone. There is some impressive architecture: the medieval 
castle, the baroque Robba fountain, a slew of great bridges, and many 
contemporary jewels. With all those students there is, of course, plenty of 
good coffee: Čokl (Krekov 8) is a tiny spot near the funicular railway, and 
Daktari next door puts on live events in what feels like a much-loved living 
room.

Self-caterers can stock up at the market on Pogačarjev trg (Wednesdays and 
Sundays) and check out the nearby covered market for cheeses. In winter, cafes 
offer mulled wine as well as the dry whites in which Slovenia excels, and there 
is a good Christmas market. Among the better restaurants are the atmospheric
Taverna Tatjana <http://www.taverna-tatjana.si/Taverna/Taverna_ENG.html> and 
Špajza <http://www.spajza-restaurant.si/en/>. Horse fillet (from €12) is a 
favourite at both.

The Adora Hotel <https://www.adorahotel.si/> (doubles from €64) a short walk 
from the old town, is stylishly comfortable, with lots of polished wood 
reflecting the grey and lime green colour palette. The city is a good base for 
day trips to ski areas such as Krvavec, 15 miles away. The Sava river, north of 
the city centre, is great for water sports, including canoe slalom at the Tacen 
world championship course.
• Wizzair <http://www.wizzair.com/> (Luton) and easyJet 
<http://www.easyjet.com/> (Gatwick and Stansted) fly to Ljubljana. Prices from 
£30 return

Memmingen, Germany
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0575b33ab05aeeb9e261acac044d6a138c247e3%2F0_140_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0575b33ab05aeeb9e261acac044d6a138c247e3%2F0_140_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
This undiscovered gem in deepest Bavaria has guarded its architectural 
treasure through several cataclysmic wars – one of the town’s tower, the 
Lindauer, boasts an embedded cannonball from 1647. It would make a great 
location for a Chitty Chitty Bang Bang remake (God help us!), with quirky 
splendours aplenty in the restored brothel (the Frauenhaus), the splendid 
seven-roofed tannery (Siebendächerhaus) and the Fishertag fountain, site of an 
annual festival in July that sees young men jumping into a little river to 
catch trout.

Cycling is popular in summer: cycle hire at the airport links to an enviable 
network of trails. In winter, feet may be more reliable, taking in the fine 
Salzstrasse and Weinmarkt before finishing on Schrannenplatz atZum Goldenen 
Löwen <http://www.weinstube-goldenerloewe.de/>, the city’s oldest tavern, built 
in 1590. Also worth seeking out is Cafe Kunz, for its location inside the 
medieval Antonierhaus on Martin Luther Square.

Hotel Weisses Ross <http://www.hotelweissesross.de/> (doubles from €103) has 
rooms in its 600-year-old original building, plus modern ones with great 
rooftop views. There is the obligatory Christmas market and snowy slopes for 
skiing and snowboarding are within easy reach at Oberstdorf. Plus, of course, 
only an hour’s drive is Neuschwanstein, the ultimate crazy king’s castle, built 
by Ludwig II before he was arrested for, among other things, poor table manners.
• Ryanair <https://www.ryanair.com/gb/en/booking/home> flies from Stansted 
from £42 return

Sibiu, Romania
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a27a26e3b6cc304d256c8cca0104c357624c90%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20winter%20city%20breaks%20in%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-winter-city-breaks-in-europe-zagreb-ljubljana-tromso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a27a26e3b6cc304d256c8cca0104c357624c90%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Sibiu really was designed for romantic winter getaways: good snowfalls, 
winding cobbled streets, medieval towers and a custom of going overboard on 
festive lighting. This is a great town to amble around, discovering ever more 
quaint medieval buildings that serve food and drink.

At the stunning wooden Crama Ileana <http://www.cramaileana.ro/rom/index.htm> 
restaurantmămăliga, polenta with cheese, is the traditional starter, and ţuică, 
plum brandy, the inevitable finish. For the local speciality, tripe soup (
ciorbă de burtă), a dish that is hard to do well, unpretentious Kon Tiki 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Kon-Tiki/158930270851774> (on Facebook) is the 
aficionados’ favourite. The squeamish might prefer coffee and cake atArhiva de 
Cafea și Ceai <https://www.facebook.com/ArhivaDeCafeaSiCeai/> on Strada 
Arhivelor.

The town’s focal point is the historic Piata Mare (Big Square), with historic 
walls and towers to explore. The Bridge of Lies, built in 1859, is still 
standing despite the superstition that if a fib is uttered while crossing, it 
will collapse. The Lutheran Cathedral of St Mary’s has colourful decor and 
astonishing tombstones, including that of a local lad, Prince Mihnea the Bad, 
son of Vlad the Impaler.

A good budget stay is Smart Hostel <http://smart-hostel.ro/> (dorm beds from 
£9, doubles from £24); more upmarket is Levoslav House (doubles from £55), a 
boutique hotel in a centrally located 19th-century villa. For winter sports, 
Păltiniş is 10 miles away; in summer it becomes a trekking area. Motorists and 
cyclists won’t want to miss theTransfăgărășan Highway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2005/apr/23/romania.guardiansaturdaytravelsection>
, the monumental tarmac folly former leader Nikolai Ceauşescu built across the 
Carpathians.
• Wizzair <https://wizzair.com> flies to Sibiu from Luton from £42 return
 