
Two literary heavyweights, two different takes on the US under Obama and two 
books that travel no further than Dover are competing to be named travel book 
of the year, on a shortlist notably low on women writers.

Paul Theroux <https://www.theguardian.com/books/paul-theroux> and Geoff Dyer 
head a list of six authors shortlisted for the Stanford Dolman travel book of 
the year, announced at an event in London on Tuesday night.

Deep South by Theroux explores the back roads of southern US states 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/20/deep-south-review-paul-theroux-southern-united-states>
 from North Carolina through Georgia, Tennessee and Alabama to Mississippi and 
Arkansas. In his first book to focus on his homeland, the veteran travel writer 
and novelist finds segregation still thrives in the old Confederate states, as 
do shanty towns and poverty on a level with developing countries. The 
communities he visits range from African American sharecroppers to Klansmen at 
churches and gun shows.

At the time of publication, Theroux said: “The towns show you how they have 
been abandoned by their own governments, how they have been left behind by 
education and politics.” He added: “It’s in the small towns you see the effects 
of poverty and of the outsourcing of US manufacturing.”

Dyer competes for the £5,000 prize with White Sands: Experiences from the 
Outside World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/20/white-sands-geoff-dyer-review-experiences-from-outside-world-essays-travel-art>
, a collection of essays that travels from the Arctic to Polynesia and blur the 
lines between fact and fiction, philosophy and memoir, to create a book of 
entertaining originality.

Former cycle courier Julian Sayarer <http://juliansayarer.com/> hitchhiked 
from New York to San Francisco through the Trump heartlands for his shortlisted 
book, Interstate. As much an examination of roadside politics as the US 
landscape, the round-the-world cycling record holder writes about encounters 
with characters who range from roadside travellers and anarchists to 
blue-collar communities struggling to find meaning after their industries have 
departed overseas.

Only one woman features on the list: artist and food writer Elisabeth Luard. 
Her memoirSquirrel Pie (and Other Stories): Adventures in Food Across the Globe 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/squirrel-pie-and-other-stories-adventures-in-food-across-the-globe-by-elisabeth-luard-zs6tjlw5m>
 mixes anecdotes with recipes garnered from her travels in search of obscure 
ingredients and food culture.

Of the 80 titles submitted for the prize, chair of judges Sara Wheeler said: 
“Many of the titles recorded travels in the UK this time round. The authors, 
perhaps, were unwittingly getting us into the Brexit mood.”

Only two UK-focused books made the shortlist. In Station to Station: Searching 
for Stories on the Great Western Line 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/station-to-station-searching-for-stories-on-the-great-western-line-by-james-attlee-book-review-10250103.html>
, author and editor James Attlee follows the railway line from London to 
Bristol through a landscape rich in ghosts, myths and memories of everyone from 
Isambard Kingdom Brunel to Charles I, Oscar Wilde and even Diana Dors. It is a 
mix of architectural guide and nature book, as well as an investigation into 
the spirit of our age.

The final book on the shortlist, which was announced at the National Liberal 
Club, isThe Hills of Wales 
<http://www.walesartsreview.org/books-the-hills-of-wales-by-jim-perrin/>, in 
which writer and rock climber Jim Perrin celebrates some of the high points in 
the Welsh landscape from Cader Idris to the little hills of Llŷn.

Wheeler said there had been “little blood on the carpet” when judging the 
shortlist. The travel writer was joined on judging panel by fellow writers 
Katie Hickman, Jason Goodwin and Jeremy Seal, as well as Traveller magazine 
editor Amy Sohanpaul and Rukhsana Yasmin of Commonwealth Writers, the cultural 
initiative of the Commonwealth Foundation.

The winner of the prize will be announced on 2 February, as part of the 
Stanfords travel writing festival.
 