
Senior Canadian officials have met several times with advisers to US 
president-elect Donald Trump in Washington in an effort to avert a possible 
trade war once he takes office this month, the Globe and Mail newspaper said on 
Monday.

Trump vowed during his election campaign to either scrap or renegotiate the 
North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) with Canada and Mexico, saying the 
two-decade old deal had been bad for American workers. This could have 
disastrous consequences forCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, 
which sends 75% of its exports to the US.

There goes the neighborhood? Canada frets over Trump's trade agenda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/canada-donald-trump-nafta-economy-nato>
 The Globe said Gerald Butts and Katie Telford – Prime Minister Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>’s two top aides – had met 
Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/jared-kushner-ivanka-trump-transition-team-chris-christie>
, and his chief strategist, Steve Bannon, and believed they had established a 
decent relationship.

The paper cited one official as saying the Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> “does not believe in 
free trade”, which could pose challenges for Canada.

 “They [the Trump team] think the basic problem in the world is that China has 
stolen a bunch of American manufacturing jobs that they are hellbent on getting 
back,” the official said.

 Trudeau spokesman Cameron Ahmad, asked about the report, said “meetings have 
indeed been happening at every level” but gave no details.

 The Trump transition team did not immediately respond to a request for 
comment on the report.

 Canada’s trade minister, pressed about the potential impact of Trump’s 
presidency, said last Friday there was no question of separating the two 
nations’ economies.

 In a video address last week to the new US Congress, Trudeau stressed the 
closeness of the links between the Canadian and US economies.
 