
Former White House ethics experts have warned that Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> could exploit a new trade 
deal with the UK to boost his private tourism businesses in Scotland.

Richard Painter, the White House chief ethics adviser to George W Bush, and 
Norman Eisen, former chief ethics adviser to the Obama administration, said 
there was a clear risk the incoming US president would attempt to promote the 
interests of his golf resorts when talks start on apost-Brexit US trade deal 
with the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/top-trump-adviser-says-post-brexit-trade-deal-feasible-within-a-year>
.

Painter said Trump was “obviously very, very interested financially and 
emotionally” in his golf courses, which would “dramatically affect what the 
United States position is on trade”.

“Our man has a dog in the hunt,” he said.

Trump owns two prominent golf resorts in Scotland, having spent more than £40m 
($50m) building a new course andboutique hotel in Aberdeenshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/trump-scotland-golf-resort-conflicts-of-interest>
 and another £140m ($173m) acquiring and upgrading the Turnberry championship 
course and five-star hotel in Ayrshire.

Trump and Scottish golf resort profit from falling pound after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/16/trump-and-scottish-golf-resort-profit-from-falling-pound-after-brexit-vote-turnberry>
Both businesses are supported and promoted by Scotland’s official tourism and 
event agencies, despite long-running political conflicts between Trump and the 
Scottish government over its staunch support for an offshorewindfarm near his 
Aberdeenshire resort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/trump-british-allies-against-windfarms-golf-courses-scotland>
.

Trump told the Times and the German Bild newspaper in an interview at the 
weekend that he planned to prioritise a new trade deal with the UK to take 
effect once Britain leaves the European Union. “We’re gonna work very hard to 
get it done quickly and done properly – good for both sides,” he said.

He used the same interview to promote the Turnberry resort, saying it was 
“doing unbelievably” following theslump in the value of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/16/trump-and-scottish-golf-resort-profit-from-falling-pound-after-brexit-vote-turnberry>
 since the UK’s decision to leave the EU.

Turnberry executives told the Guardian on Monday the previously loss-making 
business was on course to have its most profitable year in a century following 
Trump’s investment and a sharp jump in US visitors attracted by the pound’s 
fall against the dollar.


Trump’s Aberdeenshire course has consistently lost money, relying for its 
survival on loans now totalling £40m from Trump. The company said last week it 
planned to press ahead with its expansion plans, building a second course and 
extending its hotel, despite Trump’s pledge last week he would halt new and 
pending foreign investments by the Trump Organization.


Eisen, a recent US ambassador to the Czech Republic and now an analyst with 
the Brookings Institute thinktank, said alarm about the conflicts between 
Trump’s new role as US president and his complex business interests had 
intensified since the president-elect published his plan last week to distance 
himself from the Trump Organization.

Eisen and Painter lead a bipartisan ethics watchdog, Citizens for 
Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (Crew) 
<http://www.citizensforethics.org/press-release/norman-eisen-richard-painter-lead-crew-board/>
, as chairman and vice-chairman respectively.



Eisen said Trump’s refusal to sell his business interests or to place them in 
a blind trust, instead pledging to pass control to his sons Eric and Donald Jr 
and a Trump Organization executive, Allen Weisselberg, violated constitutional 
and bipartisan conventions dating back decades.

The Trump Organization has denied there will be any conflict between the Trump 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> and 
his family business but Eisen said all modern presidents had entirely divested 
themselves of personal financial interests.

“It’s like saying to his kids: ‘Hold my wallet,’” he said. “[Trump] even 
warned them that they better do a good job or he would fire them. That kind of 
retention of ownership is antithetical to the concept that Democratic and 
Republican presidents have embraced for decades and it will put him athwart the 
constitution almost immediately.”

Trump was now able to use “the full force of the United States government to 
attempt to extract concessions” that would benefit his Scottish businesses in 
future UK trade talks, Eisen added. If he did so, Eisen said, that would be a 
clear breach of the constitutional bar on US presidents using their office for 
personal gain – the so-called emoluments clause.

“It’s entirely possible, based on the porous conflict [plan] that he has 
announced, he will demand these concessions as part of his trade negotiations – 
based on what we know about his style of doing business and his erroneous view 
that conflict laws don’t apply to him.

Trump's Scotland golf resort proceeds with expansion despite business pledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/trump-scotland-golf-resort-conflicts-of-interest>
“However, if he does that, he will be mistaken. The concessions that he would 
be seeking constitute foreign government benefits of a kind that are forbidden 
to him under the emoluments clause under the US constitution when he takes 
office.

“By retaining ownership of the Trump Organization and simply relinquishing 
management to his sons, any of these unconstitutional benefits are fully 
attributable to him.”

Asked about the warnings from Painter and Eisen, George Sorial, executive 
vice-president of the Trump Organization, said: “Don and Eric Trump, along with 
longtime executive Allen Weisselberg, will control the Trump Organization and 
make decisions regarding the future of all assets and operations.

“The president-elect will have no knowledge or input in this process. The only 
policies the president-elect will pursue will be those that benefit the 
American people.”

At the height of the controversy over Trump’s incendiary attacks on Mexican 
migrants and Muslims during the presidential election campaign, he was stripped 
of his role as an honorary Scottish business ambassador by Nicola Sturgeon, the 
first minister. Her predecessor Alex Salmond supported a petition calling for 
Trump to be barred from visiting the UK.

VisitScotland, the government-funded tourism agency, said it promoted Trump’s 
golf courses and actively encouraged American visitors because golf was so 
significant to the tourism industry, generating £220m for the economy.

It was politically neutral, a spokesman said, but he said the resorts were 
premium attractions. “As five-star resorts, both Trump Turnberry and Trump 
International Golf Links [in Aberdeenshire] will continue to be promoted as 
part of the country’s rich golf offering.”
 