
It is a post-financial-crisis myth that austerity-minded conservative 
governments always favour fiscal prudence, while redistribution-oriented 
progressives view large deficits as the world’s biggest free lunch. This 
simplistic perspective, while perhaps containing a grain of truth, badly misses 
the true underlying political economy of deficits.

The fact is that whenever one party has firm control of government, it has a 
powerful incentive to borrow to finance its priorities, knowing that it won’t 
necessarily be the one to foot the bill. So expect US President-elect Donald 
Trump’s administration, conservative or not, to make aggressive use of budget 
deficits to fund its priorities for taxes and spending.

The most accurate framework for thinking about government budget deficits in 
democracies wasproposed 
<http://restud.oxfordjournals.org/content/57/3/403.short> in the late 1980s by 
the Italian scholarsAlberto Alesina 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/alberto-alesina> and Guido 
Tabellini <https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/guido-tabellini>, more 
or lesssimultaneously 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2937850?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents> with two 
Swedes, Torsten Persson and Lars Svensson. While their approaches differ 
slightly in detail, the basic idea is the same: you give money to your friends 
while you can. If there is less money to go around later, when the opposition 
party gets its turn in power, well, that’s just too bad.

China voices economic fears about Donald Trump presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/13/china-voices-economic-fears-about-donald-trump-presidency>
One only has to recall recent US economic history to confirm the insight of 
the Italian/Swedish model – and to see the absurdity of claims that Republicans 
always aim to balance the budget while Democrats always try to spend beyond the 
country’s means. Back in the 1980s, conservative hero Ronald Reagan was willing 
to tolerate enormous deficits to fund his ambitious tax-cutting plans, and he 
did so in an era when borrowing wasn’t cheap.

In the early 2000s, another Republican president, George W Bush, essentially 
followed Reagan’s playbook, again slashing taxes and sending deficits soaring. 
In 2012, at the height of the standoff between the Republican-controlled 
Congress and Democratic president Barack Obama over deficits and the national 
debt, Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney proffered an economic plan 
that featured eye-popping deficits to finance tax cuts and higher military 
spending.

On the other side of the spectrum, Democratic president Bill Clinton, during 
what most academic economists consider to have been an extremely successful 
presidency, actually put the government into surplus. Indeed, at the end of the 
1990s, some researchers actually wondered how international markets would 
function if the US government gradually retired all of its debt. Bush’s 
subsequent tax cuts and unfunded wars ensured that this never became a problem.

What, then, prevents deficits from spiralling upward as parties alternate 
power and borrow to help their supporters? In high-functioning democracies such 
as the US or the UK, there is enough collective memory of the problems caused 
by high debt to allow some support for periodic reduction of debt/GDP ratios. 
But even in the US and the UK, budget deficits are not sterile and neutral 
forms of economic stimulus, as in the classroom Keynesian model. Instead, 
deficits are almost always the product of fierce political infighting over 
fiscal priorities.

Of course, in a constantly changing world, the costs of carrying a large debt 
burden can shift over time. After falling for decades, interest rates are 
suddenly starting to rise.

Different attitudes towards risk are a central factor in the perennial 
controversy over how much stimulus is optimal. Until recently, many 
left-leaning economic commentators have been arguing for massive fiscal 
stimulus in the US, though they seem to have changed their position overnight 
(the night Trump was elected, to be precise). No one quite knows what a 
reasonable middle ground between debt and stimulus would be.

The Nobel laureate economist Thomas Sargent and others recently argued that 
the optimal level of debt for the US is in factvery close to zero 
<http://www.tomsargent.com/research/begs1.pdf>, though he does not recommend 
trying to get there anytime soon, given that US government debt is now more 
than 100% of GDP. Sargent’s recommendation contradicts the view (espoused most 
recently in an Economist magazineleader 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21702751-what-japans-economic-experiment-can-teach-rest-world-overhyped-underappreciated>
) that instead of stabilising debt, all advanced countries should be aiming to 
emulate Japan (where net debt is more than 140% of GDP, the highest ratio among 
the advanced economies).

What matters is not only the level of debt, but also how it is managed – a 
question I examined in arecent commentary 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/us-debt-long-term-borrowing-by-kenneth-rogoff-2016-08>
 focusing on the right mix of long-term and short-term government borrowing. 
Some, includingRobert Skidelsky 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/government-debt-scarier-than-taxes-by-robert-skidelsky-2016-08>
, seem to think that discussion of how the maturity structure of government 
debt should be managed is somehow a stalking horse for tight budgets and 
austerity. But if interest rates shoot up in the Trump era (as well they 
could), the US government will wish that it had opted for less short-term 
borrowing and more long-term borrowing.


If a Trump presidency does entail massive borrowing – along with faster growth 
and higher inflation 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/trump-business-confidence-growth-boom-by-kenneth-rogoff-2016-12>
 – a sharp rise in global interest rates could easily follow, putting massive 
pressure on weak points around the world (for example, Italian public 
borrowing) and on corporate borrowing in emerging markets. Many countries will 
benefit from US growth (if Trump does not simultaneously erect trade barriers). 
But anyone counting on interest rates staying low because conservative 
governments are averse to deficits needs a history lesson.

•Kenneth Rogoff is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard 
University and recipient of the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2016

 