
Donald Trump’s Ayrshire golf course is expecting its most profitable year 
thanks to the fall in the pound after the Brexit vote and an increase in hotel 
guests at the resort.

Over the weekend, Trump said business at Turnberry, which he bought for £34m 
in 2014, was doing “unbelievably” thanks to Brexit because “your pound sterling 
has gone down”.

“Business is unbelievable in a lot of parts [of] the UK, as you know,” he said 
in an interview with leave campaigner and former Conservative leadership 
contender Michael Gove. “I think Brexit is going to end up being a great thing.”

Donald Trump's first UK post-election interview: Brexit a 'great thing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
The US president-elect’s assessment of Turnberry was backed by the century-old 
golf resort’s general manager.

“From the business we have on the books so far, the pace is telling me the 
Trump Turnberry will have its best year of revenue in 100 years,” Ralph 
Porciani told the Guardian on Monday.

Porciani, who has run Turnberry for nearly 14 years, said he was expecting 
revenue this year to be 15% to 20% higher than the £16.2m it collected in 2007 
– the club’s best year so far. Trump has invested £140m in returning the resort 
on the west coast ofScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to its 
glory days.

Porciani said business had increased despite about half of the hotel being 
closed for a refurbishment programme overseen by Trump’s middle son, Eric. “I 
would be over the moon if we could meet our best year, when 50% of the business 
is under renovation, but I think we can beat 2007 by 15% to 20%,” he said.


When Trump officially reopened the resort the day after the EU referendum in 
June, he said: “If the pound goes down, more people are coming to Turnberry. I 
think it could very well turn out to be a positive.”

The pound fell by 1% on Monday to $1.2065 at 1pm, after touching $1.1986 
earlier in the day – the weakest it has been since October 2016.Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> was trading at $1.4840 before 
the Brexit vote.

Porciani said the fall in sterling had made the resort a much more appealing 
destination for US holidaymakers, despite rounds at its Ailsa course costing up 
to £350 for non-residents of its hotels.

“When it comes to customers from the USA, the pound’s [fall] against the 
dollar is much better for Americans and they are spending much more in the pro 
shop. There has been a 20% uplift,” he said. “The boys in the Trump Turnberry 
shop are saying customers are excited that they can get ‘greatTurnberry sweaters
 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2015/08/04/get-that-look-donald-trump-steps-out-in-scotland/?utm_term=.99225f8e9e72>
 for a discount’.”

Porciani said his boss’s statement is likely to be reflected in the resort’s 
financial accounts, and the club will turn a profit in 2017 after years of 
losses. The company lost £1.37m in 2015, according to the latest accounts filed 
at Companies House.

“We’ll make a profit this year – it will be the first time we have made a good 
profit in the 14 years I have worked here,” Porciani said. “But we won’t make 
anywhere near the kind of profit we will make over the next five years.”

Porciani declined to comment on Trump’s president election victory, and said 
he had zero-tolerance policy when it came to staff discussing politics with 
guests. He said he expected Trump to be too busy to visit the club as much as 
he has in the past, but said he had been an inspiration to work with every time 
he has visited.

“He points us all in the right direction, he works 20-hour plus days and 
leaves us all physically and mentally drained when he leaves but he is a real 
inspiration,” Porciani said.

The club has come under fire recently from some members for raising fees by 
38% to £2,500. Porciani said fees had been increased to reflect the huge 
investment Trump has made in the Ailsa Open Championship course and 
improvements to the resort’s secondary Kintyre course.

One member told the Daily Record  
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/local-news/members-donald-trumps-turnberry-golf-9596499>
that fees had become a “really thorny issue” and complained about a lack of 
consultation between Trump Turnberry managers and players. “We accept there 
have been massive improvements to the course and enjoy what Donald has achieved 
here,” the member said. “But you’d think the next president of the United 
States could give us some help back in the old country.”

The member said it appeared that Trump would rather have tee times available 
for “wealthier golfers and business types on day trips” than local members who 
might only want to pop into the clubhouse for “tea and a bacon roll”.

Porciani said he had not heard from any members complaining about Trump’s lack 
of interest in local golfers. He said the £700 increase might seem expensive 
but he added that fees had been frozen for the last three to four years and the 
new fees were still less than at Gleneagles, which charges £2,830.
 