
Meryl Streep used her Golden Globes acceptance speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
 to fire what appeared to be an opening salvo in America’s latest culture war: 
Hollywood vDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.


The actor excoriated him as a xenophobic bully in a podium address that turned 
her Cecil B DeMille award into a rallying cry against the president-elect.

Donald Trump hits back at 'Hillary lover' Meryl Streep after Golden Globes 
speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
The assembled film-makers stamped and cheered and tweeted, a surge of 
star-studded liberal solidarity uniting the likes of Ben Affleck, Julianne 
Moore and Viola Davis.

Robert De Niro followed up with a congratulatory letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/11/robert-de-niro-writes-letter-of-support-to-meryl-streep>
 amplifying Streep’s call to arms. “I share your sentiments about punks and 
bullies. Enough is enough ... it is so important that we ALL speak up.”

Trump led a counter-charge by branding Streep, probably Hollywood’s most 
revered actor, “overrated” and a Hillary Clinton “flunkey”, attack lines echoed 
by his supporters.

And so, days before the Trump era officially begins, battle is joined. 
Hollywood’s cultural avatars going up against a president with the nuclear 
codes and a Republican Congress.

It would make a great movie, but there’s the rub – Hollywood’s enmity may not 
transfer to the screen.

Industry figures may march in protests, fulminate in speeches and donate to 
Democrats yet channel little of that ardour into films and television shows.

“It’s more about box office than any other agenda,” said Paul Dergarabedian, 
senior analyst for the box office tracker comScore. “I don’t see any particular 
agenda besides lots of franchises to bring people into theaters. More Marvel 
superheroes, more DC superheroes, more sequels.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-hollywood-culture-wars-movie-story-lines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9249243c2503bca6fdab5193f1db34a18c4babc4%2F0_0_5000_3500%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20v%20Hollywood%3F%20Don't%20expect%20to%20see%20the%20culture%20war%20play%20out%20on%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-hollywood-culture-wars-movie-story-lines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20v%20Hollywood%3F%20Don%27t%20expect%20to%20see%20the%20culture%20war%20play%20out%20on%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-hollywood-culture-wars-movie-story-lines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9249243c2503bca6fdab5193f1db34a18c4babc4%2F0_0_5000_3500%2F5000.jpg>
 Meryl Streep used her Golden Globes acceptance speech to criticize Donald 
Trump. Photograph: Paul J. Richards/AFP/Getty Images 
He was referring to big studio fare, but the industry as a whole could 
disappoint those hoping for a liberal, inclusive wave from Los Angeles to 
counter rightwing populism from Washington.

Hollywood, after all, is still dominated by white men who like to make films 
and shows built around other white men, fictional and real, who slash, shoot 
and zap other characters in the hope, ultimately, of putting butts in seats. 
Waging a cultural crusade against the White House is not in the job description.

“You will see people stand up and use their star power to say things in front 
of an audience, but studios look at the bottom line,” said Michele Burke, a 
makeup artist with two Oscars. “Truly we are artists, and most people here want 
to create great films, great stories. But at the end of the day this is a huge 
money-making machine.”


Nobody denies this, but Tinseltown’s self-mythology dwells on its progressive, 
tyranny-fighting credentials – Charlie Chaplin mocking Hitler inThe Great 
Dictator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/chaplin-great-dictator-comedy>; 
Humphrey Bogart resisting Nazis inCasablanca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/casablanca>; Kirk Douglas, in real life, 
facing downMcCarthyite witch-hunts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2008/oct/10/kirk-douglas-mccarthy>.

Stars who blunder, such as “Hanoi Jane” Fonda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-fonda> posing with North Vietnamese 
troops during the Vietnam war, are usually forgiven. (Likewise, the music 
industry shook off the row about Natalie Maines of the Dixie Chicks chastising 
George W Bush.)

Hollywood’s left-leaning tilt is undeniable. Bill and Hillary Clinton, Barack 
Obama, and other Democrats have long used it as an ATM, minting millions at 
fundraisers hosted by the likes of George Clooney andJeffrey Katzenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/28/dreamworks-hollywood-obama-fairytale-ending>
. The political analytics firmCrowdpac 
<https://www.crowdpac.com/blog/the-political-bias-of-each-profession> studied 
federal campaign contributions dating back to 1980 and concluded the 
entertainment industry was one of America’s most liberal professions, along 
with academia and news media.

You'll see people stand up and use star power to say things in front of an 
audience, but studios look at the bottom line
Michele Burke, Oscar-winning makeup artist 
Stars occasionally make films that echo their political views – for instance, 
Clooney’sGood Night, and Good Luck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/feb/17/2> or Robert Redford’s Lions 
for Lambs <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/nov/09/thriller.tomcruise>. 

Boris Zelkin, a film composer who leans politically libertarian, said liberal 
bias was ubiquitous. “Can you name a show where there’s a sane or compassionate 
conservative? Or smart Christians without a skeleton in their closet? Or a 
non-evil corporation? It doesn’t have to be an active jab at conservatives, 
it’s what they don’t show.”

Mary McNamara, the LA Times’s TV critic, in contrast, scotches the notion of 
progressive bias, saying Hollywoodwallows in nostalgia, elides class and relies 
on white male heroes 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/la-et-hollywood-values-updates-the-window-of-aspiration-hollywood-s-1483646240-htmlstory.html>
 “across galaxies, through the centuries, in every genre imaginable”.

Explicit political partisanship seldom works well on screen, said Marty 
Kaplan, director of the Norman Lear Center at the University of Southern 
California. “Hollywood is most successful – creatively as well as commercially 
– when it conveys the American dream and the struggles to realize it. The 
industry loves stories about people who succeed against long odds, no matter 
what their backgrounds, because the audience loves those stories, too.”

Movies that show struggles against prejudice, poverty, ignorance, oppression 
and fear reflect liberal values only in the sense that “reality has a 
well-known liberal bias”, said Kaplan, quoting Stephen Colbert. “If there were 
big money to be made telling stories celebrating home schooling, semi-automatic 
rifle ownership, the bullying of gays, white supremacism, misogyny or 
xenophobia, Hollywood would be racing to make them.”

Will Trump affect storylines? 

He exploded into the presidential race in June 2015 by calling Mexican 
immigrants rapists and swiftly became the Republican frontrunner, without 
noticeable effect on studio output, said Dergarabedian, the analyst. “This 
cycle went on for 18 months but I didn’t find any impact.”
 Donald Trump’s vandalized star along the Hollywood walk of fame is tended to 
and cleaned up before being replaced. Photograph: Frederic J. Brown/AFP/Getty 
Images 
A liberal response is now stirring. The executive producer of Jane the Virgin 
has reportedly ditched the show’s Ivanka Trump shoes and urged the writers to 
insert a storyline about registering Latinos to vote. ABC’sBlack-ish devoted an 
episode 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/arts-and-entertainment/wp/2017/01/11/blackish-dissects-donald-trumps-win-in-thoughtful-post-election-episode/?utm_term=.93e3896fc855>
 to his win.

But Hollywood may also start paying more heed to white, working-class Trump 
supporters, on and off screen. ABCEntertainment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/entertainment> Group president 
Channing Dungey told an industry summit that the network had overlooked “some 
of the true realities of what life is like for everyday Americans in our 
dramas”.

Natalie Portman, who campaigned for Clinton in Pennsylvania, told the Guardian 
that her liberal bubble had blinkered her to Trump’s rise. “That’s maybe part 
of the problem. We don’t interact enough with people from different political 
persuasions.”

Another problem is Hollywood’s gender imbalance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/jennifer-lawrence-hollywood-gender-pay-gap>
. Bashing Trump for sexism, on or off screen, is awkward given an Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission investigation into Hollywood pay 
discrimination.

“Somewhat remarkably given ... the abundant attention the diversity issue has 
received over the last couple of years the percentages of women working in 
important behind-the-scenes roles actually declined last year,” said Martha 
Lauzen, author ofannual Celluloid Ceiling reports 
<http://womenintvfilm.sdsu.edu/research/>. 

The most recent study, out this week, found that women comprised just 7% of 
directors on the top 250 films, down from previous years. “Either by accident, 
design or training, behind-the-scenes individuals tend to create characters 
reflecting their own sex,” Lauzen said.

Some critics dismiss the culture war idea as absurd given that Trump, a 
Manhattan tycoon-turned reality TV star, is a product of Hollywood.

Not only that, but the industry paved his political insurrection with films 
such as Jimmy Stewart’s crusading outsider inMr Smith Goes to Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76022/mr-smith-goes-to-washington> and 
Sidney Lumet’sNetwork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/12/philip-french-classic-dvd-network-sidney-lumet-faye-dunaway-peter-finch>
, which encouraged everyone to open their windows and scream, “I’m mad as hell 
and I’m not going to take it any more”, arguedLA Times film critic Kenneth Turan
 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/la-et-hollywood-values-updates-how-the-movies-gave-us-donald-1483651048-htmlstory.html>
. “The movies were key in creating the cultural forces that made voting for 
Donald Trump seem like a fine idea.”

If Streep’s broadside at the Golden Globes was any guide, the Oscars will 
crackle with more denunciations, which will in turn provoke reactions from the 
new president and his supporters. A collision of art, celebrity and politics 
that, however heartfelt, will entertain, and ultimately perhaps add up to just 
that – entertainment.
 