
Most ostentatious egg: the MasterChef finale


It was one of those made-for-TV talking points: Heston Blumenthal’s “verjus in 
egg”. This year’s MasterChef finalists had five-and-a-half hours in which to 
make the intricate dessert,described here by 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/tv-and-radio/reality/the-masterchef-2016-final-dessert-by-heston-blumenthal-that-brought-matt-sinclair-undone-20160726-gqeexq.html>
 Blumenthal’s executive chef: “Really, really technical work with chocolate 
tempering at least twice in terms of making the shell and … the secondary panna 
cotta … a fluid gel with Gellan gum that was for the runny yolk”. The recipe 
has 91 steps. Matt Sinclair’s split apart after he missed one and Elena Duggan 
was crowned the winner. Some 2.52m Australians tuned in.– EH
#MasterChefAU (@masterchefau) 
Our heart just breaks. #MasterChefAU 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/MasterChefAU?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/1IjfBpmKD9 
<https://t.co/1IjfBpmKD9>
 <https://twitter.com/masterchefau/status/757901721427259393> July 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/masterchefau/status/757901721427259393> 
Best ‘It’s that guy!’ series: Secret City


Secret City 
<https://www.foxtel.com.au/got/whats-on/foxtel-insider/showcase/secret-city.html>
 was a convincing-ish Canberra thriller involving (fictional) Australian and 
Chinese spies and a grand Australian cast.

There was Jim from Neighbours – sorry, Alan Dale – as the prime minister, Anna 
Torv as a political journalist andDaniel Wyllie 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Wyllie>, a good candidate to be 
Australia’s new favourite character actor, especially strong as a conflicted 
minister of defence, a few months after his impressive turn in a The Beautiful 
Lie. –WW
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftvs-hits-and-misses-in-2016-masterchef-eurovision-and-please-like-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e766f990bf51404973568f400e28574a28e0f62%2F0_0_3000_2001%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=TV's%20hits%20and%20misses%20in%202016%3A%20MasterChef%2C%20Eurovision%20and%20Please%20Like%20Me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftvs-hits-and-misses-in-2016-masterchef-eurovision-and-please-like-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=TV%27s%20hits%20and%20misses%20in%202016%3A%20MasterChef%2C%20Eurovision%20and%20Please%20Like%20Me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftvs-hits-and-misses-in-2016-masterchef-eurovision-and-please-like-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e766f990bf51404973568f400e28574a28e0f62%2F0_0_3000_2001%2F3000.jpg>
 Dan Wyllie as Mal Paxton in political thriller Secret City. Photograph: 
Showcase 
Most deeply buried lede: A Current Affair’s trip to Nauru

Where respectable journalists failed to secure visas to Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>, A Current Affair miraculously 
triumphed this year. The tabloid TV show managed to file an exclusive report 
from the prison island – including interviews with government officials who 
claimed the refugees were lucky to be there.

A Current Affair goes to Nauru: facile questions and lingering shots of 
flatscreen TVs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/a-current-affair-goes-to-nauru-refugees-facile-questions-and-lingering-shots-of-flatscreen-tvs>
When Four Corners managed to do some real journalism with The Forgotten 
Children a few months later, ACA did a second story slamming the ABC for not 
crediting its scoop.– AM

Classiest commentator: Bruce McAvaney for the Olympics on Seven

There were some maddening choices of sports on the extra channels, when it 
really wouldn’t have hurt to show other countries winning medals. By the end 
they had no choice. But, at its peak, a legend of sport came through to remind 
us of his sheer class and to provide some golden TV moments. What … Usain Bolt? 
No, mate: Bruce McAvaney, the commentator.

As well as being a great race-caller, he dealt with issues such as Caster 
Semenya winning the 800m gold <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/caster-semenya>
 very deftly. Seemingly half an hour later – OK, three weeks – he was back 
doing the AFL finals.– WW

How did it come to this? Inside the doomed bid to snatch Sally Faulkner's 
children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/16/channel-nine-60-minutes-sally-faulkner-tara-brown-child-recovery-lebanon>
Most bungled child recovery effort: 60 Minutes

The attempt to snatch two Australian kids from a dangerous street in Beirut 
was so stupideven Channel Nine was shocked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/25/sally-faulkner-case-nine-apologises-and-vows-to-find-out-exactly-what-happened>
 at the poor planning.

60 Minutes lost its most senior producer, millions of dollars and what 
credibility it had – and never got to air a single frame of the Sally Faulkner 
story. – AM

Most misjudged reality TV audience: the Bachelor/ette

The producers of the Bachelor/Bachelorette franchise in Australia ought to be 
applauded for managing to send their viewers into paroxysms of rage over the 
final outcome – not once but twice in a row.

First, Bachelor Richie Strahan had the temerity to choose a girl who didn’t 
happen to be the fan favourite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/16/the-bachelor-why-do-we-care-so-much-about-this-stupid-fake-show>
. Then, a couple of months later, Bachelorette Georgia Love had the gall to do 
the same thing! Shock, horror, romance!
dan debuf (@dandebuf) 
HERE’S A POEM M8

ROSES ARE RED
YOU CHOSE THE WRONG GIRL
LOVE IS DEAD
I HATE THE WORLD#TheBachelorAU 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/TheBachelorAU?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/dandebuf/status/776376905020780544> September 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/dandebuf/status/776376905020780544> 
If the stars of the show are to be believed, the chemistry was overwhelming 
from the start 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/tv-and-radio/the-bachelorette-australia-lee-elliott-wins-georgia-loves-heart-20161027-gsciic.html>
 and it was only tricksy editing that led the audience down the garden path. 
Tricksy editing? In reality TV? Never!– SC

Most accessible, highbrow thank-heavens-for-public-broadcasting moment: Q&A on 
Shakespeare

Q&A devoted its weekly forum to a Shakespeare special, loosely marking 400 
years since his death. It was, in truth, the sort of thing that could have been 
awful. But anyone who watched a few minutes would have struggled not to stay 
for the rest: illuminating, somewhat old-fashioned public service broadcasting 
on at a viewer-friendly hour on the national broadcaster.

It featured great moments from John Bell, AC Grayling, Kylie Farmer, and Kate 
Mulvany – but most of all Germaine Greer being vividly, mesmerisingly 
challenging and entertaining and, in the end, they and the chair, Tony Jones, 
just let her run away with it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fqa-germaine-greer-discusses-the-role-of-race-in-shakespeares-work-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Q%26A%3A%20Germaine%20Greer%20discusses%20the%20role%20of%20race%20in%20Shakespeare's%20work%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fqa-germaine-greer-discusses-the-role-of-race-in-shakespeares-work-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Q%26A%3A%20Germaine%20Greer%20discusses%20the%20role%20of%20race%20in%20Shakespeare%27s%20work%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fqa-germaine-greer-discusses-the-role-of-race-in-shakespeares-work-video&media=>
Q&A: Germaine Greer discusses the role of race in Shakespeare’s work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/sep/06/qa-germaine-greer-discusses-the-role-of-race-in-shakespeares-work-video>
“Four hundred years is not very long,” she said. “It’s a blink in the history 
of the world. And what actually happens in a Shakespeare play is you’re 
prevented from arriving at easy certainties. Everything you think you 
understand is challenged. So you have to recast your own ideas.” And so we all 
did, at least for an hour. – WW

Most revealing off-camera expression: Laura Tingle at the second leaders’ 
debate

This wasn’t captured on TV but it was caused by it: to some the most apposite 
election moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gallery/2016/may/29/turnbull-and-shorten-face-off-in-australian-leaders-debate-in-pictures#img-10>
, captured by Mike Bowers, at thesecond leaders’ debate on the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-05-29/election-live-blog-may-29-leaders-debate-shorten-turnbull/7454654>
 at the National Press Club.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftvs-hits-and-misses-in-2016-masterchef-eurovision-and-please-like-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e0b6afb7eeec7d61bb0816862f65f872f17a51f%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=TV's%20hits%20and%20misses%20in%202016%3A%20MasterChef%2C%20Eurovision%20and%20Please%20Like%20Me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftvs-hits-and-misses-in-2016-masterchef-eurovision-and-please-like-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=TV%27s%20hits%20and%20misses%20in%202016%3A%20MasterChef%2C%20Eurovision%20and%20Please%20Like%20Me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftvs-hits-and-misses-in-2016-masterchef-eurovision-and-please-like-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e0b6afb7eeec7d61bb0816862f65f872f17a51f%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Laura Tingle watches the debate between the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, 
and the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, at the National Press Club. 
Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
And Laura Tingle makes a living from this stuff. – WW


Saddest scene: Please Like Me, season four, episode five

How Please Like Me became one of TV's most honest and devastating shows | 
Steph Harmon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/15/josh-thomass-please-like-me-became-one-of-the-most-honest-and-devastating-shows-on-tv>
I won’t spoil what happened, suffice to say we should have seen it coming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/15/josh-thomass-please-like-me-became-one-of-the-most-honest-and-devastating-shows-on-tv>
. Josh Thomas and the directors dealt with this plot point in as sensitive, 
nuanced and complicated way as we’ve come to expect from the series – and the 
sight of Thomas curled up in a bed holding his dog and weeping, as the camera 
panned out above him, is one that I haven’t quite been able to shake.

The show has not been confirmed for a fifth season and I’m not entirely sure 
it needs one – but, if it gets a green light, I’ll keep watching.– SH

Greatest eye roll: Van Badham on Sunrise

Every woman feels it. Whether you first saw this eye roll 
<http://www.elle.com/culture/career-politics/news/a36080/this-womans-eyeroll-is-the-only-reaction-gif-youll-ever-need/>
 on live television or have seen it only as a meme on the interwebs, it 
inspires a visceral reaction. You know instantly what’s going on: she’s been 
talked over, mansplained to, patronised.

It almost doesn’t matter that it was Mark Latham claiming that the gender pay 
gap isn’t real and that “left feminism” is essentially selfish; Van Badham’s 
eye roll on Sunrise became an instant global meme because every woman has done 
it, felt the need to do it or wishes she had eye roll action half as good to 
whip out on demand.

 It earned Badham the hallowed title of one of the most admirable every day 
women of 2016 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/12/portraits-of-admirable-women-from-2016.html> 
by New York Magazine.– GJ
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgiphy.com%2Fgifs%2Feye-roll-eyeroll-mens-rights-3o7qDOZ8nPqMscqEAU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgiphy.com%2Fgifs%2Feye-roll-eyeroll-mens-rights-3o7qDOZ8nPqMscqEAU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgiphy.com%2Fgifs%2Feye-roll-eyeroll-mens-rights-3o7qDOZ8nPqMscqEAU&media=>
 Van Badham eye roll 
Most awful interactions with a female sports journalist


Collingwood president Eddie McGuire might have won an Ernie for his horrific 
on-air quips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/eddie-mcguire-defends-comments-about-drowning-writer-caroline-wilson>
 inferring he’d pay good money to see AFL journalist Caroline Wilson drowned 
(for charity, of course) – but it’s possible that wasn’t even the worst moment 
for women working in sport in Australia in 2016.

It’s a shared prize therefore with West Indian cricketer Chris Gayle, whose 
harrowing “simple joke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/05/chris-gayle-claims-sexist-comments-were-a-simple-joke-and-blown-out-of-proportion>
” duringan interview with journalist Mel McLaughlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/04/chris-gayle-reporter-drink-blush-network-ten-big-bash-melbourne>
 garnered a $10,000 fine and prompted significant discussion about what does or 
doesn’t constitute sexual harassment in the workplace.– RP

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Feddie-mcguire-under-fire-for-caroline-wilson-drowning-comments-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eddie%20McGuire%E2%80%99s%20comments%20about%20%E2%80%98drowning%E2%80%99%20journalist%20Caroline%20Wilson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Feddie-mcguire-under-fire-for-caroline-wilson-drowning-comments-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eddie%20McGuire%E2%80%99s%20comments%20about%20%E2%80%98drowning%E2%80%99%20journalist%20Caroline%20Wilson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Feddie-mcguire-under-fire-for-caroline-wilson-drowning-comments-video&media=>
Eddie McGuire’s comments about ‘drowning’ journalist Caroline Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jun/20/eddie-mcguire-under-fire-for-caroline-wilson-drowning-comments-video>
Best child: this one, brought to you by SBS’s The Feed

The Feed on SBS has been pumping out some great segments this year, from a 
heartbreaking look at bullying 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/thefeed/article/2016/08/30/breaking-point-bullyings-deadly-toll>
 toan investigation into Australia’s most homophobic town 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d-FKwep1N5E> and a wonderful exploration of 
competitive dog grooming in Australia 
<https://www.facebook.com/pg/thefeedsbsviceland/videos/>. 

But this one – about a 12-year-old who spends all his spare time making 
teddybears for sick children, which was broadcast in October before being 
watchedmore than 35m times on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/thefeedsbsviceland/videos/345340642466315/> – was one 
of the greatest.- SH
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DquHdFGV94OM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DquHdFGV94OM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DquHdFGV94OM&media=>
Most awkward silence: Kourtney Kardashian on Today Extra

Trust a Kardashian to know how to work the media. Kourtney Kardashian pulled 
the old “bad connection” trick when asked about her sister Kim’s robbery at 
gunpoint during an interview on Today Extra on 20 October. In response to 
presenter David Campbell’s question about Kim’s wellbeing, Kourtney sat and 
stared blankly at a fixed point off-camera, oblivious to the mounting 
awkwardness felt by Campbell and co-host Sonia Kruger.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FTheEdge961%2Fvideos%2F10154670066163573%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FTheEdge961%2Fvideos%2F10154670066163573%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FTheEdge961%2Fvideos%2F10154670066163573%2F&media=>
She later returned to the show ready to “weigh in”, after having apparently 
been briefed.– EH
The Today Show (@TheTodayShow) 
.@KourtneyKardash <https://twitter.com/kourtneykardash> weighs in on 
@kimKardashian <https://twitter.com/KimKardashian>'s terrifying Paris ordeal. 
#9Today <https://twitter.com/hashtag/9Today?src=hash> https://t.co/kxaNqpt0nb 
<https://t.co/kxaNqpt0nb>
 <https://twitter.com/TheTodayShow/status/788873793259184128> October 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TheTodayShow/status/788873793259184128> 
Most diverse advertisement: Australian lamb


It feels bizarre giving a shout-out to an advertisement for meat products but 
then nothing about 2016 has felt normal. After their last blockbuster TV spot, 
Operation Boomerang, came under fire foroffending Indigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/11/operation-boomerang-lamb-ad-insults-indigenous-people-say-critics>
 andvegans 
<https://mumbrella.com.au/torching-of-vegans-home-in-lamb-australia-day-ad-draws-dozens-of-ad-standards-complaints-338933#more-338933>
, Meat and Livestock Australia dished out a very tongue-in-cheek ad for lamb 
taking it all in the opposite direction.

What we were left with could in fact be the most diverse advertisement ever, 
crossing racial, cultural religious, ability, sexuality and gender divides to 
get more people ... eating baby sheep. Delicious.– SH
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-9Ka3a7cdYw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-9Ka3a7cdYw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-9Ka3a7cdYw&media=>
Best tourism video: The Kettering Incident

This grand showcase drama is what TV executives think posh TV ought to look 
like. Great cast: tick. Faint hint of the supernatural: tick. Satisfyingly 
complicated plot: tick. But was it actually – really, honestly, properly – any 
good?

Erm … it did not matter. It had wassername off of The Night Manager – 
Elizabeth Debicki! – and look at the scenery. The under threat trees, the sky, 
the mountains. The unpredictable ghostly weather. Must get to Tasmania.– WW
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-EVESFc5iwQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-EVESFc5iwQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-EVESFc5iwQ&media=>
Most surprising gender politics: Offspring, season six

In episode 7 of Offspring’s sixth season, Martin (Lachy Hulme) misses his own 
buck’s night after he reveals to Nina (Asher Keddie) that he married for 
convenience upon arrival to Australia and never got around to getting divorced. 
Upon Nina’s urging, Martin faces his own anxiety about the mess he’s tangled 
around himself and goes to find his wife, Justine – only to discover that 
Justine is now Justin, and identifies as male.


The subsequent scene acknowledged the bureaucratic difficulties of trans 
identification in Australia and was delivered with characteristic warmth and 
acceptance. It was a sweet little subplot, all the more notable for being a 
marked rarity inAustralian television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australian-television>. More like this, 
please.– SC

Best character: Roth in The Code

The Code box set review – A blisteringly hot Australian take on Nordic noir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/nov/20/the-code-box-set-review-australian-nordic-noir>
The Code is a terrific show. I became obsessed with the first season: the 
graphics, the landscape and, most strikingly, the complex relationships between 
the characters. And the second season did not disappoint. It’s not a new trick 
in telly to make us like the baddy but the character of Roth is a masterful 
creation and the development of his friendship with Jesse continues the show’s 
excellent grasp of the nuance in human relationships.

It was not only emotional to change your mind weekly about whether you loved 
or hated Roth but it was also hugely confronting to have to admit that good 
people do bad things, and vice versa. We would understand the world so much 
better if we ditched the idea of “good” and “evil” and this season of The Code 
helped us along that path. –GJ 

Loudest “WE WAZ ROBBED”: Dami Im at Eurovision

She was perfect. We waz robbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/18/australias-dami-im-would-have-won-eurovision-under-last-years-voting-system>
.– SH
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ymFX91HwM0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ymFX91HwM0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ymFX91HwM0&media=> 