
From forecourt to scrapyard, a new car in the UK lasts an average of 13.9 years
 
<https://www.smmt.co.uk/industry-topics/sustainability/vehicle-end-of-life/average-vehicle-age/>
, which is why if you got one today, it might very well be the last car you 
buy. Over the next decade, accelerating autonomous driving technology, 
including advances in artificial intelligence, sensors, cameras, radar and data 
analytics, are set to transform not only how we drive (or, indeed, are driven), 
but the notion of car ownership itself. “Autonomous driving has become the next 
major battlefield for the car industry,” says Luca Mentuccia, automotive global 
MD at Accenture.

The six levels of automation, defined under international standards by the 
Society of Automotive Engineers 
<https://www.sae.org/misc/pdfs/automated_driving.pdf>, range from “no 
automation” to “full automation”, explains Sven Raeymaekers, of tech investment 
banker GP Bullhound. “If you look at the most recent predictions, the majority 
of car manufacturers estimate the first highly to fully automated vehicles 
[AVs] will hit the market between 2020-2025,” he says.

When they do, regulatory approval permitting, their most significant impact is 
likely to be in the area of urban mobility. “AVs will enable new service 
configurations where consumers are delivered door to door with virtually no 
stops in a comfortable vehicle with just one to three other passengers,” says 
Stan Boland, CEO of FiveAI, which builds AI-driven software for AVs and is one 
of the companies testing autonomous vehicles on UK roads in 2017, alongside 
major manufacturers including Volvo and Ford.

How driverless cars could change our whole future | John Naughton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-how-driverless-cars-could-change-our-future-lyft-john-zimmer>
Such services will be safer, reduce pollution and congestion, and will also 
bring about a paradigm shift in personal vehicle ownership rates, which are 
likely to decline steeply, he says. Arecent survey of car manufacturing 
executives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/fewer-car-owners-more-driverless-vehicles-future-survey-reveals>
 by KPMG similarly revealed that 59% of industry bosses believe that more than 
half of all car owners today will no longer want to own a car by 2025.

So how exactly will we be getting about by the end of the next decade? Will 
automation really “solve” crashes, and what other sorts of AVs are we likely to 
see on our roads? TheObserver asked a panel of experts about the likely 
realities and practicalities of driving in the year 2030.

Will I be a driver or a passenger?

You’ll have a choice, says Dr Nick Reed, academy director at transport 
consultancy TRL. “If you want to drive an MG and enjoy that, you’ll be able to. 
Or if you want to prepare for a business meeting during your two-hour journey, 
you’ll be able to do that too. Automation systems give us choices.”

Nikolaus Lang, of the Boston Consulting Group’s Centre for Digital in 
Automotive, argues it will depend on the vehicle you’re in. “By 2030, you’ll be 
a ‘controlling passenger’ in your private self-driving car and you’ll be a 
‘complete passenger’ in a robo-taxi.”

Will it still make sense to own a car or will I rent one (on demand)?

Instead of today’s car ownership model, we are far more likely to rely on 
“mobility as a service” by 2030, says Boland. “Imaginean Uber-like service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/22/uber-self-driving-car-san-francisco-arizona>
 you can summon at the touch of a button, but without a driver. Renting is not 
necessarily the right word – consumers will buy a service like using an Uber 
today, but with a wider range of vehicle configurations to suit different types 
of travel – family outings, long-distance sleeper travel, or shared commutes.”

However, Lang points out that there’s a clear difference between a young urban 
population, for whom owning cars makes little sense, and the millions of 
suburbanites with families, who will probably still opt to own.

Will there still be crashes?

A 2008 survey by the US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration found 
that human error is the critical reason for 93% of crashes, says Boland. “When
you eliminate human error 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/driverless-cars-boris-johnson-stallion-road-safety>
, our roads become dramatically safer: no more drink-driving, phone calls at 
the wheel, carelessness, inattention or plain bad driving. Clearly there needs 
to be adequate industry testing to ensure that AVs are safe for all other road 
users, but we can look forward to far safer roads as human drivers become a 
thing of the past.”

Will all cars be electric?

“I don’t think all of them will be electric by 2030,” says Danny Shapiro, 
senior director at NVIDIA, whose AI computer platform powers the supercomputer 
in Tesla vehicles. “Virtually every startup is looking at electric, and you 
have ever greater electric and hybrid focus from German, Japanese and US 
[manufacturers]. But at the same time there’s still a huge oil infrastructure. 
And, at least for the next four years, there’s a very pro-oil administration in 
the US.”

Yet Bosch is developing a lithium-ion solid state battery that they hope will 
double the range of electric vehicles at half the cost of today’s batteries, 
which Steffen Hoffmann, the corporation’s UK president, believes will increase 
take-up among those who live in the suburbs and beyond. “We have a projection 
that by 2025, globally 15% of vehicles are going to have an electric component, 
whether that’s a pure electric vehicle, a plug-in hybrid or full hybrid,” he 
says. “For western Europe, that percentage would obviously be higher.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fdriverless-cars-12-things-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02e5ee242124761827c0f113afeff28ee13458b2%2F0_184_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twelve%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20driverless%20cars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fdriverless-cars-12-things-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twelve%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20driverless%20cars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fdriverless-cars-12-things-you-need-to-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02e5ee242124761827c0f113afeff28ee13458b2%2F0_184_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The Honda NeuV concept vehicle at the International Consumer Electronics Show 
in Las Vegas. Photograph: David Mcnew/AFP/Getty Images 
Will there still be driving tests?

“Yes,” says Reed. “But they might be very different, with different layers. 
Just as you have an automatic and a manual gearbox test today, there might be 
an automated driving test which may only entitle you to ‘drive’ a certain type 
of vehicle that has certain automation systems, rather than any vehicle. 
Drivers will need to understand how to operate those systems – so there may 
also be different skills required as part of the test.”

Will there be less gridlock?

“With a heterogeneous mix of vehicle configurations and on-demand service 
delivery, autonomous vehicles will enable a higher density of passengers per 
road mile,” says Boland. “Also, because AVs can travel safely closer together, 
and with less braking and accelerating than human drivers, traffic will flow 
more smoothly and congestion will decrease. On motorways more vehicles will be 
able to fit safely into the same length of road, effectively increasing 
capacity”.

Shapiro adds that another key cause of congestion is accidents. “Even if [the 
accident] isn’t blocking lanes, the traffic slows down to see what’s going on. 
So self-driving cars will not only enable more efficient flow, but they’ll 
remove the accident side of congestion [as there will be fewer of them].”

Will automated vehicles be vulnerable to hackers?

By definition, a driverless car has more control units, computing power, lines 
of code, and wireless connections with the outside world than a regular car 
today, which is why it’s more vulnerable to hackers, explains Andy Birnie, 
systems engineering manager at NXP Semiconductors. “A hacker can potentially 
take control of the car, through exploitation of a weakness, and could cause 
the vehicle to refuse to start, or to crash, or it could exploit the privacy of 
the driver, and [their] data, including financial information.”

However, a shift in the approach to security is under way, he says. “There is 
now more focus on the basics – applying good fundamental security to the 
critical areas including the interfaces that connect the vehicle to the 
external world; gateways, which separate safety critical systems from other car 
and infotainment systems; and networks that provide secure communication 
between control units – there can be over 150 in an autonomous vehicle.” In 
addition, major advances to security include “over-the-air” software updates 
that can patch vulnerabilities seamlessly in real time, Birnie says.

Will I still need insurance (as a vehicle owner)?

“Yes,” says Niall Edwards, partner at international law firm Kennedys. Fully 
autonomous vehicles are likely to be considered a different class of vehicle 
that requires additional compulsory insurance cover, he says.

“The most likely product will be a package underwritten by a motor insurer 
that the manufacturer offers at the point of purchase, use or hire.” One 
possibility is that new vehicles fitted with advanced-driver technology will 
automatically come with a form of product liability and extended cover provided 
by the manufacturer.

The good news, says Allianz UK’s Glen Clarke, is that because semi- and fully 
autonomous cars are expected to lead to a fall in accidents, we are likely to 
see a drop in premiums. “The price you pay will be much more influenced by the 
technical capabilities of the car as opposed to estimations of the riskiness of 
the driver.”

How will the law adapt to autonomous vehicles?

Currently, UK law anticipates the existence of a “driver” who is in control of 
the vehicle at all times, says Rachel Moore, also a partner at Kennedys. 
Regulations on vehicle use will therefore need to be revised to allow the use 
of automotive technology without a driver and – crucially – to ensure that the 
technology is maintained correctly.

To start with, Moore continues, the Road Traffic Act (1988) is likely to be 
amended to include product liability for automated vehicles. “Other changes 
will be required, including to the Highway Code and international regulations 
on vehicle use. We may also see changes to the MOT to check roadworthiness.”

Do AVs reduce the risks for pedestrians and cyclists?

We’re only at the start of understanding how pedestrians and cyclists will 
interact with a vehicle that doesn’t have a human driver at the controls, says 
Reed. “Whether a pedestrian will be able to detect whether a car is automated 
or not, and adapt their behaviour accordingly, we still don’t know.”

Lang argues that there’s a risk, initially at least, that pedestrians and 
cyclists may try to “test” AVs to see how they react. “In Singapore, they are 
currently testing autonomous vehicles in public parks and they tell us that the 
large majority of incidents [near misses] are not due to the vehicles 
malfunctioning, but to people jumping in front of the cars to test whether they 
stop in time.”

Mixed traffic carries risk, he continues, just as there may be risks 
associated with behavioural patterns we cannot foresee. “As with any new 
technology, there will be failures and even fatalities, but the overall 
benefits – in terms of [estimated] 90% fewer accidents, 40% less congestion, up 
to 80% less emissions, and 50% of parking space saved – are so substantial that 
the technological development will prevail.”

What other autonomous vehicles might we see on our roads?

From vertical take-off and landing “flying car” prototypes to “sidewalk 
robots” and delivery drones, by 2030 our roads and pavements may have begun to 
resemble a scene fromBlade Runner.

“Driverless trucks are already being tested around the world, with Daimler 
testing on public roads in the US and Germany in 2016,” says Boland. Bosch 
meanwhile, envisages that a truck will become “a 40-tonne smart device on 
wheels” by 2025. “[The trucks] will receive all the data they need in real time 
from the Bosch IoT cloud, including information on the route, congestion, 
detours, and unloading facilities at the destination,” says Hoffmann. “This 
will allow the driver to get on with other things [such as processing shipping 
documents], while the truck drives itself.”

Car v tech giants: who will win?

Today’s AV sector is a crowded space. It’s estimated that at least 33 tech and 
auto corporations, ranging from Apple to Chinese bus manufacturer Yutong – via 
the likes of Audi, BMW, Google, Honda, Intel, Tesla, Uber and Volkswagen – are 
currently developing AV technology.

With the $2tn global car industry in the throes of transformation due to a 
perfect storm of digitisation, AI/automation and changes in consumer behaviour 
– such as the rise of on-demand taxi services in urban centres – it’s not 
difficult to see why car manufacturers, tech companies and investors are 
scrambling for territory, fearful of being left out. “All this change creates 
both risk and opportunity for incumbents,” says GP Bullhound’s Sven 
Raeymaekers. So who does he see coming out on top?

“Some pundits claim that since the car industry has historically only focused 
on the internal combustion engine and shell design, it has no chance against 
the tsunami of software moving towards their shores. But so many industries 
have already suffered from this onslaught, and the automakers have no plans to 
see history repeat itself,” he says. “Across the board, major players – 
Renault-Nissan, Ford, BMW, Daimler and GM, to name a few - are investing in and 
developing their own technologies, hiring talent or acquiring startups. From GM
investing $500m in Lyft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/06/lyft-driverless-cars-uber-taxis-us-roads-chevrolet-bolt>
to the creation of Ford Smart Mobility, every single big manufacturer is 
looking to innovate and adapt.”

Besides, any notion of a race between tech firms and traditional car makers is 
a false perception, argues Accenture’s Luca Mentuccia. He predicts a surge of 
strategic cooperation instead. “We will see even more cross-industry 
partnerships for autonomous driving in the future in which car makers and a 
large range of tech firms from chipmakers to big data specialists, telcos and 
mobility platforms will work together.”
 