
Bicycle sensors in Copenhagen clocked a new record this month: there are now 
more bikes than cars in the heart of the city. In the last year, 35,080 more 
bikes have joined the daily roll, bringing the total number to 265,700, 
compared with 252,600 cars.

Copenhagen municipality has been carrying out manual traffic counts at a 
number of city centre locations since 1970, when there were 351,133 cars and 
100,071 bikes. In 2009, the city installed its firstelectric bike counter 
<http://www.copenhagenize.com/2009/05/bicyclists-count-in-copenhagen.html> by 
city hall, with 20 now monitoring traffic across the city.

Copenhagen’s efforts to create a cycling city have paid off: bicycle traffic 
has risen by 68% in the last 20 years. “What really helped was a very strong 
political leadership; that was mainly Ritt Bjerregaard [the former lord mayor], 
who had a dedicated and authentic interest in cycling,” says Klaus Bondam, who 
was technical and environmental mayor from 2006 to 2009 and is now head of the
Danish Cycling Federation <http://www.cyklistforbundet.dk/>. “Plus, a new focus 
on urbanism and the new sustainability agenda broke the glass roof when it came 
to cycling.”

Why can't all cities have bike bridges like Copenhagen's new Cycle Snake?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/14/bike-lanes-bridge-copenhagen-new-cycle-snake-cykelslangen>
Since 2005, 1bn Danish kroner (£115m) has been invested in cycling 
infrastructure, from several newbike and pedestrian-only 
<http://www.treehugger.com/bikes/take-video-tour-bike-bridges-copenhagen.html> 
bridges such as Cykelslangen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/14/bike-lanes-bridge-copenhagen-new-cycle-snake-cykelslangen>
 (the Cycle Snake) to the recently openedKissing Bridge 
<http://www.thelocal.dk/20160708/copenhagen-inner-harbour-bridge-inderhavnsbroen-opens>
. “Cycling went from being a normal part of daily life to a core identity for 
the city,” says Bondam.

For Morten Kabell, the current mayor of technical and environmental affairs, 
the cycling city is “a constantly evolving goal”. He sees “the central core of 
town between Nørreport, City Hall and Kongens Nytorv becoming car-free within a 
decade”, and is striving for 50% of all commutes to be made by bike across 
Greater Copenhagen by 2025 – not such a lofty goal, given that the current 
figure is 41%.

However, he believes this figure will actually fall when the metro extension 
<http://www.kk.dk/artikel/mere-metro-p%C3%A5-vej> opens in 2019. “There’s no 
doubt it will take some of the bike traffic; but the important thing for me is 
to have a green transport system. As long as it’s fossil-free and alleviates 
congestion and air pollution, I’m cool with that,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcycling-revolution-bikes-outnumber-cars-first-time-copenhagen-denmark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31ba6dd042a909aaa4eac2a78738dd1ce26807c2%2F0_29_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two-wheel%20takeover%3A%20bikes%20outnumber%20cars%20for%20the%20first%20time%20in%20Copenhagen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcycling-revolution-bikes-outnumber-cars-first-time-copenhagen-denmark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two-wheel%20takeover%3A%20bikes%20outnumber%20cars%20for%20the%20first%20time%20in%20Copenhagen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcycling-revolution-bikes-outnumber-cars-first-time-copenhagen-denmark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31ba6dd042a909aaa4eac2a78738dd1ce26807c2%2F0_29_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The Danish government has invested 1bn kroner in cycling infrastructure. 
Photograph: Angel Villalba/Getty Images 
In the past year, bicycle traffic has increased by 15% and vehicle traffic has 
fallen 1%. Meanwhile, Copenhagen’s population has beensteadily growing 
<https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/Status%20p%C3%A5%20K%C3%B8benhavn%202016.pdf>
, with the inner city set to creep up from 600,000 to 715,000 people within the
next 15 years 
<http://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/2017_2031_fremskrivningbydele.pdf>. 
“People see that the fastest way to get around town is on a bicycle,” says 
Kabell. “In several new developments, car ownership is higher than it has been 
in older parts of town, but not ‘usership’.”

We’ve shown the world that if you build protected infrastructure, people will 
start riding their bikes
Morten Kabell 
Kabell believes the challenge now is to build infrastructure to keep up with 
the growing number of people; alongside the metro expansion, his department is 
working to increase the the cycle network’s capacity and efficiency. Last 
month, Copenhageners were invited to identify areas where bike lanes are either 
missing, too narrow, or heavily congested. In just 12 days more than10,000 
people <http://www.kk.dk/cykelstisplan> shared their views on an online map. 
While many suggestions were expected, such as improving signal times, some were 
surprising: major routes, like Nørrebrogade, one of the world’s widest and 
busiest tracks, were marked as “too narrow”.

The data will be used to develop a Cycle Track Priority Plan for 2017-2025, 
which will identify where it’s most necessary to build, widen or optimise 
intersections. This will then form the basis of plans to be put forward for 
annual budget negotiations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcycling-revolution-bikes-outnumber-cars-first-time-copenhagen-denmark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35775c2f1d72d9157536f62d68a0a61a3e836a1d%2F0_25_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two-wheel%20takeover%3A%20bikes%20outnumber%20cars%20for%20the%20first%20time%20in%20Copenhagen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcycling-revolution-bikes-outnumber-cars-first-time-copenhagen-denmark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two-wheel%20takeover%3A%20bikes%20outnumber%20cars%20for%20the%20first%20time%20in%20Copenhagen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcycling-revolution-bikes-outnumber-cars-first-time-copenhagen-denmark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35775c2f1d72d9157536f62d68a0a61a3e836a1d%2F0_25_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 In London the gap between car and bike use is getting narrower. Photograph: 
Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
For many cities, mirroring Copenhagen’s achievement is nothing more than a 
distant dream. As oneTwitter user 
<https://twitter.com/LasseLyck/status/798960469209915392> put it: “The fact 
that Nørrebrogade has been marked as too narrow must be a success of 
international dimensions.” Kabell, though, thinks anyone can do it. “It’s not 
in our genes, it’s not in our water … What we’ve shown the rest of the world is 
that if you build protected infrastructure, people will start riding their 
bikes.”

In London, figures show the gap between bike and car use is getting narrower. 
Data fromTransport for London 
<http://content.tfl.gov.uk/travel-in-london-report-8.pdf> suggests the number 
of commuters travelling through the heart of the city during rush hour could 
soon exceed the number of vehicles on the streets.

The number of cars entering the city during the morning peak hours fell from 
86,000 to64,000 between 2004 and 2014 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2016/02/central-london-rush-hour-bike-car-tfl/459774/>
, while bikes rose from 14,000 to 36,000. That’s two cars for every bike – and 
if trends continue, more people will be cycling than driving into central 
London during the morning rush hour in2019 
<http://www.bikebiz.com/news/read/the-utterly-amazing-growth-of-cycling-in-london/019317>
. But London’s cycling infrastructure needs to catch up.

Over in the Netherlands, the Dutch are already reaching the point at which 
bike traffic is overtaking car traffic. In Amsterdam,48% of city-centre trips 
<http://www.iamsterdam.com/en/media-centre/city-hall/dossier-cycling/cycling-facts-and-figures>
 are pedal-powered, while inGroningen’s core 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/29/how-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world>
, bikes are used for61% of all trips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/29/how-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world>
.

How Amsterdam became the bicycle capital of the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/amsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord>
Not all cities are going in this direction, however. In Beijing, bicycle use 
fell from60% to 17% 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2012/04/de-bikification-beijing/1681/> between 
1986 and 2010, while the high status attached to cars has seen vehicle 
ownership more than quadruple in the last16 years 
<http://www.lta.gov.sg/ltaacademy/doc/13Sep040-Feng_CarOwnershipControl.pdf>. 
But Kabell says that leaders of China’s megacities are beginning to see the 
light when they visit Copenhagen, and efforts are being made to improve cycling
infrastructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/24/beijing-cycling-capital-plans> 
and bike-hire schemes.

The next step for Kabell is to create good alternatives to the car. “You can’t 
just prohibit cars and then deal with it … That’s why we’re expanding the metro 
and investing in bike infrastructure. Give people options and then slowly take 
away space from cars and give it to bikes.”

It is cheaper too: the last 12 years of bicycle investments only amount to 
half the cost 
<http://www.roadtraffic-technology.com/projects/nordhavnsvej-northern-harbour-link-project-copenhagen/>
 of a single vehicle bypass in the north of the city.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 