
A Cambridge University study has brought to light figures showing that black 
victims of fraud aremore than twice as likely to be denied a refund by their 
bank 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/banks-biased-against-black-fraud-victims-237z7rxvm>
 as white customers. The notion that being from an ethnic minority would make 
your claim less believable is, on the surface, shocking. But given the 
stereotypes of ethnic minorities and a history of racial discrimination in the 
banking sector, these figures should not really come as a surprise.

Black Americans unfairly targeted by banks before housing crisis, says ACLU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/23/black-americans-housing-crisis-sub-prime-loan>
One possible explanation for banks being less likely to believe ethnic 
minority customers is because of stereotypes in relation to fraud. When former 
prime minister David Cameron was caught telling the Queen that Nigeria and 
Afghanistan were“fantastically corrupt” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/10/david-cameron-afghanistan-nigeria-possibly-most-corrupt-countries>
, it highlighted the perceptions many have of the countries minorities have 
migrated or descended from.

As Prof Ross Anderson, who was behind the Cambridge study, has explained, 
“bank staff have the same prejudices as the general population”. Due to the 
nature ofsegregation in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/segregation-inner-cities-racism-ethnic-minority-communities-white-people>
, many people’s only experience of Nigerians, for example, may be the cliche of 
internet scammers, as explored in the Channel 4 documentary419: the internet 
romance scam <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/419-the-internet-romance-scam>.
There is clearly a lot of work that needs to be done for people to see past the 
stereotypes of minorities that we are often fed.

These latest figures highlight a much larger problem in the banking sector. We 
are quick to point to the police, schools and even universities as sites of 
discrimination, but there have previously been suggestions that banks are just 
as institutionally racist. In 2011 Nick Clegghighlighted the problem that 
ethnic minority businesses have historically had in receiving finance from banks
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/nov/24/nick-clegg-british-banks-racist>
, with black African businesses being four times less likely to be approved for 
loans, and all groups being subject to higher interest rates. When the 
government eventually published a report in response to these allegations it 
did not refute the figures, butargued 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2013/07/31/nick-clegg-banks-racist_n_3680756.html>
 that there was “no evidence to indicate that disparities are due to racial 
discrimination per se”. This is exactly how institutional racism works: the 
clearly discriminatory playing field is acknowledged and then rejected on the 
basis that there could be “other factors” at work.

To understand institutional racism means looking beyond simple notions of the 
banks, or bank staff, being racist

To understand institutional racism means looking beyond simple notions of the 
banks, or bank staff, being racist. A routine way to dismiss claims of racism 
is to say that ethnic minorities tend to be more disadvantaged, and therefore 
are less likely to pass credit checks, which are essential to receive banking 
finance. But this way of thinking entirely ignores the fact that minority 
communities are more likely to be disadvantaged is in itself racism: we are 
poorer because we are darker. A lack of access to finance is a key cause of the
staggering ethnic wealth gap 
<http://blogs.reuters.com/great-debate-uk/2011/04/08/the-racial-wealth-gap-not-just-an-american-problem/>
, which further prevents people from owning homes and setting up businesses. 
These systemic issues are clearly about racial discrimination and the banking 
sector colludes in institutional racism if it ignores this to focus on “other 
factors”.

As far as we know Britain has never had overtly racist discrimination in 
mortgage lending as in the US, where African Americans were historically denied 
loans incertain “redlined” districts 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/10/19/498536077/interactive-redlining-map-zooms-in-on-americas-history-of-discrimination>
. However, there have long been complaints about lack of access to mortgages 
and credit from ethnic minority communities in the UK. This lack of trust in 
the banking sector was underscored by the 2008 financial crisis. Not only did 
the resulting austerity impact more on ethnic minorities but a major cause of 
the crisis wasAmerican subprime mortgage lending at high rates to African 
American communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/23/black-americans-housing-crisis-sub-prime-loan>
. And when the housing bubble burst, the mass evictions of African Americans 
sent shockwaves through black communities in Britain.

A moment that changed me: learning people disliked me for my skin colour | 
Poppy Noor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/a-moment-that-changed-me-skin-colour-racism>
A severe lack of faith in the banking sector to support minority communities 
has led groups to develop their own initiatives. In the African-Caribbean 
community,collective forms of saving such as a “pardner” 
<http://www.voice-online.co.uk/article/bring-back-pardner> are still common. 
People will pay money into the pardner regularly and each person takes a turn 
using the collective pot of money. Pardner money has been a vital source of 
financing things such as weddings, new businesses and house deposits. It also 
take a level of trust that belies the stereotype of the corrupt black community.

Ethnic minorities have also avoided using mainstream banks in order to try to 
get a better deal. Foreign institutions such as the Bank of India are becoming 
a feature in urban communities and people are also turning to credit unions. 
There are even a number of groups working towards building black-led financial 
institutions.

When faith in mainstream banks is so low that ethnic minorities are turning to 
alternative sources of finance, it is time to acknowledge a systemic problem. 
Having to fight to be believed when we are victims of fraud is just the latest 
example of the barriers facing minorities in the banking sector. A concerted 
effort needs to be taken by the banks and government to address the systemic 
racial inequalities in banking and access to finance.
 