
Police and Environment Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/environment-agency> officials today 
defended their decision to warn tens of thousands of people living near the 
east coast of England to leave their homes because they were at risk of 
flooding.

Thousands were evacuated on Friday after the Environment Agency issued 17 
severe weather warnings – which warn of danger to life – with people living in
Norfolk <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/norfolk>, Suffolk and Essex told 
they were most at risk.

Relief for thousands on UK east coast as flooding threat wanes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/14/relief-for-thousands-on-uk-east-coast-as-flooding-threat-wanes>
But in the early hours of Saturday the final tranche of those who had heeded 
the warnings and left – a group of residents from Jaywick, Essex – were told 
they could return home. While they expressed relief that the predicted storm 
surge had failed to deliver the chaos expected, some questioned whether the 
warnings had been necessary. Many had refused to leave their homes, despite an 
emergency services evacuation plan and pleas fromEssex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/essex> police for them to move to safety.

Resident Brenda Smith, 71, one of those who refused to leave, described the 
warnings as a “load of rubbish”. She said: “I did not think anything would 
happen. Maybe one day it will happen – but I don’t think it will happen yet.”

Katrina Russell from Harlow was staying with her mother, who lives in Jaywick, 
and said they remained at home because it had happened before and “nothing came 
of it”.

“I think 99% of people stayed, I only know one person that did leave, and 
that’s because they have children,” she added.

Alison McGuire, who also decided to stay at home, said: “I did not think it 
would come over – I thought to myself, what is all the fuss about?”

Further up the coast, in Great Yarmouth, residents expressed relief that their 
worst fears had not been realised. Jess Hudson, 19, of nearby Gorleston-on-Sea, 
said: “I didn’t think it would be as bad as before [when floods hit in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/06/east-coast-britain-hit-tidal-surge-floods-weather-live-updates>
] but people were worried and they’ll be relieved the worst seems to have 
passed.

“I was surprised at the number of people who stayed in their homes when they 
were asked to leave. If it was me, I wouldn’t want to risk that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsnow-britain-battered-winter-storms-winds-rain-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Huge%20waves%20hit%20coastal%20areas%20as%20Britain%20faces%20winter%20storms%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsnow-britain-battered-winter-storms-winds-rain-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Huge%20waves%20hit%20coastal%20areas%20as%20Britain%20faces%20winter%20storms%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsnow-britain-battered-winter-storms-winds-rain-video&media=>
Huge waves hit coastal areas as Britain faces winter storms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/12/snow-britain-battered-winter-storms-winds-rain-video>
Essex police deputy chief constable Matthew Horne defended the warnings, 
saying they were grounded in science and advice from both the Environment 
Agency and the Met Office. “We prepare for the worst-case scenario, and we 
would be happy to take the same decision again should we be faced with the same 
advice as we have had over the last 36 hours,” he said.

According to its live incidents web page, Norfolk Fire and Rescue Service 
attended several incidents to “assist with flooding”, including rescuing people 
stuck in floodwater, and assisting “with emergency lighting at an evacuation 
centre” in Walcott.

Doug Wilson, flood duty manager at the Environment Agency, said high tides and 
strong winds had caused large waves along the east coast of England on Friday 
night, with a risk of flooding and danger to life.

“The Environment Agency issued over 100 flood warnings, operated its permanent 
flood defences, including the Thames Barrier and Hull Barrier, and set up 
temporary defences in areas at risk,” Wilson said.

“These actions protected over 550,000 properties. In the event, the 
combination of the peak surge, strongest winds and largest waves didn’t 
coincide in all areas and did not reach the most dangerous levels that were 
possible all along the east coast. Some properties in the north and east 
Yorkshire were flooded and our thoughts are with those affected.”

Fire and rescue services were yesterday being deployed to deal with the 
potential risks of flooding in Surrey, Bedfordshire, London, Hertfordshire, 
Northamptonshire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, West Midlands, Oxfordshire, 
Cumbria, south Wales, Warwickshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and South 
Yorkshire.
 