
Brexit means Brexit

In a major speech, Britain’s prime minister, Theresa May, said that when the 
UK leaves the EU it will also quit the bloc’s single market, customs union and 
court system, and made clear that Britain was not going to seek any form of EU 
membership via the back door. She also committed to putting the final Brexit 
deal to a vote in both houses of parliament, handing politicians in Westminster 
the power to block the plans.

Follow our rolling coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>
 for analysis and reactions.

Key points from May’s Brexit speech: what have we learned? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>

Prime minister vows to put final Brexit deal before parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>


Congress members to skip inauguration

With Donald Trump’s inauguration just days away, more than 30 members of 
Congress plan to boycott the ceremony on Friday. Their pledges to skip Trump’s 
swearing in come amid escalating outrage overalleged connections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/mike-pence-trump-campaign-russia>
 between the president-elect’s team and Russia and disparaging remarks about the
civil rights veteran and congressman John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>
, who said last week he does not regard Trump as a legitimate president. Amid 
the chaos, Trump met with Martin Luther King III, the son of the revered civil 
rights leader, on Monday, the public holiday that commemorates his life. King 
and William Wachtel, a New York lawyer, said they spoke to Trump about voter 
participation and how to carry forward King’s father’s legacy by making it 
“easier for everyone to vote”. Asked about Lewis, King said: “Things get said 
on both sides in the heat of emotion. And at some point in this nation we’ve 
got to move forward.” He added that he would “continue to evaluate” Trump’s 
commitment to representing all Americans.

Inauguration boycott grows as Donald Trump meets Martin Luther King III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/inauguration-boycott-donald-trump-martin-luther-king-iii-john-lewis>

What defunding Planned Parenthood would look like


Congress seeks to defund Planned Parenthood through a budget measure that 
blocks the reproductive health services provider from accepting Medicaid, which 
allows it to offer contraception, cancer screenings and STI tests to 1.5 
million patients at some 650 health centers for no cost. Public health 
officials who work in states where Planned Parenthood’s presence is already in 
decline – such as Texas or Wisconsin – are sounding the alarm. They say the 
loss of Planned Parenthood would imperil the health of thousands of women who 
already face high barriers for care. “I don’t know where else I would go,” one 
woman who used Planned Parenthood for cancer screenings and contraception said. 
“I would have to spend time finding somewhere else to go, and worry about: can 
I afford it? And worry about: am I getting the same quality of care I get with
Planned Parenthood <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>? 
It’s only making it more difficult for people already having struggles.”

Healthcare without Planned Parenthood: Wisconsin and Texas point to dark future
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/planned-parenthood-congress-wisconsin-texas>

First day of World Economic Forum

The annual World Economic Forum commenced today, with political leaders, top 
business people, economists, academics and the media meeting in Davos, 
Switzerland. Trump’s influence can be felt, even if he’s not there, making the 
event feel like “Hamlet without the prince”, Larry Elliott writes. Just as 
significantly, Xi Jinping is the first Chinese premier to attend Davos. He 
spoke to a packed room and defended globalization.

Absent Trump dominates Davos discussions as WEF starts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/absent-trump-dominates-davos-discussions-wef-starts>

Istanbul gunman arrested

The man accused of killing 39 people in an Istanbul nightclub on New Year’s 
Eve was arrested on Monday night at a friend’s home after a two-week manhunt. 
Istanbul’s governor, Vasip Sahin, said Abdulgadir Masharipov was born in 
Uzbekistan, received training in Afghanistan and entered Turkey illegally last 
year. Sahin said it was clear the gunman carried out the attack on behalf of 
Islamic State. Masharipov has admitted his guilt and his fingerprints matched 
those at the scene, Sahin added, describing the attacker as a well-educated 
terrorist, born in 1983, who speaks four languages.

Istanbul nightclub attack: suspected gunman ‘had training in Afghanistan’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/istanbul-nightclub-attack-suspected-gunman-abdulgadir-masharipov-had-training-in-afghanistan>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Parts of US heating faster than globe as a whole 


A new study published by scientists from the University of Massachusetts at 
Amherst looking specifically at the north-eastern US found that this area will 
warm much more rapidly than the globe as a whole and faster than any other US 
region. The authors expect the north-east will warm 50% faster than the planet 
as a whole and find that the US will reach warming of 2C (3.6F) 10 to 20 years 
before the globe as a whole.

Parts of United States are heating faster than globe as a whole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2017/jan/17/parts-of-united-states-are-heating-faster-than-globe-as-a-whole>

Obama welcomes Cubs to the White House

In his last official White House function, Barack Obama on Monday hosted the 
Chicago Cubs, whowon the World Series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/world-series-game-7-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians-mlb>
 last year for the first time in 108 years. Speaking in the East Room, Obama 
noted that it was important to spend time on sports “when there’s other stuff 
going on”, saying that could bring a divided country together. “Sports has 
changed attitudes and culture in ways that seem subtle but ultimately made us 
think differently about ourselves and who we were. It is a game and a 
celebration but there is a direct line between Jackie Robinson and me standing 
here,” he said. It was apt that Obama’s final event celebrated a team from his 
adopted home town – even though the president is actually a White Sox fan. 
Michelle Obama, who was in attendance, supports the Cubs.

‘Sports has changed attitudes’: Obama welcomes Chicago Cubs to White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/obama-chicago-cubs-white-house-visit>

And finally ... Trump tweets wrong Ivanka

The president-elect quoted a praiseworthy tweet which mentioned Ivanka Majic, 
a council worker from Brighton, England, instead of his daughter. “And you’re a 
man with great responsibilities. May I suggest more care on Twitter and more 
time learning about#climatechange 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/climatechange?src=hash>,” Majic wrote back on 
Tuesday morning.

Donald Trump mistakes Ivanka from Brighton for his daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/17/donald-trump-mistakes-ivanka-from-brighton-for-his-daughter>
 