
An embryonic industry trying to harness the UK’s waves to generate clean 
electricity has been dealt a significant blow by a warning that the technology 
is too costly.

Wave power devices being tested in Cornwall and at Orkney are 10 times more 
expensive than other sources of low carbon power and need a radical rethink,the 
Energy Technologies Institute (ETI) said 
<http://www.eti.co.uk/news/eti-sets-out-priorities-for-marine-energy-if-it-is-to-compete-with-other-low-carbon-sources>
.

The energy research body added that even if costs were cut aggressively, wave 
power would be unlikely to make a significant contribution to the UK’s energy 
demands in coming decades.

The institute, which has a mission to accelerate low carbon technologies, said 
the UK’s marine energy strategy should instead prioritise support for tidal 
stream power, such asa project being tested in the Pentland Firth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/12/worlds-first-large-scale-tidal-energy-farm-launches-scotland>
, which resembles underwater wind turbines. The ETI urged the government to 
agree a subsidy deal for Atlantis Resource’s MeyGen scheme, which is the 
world’s first large-scale tidal power project.

Atlantis Resources hopes to ultimately expand the tidal array’s first four 
turbines to 269, which would generate even more power than the Swansea bay 
tidal lagoonbacked by an independent review last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/12/tidal-lagoons-could-ensure-uk-power-supplies>
. Such lagoon projects are further advanced than wave energy projects but some 
way behind tidal stream power development, and require large levels of 
investment, the ETI said.

Government review likely to back Swansea Bay tidal lagoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/10/government-review-swansea-bay-tidal-lagoon-electricity>
Experts have previously described the UK’s wave power potential as huge and 
said it could generate a tenth of electricity needs. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/oct/17/cornwall-scotland-uk-wave-power>

But despite being heralded six years ago by Scotland’s then first minister 
Alex Salmond as on the verge of commercial deployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/sep/27/wave-and-tidal-power-alex-salmond>
, the fledgling sector has been dogged by delays and bankruptcies, such as the 
collapse of Scotland’sPelamis Wave Power 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-business-30151276> in 2014 and 
Aquamarine Power 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-business-34659324> in 2015.

The ETI, which is funded by government and companies including Rolls-Royce, 
EDF and BP, called for a “radical rethink” if the technology is to provide 
affordable renewable electricity.

Developers, which include Australia’s Carnegie Clean Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>, Finland’s Fortum and the UK’s 
Seatricity, need to reconsider their approaches to “drastically” cut costs, the 
ETI said. Grid connections were another concern, it added.

“On wave energy our view is that even with aggressive cost reduction and 
innovation activities, current attenuator wave energy technologies are highly 
unlikely to meet the ETI/UK Energy Research Centre marine energy roadmap 
targets, and are therefore unlikely to make a significant contribution to the 
UK energy system in the coming decades,” a spokesman said.

However, people in the industry disputed the analysis, saying they would not 
be testing and developing the technology if they thought it was not 
commercially viable.

Andy Bristow, managing director at Seatricitysaid it was “nonsense” to suggest 
wave power was 10 times as expensive as the alternatives.

 “We’re confident in our technology but we’re less confident in the UK 
government’s commitment to renewables. We’re finding it difficult at the moment 
because of a malaise that seems to have infected the marine renewables sector,” 
Bristow said.

“We think it’s a shame, because ultimately it’s a no-brainer: it’s clean, it’s 
green, it has potential to be very cost effective.”

Bristow added that he was surprised the ETI had not consulted the company.

In a statement, Fortum said: “Wave power is still under research, development 
and piloting phase throughout the world compared to for example solar and wind 
technologies which are rapidly maturing and becoming more market-based. It is 
important to understand that the development of new competitive energy 
technologies takes time.”

Tim Sawyer, CEO of Carnegie, said he believed the report was based on out of 
date data.

RenewableUK’s deputy chief executive, Maf Smith, said: “The UK is right at the 
forefront of a global race to develop wave power on a commercial scale. It’s 
vital that we don’t lose our lead to other countries, who stand to benefit from 
the years of investment and progress we’ve made. The more we deploy, the 
cheaper the technology will become.”


The ETI’s views on marine energy come after a global renewable energy body 
said developments in energy storage could be a “game-changer” for clean power. 
The Abu Dhabi-based Irenasaid battery storage capacity for electricity could 
increase from 1GW today to 250GW by 2030 
<http://www.irena.org/menu/index.aspx?mnu=Subcat&PriMenuID=36&CatID=141&SubcatID=3802>
, helping alleviate renewable energy’s intermittent nature.

 