
A hard Brexit could be the “biggest disaster” for British universities, 
costing decades of progress and leaving the UK’s international status 
diminished, vice-chancellors and senior academics have told MPs.

An education select committee hearing on the impact of the vote to leave the 
EU on British universities was told that German and Irish institutions were 
“snapping at the heels” in poaching UK-based staff, while Oxford University’s 
head of Brexit strategy said the benefits of centuries of cooperation were 
being put at risk.

Asked about the likely impact of a hard Brexit, Prof Alistair Fitt, the 
vice-chancellor of Oxford Brookes University, said: “It would probably be the 
biggest disaster for the university sector for many years.”

What will happen in higher education in 2017?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2017/jan/05/what-will-happen-in-higher-education-in-2017>
Prof Alastair Buchan, Oxford University’s incoming head of Brexit strategy, 
said: “We’re giving up 500 to 950 years of exchange – I think we need to be 
very cautious [about what type of Brexit is pursued].”


Buchan, the dean of Oxford’s medical school, takes up his Brexit role on 20 
January. His seniority and the status of the post is a clear sign of the 
gravity with which Oxford and other universities are treating thepotential 
impact of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/15/uk-universities-eu-ucas-foreign-undergrads>
.

Buchan drew parallels between British universities and Premier League football 
clubs. “Our problem is the Manchester United problem, isn’t it?” he told the 
committee.


“Every student and every staff member that comes to Oxford is a benefit for 
this country, because we recruit quality, people that play in the top league.


“We need to be leading, and we have been leading as universities in the past 
10, 20 years. Thirty or 40 years ago we weren’t, when we joined the EU. To lose 
that would be absolutely shooting ourselves in the foot – we must not do that.”

Buchan complained that the Brexit department and the Department for Education 
had no way of communicating with universities about the problems they faced. 
Instead, academics were spending their time helping ministers and civil 
servants.


“In the Department for Exiting the European Union, there is no structure of 
who we can talk to, there’s no base camp, there’s no one responsible for 
research or education in universities,” he said.


“Likewise, in the Department for Education, there’s nobody really responsible 
for leaving the EU. So there’s a real need to see who is the channel or the 
portal for information.

“They are very hungry for information, I’ve spent a lot of time explaining to 
them how it works.”

Asked if the government had sought universities’ views, Fitt said: “I would 
say, largely, no.” However, he added that the universities minister, Jo 
Johnson, had been “welcoming”.

Catharine Barnard, a professor of EU law at Cambridge University, said the 
threat of Brexit had “turned upside down” the lives of EU staff and students in 
the UK.

She cited a survey by the university of potential students who did not take up 
a place, with a number of respondents mentioning “anti-immigrant sentiment” as 
one reason. Overall undergraduate applications to Cambridge from the EU are 
down by 14% so far.

Other European universities were looking to take advantage of Britain’s 
difficulties, shetold the committee hearing (pdf) 
<http://www.pmb.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/higher_education_brexit_session_university_of_oxford.pdf>
, held at Pembroke College, Oxford.

“Germany is working very hard to see if they can attract British academics or 
academics from British universities to Germany, offering positions that have no 
teaching connected, research-based posts, and in Germany, much of the academic 
work is now done in English, so Germany is snapping at our heels,” Barnard said.

“Particularly in the field of maths, the German universities are really 
looking to tap into the pool of talent that we are getting from Hungary and 
Poland.

“Universities in other member states see Brexit as an opportunity to undercut. 
It’s a tall poppy – we are the tall poppy, we get more ERC [European Research 
Council] funding than any other member state, we are seen as the best. Germany 
is number two, significantly behind in terms of funding, and they want some of 
that action.”

Barnard said the status of an elite institution such as Trinity College, 
Cambridge, was “largely due to Trinity’s brilliance in maths, which has much to 
do with the input of our Hungarian, Polish and Romanian students”.

Buchan warned that Britain’s higher education sector could follow the US in 
becoming more insular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/uk-halve-international-student-visa-tougher-rules>
 and liable tobeing overtaken by China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/22/uk-universities-mull-eu-campuses-in-new-era-of-uncertainty>
.

“What we see in America, heading into Trump’s administration, over the past 
five or 10 years, has been in a reduction in funding, their collaborative 
publications have fallen off, their impact is beginning to drop.

“Our worry is that China and India are in the ascendancy. We have been second 
only to the US – we need to be very sure that we negotiate the kind of openness 
that academia is all about,” he said.
 