
Since its birth in the 19th century, photography has captured the development 
of cities around the world, documenting the often huge changes in the urban 
landscape.

UrbanPhotoFest <http://www.urbanphotofest.org/>, an annual photographic arts 
festival focusing on cities and urban spaces, kicks off in London on 3 
November. “We believe that photography plays an important role in opening up 
debates about urban change, voice and the condition of the city,” the festival 
organisers explain. The main theme this year is “photography, memory and 
archive”, exploring how the city operates as a living archive and how 
historical photographs visualise and politicise daily life of the past.

As cities swiftly change, photographs can capture urban destruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/aug/06/after-the-atomic-bomb-hiroshima-and-nagasaki-then-and-now-in-pictures>
,decay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/feb/11/the-death-of-detroit-how-motor-city-crumbled-in-the-90s-in-pictures>
,genesis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/ng-interactive/2015/jan/20/costa-del-concrete-mediterranean-coastline-then-now-in-pictures>
 and renewal;buildings lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/06/great-city-buildings-demolished-destroyed-les-halles>
, oriconic structures being built 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/aug/02/how-london-was-built-tower-bridge-southbank-in-pictures>
; thetrappings of daily life gone by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/16/stereographic-new-york-animated-3d-images-1850s-1930s>
;transformed neighbourhoods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/jul/28/fading-england-1970s-snapshot-people-and-places-in-pictures>
 andsocial history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/jun/03/double-vision-how-apartheid-tore-soul-out-of-south-africa-port-elizabeth-south-end>
.

We’d love to see your old photos capturing urban places that have since 
changed – whether it’s your local neighbourhood or a city you visited, five 
years ago or five decades ago. You cansubmit photos and stories using 
GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58107fd8e4b01c528432cd3d> (by 
clicking on the blue “contribute” button) and we’ll feature a selection on
Guardian Cities <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>. Please ensure they are 
photographs you have permission to share.

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on 
the Guardian site. 
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 