
The rate of abortion in the US reached a lower level in 2014 than in any other 
year since the procedure first became legal, a study has found, a decline that 
appears to be due to the widespread use of contraception producing a drop in 
unintended pregnancies.

Tennessee woman jailed for attempting abortion accepts plea deal for release
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/tennessee-woman-released-abortion-attempt-tennessee>
Nineteen percent of pregnancies ended in abortion in 2014 – the lowest 
abortion rate since the supreme court handed down Roe v Wade in 1973, 
legalizing the procedure – and the number of abortions between 2011 and 2014 
also fell, by 12%.

But the researchers found strong indications to link the decline in the 
abortion rate to the wider availability of highly effective contraception – 
which could be imperiled byefforts to repeal Obamacare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/democrats-obamacare-repeal-bernie-sanders-healthcare>
 by the incoming Republican administration.

The study appears in the latest issue of Guttmacher Institute’s scholarly 
journal,Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/journals/psrh>, and was conducted by two of the 
institute’s researchers, Rachel K Jones and Jenna Jerman.

The researchers made an estimate of the number of abortions by surveying local 
health department data and abortion clinics, which may be hampered by clinics 
that did not respond. Guttmacher is a thinktank that supports access to 
reproductive care, but its data is widely trusted by supporters and opponents 
of abortion rights alike.

The decline in the abortion rate was greatest in the midwest, south and 
north-east.Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> is still a 
common procedure – in 2014, Jones and Jerman estimate, US women had 926,200 
abortions – but there were nevertheless shifts in how abortions were performed. 
The number performed with medication, which is only effective early in a 
pregnancy, rose 7% to account for 31% of abortions outside a hospital setting.

There are competing theories to explain the decline in the abortion rate. The 
drop coincided with the enactment of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), which made 
more effective and expensive methods of contraception, such as IUDs, available 
to millions more women for no “copay” or prescription charge. But the decline 
also aligned with a historic spike in new, state-level abortion restrictions.

Some data – such as trends in contraception usage – that could help determine 
the reasons for the decline are not yet available for 2014. Still, the 
researchers predicted that the drop in the abortion rate had less to do with 
new restrictions than with changes in contraception usage and a reduction in 
unintended pregnancies.

One clue is that more than 60% of the decline in the abortion rate took place 
in states that had not enacted new hurdles to getting the procedure.

If the drop is due to contraception, it would have alarming implications for 
Republicans’ breakneck campaign to repeal the ACA. The law says that most 
health insurance plans must cover a broad range of contraceptive drugs and 
devices at no copay – the so-called contraception mandate. Public health 
advocates have credited this provision with an explosion in women’s access to 
more affordable and more effective birth control.


Between the fall of 2012 and spring 2014, a separate Guttmacher study found, 
the share of privately insured women who had no copay for contraception
quadrupled 
<http://www.contraceptionjournal.org/article/S0010-7824(14)00687-8/pdf>. By 
2015, the federal Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) found,55.6 
million 
<https://aspe.hhs.gov/pdf-report/affordable-care-act-improving-access-preventive-services-millions-americans>
 US women had access to FDA-approved methods of contraception without a copay.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fus-abortion-rate-lowest-roe-wade-contraception-access%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b65d495d9111133166e53d5117f549385350947%2F0_20_2719_1632%2F2719.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20abortion%20rate%20is%20lowest%20since%20Roe%20v%20Wade%20%E2%80%93%20but%20contraception%20access%20may%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fus-abortion-rate-lowest-roe-wade-contraception-access%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20abortion%20rate%20is%20lowest%20since%20Roe%20v%20Wade%20%E2%80%93%20but%20contraception%20access%20may%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fus-abortion-rate-lowest-roe-wade-contraception-access%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b65d495d9111133166e53d5117f549385350947%2F0_20_2719_1632%2F2719.jpg>
 Vice-president-elect Mike Pence has proposed a rule allowing business owners 
to refuse to cover contraception if doing so violates religious beliefs. 
Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
If Republicans were to repeal Obamacare, it is not clear that their 
replacement would contain a similar provision. Tom Price, Trump’s nominee to 
lead the HHS, has put forthseveral proposals for an Obamacare replacement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/tom-price-health-secretary-planned-parenthood-trump>
 that do not contain a contraception mandate.

Separately, the vice-president-elect, Mike Pence, has proposed issuing a rule 
<http://www.christianpost.com/news/mike-pence-james-dobson-trump-birth-control-mandate-transgender-bathroom-170485/>
, through the HHS, that would allow business owners to refuse to cover 
contraception if doing so violates religious beliefs.

“Their agenda … could stop or reverse progress in empowering women to meet 
their childbearing goals, including by avoiding unintended pregnancy,” Joerg 
Dreweke, of Guttmacher, wrote in a policy brief accompanying the new study.

“There is strong evidence from recent abortion declines that supporting 
women’s decision-making across the spectrum of reproductive healthcare is very 
much compatible with reducing abortion incidence.”

The Guttmacher researchers found less evidence to link the decline in 
abortions or to new abortion restrictions. About 38% of the decline in the 
number of abortions was observed in 22 states that had enacted new restrictions 
significant enough to potentially impact women’s access to abortion.

Telling the story behind Roe v Wade: 'The play illuminates choice'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2017/jan/09/roe-v-wade-play-lisa-loomer-abortion-case>
These included laws that imposed extra counseling for an abortion. But only 
eight of those 22 states had abortion declines that outranked the national 
average, and four states – Arkansas, Michigan, Mississippi and North Carolina – 
actually saw an increase in their abortion rates.

There was, however, one type of abortion restriction that seemed to cause a 
decline in the abortion rate. These were laws that placed medically unnecessary 
regulations on abortion clinics in order to shut them down.

The number of abortion clinics fell by 6% between 2011 and 2014, and the loss 
of access appeared to be linked with a decrease in abortions – although it 
could not account for the entire declines observed in those states. In June 
2016,the supreme court ruled these kinds of laws to be unconstitutional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/27/us-supreme-court-texas-abortion-ruling>
.

On Tuesday, groups opposed to abortion linked the decline in the rate and 
number of abortions to laws that impose new restrictions. Clarke Forsythe, the 
acting president of the legal group Americans United for Life, said in a 
statement that those laws were a factor.

“Another factor in lowering the number of abortions is the power of beautiful 
pictures of life inside the womb, through ultrasound,” he said. “Such pictures 
are worth more than a thousand words when it comes to helping people understand 
whose lives are on the line.”

“Although Planned Parenthood and the abortion industry wants to say that this 
is a contraception story, the fact is, contraception has been around since the 
1950s,” added Kristi Hamrick, a spokeswoman for AUL.

The decline in the abortion rate from 2011 to 2014 continues a long downward 
trend. The US also saw its abortion rate drop between 2008 and 2011, driven, 
according to Guttmacher, by a steep decline in unintended pregnancies, probably 
explained by improvements in the use of contraception. As the abortion rate 
fell, the birth rate did not rise commensurately.

In particular, the rise of the use of highly effective, long-acting, 
reversible contraception, such as IUDs, might account for the drop in abortions.
 