
‘I’m always up for a bit of a challenge,” says director Carly Wijs cheerfully. 
“The challenge with Us/Them is whether it is possible to make a children’s 
theatre piece that talks intelligently, meaningfully and sensitively about 
terrorism.”

On 1 September 2004, the children at School No 1 in Beslan, North Ossetia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/01/beslan-school-massacre-ten-years>
, were celebrating the start of a new term when an armed group demanding 
Chechen independence attacked the building. For 52 hours, while desperate 
families and Russian special forces gathered outside, more than 1,000 parents, 
teachers and children were held hostage in the school gym in sweltering 
conditions.


The siege came to an end when one of the bombs in the booby-trapped gymnasium 
exploded incircumstances still not fully explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/01/five-beslan-mothers-detained-anti-putin-protest-memorial-ceremony-russia>
 and a shootout between the terrorists and the army ensued as fire ravaged the 
school. Three hundred and thirty-four people died, including 186 children.


The stuff of nightmares, it might seem an unpromising and possibly even 
offensive subject for a theatre show made for young audiences. But Wijs’s 
production sweeps aside all doubts in an astonishingly assured, frequently 
playful, sometimes surprisingly jokey – and ultimately desperately moving – 
show in which the events of the siege are told entirely through the eyes of two 
(fictional) children.


Us/Them, which arrives at the National Theatre this month after a sell-out run 
last summer at the Edinburgh fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/us-them-edinburgh-festival-review-summerhall-beslan-seige>
, begins with a boy and girl squabbling over how to chalk out a map of their 
town and school. It’s vitally important they get it right, but their memories 
differ. They bicker, make up and then carry on, the concentration showing in 
their faces.


Gradually it becomes clear that this is more than just a game. It is a way of 
dealing with internalised trauma and of replaying a story when words fail. By 
the end of the show, the carefully constructed map will be nothing but dust. 
Tomorrow, the map and the story must be constructed again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fus-them-terrorism-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd72cae20731baa446b5cbdcf00402def25df7b38%2F0_22_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Us%2FThem%3A%20unlikely%20children's%20show%20about%20terrorism%20opens%20at%20National%20Theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fus-them-terrorism-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Us%2FThem%3A%20unlikely%20children%27s%20show%20about%20terrorism%20opens%20at%20National%20Theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fus-them-terrorism-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd72cae20731baa446b5cbdcf00402def25df7b38%2F0_22_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Us/Them was a sellout hit at the Edinburgh festival in 2016. Photograph: Murdo 
MacLeod for the Guardian 
It was Wijs’s son who gave her the idea for Us/Them. He was eight at the time 
that the Brussels-based director was casting around for an idea after Belgium’s
Bronks theatre <http://www.bronks.be/en/> commissioned her to make her first 
children’s show. Her son was starting to look outwards and was getting to grips 
with the world that existed beyond his home, family, friends and school.


“He saw a news item about the attacks on the Westgate mall in Nairobi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/04/westgate-mall-attacks-kenya> and 
I was struck by the matter-of-fact, very distanced way that he spoke about what 
happened. I was interested in how different his response was to the emotional 
way an adult would react to such news. Then I found a BBC documentary,The 
Children of Beslan <http://topdocumentaryfilms.com/children-beslan/>, in which 
some of the children who had survived the siege spoke in exactly the same tone 
as my son had about the Nairobi attack – as if it had happened to somebody else 
entirely, not to them, and that made me realise that might be a way into 
dealing with the subject on stage.”


Even so, the show initially proved a difficult sell, even in liberal Flanders 
where parents are more relaxed about what is and isn’t suitable for children to 
see in the theatre. (At the NT the show is being marketed as suitable for the 
over-12s, as opposed to over-nines in Belgium.) Flanders has a theatre culture 
that has produced the teenage mayhem of Ontroerend Goed’sOnce and For All I’m 
Gonna Tell You Who We Are So Shut Up and Listen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2008/oct/27/children-teenagers-theatre>
,The Hamilton Complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/28/the-hamilton-complex-teenage-girls-stage-unicorn-theatre-lift>
, in which pubescent girls knowingly flaunt their innocence, and Milo Rau’sFive 
Easy Pieces <http://international-institute.de/en/five-easy-pieces-2/>, in 
which children aged 8 to 13 re-enact the life and crimes of Belgian child killer
Marc Dutroux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/jan/16/worlddispatch.dutroux>. Yet a 
play made for children about a terrorist incident that claimed the lives of so 
many was at first deemed a step too far by some venues. “People said it 
wouldn’t look good in the brochure,” recalls Wijs.

She says her lack of experience at making work for children made her braver 
about tackling a tricky subject. “I didn’t know my audience. All I know is my 
own son and what he can manage, so that was my audience. Maybe I’m a bit more 
robust with my child than other people, but he was my mirror.”

For those who questioned the sensitivity of making a piece about the siege, 
she countered: “I’m not making a performance for the children of Beslan, I’m 
making a performance for children inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to talk about stuff that is 
really far away but which is happening and must be confronted.”

A year later – by which time the show had been seen by programmers at the 10 
venues brave enough to host it and booked into a further 50 theatres in Belgium 
and France – theParis  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>and 
Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/mar/22/where-the-brussels-attackers-struck>
 attacks brought terrorism much closer to home. In Wij’s case, within 100 
metres of her front door.

“Initially I had thought that one of the reasons Us/Them worked was because it 
was something that had happened far away and we could look at it with a distant 
eye. But now the kids in Brussels have been affected by terrorism. The show 
communicates immediately to them and provides a way of thinking and talking 
about terrorism and its realities.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fus-them-terrorism-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95d19b447401581d17df8662a59624b8d23dc7bc%2F0_142_3979_2388%2F3979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Us%2FThem%3A%20unlikely%20children's%20show%20about%20terrorism%20opens%20at%20National%20Theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fus-them-terrorism-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Us%2FThem%3A%20unlikely%20children%27s%20show%20about%20terrorism%20opens%20at%20National%20Theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fus-them-terrorism-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95d19b447401581d17df8662a59624b8d23dc7bc%2F0_142_3979_2388%2F3979.jpg>
 ‘It’s up to the audience to make up their own minds’ … Us/Them. Photograph: 
Murdo MacLeod 
Us/Them may have been made for young audiences, but there is nothing remotely 
childish about a piece that constantly raises questions about perception and 
the way we view those who are different to ourselves as “other”.


The devastating final 15 minutes, where the truth appears as several versions, 
are an acute inquisition into how myths and stories are made. They reveal the 
ways the media and those with vested interests can manipulate the truth and use 
images to influence our perception of events.


Isn’t that too complicated for children? Wijs thinks not, pointing to the 
American election and fake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
 stories as reasons why it’s vitally important for young people and adults to 
question what they are told.


“Us/Them has multiple endings, and maybe some of them are part of the truth of 
what happened and some are not. It’s up to the audience to make up their own 
minds.”


 * Us/Them is at the National Theatre <https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/> 
from 16 January. Box office: 020-7452 3000.
 