
In one sense, it is not the most enormous shock to find that footballers’ pay 
is something on whichJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> disagrees with himself. A 
subject the Labour leader cannot hold two diametrically opposed opinions on the 
same day is increasingly a rarity. The problem with the new strategy of letting 
Jeremy be Jeremy is that – a bit like various football sides of cliché – you 
never know which one is going to turn up.

Last week Corbyn declared that there should be a cap on “grotesque” salaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
. And whaddayaknow –the very first example of such salaries upon which he 
alighted was in football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-calls-for-maximum-wage-law>
. “Certainly, the salaries that are paid to some footballers are simply 
ridiculous,” he stated, adding: “Some of the salaries paid to very high-earning 
top executives of companies are utterly ridiculous.”

Then, at the weekend, Corbyn seemed to have changed tack. His idea of a salary 
cap would not be extended to footballers, he told Andrew Marr, because they 
weren’t bosses. As he put it this time: “Footballers, while they are played 
ludicrous sums of money which I suppose we all pay for through our tickets, in 
reality they’re employees for quite a short time with those clubs.” Mmm. You’ll 
note the quality of Jeremy’s mercy is strained.

It’s odd how you never hear politicians banging on about movie actors getting 
paid too much

At time of going to press, it was difficult to speculate which way the 
pendulum inside Jeremy’s noggin was swinging – or, indeed, where it would be 48 
hours hence. What can be said with certainty is that in all arguments about pay 
and equality – whoever is making them this week or any week – football should 
be right down anyone sensible’s list of give-a-tosses.

It is always telling when people who are supposed to have big ideas fall back 
on tipping all over the Premier League. I hate to break it to them, but 
whingeing about footballers is not a big idea. They should have other fish to 
fry. Aside from anything else, top-flight football is one of the few engines of 
social mobility that still works in this country. Albeit for only a talented 
few, but hey – that already makes it more effective in this regard than almost 
every other profession. Yet it is footballer remuneration that is mentioned 
most frequently and most disparagingly by people in public life seeking to get 
attention.

What is it that they so detest about top-flight football, with its remorseless 
habit of creating working-class millionaires? And so many black working class 
millionaires, at that. I mean, really – of all the possible professions to 
pick, football would be one of my last ones, not least because it entertains so 
many people (however much they moan about it). It’s odd how you never hear 
politicians banging on about movie actors getting paid too much. Perhaps it’s 
becausethe working-class actor is a more endangered species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/08/working-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh>
 than it was even decades ago, so that branch of entertainment is not regarded 
as such a pressingly uppity problem.

And so it is that you frequently hear a footballer’s contract discussed in 
terms of how many NHS nurses it would fund, but weirdly never hear how many 
Mesut Özils a banking bailout orcocked-up Royal Mail flotation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/10/royal-mail-flotation-privatisation>
 could have provided instead. That certainly says something about the way our 
society is structured – but not the thing that the anti-Premier League crowd 
think it says.

For my money, there is no clearer indication of a policy’s essential weakness 
than to find it primarily illustrated via recourse to the Premier League. Using 
footballers as an example for anything is the lamest sort of playing to the 
gallery, always indulged in by people too lazy or dim to formulate a proper 
argument. Furthermore, it always has the whiff of something patronisingly 
packaged to appeal to “ordinary people” in the sort of language “they” 
understand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffootballers-wages-excess-patronising-lazy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee4fc13d2b6f618832162a392bf48a2021f7182d%2F0_48_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Using%20footballers%E2%80%99%20wages%20as%20an%20example%20of%20excess%20is%20patronising%20and%20lazy%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffootballers-wages-excess-patronising-lazy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Using%20footballers%E2%80%99%20wages%20as%20an%20example%20of%20excess%20is%20patronising%20and%20lazy%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Ffootballers-wages-excess-patronising-lazy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee4fc13d2b6f618832162a392bf48a2021f7182d%2F0_48_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Footballers’ wages are often discussed in terms of NHS nurses but never how 
many Mesut Özils a banking bailout could have provided. Photograph: Stuart 
MacFarlane/Arsenal FC via Getty Images 
Indeed, instead of going along with it, I wish Corbyn had firmly resisted 
Marr’s reliance on that old footballing insult, “we pay your wages”. “We pay 
your wages” is such a loathsome sentiment. Some might think it more refined to 
say it on a TV show sofa, as opposed to scream it behind the goal, but it made 
me shudder even harder.

Those who think it’s OK to direct that comment at footballers should probably 
ask whether they’d toss it in the direction of serving staff in a restaurant 
they were eating in or a station cleaner who looked like they’d missed a bit. 
If they would, then at least they’re consistently unpleasant. If they wouldn’t, 
they need to dispense with the idea that the sums of money involved make it 
justifiable in one instance and not another. There are a few obvious exceptions 
to this rule – discovering your elected member of Parliament has abused your 
trustand claimed moat-cleaning expenses  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/19/douglas-hogg-mps-expenses>and 
so on – but as a general principle it’s a cringeworthy thing to say.

As a man who gets paid an extra £62,440 from the public purse, supposedly for 
the task of leading Her Majesty’s opposition, it’s probably not one Corbyn 
ought wisely to get into.
 