
In December, footage emerged of the Japanese film director Hayao Miyazaki 
visiting the Dwango Artificial Intelligence Laboratory in Tokyo. In the clip, 
which was broadcast as part of an NHK documentary, the director ofSpirited Away 
is shown a video of a computerised humanoid creature that has taught itself to 
walk by using its head and buttocks to shimmy along the ground. After the 
presentation Miyazaki sits in thought, before issuing his verdict. “Whoever 
creates this stuff has no idea what pain is whatsoever,” he says. “I am utterly 
disgusted.”

Miyazaki’s delivery has none of the vein-throbbing fury of a Gordon Ramsay – 
only the life-haunting melancholy of the disappointed father. “I strongly feel 
that this is an insult to life itself,” Miyazaki adds. A devastated researcher 
reels from the blow, and judging by the look on his face may never recover from 
it.

The video game medium, which stems as much from the computer science tradition 
as that of the arts, has often prioritised technological advancement over 
humanity and empathy in its on-screen depictions. Miyazaki’s wounding judgment 
could be considered to be anti-experimental (indeed, the researcher eventually 
protests, mournfully: “This is just our experiment”) but his perspective is a 
useful splash of cold water on an industry that can pursue technological 
invention at the expense of other considerations. As the trajectory of video 
game technology has levelled out in the past few years, the question of how to 
build and populate virtual worlds is giving way to the deeper, tougher question 
of why. In 2017 we can expect to see a huge range of answers to that question.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fvideo-games-2017-night-in-the-woods-resident-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84de943c9efcb1d4d3322c01063b09b48b69b70a%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Video%20games%20for%20a%20more%20human%20new%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fvideo-games-2017-night-in-the-woods-resident-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Video%20games%20for%20a%20more%20human%20new%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fvideo-games-2017-night-in-the-woods-resident-evil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84de943c9efcb1d4d3322c01063b09b48b69b70a%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 Horizon: Zero Dawn 
This month’s Resident Evil 7 <http://residentevil7.com/>, the latest entry in 
the long-running Japanese horror series, will take us to sweltering Louisiana, 
to explore the dark history of a hick family that could have stepped from one 
of Truman Capote’s grislier books. Here the goal is familiar and elemental: to 
exploit our fears.Night in the Woods <http://www.nightinthewoods.com/> has a 
different aim. College dropout Mae Borowski returns home to find an 
impoverished American community that has lost both hope and identity. It’s a 
game about how the collapse of industry gives rise to mental illness and 
desperation.Yakuza 0 <http://yakuza.sega.com/yakuza0/>, by contrast, will whisk 
us into the criminal underclass of Tokyo’s Kabukicho district, where yakuza 
factions vie for domination in clashes that can affect the city and its 
populace in drastic ways.

At times of great political and environmental turmoil it follows that the 
themes of our fiction would return to former landscapes as a way to wrestle 
with futuristic questions. HBO’sWestworld uses the wild west as a lens to 
examine our responsibility to robots. In a similar vein, Sony’sHorizon Zero Dawn
 <https://www.playstation.com/en-gb/games/horizon-zero-dawn-ps4/> explores how, 
in a world where humans are returned to hunter-gathering, we might work with 
robots to ensure the survival of our species. For the developers of 2017’s 
games, the fictional, tactile realities they create appeal to a range of human 
instincts. The hope surely is that, in their depictions, they treasure life 
rather than, as Miyazaki might put it, insult it.
 