
Monday afternoon’s tube strike provided the predicted scenes of chaos on the 
London streets – but the fashion crowd were still out in force for the last day 
ofLondon fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week> 
men’s. The reason? The return of one of their own: 75-year-old Dame Vivienne 
Westwood, a punk national treasure, global brand and latterday environmental 
campaigner all at once. This was her debut at the London men’s shows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fvivienne-westwoods-eco-punks-close-london-mens-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf5774ac781e86270c8f7bb32e7b5d1334cb8df1%2F0_0_2088_3168%2F2088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vivienne%20Westwood's%20eco-punks%20close%20London%20men's%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fvivienne-westwoods-eco-punks-close-london-mens-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vivienne%20Westwood%27s%20eco-punks%20close%20London%20men%27s%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fvivienne-westwoods-eco-punks-close-london-mens-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf5774ac781e86270c8f7bb32e7b5d1334cb8df1%2F0_0_2088_3168%2F2088.jpg>
 Vivienne Westwood catwalk show on Monday. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
The location may have changed, but there were all the elements that the front 
row would be familiar with. Across designs for men and women created by 
Westwood and her designer partner Andreas Kronthaler, the punk heritage was 
there in mohair pieces, rips and tears, and a DIY aesthetic that reworked a 
plastic knife into an earring.

Environmentalism and politics, which have seemed to dominate Westwood’s 
thoughts over the past decade or so, were also plain to see. The collection was 
titled Ecotricity. The show notes read: “What’s good for the planet is good for 
the economy/what’s bad for the planet is bad for the economy.” Strings worn as 
belts and handmade paper crowns felt like something that might have been worn 
by an off-grid community. Some models’ clothes also had patches with 
anti-climate change slogans.

Streetwear gets tougher at London men's fashion week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2017/jan/07/streetwear-gets-tougher-at-london-mens-fashion-week>
Westwood’s non-fashion preoccupations aside, the brand in her name is now a 
global business, with a turnover of £33.8m in 2015. Sure, there were more edgy 
things, such as dresses for men and tight Lurex leggings, but the majority of 
the collection will be gratefully received by Westwood’s large and loyal 
fanbase. There was sharp tailoring, smart outerwear and reliably glamorous 
party dresses. Westwood understandably remains a red carpet favourite: the 
night before this show, the Game of Thrones actor Gwendoline Christie wore 
Westwood at the Golden Globes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fvivienne-westwoods-eco-punks-close-london-mens-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0b0cf62e43d39ff3d2b33f5914ce6dd73324121%2F0_28_4471_2935%2F4471.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vivienne%20Westwood's%20eco-punks%20close%20London%20men's%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fvivienne-westwoods-eco-punks-close-london-mens-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vivienne%20Westwood%27s%20eco-punks%20close%20London%20men%27s%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fvivienne-westwoods-eco-punks-close-london-mens-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0b0cf62e43d39ff3d2b33f5914ce6dd73324121%2F0_28_4471_2935%2F4471.jpg>
 Models at Vivienne Westwood’s show during London men’s fashion week. 
Photograph: Jeff Spicer/Getty Images 
With a collection showing all the confidence of someone who has been designing 
for five decades, Westwood was greeted with extended applause for her finale. 
She walked it surrounded by tons of models with a huge bouquet of flowers, in 
platform heels and a tear in her eye. Even punk pioneers out to save the world 
get emotional sometimes.

Westwood closed four days of shows in London in which younger designers – 
Grace Wales Bonner, Martine Rose, Craig Green, Christopher Shannon – have been 
the highlights. The focus now shifts to Milan. Prada, the key show of the 
schedule, if not the season, unveils its autumn/winter collection on Sunday 
night.
 