
Almost three times as many people trust the Conservatives to deliver the best 
Brexit deal for the UK as Labour, according to a new Opinium/Observer poll. The 
survey comes before a keynote speech on Brexit to be delivered by Theresa May 
at Lancaster House in London on Tuesday. It shows theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> also enjoy stronger 
backing than Labour over the key issue of immigration.

The findings will sound alarm bells within Labour before two impending 
byelections, the first in Copeland, Cumbria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/07/labour-nuclear-test-copeland-byelection-cumbria>
, and the second in Stoke-on-Trent Central, triggered by Labour’sTristram Hunt 
stepping down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
. Hunt announced on Friday that he is to become director of the Victoria and 
Albert Museum.

The contest in Stoke-on-Trent, a seat Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has held since 1950, is likely to 
see strong challenges from Ukip and the Tories. Almost 70% of people in the 
constituency backed Brexit in last June’s referendum and the issues of Europe 
and immigration are bound to be centre stage.

Opinium found that 30% of people said they most trusted the Conservatives to 
deliver a successful Brexit, compared with just 13% for Labour and 11% who 
cited Ukip. A further 36% of respondents said they did not trust any of the 
main parties or did not know. On immigration, 22% trust the Conservatives most, 
with Ukip second on 17% and Labour third on 14%. Among Leave voters, 34% trust 
Ukip most on immigration, 25% trust the Tories most and only 7% Labour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fbrexit-poll-conservatives-labour-ukip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5034dbe674354f7a851fefa291d8d1f7c6497952%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Voters%20back%20Tories%20to%20deliver%20best%20Brexit%20by%20three%20to%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fbrexit-poll-conservatives-labour-ukip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Voters%20back%20Tories%20to%20deliver%20best%20Brexit%20by%20three%20to%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fbrexit-poll-conservatives-labour-ukip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5034dbe674354f7a851fefa291d8d1f7c6497952%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Wes Streeting, Labour’s Ilford North MP, says ‘now is not the time for people 
to quit’ the party. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Labour MPs expressed surprise and shock at the resignation of Hunt, who was a 
prominent figure on the modernising right of the party. In an article for the 
Observer, Wes Streeting <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/wesstreeting>, the 
Labour MP for Ilford North, says now is not the time for people to quit the 
party as it faces populist threats and huge issues such as Brexit. “This isn’t 
the time to walk away from politics,” he says. “Those of us who want to see a 
genuine alternative to the ugly populism of Donald Trump and Nigel Farage have 
to roll our sleeves up and get stuck into the battle of ideas.”

Former shadow cabinet member Chris Leslie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leslie-chris>said it would be appalling if 
Labour lost Hunt’s seat: “Stoke has been Labour since 1950. It is a bedrock of 
Labour support. To lose it would be a catastrophe and would have to provoke a 
serious rethink about where Labour is going.” Birmingham MPJess Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jess-phillips> said she expected Labour 
to win the seat because Ukip was not well organised in the area, and while many 
people voted for Brexit, they would not be ready to vote Ukip. “If we lose it 
will be shocking and I will have been proved wrong,’ she added.

The Opinium poll suggests that if a general election was called tomorrow, the 
Tories would gain 38% of the vote, giving them a commanding lead over Labour, 
which is on 30%. Ukip and the Liberal Democrats were both up one point, putting 
them on 14% and 7% respectively.

The poll also found that if the government had to choose between staying in 
the single market or ending free movement, 41% would opt for ending free 
movement, while 32% would choose continued single market membership.

Just over half of UK adults agreed that having some restrictions on the 
overall numbers of migrants from the EU would not damage UK businesses. 
However, 40% think businesses will suffer if they cannot hire any migrant 
labour from the EU – although 32% disagree.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-says-wrong-to-claim-hard-brexit-is-inevitable-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20says%20it%20is%20wrong%20to%20claim%20hard%20Brexit%20inevitable%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-says-wrong-to-claim-hard-brexit-is-inevitable-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20says%20it%20is%20wrong%20to%20claim%20hard%20Brexit%20inevitable%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-says-wrong-to-claim-hard-brexit-is-inevitable-video&media=>
Theresa May says it is wrong to claim hard Brexit inevitable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-says-wrong-to-claim-hard-brexit-is-inevitable-video>
Overall, however, Brexit and immigration have slipped in perceived importance 
compared to health and the NHS, as the crisis in the healthcare system deepens. 
The proportion of respondents viewing theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> as the most crucial issue facing the 
country rose eight points to 61%, while immigration fell two points to 41% and 
Brexit one point to 36%.

However, despite 47% agreeing that the Red Cross was right to say the NHS was 
in a “humanitarian crisis” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
, voters still believe the health service is better off under Theresa May and 
the Conservatives than it would be under Jeremy Corbyn and Labour, a separate 
opinion poll has found.

A ComRes poll for the Sunday Mirror and the Independent found 43% thought the 
Tories would make a better job of managing the NHS this winter compared to 31% 
who thought Labour would. The findings will be seen as a further blow for 
Corbyn as the NHS crisis is being used by the party as a central theme in its 
campaign to retain Copeland at the upcoming by-election followingJamie Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
’s resignation.
 