
It’s always nice to be wanted. In demand. Especially if you’re a worker in 
these uncertain and austere times. It means that employers are willing to do 
much more to keep you – even outmatch potential offers from rival firms. The 
result is better pay and conditions, a win-win situation.

We’ve all heard of supermarket price wars. The Great Baked Bean Battle of the 
1990s 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/beans-means-cuts-in-supermarket-wars-1304956.html>
 stands out; prices dropped to 3p per can at one point. But what about a wage 
war where employers outbid each other to hire the most desirable workers? 
Outside the Premier League and the corporate elite, that’s not such a familiar 
story unfortunately. But perhaps we are now seeing a sea change.

Last week the discount supermarket Aldi announced plans to increase its lowest 
hourly wage 
<http://news.sky.com/story/discounter-aldi-ups-pay-war-with-lidl-by-raising-minimum-wage-10718580>
 to £8.53, or £9.75 for those in living in London. This is above the 
recommended voluntary living wage of £8.45 per hour, for non-Londoners at 
least. Two weeks earlier, Lidl said it was bumping up its lowest rate to £8.45, 
and £9.75 in the capital. Will it now outbid Aldi with another offer?

These wage levels are bucking the trend. Even the Tories’ much-touted national 
living wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
 was set at just £7.20 an hour for workers aged 25 and above. And the 
announcements ought to be welcomed in the present climate. Average wages have 
been stagnating in England for some time. The massive shift towards agency work 
and zero-hours contracts hasn’t helped. With horrible revelations about 
companies such asSports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/sports-direct-agrees-back-pay-deal-with-hmrc-minimum-wage>
 now commonplace, it’s clear that economic exploitation is rampant in British 
society, and it’s biting into middle-class occupations as much as those of the 
working poor.

The problem is not simply that wages have stalled. It’s the rising cost of 
everything else. Train fares. Childcare. Rent. Energy. This is having a massive 
impact on cities such as London, which is slowly being drained of skilled 
workers, many of whom are vital. Take schoolteachers for example; they are
leaving the city in droves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/01/teachers-house-market-property-prices>
 because they can no longer afford the rent. Despite this, the education 
secretary has recommended that teachers’ pay rises be capped at 1% for 2017-18.

Similar to the “blandification” that has wrecked New York and San Francisco, 
London, too, is fixed soon to be the exclusive playground of the super-rich, 
like those CEOs who recently rejoiced on “Fat Cat Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/04/uk-bosses-will-make-more-by-midday-than-workers-will-earn-all-year-fat-cat-wednesday>
”. FTSE 100 bosses made more in the first two and a half days of 2017 than the 
average annual wage; they won’t be worrying about who will teach their kids 
when state schools are finally gutted of their staff.

So Aldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> and Lidl appear to be 
going against the grain. And isn’t this how a free and unfettered labour market 
ought to operate? Multiple companies vying with each other for the best staff, 
offering ever growing wages in the process?

However, it might pay to be a bit cautious before jumping to that conclusion. 
The idea was enthusiastically promulgated byMilton Friedman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/nov/17/guardianobituaries.politics>, one 
of the more outspoken neoliberal economists. On one occasion, after he’d 
preached about the evils of meddling in free labour markets, he was asked: “But 
who will protect the workers?” Not the unions, he replied, since they’re simply 
self-serving. Nor government regulation; that only hurts the economy. No, the 
workers’ best friends are employers because they have to outdo each other to 
attract the best talent. As the business thrives, its workers will too, since 
they could always accept a better deal from a rival employer.

The problem with Friedman is that he didn’t actually understand capitalism 
very well, which is surprising given how much he wrote about it. Should workers 
really base their entire economic wellbeing on the hope that employers will 
aggressively compete with each other to hire them? Of course not.

Neoliberal economics is predicated on a degree of unemployment. This means 
it’s more likely that workers will find themselves competing with each other 
for limited jobs. In any case, there is a major skills deficit in economically 
developed countries such as Britain. Firms are reluctant to invest in training 
(since that eats into the next dividend payment) and skyrocketing tertiary 
education fees have turned generations away from university. Less skill means 
lower bargaining power because there are thousands of people who will take the 
job if you don’t.

Capitalism has seldom been about countless businesses competing with each 
other. The economic logic of any large firm is to kill competition. This has 
resulted in the immense concentration of capital we see today. There’s a good 
chance that our employer will be a monopoly or oligopoly, such as Royal Mail or 
Thames Water. Friedman’s argument completely falls apart here.

And even Aldi and Lidl <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> would 
probably admit that a degree of uncertainty is coming their way, especially if 
the pound weakens in the wake of Brexit. Importing costs will increase, be 
passed to the consumer and will thus have a downward pressure on wages. These 
ups and downs are what globalisation is about, but are hardly reassuring to the 
average employee.

The two supermarkets should be congratulated. Here’s hoping other businesses 
will follow suit and start paying their workforce a genuine living wage. But 
let’s not encourage the army of Friedmaniacs out there who still hold on to the 
fantasy – and amazingly so given everything we’ve seen since 2008 – that 
competition is the workers’ best and only friend. After all, the price of my 
baked beans aren’t what they used to be.
 