
Baireuth [sic] is no ordinary city. The present capital of the Bavarian 
district of Upper Franconia was once the residence of the powerful Margraves of 
Brandenburg, and shows at once their impress in almost every quarter. Broad 
handsome streets wind away between stately stone buildings, picturesque towers, 
and ancient gabled houses that vie with each other in quaintness; the horizon 
to every street is a sunny slope of pine-clad hill. Especially did the 
splendour-loving Frederick in the long line of rulers do much to decorate the 
place, and to him it owes its parks, gardens, and public buildings.

The district has been the home of several great men in its time, and a 
monument toJean Paul <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Jean-Paul>, who lived 
and died in the house opposite the one from which I am writing these lines, 
ornaments the Friedrich Strasse; but Jean Paul and all of the great both before 
and since his day are lost sight of to-day in the great blaze of Wagner’s name. 
Portraits of the composer and the singers who are to take part in the 
approaching festival adorn every shop. From each window frame his 
characteristic features stare one in the face. The cigar shops are selling but 
one form of pipe,meerschaum <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meerschaum_pipe> 
carved with the heroic features of Baireuth’s present idol; wines, cigars, 
hats, collars, cravats, &c. are all of the Wagner brand; and from the windows 
float snatches of the Nibelungen music.

Wagner rushes up to a singer in the midst of his or her part to say, in a 
sharp voice, 'No, no, no, not so; sing it so'

Wagner has laboured for very nearly thirty years upon the work he is now 
producing, slowly approaching his ideal; much of the music was composed more 
then a quarter of a century ago. For the Baireuth festival is the legitimate 
outgrowth of two desires on the part of its originator: viz. to found a 
distinctively national type of opera (i.e. dramatic music) and then to produce 
this opera free from the trammels which have been created and fostered during a 
century and a half by the nonsensicallibretti and the “machine music” that 
marks much of the work of the Italian and French schools.

His theories I will not enter upon here, but these two ideas bring us to the 
origin of the festival when grafted on a third – a desire to erect a permanent 
temple at which allGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> might 
assemble once a year as the Hellenes of Old did at Olympia, to enjoy the votive 
offerings of German dramatic genius.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrom-the-archive-at-wagners-first-bayreuth-opera-festival-1876%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F897a38ba7a1dbe3951f022c927e410d1b0c35726%2F84_0_2855_1714%2F2855.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20archive%3A%20The%20Manchester%20Guardian%20reports%20on%20the%20first%20ever%20Bayreuth%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrom-the-archive-at-wagners-first-bayreuth-opera-festival-1876%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20archive%3A%20The%20Manchester%20Guardian%20reports%20on%20the%20first%20ever%20Bayreuth%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrom-the-archive-at-wagners-first-bayreuth-opera-festival-1876%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F897a38ba7a1dbe3951f022c927e410d1b0c35726%2F84_0_2855_1714%2F2855.jpg>
 Bayreuth opera house, Germany. Photograph: Johannes Simon/Getty Images 
Dress rehearsal
The first grand dress rehearsal took place on Sunday night, although the first 
actual dress rehearsal occurred a week earlier. Joining the band of 
profound-looking music lovers, I strolled up to the great theatre, and groped 
my way to my seat in the gallery. The anxieties of a nervous spectacled 
gentleman who was afraid that sufficient support had not been placed beneath 
the gallery, were hushed at the appearance of Herr Wagner. A curt bow, a few 
immaterial words in a low monotone, hardly audible from where I sat, relating 
to the opening of the dress rehearsals, at which the clatter of the comers had 
ceased and the noise behind the curtain silenced, a pause, then a rap, and the 
wonderful waves of undulating music which introduce the prologue to the trilogy 
“Das Rheingold” came floating up from the mysterious depths beneath the stage. 
The sinking of the orchestra gave a mellowness and unison to the music, without 
in the least diminishing the volume or dulling the tone. It seemed to flow and 
follow, growing fuller and grander, like the current of some mighty stream, 
until the curtain parted and the realistic effect of the scenery was added to 
the impressive power of music, and one really thought he saw the lonely depths 
of the Rhine, each crested wave lit with a golden light.
 Manchester Guardian, 9 August 1876. 
Of course there were the inevitable hitches and pauses consequent on any 
rehearsal, yet they were few and far between, and everything went most 
smoothly. Wagner, as stage director, sat normally in a chair at the side of the 
stage. He was dressed in light clothes, and wore his velvet cap. Suddenly he 
would shuffle across the stage with his hands beneath his coat tails, 
gesticulate violently to put more force into the orchestra, or rush up to a 
singer in the midst of his or her part and say, in a light sharp voice, “No, 
no, no; not so; sing itso:” and, suiting the action to the direction, would 
sing the part as it should be, or throw the necessary dramatic fire into the 
acting. All his directions were given with the aim of producing the greatest 
naturalness and through this, the most perfect power. The delighted audience 
sat in silence, and as they streamed out of the theatre on to the terrace and 
into the beer-room in their festal dress, the only word heard was “Herrlich” 
(glorious).


This is an edited extract - click to read the full article. 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/03/11/Wagner_festival_14_August_1876.jpg>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkY8zGYe5W5g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkY8zGYe5W5g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkY8zGYe5W5g&media=>
 Bayreuth Festspielhaus - behind the scenes of Richard Wagner’s Bayreuth 
Festival Stage, narrated by the composer’s grandson, Wolfgang Wagner. via 
YouTube.  