
The announcement that you’re thinking of pursuing a master’s degree is almost 
certain to be met with some variation on a familiar question: “What are you 
going to do with that?”

Given the pressures – financial and otherwise – that come with studying at 
postgraduate level, the question is understandable. However, the suppositions 
behind it are a little misguided. Having a career plan is nowhere near as 
important as doing a master’s course that you truly enjoy.

When people ask “what are you going to do with that?”, they are seeing 
education as a matter of utility. They’re probably concerned about what it can 
do for your career and, ultimately, your pay-cheque. While this is valid, 
education is also valuable in and of itself. To treat a master’s as just 
another line on your CV is to miss out on so much of what this kind of degree 
can offer you.

Postgrad study: a new perspective from the top of the hill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/06/postgrad-study-a-new-perspective-from-the-top-of-the-hill>
A good postgraduate degree provides time and space for you to engage with a 
discipline in depth and detail. A master’s course will train you to ask awkward 
questions, to analyse information, and to research new areas of interest. It 
gives you the chance to figure out what you think, how you think, and most 
importantlywhy you think these things about issues that matter to you. 

Rather than acquiring new knowledge per se, a good postgraduate course is 
first and foremost an exercise in intellectual development.

Forget about ‘employability’

To view a master’s as the key to a specific job market is something of a 
category mistake anyway. While there is no doubt certain coursesmarket 
themselves as being designed to boost your employment prospects, even the most 
industry-focused course won’t quite measure up to hands-on experience.

That’s why so many graduate schemes don’t express all that much interest in 
what your degree is, just that you have one. The work experience will come 
afterwards. Lots of these promises of employability should be seen for what 
they are – marketing, pure and simple.

 The obsession with employability that pits “employable” degrees against 
“unemployable” vanity subjects (usually humanities) is also out of date. 
Humanities faculties have made a conscious effort to provide skills and support 
that will help graduates to take good attributes to the job market.Even 
business magazines 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/11-reasons-to-major-in-the-humanities-2013-6?IR=T>
 now recognise the value of such degrees. That’s why philosophy, a subject that 
would seem far removed from any application outside of academia, produces 
graduates who are actually highly employable; bosses value the intellectual 
skills that studying philosophy provides. Or, as a friend of mine put it on 
Twitter:
cranky (@CrankyEthicist) 
"what are you going to do with a philosophy degree?"
"answer this shallow question for the rest of my life, I'd guess"
 <https://twitter.com/CrankyEthicist/status/597167482907054080> May 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/CrankyEthicist/status/597167482907054080> 
So you probably shouldn’t bother with a course you don’t like just because you 
think it’ll make you “employable”. Employers have increasingly come to value 
skills and qualities such as creativity, flexibility and imaginative approaches 
to problem-solving – often called “soft skills”. And these qualities are best 
cultivated in the time and space afforded by a course that you like. Subjects 
that parents might think frivolous provide an opportunity to develop the 
qualities that employers really care about.

How I found my passion

For me, pursuing literary theory often provoked the question of “what are you 
going to do with that?”. While I never had a perfect answer, the skills my 
study has given me have provided opportunities that a more orthodox path might 
not have. Here I found my passion: to help popularise academia in a world where 
opportunities to access it are becoming restricted.

I see my subject area as a great opportunity to do something positive and 
fulfilling. I have found that it isn’t just me who cares about literary 
thinkers and ideas;many people have wanted to follow along and learn what they 
can <https://twitter.com/TheLitCritGuy>. 


University league tables 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-league-tables-2017>
The choice to study a master’s, and then which course to follow, is not to be 
taken lightly. It’s loaded with possibilities and pressures. But all too often, 
students end up sacrificing what they care about in favour of the safe option – 
which might then turn out not to be so safe after all.

What the world needs right now is not more graduates clutching more pieces of 
paper, but people who have followed their interests, and become more informed, 
more aware, more critical and more capable of expressing what they think. What 
you need is a course that piques your interest, fires you up, and asks you 
awkward, important questions. Just think what you could do with all of that.

TheLitCritGuy is an academic based in the north of England, who aims to bring 
literary theory to the widest possible audience. Find out more on Twitter
@TheLitCritGuy <https://twitter.com/TheLitCritGuy> or go to thelitcritguy.com 
<http://thelitcritguy.com/>

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 