
Professor F. Haverfield <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_J._Haverfield>; 
Camden Professor of Ancient History at Oxford, had prepared a paper on “The 
Roman Wall,” from Newcastle to Carlisle, to be read before the Chester and 
North Wales Archaeological Society, but was unable to make the journey north, 
and in his absence the paper was read on Tuesday byMiss M. V. Taylor 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margerie_Venables_Taylor>, who assisted the 
Professor in the preparation of his work. The Rev. Canon Hylton Stewart 
presided.


Britain and Rome
The Professor’s paper stated that the ruins of the Roman wall, the northern 
frontier defence of Roman Britain; still stretch from Wallsend–on–Tyne, three 
miles east of Newcastle, to Bowness–on–Solway, twelve miles west of Carlisle. 
One of the best tests of an Empire’s vigour was certainly the amount of 
strength which it could exert, without overstrain, on its really remote 
frontiers. When it failed to maintain these, to defeat its distant enemies and 
control its distant officers, it was probably nearer to its decline and fall 
than when it had ceased to conquer more and more territory. Britain offered 
many strong proofs that the Roman Empire could guard its furthest borders till 
a very late date.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dd69fdc83fcf224c42260135c3635fb65ae8c4a%2F0_133_4064_2438%2F4064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20lessons%20from%20Ancient%20Rome%20-%20archive%2C%2011%20January%201917&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20lessons%20from%20Ancient%20Rome%20-%20archive%2C%2011%20January%201917&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dd69fdc83fcf224c42260135c3635fb65ae8c4a%2F0_133_4064_2438%2F4064.jpg>
 Hadrian’s Wall built by the Romans in the 2nd century. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
Indeed, the task of the Roman Empire was not at all unlike our own to–day. 
Just as we in our present struggle stood, as we believed, for freedom and for 
civilisation, so stood the Roman Empire. In some ways, perhaps, Rome’s task was 
greater than ours. In one military respect, too, the Empire closely resembled 
the world of to–day. In it the defensive was far stronger than the offensive; 
towns were rarely taken by storm, but often by hunger: the prevailing arm was 
heavy infantry; cavalry was of little account. No one would be surprised to 
hear that this age of wall defence, of trench warfare, as we should call it 
to–day, produced no great general who could be ranked with Hannibal, 
Marlborough, or Napoleon as a genius in tactics or strategy.


The Process of Attrition
In the long defensive struggle of Rome (against barbarism) a frontier such as 
that of North Britain was highly important. Then, as in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, in the same North British region, the special danger came 
from the furious charges of undaunted Caledonians – charges which might be 
compared with the huge rushes en masse that had lately piled French and Belgian 
battlefields with dead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8b002f8ffe8b42c82e13c08790607770c6b5168%2F0_105_3594_2157%2F3594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20lessons%20from%20Ancient%20Rome%20-%20archive%2C%2011%20January%201917&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20lessons%20from%20Ancient%20Rome%20-%20archive%2C%2011%20January%201917&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8b002f8ffe8b42c82e13c08790607770c6b5168%2F0_105_3594_2157%2F3594.jpg>
 Detail of Trajan’s Column showing triumph of the emperor after the first 
campaign against the Dacians. Photograph: Independent Picture Service/UIG via 
Getty Images 
When the history of China became better known to Western men, when we realised 
better the extraordinary achievements of the Middle Kingdom, we should see that 
it, too, toiled at the same task as ourselves and Rome, the task of shutting 
out barbarians, and it, too, used the same method, that of frontier walls; of 
fortified frontier lines.


Professor Haverfield ventured to assign the fall of the Roman Empire to a 
reason which was in most minds today. He did not attempt to predict how far 
attrition might be likely to overthrow our present enemies, but he had little 
doubt that attrition was a real factor in great wars, and he thought it 
destroyed the Empire of Rome. Long plagues and long frontier struggles against 
the inexhaustible manpower of the barbarian invaders gradually wore down the 
imperial fighting strength.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e79fb5c02bc343398cccbfb49517f9820e9273c%2F0_0_2636_3905%2F2636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20lessons%20from%20Ancient%20Rome%20-%20archive%2C%2011%20January%201917&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20lessons%20from%20Ancient%20Rome%20-%20archive%2C%2011%20January%201917&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwar-lessons-from-ancient-rome-archive-1917%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e79fb5c02bc343398cccbfb49517f9820e9273c%2F0_0_2636_3905%2F2636.jpg>
 The Fall of Rome: Alaric’s Visigoths sack Rome. Niccolò Sanesi, before 1889.
 Photograph: Mary Evans Picture Library / Ala/Alamy 
If we should learn any lesson from the Roman Empire it was that which seemed 
to be in many enemy mouths to–day, the lesson ofDurch-Halten 
<http://dictionary.reverso.net/german-english/durchhalten>. That to–day a Roman 
culture was spread over Western Europe, that we were the allies of France, of 
Italy, and (in Rumania) of a Hohenzollern prince, was in part due to the cold 
tenacity of the Roman frontier defence. Guns and munitions in inexhaustible 
numbers were the only help against human hurricanes, and that Rome had not 
these was hardly her own fault, but that of the slow progress of all mankind.

Continue reading 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/09/Britain_and_Rome_-_Jan_11_1917.pdf> 
about excavations at the Roman wall

 