
Wasps are turning into late masters, much to the frustration of their director 
of rugby, David Young. Aftersalvaging a draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/toulouse-wasps-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 in Toulouse in October with a late try, the Premiership leaders left it until 
the final play of the game in the return to seal their 19th successive home 
victory.

Young’s response was not to congratulate his players, who created enough 
chances to win with a bonus point that would have taken them into the final 
round on top of the group, but to tell them to expect a full-on week before 
facing Zebre on Sunday, even though the Italian club have conceded an average 
of 58 points a match in the tournament this season.

It was the third time that a game involving Wasps had been decided at the end. 
They came out on the wrong side in Connacht after the clock had reached zero 
and in their last Premiership match against Leicester they were hanging on at 
the end. “Late finishes are not part of the plan, but a couple of years ago we 
would have been on the wrong side of them,” said theWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> prop Matt Mullan, who is in 
line to start at loosehead for England in the Six Nations opener against France 
at Twickenham on 4 February following injuries to Mako Vunipola and Joe Marler.

“Our grit and determination got us out of trouble, but the overall performance 
was what we wanted and that is a measure of how far we have come. We have 
matured as a group and are now able to see out games, but it is not something 
we are desperately keen to keep repeating. Dai has promised us a tough week in 
training and we will analyse Zebre as we would any other side because we know 
how big a game it is.”

European Champions Cup roundup: Northampton take revenge on Castres
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/european-rugby-champions-cup-roundup-northampton-castres-connacht-zebre>
Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> have struggled on the 
road in Europe in recent seasons, but here they were on the front foot from the 
start, using their big pack to dominate the set-pieces and make a mess of the 
breakdown to deny Wasps quick ball and the opportunity to crash over the 
gainline. The hosts were at their most threatening counterattacking from 
turnover ball, but their finishing was for once suspect and they needed two 
moments of opportunism when they had a player in the sin-bin from Elliot Daly 
and Dan Robson in the final quarter to steal a victory their overall play 
barely merited.

“I was here when we lost every weekend so it is extremely nice to be winning 
more games than we are losing,” said the Wasps captain, Joe Launchbury, who 
made a timely return from a calf injury by eventually helping to counteract the 
breakdown threat of Thierry Dusautoir who for an hour gave a vintage display.

“We should enjoy that and not be too negative, but at the same time we are not 
playing how we want to. We wanted to play with tempo and tire them out by the 
final 15 minutes, but they constantly looked for their stoppages but when their 
tighthead goes down every scrum it is hard to get pace into the game.”

Launchbury and Mullan are set to be named in England’s Six Nations squad on 
Friday but the prop, who last started for his country in the Twickenham 
friendly against Wales in May, is thinking only of Zebre. “You cannot be 
distracted by that announcement,” he said. “It is out of your control and you 
hope you have done enough to catch their eye. Every player is ambitious to play 
for his country, but you do not know what is going to happen. All you can do is 
work hard for your club.”

The England flanker James Haskell will return for the trip to Zebre, and 
probably make his first start of the campaign, when even five points may not be 
enough to earn Wasps a home quarter‑final if they manage to finish on top. That 
may prove too much given the home form of the other pool leaders.

Wasps Beale; Wade, Daly, Gopperth, Bassett; Cipriani, Simpson (Robson, 43); 
Mullan (McIntyre, 63), Johnson, Moore (Swainston, 71), Launchbury (capt), Myall 
(Symons, 48), Young, Thompson, Hughes.

Tries Daly, Robson. Cons Gopperth 2. Pen Gopperth.

Sin-bin Wade 53, Cipriani 71.

Toulouse Médard; Kunatani, David, Fickou, Huget; Doussain, Bézy; Baille 
(Kakovin 67), Tolofua (Ghiraldini 67), Johnston (Aldegheri 56), R Gray, Tekori 
(Maestri 52), Dusautoir (capt; Fa’asalele 67), T Gray (Galan 56), Cros.

Try Huget, Penalty. Cons Doussain 2.

Referee John Lacey. Attendance 17,248.
 