
Producing electricity from coal, gas and oil is a surprisingly thirsty 
business. The United States needs around731,920 million litres a day 
<https://water.usgs.gov/watuse/wupt.html> (161,000m gallons) to produce and 
burn thenearly 900m tonnes of coal 
<https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=28832> it uses each year to 
generate just a third of the nation’s electricity.

In India, plans to produce 5 
<https://www.worldcoal.org/what%E2%80%99s-driving-india%E2%80%99s-coal-demand-growth>
00 gigawatts 
<https://www.worldcoal.org/what%E2%80%99s-driving-india%E2%80%99s-coal-demand-growth>
 of coal-fired electricity by 2040, will require at least58bn cubic metres per 
year 
<http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2012/WEO_2012_Water_Excerpt.pdf>
 (pdf). And in China, about15% of national water withdrawals 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/water-demands-of-coal-fired-power-drying-up-northern-china//>
 are used for coal mining, processing, ash control, and for cooling of its 
coal-fired power plants.

Where will all this water come from?

Global energy consumption is forecast to increase nearly 50% by 2040 
<https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/world.cfm>, driven mostly by emerging 
economies such as China and India. Energy strategies based on fossil fuels will 
require much more water to be allocated to new power plants. This additional 
water can come from only two sources: from those who are already using it or 
from the resource base, which is difficult when many river basins already face 
over-abstraction.

Growing global thirst for energy threatens water supplies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/mar/21/global-thirst-energy-threatens-water-supplies>
The water-energy conundrum is a good example of the complicated environmental 
systems challenges faced by policymakers planning strategies for national 
economic growth.


For example, an economy dominated by rural farming activities will likely be 
poorer per capita than one which is more urban and industrialised. 
Historically, many countries have allocated the majority of their water to 
agriculture – 70% is the global average – yet most industrialisation strategies 
are based on increasing fossil fuel capacity to drive growth. Few countries 
plan the majority of their national energy security around less thirsty 
renewables, such as wind or solar. Chile may be the exception.


This can become politically challenging. Trade-offs are required for regional 
water basins to not be dangerously overused and put at risk of drying up, 
leaving everyone worse off.

Someone, usually farmers, will be required to effectively use less water – by 
paying higher water prices, for example – to free up water for an urban-focused 
energy strategy. Social tensions, which politicians would prefer to avoid, can 
flare up as a result, such asrecent riots in  
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-03/deaths-riots-in-bangalore-show-india-water-risk-as-states-argue>
Karnataka, India 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-03/deaths-riots-in-bangalore-show-india-water-risk-as-states-argue>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fwater-energy-food-challenge-davos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff31948e5175aa33fb69542f78de6c4046065d99b%2F0_85_3269_1961%2F3269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Water-energy-food%3A%20can%20leaders%20at%20Davos%20solve%20this%20global%20conundrum%3F%20%7C%20Dominic%20Waughray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fwater-energy-food-challenge-davos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Water-energy-food%3A%20can%20leaders%20at%20Davos%20solve%20this%20global%20conundrum%3F%20%7C%20Dominic%20Waughray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fwater-energy-food-challenge-davos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff31948e5175aa33fb69542f78de6c4046065d99b%2F0_85_3269_1961%2F3269.jpg>
 Agitation increased in the state of Karnataka in September 2016 after the 
Supreme Court ordered the release of 15,000 cusecs of water each day to 
neighbouring Tamil Nadu, while Karnataka faced an acute shortage of water 
itself.
 Photograph: Manjunath Kiran/AFP/Getty Images 
The outcome is usually the easiest but least ideal strategy; water resources 
are over-used, farmers continue to irrigate so that thirsty, fossil fuel-based 
industrialisation can expand, all to the point of hydrological unsustainability 
and, in some cases, the collapse of the water system.


This happened during the last century in many countries of the southern 
Mediterranean and across drier parts of the United States and the former Soviet 
Union – perhaps the most infamous case is theAral Sea in Kazakhstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/01/satellite-images-show-aral-sea-basin-completely-dried>
. Following decades of inefficient water use in farming, urban centres and 
industry, structural problems of water scarcity are now coming home to roost in 
many of these areas. They are also being replicated in water-scarce emerging 
economies across Africa and Asia,threatening food and economic security 
<http://www.fao.org/nr/water/docs/summary_synthesisbook.pdf> (pdf) unless major 
policy changes are put in place. Changing weather patterns combined with 
historic levels of water over-use can act as risk multipliers,making a bad 
situation worse 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water/publication/high-and-dry-climate-change-water-and-the-economy>
.

In France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/aug/12/france.nuclear> and 
thesouth-east United States 
<https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/Impacts%20of%20Long-term%20Drought%20on%20Power%20Systems%20in%20the%20US%20Southwest%20%E2%80%93%20July%202012.pdf>
 (pdf) there are cases of nuclear reactors being throttled back and temporarily 
shut down because of drought-induced water shortages. And in March last year a 
new 2,300 MW coal plant in West Bengal had to suspend generation due to low 
water levels in the canal that feeds it.


This is why the World Economic Forum encourages a systems approach to solving 
environment and economic problems – a strategy that brings together all the 
right people from across government, civil society and business, with access to 
the right resources – to help jointly explore and resolve these 
food-energy-water, climate and growth conundrums.

For example, when all costs and risks are considered, is an energy security 
strategy based on fossil fuels really the cheapest and smartest long-term 
solution? And more worrying still for a policymaker in a water-stressed 
country, will the pursuit of fossil fuels actually exacerbate social and 
political tensions over water security more than it delivers citizen 
satisfaction through improved energy security?

Dams be damned, let the world's rivers flow again | Kate Horner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2017/jan/09/dams-building-let-rivers-flow>
At the World Economic Forum’s annual meeting in Davos this week, heads of 
government and leaders from science, civil society and business will tackle 
some of these interconnected challenges. Why, for example, are mainstream 
economics failing to account for these environmental risks and what can be done 
to better manage our global environmental commons? Are there practical 
partnerships that help governments solve these challenges, such as theWater 
Resources Group <http://www.2030wrg.org/> or Tropical Forest Alliance 
<https://www.tfa2020.org/>, which could be expanded? Could new production or 
consumption strategies, such as the circular or sharing economy, “design-out” 
some of these systems failures? And could new technologies such asblockchain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/blockchain-answer-life-universe-everything-bitcoin-technology>
 help society to better manage these kinds of water and energy trade-offs?

Unless we address these tricky challenges using a systems approach, we will 
never resolve the kinds of interconnected environmental risks we will face in 
the coming decades.

Dominic Waughray is the head of public private partnership at the World 
Economic Forum. Follow@dwaughray <https://twitter.com/dwaughray> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians.Follow @GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 