
It’s almost a surprise that Wayne Coyne doesn’t roll up to our interview in 
his giant hamster ball. The Flaming Lips frontman is so defined in his Wayne 
Coyne-ness that, waiting around, it’s hard not to picture him as he appears 
onstage: an intergalactic pirate smothered with fake blood and confetti, 
flanked by dancing pandas, his boulder-sized fists raised aloft to shoot green 
lasers into the sky. This is a man whose life is such a carnival of oddness 
that he’ll sometimes forget he’s carrying a solid gold hand grenade, which 
didn’t go over well when he took it through customs at Oklahoma City’s airport 
back in 2012. When he wanders into the lounge of his Clerkenwell hotel engulfed 
in a baggy hoodie, he can’t help but seem down to earth measured against his 
reputation. Despite the glitter in his snowy ringlets and the glue-on plastic 
diamonds studded around his right eye, he’s human after all.

The Flaming Lips – 10 of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/24/the-flaming-lips-10-of-the-best>
The Flaming Lips’ last full album, 2013’s The Terror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/28/flaming-lips-the-terror-review>, 
was an exploration of doom and despair with a very human backstory. The 
previous year, Coyne had separated from his wife Michelle, bringing a 25-year 
relationship to an end. Looking back, he agrees the record, filled with buzzsaw 
synths and jarring beats, was a reflection of where his head was at. “We were 
chasing a specific sound, but who can say what it is that makes you like all 
that agitation and discord?” he asks. “It definitely has to do with your state 
of mind. I see that now, for sure, but at the time I probably would have said: 
‘Nah man, it’s just cool-sounding shit.’”

He was lifted out of his funk by a wrecking ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/02/wayne-coyne-im-not-having-a-mid-life-crisis-im-having-fun-miley-cyrus>
. In January 2014, former Disney child star Miley Cyrus was about to begin her 
world-straddling Bangerz tour when she tweeted birthday wishes to Coyne: “one 
of my favorite artists OF alllllll time.”

“I tweeted her back my phone number and said: ‘Text me,’” he says, still 
sounding bemused by this turn of events. “Since then, we’ve texted each other 
every day. I’ll say: ‘What are you doing?’ and she’ll send me pictures of 
herself peeing. Sometimes it’s 1,000 times a day, sometimes it’s a couple of 
times a day, but we’re in each other’s lives.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DunLnJvzf-So&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DunLnJvzf-So>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DunLnJvzf-So&media=>
Miley Cyrus and Flaming Lips record an album together
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/04/miley-cyrus-and-flaming-lips-record-an-album-together>
Even by the Flaming Lips’ standards, it was a surreal twist of fate. Having 
started out in Oklahoma City in 1983 as druggy punk upstarts with no greater 
ambition than to sound like the Butthole Surfers, by the end of the century 
they’d transmogrified into the psychedelic shamans of1999’s The Soft Bulletin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jun/25/flaming-lips-soft-bulletin-cover>
 and2002’s Yoshimi Battles The Pink Robots 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AzlMeTxVdH8>. They became adept at smuggling 
existential truths into euphoric pop songs such as Waitin’ For A Superman and 
Do You Realize??, and it was this era of the band that earned them Cyrus’s 
adoration. A month after exchanging those first texts, Cyrus invited Coyne and 
musical polymath bandmate Steven Drozd onstage with her in LA to perform 
Yoshimi’s title track.

That was just the start. On the band’s next project, With A Little Help From 
My Fwends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/30/flaming-lips-with-a-little-help-fwends-review>
, a track-by-track cover album of Sgt Pepper, Cyrus’s guest spots stole the 
show. Coyne and Drozd then found themselves co-writing her next album, Miley 
Cyrus & Her Dead Petz, which she released for free and sounded as far removed 
from her teen pop career as you’d expect. Coyne was part of her world now, 
ending up at charity dinners where she’d introduce him to the likes ofA$AP Rocky
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/02/asap-rocky-hanging-out-with-rod-stewart-interview>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1f379b41bb0141784faec08954e4729cc1c5de5%2F0_220_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wayne%20Coyne%20on%20Miley%20Cyrus%3A%20'She%20sends%20me%20pictures%20of%20herself%20peeing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wayne%20Coyne%20on%20Miley%20Cyrus%3A%20%27She%20sends%20me%20pictures%20of%20herself%20peeing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1f379b41bb0141784faec08954e4729cc1c5de5%2F0_220_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Wayne Coyne performs with Miley Cyrus at the 2015 MTV Video Music Awards. 
Photograph: John Shearer/Getty Images 
“He’d just got a new set of gold teeth, braces things, and he was talking 
about taking acid,” says Coyne. “In between, Miley was whispering: ‘He’s never 
really taken acid. He’s just saying that because he wants to write music about 
taking acid.’ He would keep talking and she would go: ‘He doesn’t know anything 
about acid.’ She’d know. Cyrus has done acid plenty.”

Whether or not Rocky really does know his LSD from his DMT, Coyne found 
something on his wavelength in the rapper’s music. He has described the new 
Flaming Lips album Oczy Mlody as “Syd Barrett meets A$AP Rocky trapped in a 
fairytale from the future”. Lyrically populated with unicorns, witches and 
“frogs with demon eyes”, it features a spoken-word appearance from US comic 
Reggie Watts; Cyrus, of course, pops up on its closer,We A Famly 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PPyEjQLS85s>, lending the song her ebullient 
vocals.

It’s a more optimistic, melodic and playful record than The Terror, but what 
keeps the Flaming Lips interesting this far into their career is that they’re 
still dismantling pop songwriting. Third track There Should Be Unicorns messes 
around with form and structure before eventually dissolving into a long 
spoken-word section where Watts simply reels off his to-do list for organising 
a party in a magical kingdom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ec7e007baba5ed2cd71f9786447f4c837d1d3bb%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wayne%20Coyne%20on%20Miley%20Cyrus%3A%20'She%20sends%20me%20pictures%20of%20herself%20peeing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wayne%20Coyne%20on%20Miley%20Cyrus%3A%20%27She%20sends%20me%20pictures%20of%20herself%20peeing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ec7e007baba5ed2cd71f9786447f4c837d1d3bb%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
 Wayne Coyne and the Flaming Lips. Photograph: George Salisbury/PR 
While, fortunately, he hasn’t been tempted to start rapping, Coyne does say 
the band were inspired by listening to Rocky and watching videos of rappers in 
the studio, such as the YouTube footage of Timbaland playing Jay Z the Dirt Off 
Your Shoulder beat for the first time. He and Drozd found themselves envying 
their way of working.

“To me, the great revelation about rap music is that rappers don’t look at it 
like: ‘We’re a band, and there’s a drummer and a bass part and a guitar part 
and somebody sings,’” he says. “Rappers are like: ‘There’s a track, I don’t 
give a fuck how it got there but I’m going to do something cool on top of it.’ 
We liked the idea that we’d be both sides of it. On this record, we’d go in as 
the Flaming Lips and make a track, then we’d hand it to the other part of the 
Flaming Lips to sing on top of it.”

It’s a method they’ll also apply to their next project, another Miley Cyrus 
album, which they’re planning to fit around her current day job. “She’s going 
to keepbeing a judge on The Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/feb/05/miley-cyrus-the-voice-famous-tongue-licked-christina-aguileras-chair>
, but I know she wants to make music at the same time,” says Coyne. “I’m 
thinking of a way we can make a record without her having to sit there for 
months and months. I think she likes it when it’s like: ‘You guys do some of 
the work, and then I get to come in and do something really cool.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd9d6c156b1b40bfd21a8cebe8705634d82fb0f%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wayne%20Coyne%20on%20Miley%20Cyrus%3A%20'She%20sends%20me%20pictures%20of%20herself%20peeing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wayne%20Coyne%20on%20Miley%20Cyrus%3A%20%27She%20sends%20me%20pictures%20of%20herself%20peeing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fflaming-lips-wayne-coyne-on-miley-cyrus-acid-asap-rocky%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd9d6c156b1b40bfd21a8cebe8705634d82fb0f%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Wayne Coyne performs in Aspen, Colorado, in December 2016. Photograph: 
Riccardo S Savi/Getty 
Along with Cyrus, a generation of psych bands such as Tame Impala cite the 
Flaming Lips as an influence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/04/tame-impala-psychedelic-disco>. 
Coyne, though, dismisses the idea that he’s become some sort of elder 
statesman. Despite turning 56 this week, he has no interest in fronting a 
heritage act. “We all listen to the same records,” he says. “Without the 
Flaming Lips even existing, Tame Impala could sound exactly like Tame Impala. 
Once they came along, we were influenced by what they were doing, and then they 
would be influenced by something we did that was actually influenced by them. 
Everybody’s covered in each other’s shit.”

What drives him isn’t the idea of being a psychedelic icon, but being an 
explorer. “We get tired of everything always being so musical,” says Coyne. 
“Steven and I would say that about music we heard, as a putdown: ‘It just 
sounds like music to me.’ It could be anything, including things we were 
working on. We’d say: ‘Who cares? It’s just music.’ That doesn’t interest us. 
There would be no element in there which would be a mystery.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPPyEjQLS85s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPPyEjQLS85s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPPyEjQLS85s&media=>
Even after 30 years of his band, Wayne Coyne still wants to surprise you. More 
than the hamster ball, or singing about unicorns with Miley Cyrus, the most 
surprising thing about the Flaming Lips is that they still can.

Oczy Mlody is out on Friday on Bella Union. They play Brixton Academy, London, 
on 21 January and Manchester Academy on 22 January
 