
There are almost 75,000 pizzerias in the US, and the granddaddy of them all is 
Lombardi’s, an unassuming place opened more than a century ago at 32 Spring 
Street, in New York’s Little Italy. Its coal-fired oven, installed in the early 
1900s, produces a chewy, blistered crust markedly different from the moister 
wood-fired Neapolitan version.

For Lombardi’s signature margherita pizza ($18.50-$22.50) that base gets a 
simple, classic topping of tomato sauce and creamy rounds of mozzarella. 
Garnished with fresh basil, the pie is a refreshing throwback to the days 
before pizza came strewn with ingredients you couldn’t pronounce.

“Some pizzerias add five or six toppings, but this one delivers so much 
flavour with no nonsense,” said Scott Wiener, founder of Scott’sPizza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pizza> Tours, who includes Lombardi’s 
on his itineraries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Flombardis-americas-oldest-pizzeria-pizza-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39827b5cca246fffc545eb83beea3bd1d831f5f2%2F0_46_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20Lombardi's%2C%20America's%20oldest%20pizzeria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Flombardis-americas-oldest-pizzeria-pizza-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20Lombardi%27s%2C%20America%27s%20oldest%20pizzeria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Flombardis-americas-oldest-pizzeria-pizza-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39827b5cca246fffc545eb83beea3bd1d831f5f2%2F0_46_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Hot stuff … the restaurant’s coal-fired oven. Photograph: Mark Peterson/Corbis 
via Getty Images 
The brick dining room is papered with photographs of key figures in the 
restaurant’s history, and one adviser to the business is the grandson of 
founder Gennaro Lombardi, who arrived in New York from Naples in the 1890s. As 
with many Italian immigrants, Lombardi opened a grocery store and sold pizza as 
a way to use up leftover dough and cheese. But his pies were so sought after 
that he opened the country’s first restaurant dedicated entirely to pizza.

According to Weiner, if you couldn’t afford a whole 5¢ pizza, the staff would 
cut you a slice. Today, pizzas are only served whole (and cost more than 5¢), 
but in a time when trendier, food-fad pizzerias fill the surrounding blocks, 
Lombardi’s old-school ambience offers a nostalgic glimpse of a disappearing New 
York.

• 32 Spring Street, NY 10012, +1 212 941 7994, firstpizza.com 
<http://www.firstpizza.com/>
 