
West Ham United have warned Dimitri Payet that they will not be pushed into 
selling him in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/west-ham-reject-bid-dimitri-payet-marseille>
 if he does not leave during the current transfer window, with the club 
doubtful whether Marseille will come up with an acceptable offer for the France 
international.

Despite Payet’s determination to return to the south of France as soon as 
possible, West Ham are insistent there is no financial pressure on them to sell 
a player whose deal runs out in 2021 and they are willing to bide their time 
until receiving asuitable fee from Marseille, whose second bid of £20m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/dimitri-payet-west-ham-marseille>
 was turned down on Monday.

West Ham have cautioned the 29-year-old, who has been told to train with the 
under-23s until the dispute is resolved, against attempting to force their hand 
by allowing his physical condition to deteriorate if he is not sold this month, 
reasoning that such a tactic could lower his value when the summer window opens 
and give them less of an incentive to sell.

Dimitri Payet and co cross a line with their striking self-indulgence | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/14/dimitri-payet-striking-west-ham>
Payet told Slaven Bilic last week that he no longer wishes to play for West 
Ham and David Sullivan, the club’s co-owner, metMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> officials on Monday, having 
already rejected an opening offer of £19m. It is understood that a significant 
gap remains between the two clubs in their respective valuations of Payet.

Although West Ham anticipate further bids from Marseille, who are the only 
interested suitors at the moment, they are unconvinced the club will meet their 
asking price. Although they were initially adamant that they would not sell, 
West Ham would be tempted by an offer of more than £30m. Payet, who missed the 
weekend win against Crystal Palace, joined Bilic’s side for £10.7m from 
Marseille 18 months ago and he excelled in his debut season. His form earned 
him a recall to the France squad and he was one of the stars of Euro 2016. West 
Ham believe that he owes them a debt of gratitude.

There is sympathy, however, with the personal reasons behind Payet’s stance. 
His family is homesick and his wife has returned to Marseille. Yet his 
behaviour has angered West Ham and while it is unlikely he will play for them 
again, that will only happen if he apologises to the board and supporters.
 