
Just in case we thought higher education would enter the new year in an 
orderly fashion, 2016 ended with the news of theLords‚Äô revolt against the 
government‚Äôs proposed reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/31/lords-revolt-tory-plans-free-market-universities>
. Hours later, 2017 started with Lord (Chris) Patten‚Äôs scathing op-ed on the 
subject, in which he opined: ‚ÄúIt seems particularly ham-fisted to turn the 
academic world upside down when universities face so much turbulence and 
uncertainty after the Brexit vote and the rhetoric surrounding immigration.‚Äù 
Game on.

So what should we expect from the coming 12 months? We asked experts from the 
sector for their predictions.

‚ÄòThe Brexit brain drain will gather pace‚Äô

Sadly, I predict the Brexit related brain-drain of academics will gather pace 
unless the government acts quickly to guarantee the rights of current EU staff 
and students to remain, and secures continued access to EU research programmes.

And after the first recorded decline in international undergraduates in autumn 
2016, the government must adopt a more welcoming approach by dropping proposals 
to cut student visas and removing students from net migration figures.


It will be a busy year for UCU as we continue the fight to reduce the gender 
pay gap and tackle the endemic use of casual contracts by universities and 
colleges. After three decades of them ignoring these issues, it would be rash 
to predict that 2017 will be the year when higher education leaders finally get 
to grips with this problem. However, with the exploitative nature of the 
employment model in higher educationnow front page news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/low-paid-workers-sports-direct-university-staff-rights-mike-ashley>
, employers‚Äô cards are marked.


A tumultuous year looms with contentious legislation and the introduction of 
the Teaching Excellence Framework on the horizon.
Sally Hunt, general secretary of University and College Union


‚ÄòMedals for universities will cause a stir‚Äô

The Higher Education Bill will be passed, although it will get watered down by 
the Lords. The Office for Students (OFS) won‚Äôt be quite as powerful ‚Äì or the 
barriers to new entry quite as low ‚Äì as Jo Johnson might like.

Most people won‚Äôt bat an eyelid about the legislation ‚Äì except about the 
Teaching Excellence Framework. The different medals allocated to universities 
and the subsequent fee increases will cause much more of a stir.

Consultations on industrial strategy and immigration will finally appear: 
universities will like the first as it will contain more details about how 
¬£4.7bn for research and development borrowed during the autumn statement will 
be spent. The other, not so much.


It‚Äôs also going to be a year of new faces in HE. New chief executives and 
chairs at the OFS, UKResearch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/research> and Innovation 
(UKRI) and Ucas, and new directors at the Russell Group and Million Plus. Also, 
new city mayors in Greater Manchester, Merseyside and the West Midlands and 
nearly-new permanent secretaries at the Department for Education, the treasury 
and BEIS too. All are abound to want to change something in HE. We‚Äôre going to 
be busy.
Andy Westwood, professor of further education and higher education at the 
University of Wolverhampton

‚Äò2017 will be the year universities reconcile themselves to Brexit‚Äô


I think 2017 is the year universities will reconcile themselves to Brexit. 
This is likely to mean a more sophisticated understanding of what leaving the 
EU means in terms of demand from abroad. Universities will need to do lots of 
hard work to ensure they are in closer touch with their surrounding communities 
‚Äì many of which voted for Brexit by large majorities. If Brexit is to be 
successful, the government will also need the accumulated benefit of academic 
expertise.

Institutions will continue to be very worried by the Home Office‚Äôs negative 
approach to higher education. But if the Trump presidency leads to a new period 
of isolation for the US, then UK universities could actually benefit by looking 
relatively open. That is perhaps a potential silver lining to various big black 
clouds.
Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute

‚ÄòA radical start, with more rent strikes‚Äô

This year could open to a radical start as hundreds of students at various 
campuses have pledged to take part in rent strikes again, demanding affordable 
prices.


What Warwick‚Äôs activists started at the end of last term will set the agenda 
elsewhere. Theystaged an occupation 
<http://www.coventrytelegraph.net/news/coventry-news/student-protect-warwick-university-continues-12267322>
 as leverage against the Tef, and also won union representation for casualised 
academics and an end to a protest injunction. Several other universities hold 
similar injunctions: this could set a precedent for them to be scrapped.

As with every other year, the end of January will see the National Student 
Survey launch. But this year, I predict thousands of students will refuse to 
fill it out, in protest at its results being used to inform fee rises.

I think we will see the 1752 group <https://1752group.com/> do progressive 
work on tackling sexual harassment and misconduct; and UUK‚Äôs latest mental 
health initiative looks set to be a big success.
Shelly Asquith, vice-president at the National Union of Students


And here are some thoughts from our readers ‚Äì let us know your predictions in 
the comments or @GdnHigherEd.
Sue Shepherd (@sueshepherdHE) 
@GdnHigherEd <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd> @RussellGroup 
<https://twitter.com/RussellGroup> institutions will become increasingly 
worried about the potential impact of TEF on their reputational positioning
 <https://twitter.com/sueshepherdHE/status/810856122999521282> December 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/sueshepherdHE/status/810856122999521282> Colin Clark 
(@profcolinclark) 
Two for the price of one deals on BA & MSc and/or the banning of any assessed 
small group work. Strike action too, quite possibly.https://t.co/bWKb9d8MDK 
<https://t.co/bWKb9d8MDK>
 <https://twitter.com/profcolinclark/status/811154626745659392> December 20, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/profcolinclark/status/811154626745659392> Jolemai 
(@LordJolemai) 
@GdnHigherEd <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd> Tuition fees going up, foreign 
students becoming rare, entry levels lowered to fill places. Oh, and research 
to plummet.
 <https://twitter.com/LordJolemai/status/811157477278547968> December 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LordJolemai/status/811157477278547968> Elizabeth Morgan 
(@SaysElizabeth) 
@GdnHigherEd <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd> pic.twitter.com/24jNmMXLlj 
<https://t.co/24jNmMXLlj>
 <https://twitter.com/SaysElizabeth/status/814800554421403648> December 30, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/SaysElizabeth/status/814800554421403648> Brandon Smith
(@brandonrsmith31) 
@GdnHigherEd <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd> increased costs, increased 
awareness for diversity and sexual asult, and increased dialogue about job 
placement
 <https://twitter.com/brandonrsmith31/status/814846048229322752> December 30, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/brandonrsmith31/status/814846048229322752> Ellie 
Mackin (@EllieMackin) 
Inequality will disappear, expertise embraced, Humanities and STEM will live 
in interdisciplinary harmony, increased funding. (Cue fantasy.)
https://t.co/6XZfDoEIXH <https://t.co/6XZfDoEIXH>
 <https://twitter.com/EllieMackin/status/816626265105039360> January 4, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/EllieMackin/status/816626265105039360> Peter Tennant üá™üá∫ 
(@PWGTennant) 
Another year playing the grant application lottery, hoping my numbers come up 
before my probation review!https://t.co/ikAhvGmPeQ <https://t.co/ikAhvGmPeQ>
 <https://twitter.com/PWGTennant/status/811161979545145344> December 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/PWGTennant/status/811161979545145344> 
Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 