
Democracy is a bundle of rights and freedoms wrestled from the powerful. Our 
rulers only surrender their power when compelled to – when the cost of 
resisting pressure from below becomes greater than the cost of giving ground to 
it.

But it is naive to regard these concessions as permanent. Elites are always 
waiting for opportunities to seize back their power. The ideal excuse is a 
national crisis, contrived or otherwise, normally involving an alliance of 
internal and external threats, all requiring drastic measures to defeat. The 
authoritarian rightwing populism sweeping the Western world skilfully exploits 
fear to drive back the borders of democracy.

Erdoğan v the Gülenists: from political allies to Turkey's bitter rivals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/thousands-detained-as-turkey-vows-to-smoke-out-gulen-supporters>
Turkey’s regime is fast degenerating into outright dictatorship, emboldened by 
the imminent ascent of Donald Trump to the most powerful position on Earth. I 
spent last week with Turkey’sbeleaguered opposition parties, newspapers and 
activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/20/turkey-ally-purge-recep-tayyip-erdogan>
. Their courage is inspiring, their plight distressing.

Last July an attempted military coup failed to dislodge the autocratic 
president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. The backlash was swift. As Human Rights Watch
reported 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/01/12/turkey-alarming-deterioration-rights>, the 
regime took advantage of the moment “to crack down on human rights and 
dismantle basic democratic safeguards”.More than 120,000 Turks 
<http://turkeypurge.com/> have been sacked, nearly 90,000 detained, and more 
than 40,000 have been arrested,144 of them journalists 
<http://turkeypurge.com/turkey-jails-2-more-journalists-for-insulting-erdogan-brings-total-to-144>
. Turkey is a world leader in jailing media workers, withsome 160 outlets closed
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/15/two-months-failed-coup-turkey-divided-erdogan>
.

So how did things deteriorate so badly? Erdoğan’s Justice and Development 
party (AKP) was, for many years, inalliance with a secretive movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/thousands-detained-as-turkey-vows-to-smoke-out-gulen-supporters>
 led by the US-based cleric Fethullah Gülen. The Gülenists infiltrated much of 
the Turkish state, including the army, police and education system.. It was, in 
part, a marriage of convenience: both sought to drive out authoritarian 
elements that opposed Islamism. But the means were, from a democratic 
perspective, dubious.

In 2013 the two sides fell out, and Turkey’s rulers accused the Gülenists of 
plotting the failed coup. But this charge has been used to suppress a secular 
opposition that has no association with Gülenism whatsoever. There have been 
clampdowns on the media and basic democratic freedoms, concentrating even more 
power in the hands of the regime.

Ahmet Sik is a prominent Turkish investigative journalist who would fearlessly 
challenge authority. In his book The Imam’s Army, Sik exposed how Gülenism 
infiltrated everything from the judiciary to the security services, building a 
parallel state. “Ahmet knew it had heavy risks,” a friend says, “but he went 
ahead and published the book.”

Sik was jailed in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/05/turkey-censorship-ahmet-sik-perrier>
, and his book was banned. Even when he was released, he refused to be 
silenced: he said the AKP and the underground terror group FETÖ, allegedly 
affiliated to Gülen, “were working in hand in glove”. His friends called him a 
hero, a label he resented. “It’s only that everyone else is silent that I look 
like a hero,” he said.

Turkey is our ally. So we cannot ignore the purge that is now under way | Owen 
Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/20/turkey-ally-purge-recep-tayyip-erdogan>
Turkey’s current justice minister has praised Gülen as a great Islamic 
scholar. But in 2013 Sik exposed a “full-scale war” between the government and 
the Gülenists. And after the failed coup, Sik refused to stop exposing the 
AKP’s past associations with the Gülenists. “If they were blaming FETÖ for the 
coup,” as his friend puts it, “then the AKP were partly responsible because 
they had worked together for so long.”

Last month Sik was arrested for spreading terrorist propaganda on social 
media, and not just on behalf of FETÖ – he was also accused of backing the PKK, 
which fights for Kurdish national self-determination and is diametrically 
opposed to Gülenism. So a journalist persecuted for exposing regime links with 
Gülenism was locked up on charges of being in league with Gülenists.

I visited the newspaper Cumhuriyet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/06/last-gasp-free-press-turkey-cumhuriyet>
, whose office lies in the shadow ofTrump Towers Istanbul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/donald-trump-towers-istanbul-condemns-anti-muslim-stance>
. So many of its journalists have been arrested, it is on a skeleton staff. 
Moreover, 189 journalists have been physically or verbally abused, and hundreds 
have had their press cards confiscated – in effect banning them from their job. 
And opposition papers are being commercially asphyxiated, with advertisers 
pressured to withdraw.

Then there’s the opposition: members of the leftist HDP have faced mass 
arrests, offices raids and accusations of terrorist links. The secular 
centre-left CHP told me: “We represent western values, but the west has 
abandoned us.”

Journalists and civilians alike have been rounded up for the crime of 
“insulting” President Erdoğan. Perhaps in solidarity the people of the world 
should make his name the ultimate insult. As he cows opposition, the president 
now intends torig the constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/bill-to-cement-erdogans-power-passes-first-vote-in-turkey>
 to grant himself even more sweeping powers.

The west is largely silent. And Erdoğan is triumphalist. Last July Trump 
praised Erdoğan 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2016/07/21/donald-trump-says-u-s-shouldnt-criticize-turkeys-erdogan-over-post-coup-purge/>
 for “turning it around” after the attempted coup. And Erdoğancheered Trump’s 
car-crash press conference 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/turkey-preisident-recep-tayyip-erdogan-donald-trump-put-cnn-reporter-jim-acosta-in-his-place-press-a7525821.html>
 last week: Trump, who told a CNN reporter that the organisation he worked for 
produced fake news, had – according to Erdoğan – put the reporter “in his 
place” because media organisations such as CNN “undermine national unity”.

Turkey’s fragile democracy is being bled to death. It is dusk for democracy in 
Poland and Hungary too, aspopulist rightwing governments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/18/the-guardian-view-on-polands-turn-to-the-right-europe-is-correct-to-be-concerned>
 keep the superficial trappings of democracy for appearance’s sake but hollow 
it out in practice. Now that the demagogue Trump is about to become the world’s 
most powerful man, the authoritarians believe history is on their side.

Turkey is a warning: democracy is precious but fragile. It underlines how 
rights and freedoms are often won at great cost and sacrifice but can be 
stripped away by regimes exploiting national crises. The danger is that Turkey 
won’t be an exception, but a template of how to rid countries of democracy. 
That is reason enough to stand byTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>. Who knows which country could be 
next?
 