
I t’s safe to say that this is an outfit I would not have foreseen myself 
wearing when I first spiedJulia Roberts in thigh-high latex boots 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jTSSNK5EUn8> with a Lycra body and a tiny 
skirt on screen inPretty Woman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pretty-woman>. 
Yet here I am, in over-the-knee boots and a demure, flowery dress that, if not 
exactly a tea dress, is definitely the sort that suggests drinking Earl Grey 
from a cup and saucer, rather than calling room service for champagne. It is as 
if the two Vivian Wards – the streetwise, gum-snapping one and the 
polka-dotted, polo-match-attending one – are dressing for a job share.

Over-the-knee boots, until recently NSFW, have been gentrified. They are for 
fashion, not for pulling, and you can tell. They look different. The new 
generation are not the shiny, black kind, wipe-clean on the outside and sweaty 
on the inside. They are suede, or velvet, or at least soft leather, all 
high-maintenance fabrics that you would not risk on a street corner, for fear 
of splashing. Also, they are probably not black. Instead, they are Armani-ish 
shades of sophisticated, understated grey, petrol blue, mushroom.

And these are not thigh-high boots. They are over-the-knee boots. I don’t just 
mean that they have a new name, although that is significant, as is the fact 
that this new name avoids mention of thigh in favour of the less-saucy knee. 
The new style of wearable tall boot ends over the knee, but only just.

Over-the-knee boots set to become footwear of the decade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/09/over-the-knee-boots-set-to-be-the-shoe-of-the-decade>
The most important change is what you don’t wear with them. You don’t wear 
them with a short, tight dress. Nor do you wear them over skinny jeans. You can 
wear them with something short if it’s loose; this is lampshading and is in 
vogue as a cool way to do dressed-up. But lampshading, as the silly name 
suggests, is a bit outré for most offices. More low-key, and just as modern, is 
to team your boots with a hemline that covers their top edge. This feels 
counterintuitive – the boots are such a look that the instinct is to show them 
off – but playing them down is in its own way a strong look. Like wearing 
Pretty Woman boots is, you know, no big deal. Over the knee? Yes. But not over 
the top.

• Jess wears dress, £110, massimodutti.com <http://www.massimodutti.com>. Boots
, £160,aldoshoes.com <http://www.aldoshoes.com/uk/en_UK>

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Managment.
 