
In 2016, open data was central to a growing number of projects across the 
globe. Throughout the year, data initiatives attempted tochange the banking 
industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/feb/16/banking-industry-uber-moment-standard-open-banking-working-group>
, took strides towardsgetting London fit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/may/04/data-londoners-fitness-olympic-park-tfl-strava>
, and fought “superbugs” through areal-time record of antibiotic resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/apr/11/antibiotic-resistance-real-time-open-data>
.

How will we see the open data ecosystem continue to grow in 2017? We asked the 
experts to tell us what the coming year will hold.


Sir Nigel Shadbolt 

Principal of Jesus College, Oxford 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jesus_College,_Oxford> and chair and co-founder 
of theOpen Data Institute <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Data_Institute>

The UK has been top of the open data tree so far. But in 2017 we risk losing 
our place as others ascend, such as Australia which is opening up itsmap and 
address data <http://nationalmap.gov.au/> and France which has recently 
legislated for data in its digital republic bill 
<http://www.republique-numerique.fr/pages/in-english>. I’d like to see the UK 
government investing in data infrastructure. Just as it builds and maintains 
physical infrastructure, such as transport networks, so it needs to invest in 
building, maintaining and opening important data, from lists of legally 
constituted companies, NHS procedures, environmental indicators, to maps, legal 
addresses, timetables and tariffs.

Too much of our data infrastructure is currently unreliable, inaccessible or 
only available for those who can pay. Innovators struggle to get hold of data 
they need, while many citizens do not feel empowered to access and use data. We 
must improve data skills throughout society, so policymakers, businesses and 
citizens can interpret and use it well.

I also want to see more algorithmic accountability: greater transparency 
around the algorithms that shape services and information. We should understand 
how software is making decisions about what we need when, in order to judge 
whether it is honouring our best interests. The commercial sector must be more 
transparent, as should government if it starts using algorithms to target and 
determine the public services it provides citizens.

Neil Lawrence

Professor of machine learning at University of Sheffield on leave of absence 
as a senior principal applied scientist at Amazon

It’s likely to be a year of consolidation for open data, we’ve seen the 
benefits in the scientific world, and government has bought strongly into the 
ideas. There remain challenges for companies in how to best extract value from 
open data: is it commercialisation of solutions based on open data? Or is it 
improvement of their internal processes in the light of open data? Or will it 
be something else?

A new trend is that of open models, the wide availability of pre-trained 
machine learning models systems which can be reused or repurposed. Some of 
these models could be seen as open data in distilled form. Sharing of models 
derived from open data might prove to be an easier way of building on the 
benefits. A remaining challenge is how companies exploit their own internal 
data sets, particularly when to obtain best value these data need to be 
combined with information stores from other companies.


Dr Elena Simperl

Associate professor, electronics and computer science, University of 
Southampton, and coordinator ofODINE <https://opendataincubator.eu/> (sponsors 
of the Guardian’s editorially independent coverage of the open data economy)

Predictions backed by lots of data and established methods have proven wrong 
time and time again. 2016 was the year data science failed. Engagement with 
data, factual evidence, and expertise is lower than ever. For open data this 
means one thing: that publishing it in the public domain cannot be a 
box-ticking exercise.

If we want these efforts to be fruitful, if we want citizens, businesses, and 
communities to take informed decisions using the wealth of data sources 
available online, we need to make this data useful and exciting for them. This 
can mean many things, from creating a better experience of the tools people use 
to explore data to publishing data in a way that people relate to.

Pavel Richter

Chief executive officer of Open Knowledge International <https://okfn.org/>


This year is going to be full of challenges. With restrictions on civic space 
<http://civicus.org/index.php/socs2016> taking place around the world, civil 
society organisations are particularlyunder siege 
<https://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/why-is-africas-civil-society-under-siege/>. But 
this challenge also presents an opportunity for the open data community to 
foster meaningful dialogue between citizens and civil society.

2017 is the ideal time for the open data community to work with civil society 
and demonstrate how information can be used to drive change and build trust 
across divisions in society. Open data is already being used in many different 
contexts to improve people’s lives and we must continue to communicate how.

Openness of data in itself is not enough – we will need to engage further with 
users and potential users of data in 2017 to make sure the information 
governments and other data publishers are providing is the information citizens 
actually require. I look forward to seeing more collaborations between NGOs and 
data experts to address local, national, and transnational issues using
citizen-generated data 
<http://blog.okfn.org/2016/12/22/new-report-making-citizen-generated-data-work/>
.

The Open Data Institute, the University of Southampton and the Guardian are 
members of theODINE <https://opendataincubator.eu/> consortium.


To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.
 