
Enron

Chosen by Vinay Patel

I saw Enron on 5 August 2010. I know this because I still have the ticket 
stuck to my wall.Lucy Prebble’s play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/sep/23/enron-review> charts the rise 
and fall of the energy giant whose story mirrors the hubris and deceit behind 
the 2008 sub-prime mortgage crisis in the US – which in turn triggered the 
global recession that I conveniently, more or less, graduated into.

Prebble has spoken about how any prescience on her part regarding the 
financial collapse was coincidental, but with Enron as a company revealing 
itself to be less a singular cautionary tale and more a microcosm of a failing 
system, a play dramatising its workings seemed like vital viewing for a 
bewildered 24-year-old who was trying to figure out what exactly had just 
happened to the world.

I expected high-stakes drama. I expected important individuals waxing lyrical 
about money and power. What I didn’t expect was the fun.

Both the play and production embraced the absurdity at the heart of theatre – 
the silliness of the act, the joy of metaphor – and used it to power its more 
serious points. Is depicting the once mighty, now defunct financial services 
company Lehman Brothers as giant, conjoined twins any less ridiculous than 
believing you can set up countless shell companies to help buy up your growing 
debt while still believing yourself to be the biggest company in the world? Do 
you miss warning signs when you’re an employee at such a place, because working 
for a titan made you feel as if you wanted to wrap a tie around your head in 
celebration and belt out Welcome to the Jungle on repeat? For me, the play’s 
real triumph is less inshowing how Enron happened (though it does that 
masterfully) and more in letting youfeel how it happened. A desire to replicate 
that experience for an audience sits at the heart of everything I now do.

I adore Enron because it’s messy and ambitious and so many things at once. 
It’s a play about dismantling capitalism’s catechisms. It’s a play about faith. 
Light and shadow. Rise and fall. Raptors and ruin. A swaggering statement piece 
from an extraordinary young playwright. Prebble’s second-greatest work, after
her Twitter feed 
<https://twitter.com/lucyprebblish?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b24a92bf74602653413257268516b5b526e2ffb%2F0_371_2684_1610%2F2684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b24a92bf74602653413257268516b5b526e2ffb%2F0_371_2684_1610%2F2684.jpg>
 ‘She was so convincing that I bristle when I see her in posters for anything 
else’ … Imelda Staunton in Good People. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
Good People

Chosen by Atiha Sen Gupta

For playwrights the challenge is how to dramatise the big questions of our 
day. It means treading the tightrope between the political and the personal. 
Good People by David Lindsay-Abaire does this expertly, weaving a convincing 
tapestry of working-class life in south Boston, a go-to setting for dramas 
about hardened criminality and bleak existences but treated here with dignity 
and respect.

Our protagonist, newly unemployed Margie, spends the bulk of the play trying 
to coax a job out of her ex-boyfriend Mike – a doctor who made it out of their 
tough neighbourhood while she didn’t. In the process, profound questions are 
raised about success and social mobility. Does the system determine our 
destinies? Is there such a thing as making our own luck? If we are subject to 
forces greater than ourselves, why do some people succeed and others don’t?


Alan Plater said that after watching a play we remember moments above all 
else. We don’t recall character arcs or structure but moments: funny ones, sad 
ones, tender ones. My favourite in Good People is all three at once. It comes 
just after Mike suggests that Margie hasn’t succeeded because she made, and 
continues to make, the wrong decisions. In an impassioned rebuttal, Margie 
savages this notion of choice; the commonly bandied about idea that people 
choose to be poor. She traces why she lost her job to a piece of candy brittle: 
she was late for work because she lost her car; she lost her car because she 
used her instalment money to pay the dentist; and she needed dental treatment 
because one night, to save money, she missed dinner but got hungry and ate a 
piece of candy brittle, which cracked a tooth. Margie concludes: “And that’s 
all it took – a piece of fucking candy brittle, and I was out of a job again.”

I saw the play in 2014 in the West End, with Imelda Staunton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/06/good-people-review-imelda-staunton-perfection>
 as Margie. She was so convincing that I bristle when I see her in posters for 
anything else. Despite its title, there are no goodies or baddies in the play: 
our protagonist is flawed, our antagonist sympathetic. The play’s beauty lies 
in its ability to hold two contradictory realities in tandem: Margie is both 
victim (of circumstances not of her making) and victor (she resists her 
reality). She suffers but she survives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b5442c5401f837e243080e0bc1ac2cd79859089%2F0_96_2600_1560%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b5442c5401f837e243080e0bc1ac2cd79859089%2F0_96_2600_1560%2F2600.jpg>
 ‘The silly becomes sublime. The petty becomes magical’ … Arye Gross and Marin 
Hinkle in Circle Mirror Transformation. Photograph: Allen J Schaben/LA Times 
via Getty Images 
Circle Mirror Transformation

Chosen by Sam Steiner


A disclaimer: I may find it difficult to explain why I think Circle Mirror 
Transformation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/13/circle-mirror-transformation-review>
 is as wonderful and important as it is. But that seems fitting for a play 
about the limits of honest expression, whose characters try and fail to 
communicate the depth of their loneliness, pain, love and regret to each other.

Annie Baker’s play is set in an adult community drama class in the fictional 
town of Shirley, Vermont. It takes place over six weeks and Baker shows us 
snapshots from each of the weekly classes. We watch the characters perform 
drama games and exercises such as explosion tag (like tig, but the person 
that’s “it” has to explode).


Much of it is laugh-out-loud funny. Not chortle-at-witty-wordplay funny. 
Proper belly-laugh-until-the-person-beside-you-gives-you-weird-looks funny. But 
the humour invariably stems from failure and inadequacy. In one scene Schultz, 
a divorcee in her late 40s, casts the other members of the group as objects in 
his beloved childhood bedroom. As they twist their bodies into baseball gloves, 
trees and a very specific stuffed snake, Schultz steps back, surveys the room, 
sighs and says sadly: “It doesn’t really look like my bedroom.” Moments of high 
comedy are undercut with those of profound pathos. The silly becomes sublime. 
The petty becomes magical.

In another scene, Lauren directs James and Marty in a hammy re-enactment of an 
argument between her parents. The scene begins to say just as much about James 
and Marty’s own marital scars as it does about Lauren’s troubles at home. Baker 
draws lines between these characters’ feelings but never treats them as 
anything less than subjective. Schultz’s loneliness is different to Theresa’s. 
Marty’s sense of regret is different to James’s. Therein lies the quiet tragedy 
of the play. Their pain and insecurities unite them and force them apart.

Baker’s writing is often accused of being apolitical. The words “small” or 
“inward-looking” frequently appear in reviews. But at a time in which our 
society has seemed more disconnected than ever, in which far too often the 
loudest, most soundbitey voice has triumphed over thoughtful discussion and 
reasoning, few pieces of theatre seem as urgent, vital or hopeful as this 
“little” play about five broken people in a windowless room in small-town 
Vermont trying desperately to understand each other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b73b670bb9fe2452675ec761ee9d8e356148296%2F0_110_3731_2350%2F3731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b73b670bb9fe2452675ec761ee9d8e356148296%2F0_110_3731_2350%2F3731.jpg>
 ‘The play is about people not ideas’ … Paul Bazely and Jaz Deol in The Djinns 
of Eidgah. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The Djinns of Eidgah

Chosen by Anya Reiss

The Djinns of Eidgah by Abhishek Majumdar was staged in 2013 at the Royal 
Court’s Theatre Upstairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/22/djinns-of-eidgah-review> and it 
was everything you expect from that space: the play was by someone I’d never 
heard of, it was about a world I knew nothing about and it was brilliant.


It’s set during the conflict in Kashmir, but isn’t a politics or history 
lesson. It’s a strange, dreamy, haunted, funny and blood-soaked play in which 
one boy dreams of becoming a professional footballer while his sister hides in 
stories about ghosts and gods. Both are trying to ignore the war-torn reality 
they find themselves in.

In general, I’m not a big fan of highly poetical or theatrical plays. I 
usually feel they take themselves too seriously and lose sight of reality, but 
this one didn’t. I suppose it was because the reality is so horrific that you 
have to step away from it to actually talk about it. Richard Twyman’s 
production kept it so grounded – the play is about people not ideas.

What I remember most clearly is coming back after the interval and the play 
beginning again in darkness: you sat and listened as brother and sister 
searched a tent of dead bodies to steal their murdered friend’s shoes for 
football practice, only to realise as they felt around in the dark that the 
friend’s body had no feet. That is always going to stay with me. I’ve never 
been so relieved for the lights to come back on in a theatre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe990c31e2fc6aa42ba2885f21f85dac9d07b79d3%2F0_354_3802_2282%2F3802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe990c31e2fc6aa42ba2885f21f85dac9d07b79d3%2F0_354_3802_2282%2F3802.jpg>
 ‘In times of collective grief, directors will reach for it again and again’ … 
Mr Burns. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Mr Burns

Chosen by Katherine Soper

Mr Burns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/21/bart-of-darkness-mr-burns-common-culture>
, a “post-electric play” byAnne Washburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/11/anne-washburn-playwright-ancient-greeks-simpsons>
, charts the short- and long-term aftermath of an American nuclear disaster, 
focusing on the changing role of artistic culture in the lives of the 
survivors. It shows art’s ability to comfort and connect us, and shape a sense 
of our own identity. Washburn’s stroke of genius is to use a famous Simpsons 
episode,Cape Feare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/feb/16/the-simpsons-top-10-episodes>
, as the central focus for the characters. The shaken refugees’ attempts to 
piece together the episode from memory are achingly similar to Primo Levi’s 
desperation in Auschwitz to remember fading snatches of Dante.


Matt Groening’s TV series is a truly populist cultural phenomenon that has 
changed the way a generation tells jokes, and it perfectly grounds an idea that 
could easily have become inaccessible and overly cerebral. The Simpsons, chart 
hits and even adverts become both nostalgia and currency: the characters 
struggle to move on from the pre-meltdown world, treating each salvaged line as 
sacred, even as their re-enactments can’t hope to replicate the past.

Aside from exploring how stories morph in transmission, threading images and 
dialogue from earlier acts into an operatic parable about the disaster, Mr 
Burns captures the reasons we tell stories at all. In times of upheaval, it’s 
easy to think of art as frivolous, or to measure the “effects” of it in a very 
narrow way. In its final act, showing Burns himself reappropriated as a symbol 
of the nuclear disaster, the play becomes a tribute to art’s power to help us 
process real events. I suspect that in times of collective grief, directors 
will reach for it again and again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4bc30008c70233ff4e1117b33ade74e6e400ba0%2F0_2_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4bc30008c70233ff4e1117b33ade74e6e400ba0%2F0_2_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 ‘A performance channelling Cantona’ … Mark Rylance in Jerusalem. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Jerusalem

Chosen by Barney Norris


Jez Butterworth’s Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/feb/10/jerusalem-review> is about a man 
being evicted from his caravan. Except more than that happens and he’s more 
than a man. Johnny “Rooster” Byron, the local drug dealer, becomes a scabrous, 
seductive embodiment of the wild heart of England itself. At the Royal Court in 
London in 2009, directed by Ian Rickson, Mark Rylance gave a performance 
channelling Cantona that detonated among my generation as the most 
extraordinary thing we’d ever seen in a theatre.


As someone who grew up in the landscape it depicts, I have a lot of arguments 
with it. Wiltshire is more waterlogged than the play’s pyro-Technicolor, and I 
felt my world was used more as metaphor than treated in its own right. 
Butterworth has lived in Pewsey, but it struck me as a Londoner’s play in its 
raucous bones. Mind you, Jerusalem never claimed to be an anthropological 
portrait of anywhere: any play with a vicar and a morris dancer on the same 
stage has more in common with Alan Bennett than William Cobbett.

Like Martin McDonagh, Butterworth’s game is to play with theatre as much as 
with society, simultaneously mastering and satirising tropes, delighting us 
with what he can do with the conventions of the form. And Butterworth gave me 
everything I look for when I go to the theatre: roles affording great actors 
the room to do their best work; a set of people who find a way to stand for 
more than themselves; a willingness to dive into aria, to delight in verbal 
creativity; and a glorious, defiant, snarling evocation of the 
extraordinariness of ordinary people living ordinary lives, the things that 
turn us all into giants.

So I cherish my disagreements. Jerusalem is a play worth having a row with. My 
response to it has fuelled my whole career. I long to see it again. Someone 
should revive it post-Savile – it is, among so many other things, the 
definitive exploration of England’s affair with the pied piper myth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ea108f91a1d587ca269127bf9b70a3e2d0361e6%2F0_60_4148_2631%2F4148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ea108f91a1d587ca269127bf9b70a3e2d0361e6%2F0_60_4148_2631%2F4148.jpg>
 ‘As my toes began tapping along to the uptempo beat, they were soon stopped by 
the gut-churning lyrics’ … Colman Domingo and Forrest McClendon in The 
Scottsboro Boys. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The Scottsboro Boys

Chosen by Charlene James

I never thought that one of the best pieces of theatre I’d ever see would be a 
musical – or that it would involve a minstrel show. John Kander and Fred Ebb’s 
The Scottsboro Boys is based on the harrowing true story of nine black 
teenagers in 1931 who were falsely convicted of raping two white women on a 
freight train in Alabama. They were beaten and thrown in jail to await 
execution.


The use of minstrelsy in the show is subversive: instead of white actors 
“blacking up”, it is the black cast that take on a plethora of all-singing, 
all-dancing white characters, as well as playing the nine boys. The music is a 
mix of jazz and gospel, and the exaggerated movements of the choreography 
acknowledge the vaudeville shows of the time. The youngest character performs 
an unsettling tap dance about his fears of the electric chair. As my toes began 
tapping along to the uptempo beat, they were soon stopped by the gut-churning 
lyrics. (“If on that chair you put your rear, your hair frizzles out and your 
eyes disappear.”) No matter how often my fingers wanted to click along to the 
score, or a brief smile appeared on my face at the buffoonery, the underlying 
feeling of discomfort stayed with me – and did so long after it ended.

The finale of most minstrel shows was the cakewalk, a moronic dance that 
ridiculed slaves on plantations. But here the boys refuse to participate and 
they walk off stage. The real Scottsboro boys had no choice in their narrative; 
the play’s characters, in this moment, do. They leave the stage more empowered.

The week I saw Susan Stroman’s production at the Young Vic in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/20/best-theatre-of-2013-no8-scottsboro-boys>
, the Alabama parole board granted posthumous pardons to the three Scottsboro 
boys, who had yet to be exonerated. It took 82 years for all of their names to 
be cleared.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97d5b0a9bbfdba5aa34799bf28df3d244ac4f779%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97d5b0a9bbfdba5aa34799bf28df3d244ac4f779%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
 ‘We are invited to begin imagining together’ … Tim Crouch in An Oak Tree. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
An Oak Tree

Chosen by Alistair McDowall

It was the first play I’d seen that was conceptually daring and highly 
emotionally engaged. I’d always presumed those two things were exclusive – I 
went to certain stories to get my fix of the first, and others to get the 
second.Tim Crouch’s An Oak Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/jan/17/theatre2> satisfied both in just 
over an hour. I first saw it while I was at university. I’ve seen it a few 
times now, and it works brilliantly with audiences of all shapes and sizes.

It’s a story about the death of a girl from the perspective of both her father 
and the man who killed her accidentally, a hypnotist. The twist is that the 
actor portraying the father has no knowledge of the play – a different actor 
plays the role at each performance and arrives at the theatre the same time as 
the audience. The actor is then invited on stage and guided through the 
performance by the hypnotist, played by Crouch.

It’s a simple, well-told story, and the way the twist in the form works is 
straightforward enough to be understood by everyone as, crucially, it emerges 
from the story itself. It is about hypnosis and transformation, and we watch an 
act of hypnosis, we see a transformation. Form rises from content.

In the opening scenes, the actor is told to repeat questions and learn answers 
from Crouch about who they’re playing, what the world of the play is, what the 
rules are. It’s the entire act of theatre distilled. We are invited to begin 
imagining together. As Dan Rebellato puts it in his introduction to the play: 
“The theatre only exists if we believe in it.”

On a good night at the theatre, it’s thrilling to be in the audience – all of 
you working together to will something into being. I think about these opening 
moments when trying to do my job effectively; trying to find a language, a 
structure and a form simple enough to reach everyone, deep enough to contain 
multitudes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27f53ef6145e91ab28475ebf251dd86e38cfac57%2F0_33_1600_1030%2F1600.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27f53ef6145e91ab28475ebf251dd86e38cfac57%2F0_33_1600_1030%2F1600.png>
 ‘What’s the twist? Well, the family is black’ … Stick Fly. Photograph: Richard 
Termine 
Stick Fly


Chosen by Branden Jacobs-Jenkins


The plot of Lydia Diamond’s Stick Fly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/11/smart-people-review-theatre-lydia-diamond>
 is a staple of American theatre, but with a twist. A clan of significant 
wealth descends on their homestead (in this case, a summer home on Martha’s 
Vineyard), the adult children with romantic partners in town. Secrets are 
revealed. Drama ensues. Everyone’s “changed”. What’s the twist? Well, the 
family is black.

If there’s one theme American drama has in spades, it’s family: Long Day’s 
Journey Into Night, Death of a Salesman, Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, Buried Child. 
Unfortunately, entries into this canon by playwrights of colour are rarely 
treated as such. Instead they are often regarded as nothing more than 
sociological studies of black economic disenfranchisement and labelled as being 
about “the African-American experience” (as if every black person in the US was 
either stuck in mid-19th-century Chicago or living in Pittsburgh). Like 
something halfway between Fences and Hay Fever, Stick Fly dared to expand our 
repertoire of black representation in US drama. It wasn’t a play so much about 
race, as one about the essence of privilege and love and fatherhood.

Stick Fly is a remarkable piece of writing on a number of other levels. It is 
self-consciously well-made, something – oddly enough – frequently lobbed at it 
as some sort of criticism. It spoke to genuine evolutions in race relations 
that I believe just weren’t recognisable at the time. The best writing, to me, 
is never so much about technical proficiency. It’s about daring to chart 
uncharted waters of feeling and experience. As the product of two highly 
educated, black, middle-class Americans, whose own education can often feel 
like a curse as much as a privilege, who had found himself romantically 
entangled with folks across all kinds of racial lines, who, too, had been 
raised by a single mother – suddenly, for the first time in my life, I found 
myself fully identifying with what was happening and what was being said on 
stage, and it was like a bolt of lightning. For the first time, I fully 
understood what the power of identification in the theatre truly meant and why 
this form matters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91a70ded1267fb97521b66f0c5da4fc681f7495e%2F299_17_4992_3479%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20night!%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century's%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20night%21%20Millennial%20playwrights%20pick%20this%20century%27s%20best%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmillennial-playwrights-pick-the-centurys-best-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91a70ded1267fb97521b66f0c5da4fc681f7495e%2F299_17_4992_3479%2F4992.jpg>
 ‘It’s easy to be cynical. It’s much harder to be hopeful’ … Hoke’s Bluff. 
Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Hoke’s Bluff

Chosen by Lulu Raczka

It’s the run-up to the big game. No team from the town of Hoke’s Bluff have 
made it this far in forever. A win would mean everything. No one feels this 
more than the team captain. It’s all on him.

Sound familiar? It’s supposed to. Gemma Paintin and James Stenhouse, who make 
up the Live Art companyAction Hero <http://www.actionhero.org.uk/>, are 
knowingly telling usthe unoriginal American underdog story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/22/hokes-bluff-edinburgh-festival-2013-review>
. Between them they play every character of this familiar cinematic universe: 
the competitive cheerleaders, the coach living vicariously through his team and 
the guy chatting shit on a car bonnet, looking at the stars.


I was fascinated by this show when I saw it three years ago at Forest Fringe, 
but not because of what it does, more because of what it doesn’t do. We sit in 
bleachers and a Wildcats mascot fires up the audience. Then it starts, and the 
cliches roll out and the performers keep their British accents. And you think: 
this is about the American Dream, I know where this is going. You see, most 
other theatre-makers, myself included, would have kept up this premise for 
two-thirds of the show, and then started to dismantle it, until it broke down 
completely, probably taking some of the set with it. Break the cliche, make a 
point. But Action Hero played it straight. Cliche after cliche was treated with 
the earnest tone of the movies they borrowed from. And I actually connected to 
it. Of course, we could be cynical, we could play the stoned high-school 
philosopher and say that Action Hero, along with all the movies, have sold us a 
lie. But this show reminded me it’s easy to be cynical. It’s much harder to be 
hopeful. And it is much, much harder to take the most saccharine material 
possible, and find real warmth in it.
 