
“Oh, so your husband’s a professor? Well, he must be really clever then.” 
Well, actually, no – I’m the clever one. He’s very, very, knowledgable in 
a moderately obscure area of human knowledge. I know loads about everything. 
I’ve been at academic functions where someone has asked what I do, and when 
I’ve replied, “Bringing up the next generation” or “Looking after small 
children”, they have looked blank and turned away. I’m a non-person; not an 
academic, valueless and probably stupid.

It’s not that I don’t value my partner’s achievements; I’ve been there every 
step of the way from the first temporary research assistant contract. I know 
what has gone into it: the all-nighters, the up-at-3am writing papers and 
lecture notes; the holidays when he never left the computer, producing the 
books that led to the promotions that led to the holy grail of the title.

What I’m really thinking: the divorce lawyer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/27/what-im-really-thinking-divorce-lawyer>
I want him to be respected for it, just not at my expense. I’ve got a degree, 
but I’ve been a bit busy to write any books myself. I’m the one always on her 
own with the kids at parties, or on family days out, museum trips and cinema 
visits, because he was always “working”. Don’t get me started on people who 
think academics have “lovely long holidays”.

And I really am much cleverer. I’ve read more, and retained more general 
knowledge. I know facts, but I also know how people work, too. He can’t even 
follow the plot on EastEnders or work out whether the shopping goes in the 
fridge or the freezer. The absent-minded professor tag really is apt. AsJim 
Carrey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jimcarrey> says, “Behind every great 
man, there is a woman rolling her eyes.”

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
 