
As I finned alongside the bulky remnants of the ship’s boilers - three massive 
blocks of northern iron – the light had almost gone. The gently rusting masses 
were riddled with fire-tubes, each seemingly host to a wary crab. In some, the 
red eyes of a velvet swimming crab (Necora puber) reflected my light; in others 
edible crabs (Cancer pagurus) retreated from my gaze. Small prawns and a few 
well-camouflaged fish moved to avoid me, drab browns revealed as reds and 
oranges under my torch light. And there, on a piece of deck plate, covered by a 
bright red encrusting sponge, was one of the jewel-like animals I’d set out to 
capture on film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F735b78f6322e83095eb44ff4656edab8f8900ec6%2F0_255_667_559%2F667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F735b78f6322e83095eb44ff4656edab8f8900ec6%2F0_255_667_559%2F667.jpg>
Flabellina pedata. The head end is uppermost and can be identified by two 
tentacle-like projections known as rhinophores, which contain chemosensory 
organs. Photograph: Richard Aspinall 


“That’s a Flabellina!” I said to myself in the dark, angling my flash guns to 
best illuminate this three-centimetre purple gem and starting to fire the 
trigger. My fingers were freezing in the water that my dive computer told me 
was a balmy 14C (57F). Never at any point, did I question the fact that I was 
entirely happy, 30 metres down on a cold, dark, silty shipwreck not far off the 
mouth of the Tyne, with a little more than five metres of visibility (a good 
day). As my flash guns (more properly known as strobes), fired away in the 
perpetual gloom, I was in critter-shooting heaven.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ff08190f4fbbdf8bdbb3889dee4a8b29fe9207%2F0_0_667_1000%2F667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ff08190f4fbbdf8bdbb3889dee4a8b29fe9207%2F0_0_667_1000%2F667.jpg>
 The lumpy blobs of dead man’s fingers, a native soft coral. Photograph: 
Richard Aspinall 
Satisfied, but running low on gas and heading towards the end of my allowable 
dive time, I slowly made my way across the landscape of rocks, rusting spars 
and deck plates, covered in the surprisingly pretty dead man’s fingers 
<http://www.arkive.org/dead-mans-fingers/alcyonium-digitatum/> (Alcyonium 
digitatum – they’re lovely when viewed up close, anyway). As I passed a growth 
of sea chervil, I was rewarded with a real gem: the aptly named crystal sea 
slug.

Janolus Cristatus boasts finger-like projections from its body, called cerata, 
that are tipped with blueish-white pigment. It seems to glow under a diver’s 
torch as the light suffuses its translucent body. It puts me in mind of the 
opalescence of Lalique glass.

I’ve photographed astounding animals across the tropics including plenty of 
nudibranchs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/12/sluggy-mcslugface-public-invited-to-name-flamboyant-nudibranch-species>
, yet finding exotic-looking animals in my often gloomy native seas seems far 
more rewarding. I suspect as well that few people have any idea that off our 
beaches and cliffs the life can be as rich as it truly is.

Unsure of the status of nudibranchs around the UK and keen to know more about 
these shell-less molluscs, I contacted fellow diver and amateur expert on the 
subject, Jim Anderson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa48fbba92a13603dce9e6c54dfe91a7f999302fa%2F0_0_1000_667%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa48fbba92a13603dce9e6c54dfe91a7f999302fa%2F0_0_1000_667%2F1000.jpg>
 Extreme close up of the feeding tentacles of dead man’s fingers. Photograph: 
Richard Aspinall 
Referencing a now out-of-print guide book, Anderson tells me that although 
there is no recognised list that can be totalled up, “there are at least 116 
nudibranchs with more being added now that the detailed study of their DNA is 
more readily available.” He also noted that “... there may also be additions to 
the UK ‘list’ from speciesmoving north with warmer sea temperatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/08/fish-ocean-warming-migration-sea>
. However, who knows, maybe we will lose some by the same mechanism.”

I hadn’t expected that many – it seems I still associate UK waters with drab, 
grey animals, robust and sturdy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc38f11a9016be254f9adc82ed73dc4f5d38b3cce%2F0_3_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc38f11a9016be254f9adc82ed73dc4f5d38b3cce%2F0_3_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Orange clubbed sea slug. This species can reach two centimetres. It feeds on 
Bryozoans, an encrusting form of colonial animal often seen as a mesh-like 
growth on seaweeds. Photograph: Richard Aspinall 
Nudibranchs, literally meaning “naked gill” have evolved from shelled 
molluscs. They have lost the spiral shape, of course, and are without any trace 
of a shell, unlike some of their relatives (the sea hares, or Aplysiomorpha, 
for example), which retain an internal remnant of it. The group as a whole 
demonstrates a stunning variety of body shapes, patterns and colours. Residing 
within the Opisthobranchia group – which includes other slug-like species such 
as the sap-sucking sacoglossans and our more familiar terrestrial slugs and 
snails – the nudibranchs understandably punch above their weight in their 
allure for divers and biologists. Sea slug, it should be noted, is a catch-all 
title that can cover animals from across many different taxonomic groups and 
carries with it a sense of the pejorative amongst true nudi aficionados.

Like many other richly-coloured and patterned slow-moving animals, nudibranch 
colours and patterns are warnings of their unpalatability. Some species (such 
as the Aeolids) can even sequester stinging cells from their prey into their 
cerata. The stinging cells pass through the animal’s gut intact.

Being, in effect blind, nudibranchs have a light-sensing organ, but nothing 
that would pass for an eye, so colouration is not about attracting a mate. Some 
rely more on camouflage to survive. The dead man’s finger sea slug, despite 
being the largest of its kind in UK waters (up to 20cm in length), is amazingly 
hard to spot against its soft coral prey and like many of its tropical 
relatives does not advertise its presence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F254e8113c487b7b6e09de1516ef5814606ce01d9%2F0_0_1000_750%2Fmaster%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20discovering%20surprising%20jewels%20in%20the%20North%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwhat-lies-beneath-discovering-surprising-jewels-in-the-north-sea-nudibranchs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F254e8113c487b7b6e09de1516ef5814606ce01d9%2F0_0_1000_750%2Fmaster%2F1000.jpg>
 The spiral-shaped egg mass of the nudibranchJorunna tomentosa. Photograph: Jim 
Anderson 
All nudibranchs are hermaphrodites and after fertilisation lay an egg mass 
that is typically spiral-shaped and one of the most delicately attractive 
structures that can be seen underwater.

I suspect I am one of those amateur naturalists and underwater photographers 
destined to become a fan of the “nudi”. Amongst photographing other tiny life, 
from cup corals to anemones, it will always be nudibranchs that call me back 
and the: “what, you found that off Newcastle?!” exclamations of family and 
friends, will simply add to the delight of shooting these gems.

Jim Anderson’s website chronicling his obsession with marine opisthobranchs in 
Scottish waters can be found at www.nudibranch.org <http://www.nudibranch.org/>
 