
I’m going to the inauguration in DC this week. What should I wear?

Rose, by email

Something waterproof, obviously. What? I was referring to DC’s famously poor 
winter weather. Look what happened to William Henry Harrison when he didn’t 
wear weather-appropriate clothes at his inauguration – the man died nine days 
later! So honestly, I was just thinking about everyone’s good health and in no 
way making some cheap reference to #watersportsgate (the only -gate this column 
accepts).

So! You’re going to the inauguration, Rose. Well, I don’t think you’ll have 
trouble getting a seat, put it that way. Despite a lifetime of desperation to 
be near celebrities, a desperation that has resulted in him appearing in such 
classy fare asHome Alone 2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YXE3Ku-mGrk> and 
beinga guest at QVC’s Oscars party in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/01/oscars-2011-with-the-stars> 
alongsideKim Kardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian>, Trump is now 
insisting, from his gold-plated Manhattan penthouse, that he doesn’t care about 
those elites.

“The so-called ‘A’ list celebrities are all wanting tickets to the 
inauguration, but look what they did for Hillary, NOTHING. I want the PEOPLE!” 
hetweeted last month 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/812115501791006720?lang=en>, 
sounding adorably like a seven-year-old who didn’t actually want any of those 
people he begged to come to his birthday party to turn up. He totally planned 
all along to celebrate with two teddy bears, a set of Lego and his mother.

And, indeed, Trump proceeded to prove how little he cares about these 
A-listers bytweeting about how many more people watched him on The Celebrity 
Apprentice <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38531417> compared 
with its new host,Arnold Schwarzenegger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/arnold-schwarzenegger>. Keeping it real for 
the PEOPLE there.

Anyway, the team around Trump continues to use language in a way that the pigs 
inAnimal Farm <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/animal-farm.html> can only 
admire. The head of his inaugural committee,Tom Barrack, said last week 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2017/01/donald-trump-inauguration-soft-sensuality>
 that they don’t need any celebrities because “we have the greatest celebrity 
in the world … ”

… MADONNA?!

“Which is the president-elect.” Oh. “So what we’ve done, instead of trying to 
surround him with what people consider A-listers, is we are going to surround 
him with the soft sensuality of the place. It’s a much more poetic cadence than 
having a circus-like celebration that’s a coronation.”

Wait. You’re going to have to run that by me again: “We are going to surround 
him with the soft sensuality of the place.”

I’m sorry, have you ever been to DC? I have, many times, and let me tell you, 
of all the adjectives that come to mind when I think of the place (“clean”, 
“white”, “clean”), “soft sensuality” does not appear very high in the list. In 
fact, I genuinely don’t think anyone has sex in that city (too dirty, too 
little possibility of politics chat.) So the tactic seems to be, instead of 
surrounding Trump with people, he will instead be surrounded by air, which is 
totally what I’m going to say to waiters when they give me grief about dining 
on my own.

“What, you’re eating by yourself?”

“Instead of trying to surround myself with what people consider to be other 
people I’ve decided to surround myself with the soft sensuality of the 
restaurant. Can’t you see the poetic cadence?”

Anyway! There is, amazingly, a point to all this, and that is to suggest you 
try to match this mood board by looking for clothes that convey soft sensuality 
and poetic cadences. I’m seeing a veryStevie Nicks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/stevie-nicks> look here, all flowing sleeves 
and sheer materials. Honestly, I can’t think of a better look to celebrate this 
incoming administration than one associated with a band known for 
self-destruction and in-fighting.

But you must sort your look out fast, Rose, because Trump has said that his 
inauguration is going to be so popular that “all the dress shops are sold out 
in Washington.It’s hard to find a great dress for this inauguration. 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/reliable-source/wp/2017/01/09/donald-trump-says-d-c-s-dress-shops-are-sold-out-of-inauguration-gowns-wrong/?utm_term=.9b40502826a5>
” Now, you’ll never believe this, but some DC stores have cast doubt on this 
claim (“We have a wonderful assortment of dresses and gowns,”Bloomingdale’s, a 
US department store with two locations in DC, has said 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/donald-trump-presidential-inauguration-dress-shortage-claim-ceremony-balls-washington-dc-retailers-a7518871.html>
), but doubtless that is just fake news from the elites, or something something 
word salad something.

The person who really needs to get a move on is Melania Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump>. Some Trump supporters have 
criticised those designers, such as Tom Ford and Marc Jacobs, whohave said they 
won’t give clothes to her 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/marc-jacobs-tom-ford-refuse-dress-melania-trump/>
. I must have missed the part in the constitution where it says fashion 
designers are obliged to give free clothes to the president’s wife, even if she 
is married to a man who appoints a raging homophobe as his VP, a man who 
objects to everything about these designers’ lives.

But never mind Marc and Tom, I honestly reckon a bit of Stevie Nicks fringing 
would suit Melania a treat. A little dancing across the stage, waving her shawl 
and shouting in Don’s face: “You can go your own way.”

For once, I think Melania would be speaking for Republicans and Democrats 
alike. Roll on, bipartisanship!
 