
Next month, it seems, the Baftas will be spared the all too frequent 
embarrassment of a dim showing by the home side. After the shame of the snub 
for Mike Leigh’s Mr Turner two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/oscar-nominations-2015-mr-turner-selma-grand-budapest-hotel-birdman>
, this time round, the picture is very different. According tomany 
<https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/i_daniel_blake/reviews/>, I, Daniel Blake – 
up for five awards, and the easy frontrunner in those fields –is a timeless 
jewel of social realism. It’s being hailed as the crowning achievement of its 
octogenarian director, Ken Loach. Already, it’s triumphed atCannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/ken-loach-cannes-2016-palme-dor-win-i-daniel-blake>
, Locarno, San Sebastián, Stockholm and Vancouver. But does it really deserve 
to win again?

The film can’t quite claim excellence as drama. Its put-upon but saintly 
principals aren’t so much conflicted characters as ciphers in a morality play. 
But then,I, Daniel Blake <https://www.theguardian.com/film/i-daniel-blake> is 
out to deliver a message, not to entertain. There’s nothing wrong with that; 
still, the message needs to measure up.

I, Daniel Blake review: Ken Loach's welfare state polemic is blunt, dignified 
and brutally moving
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
Some have questioned the film’s credibility 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3869182/Why-Lefties-misty-eyed-movie-romanticises-Benefits-Britain-says-TOBY-YOUNG.html>
. For example, they’ve doubted that starving single mums gorging cold beans 
from the can are really to be encountered in Newcastle food banks. Yet such 
complaints are somewhat beside the point. I, Daniel Blake’s beef isn’t really 
about the level of welfare provision; it’s about the way in which it’s 
delivered. The film presents this as thoroughly inhumane, and in this respect 
it seemspretty much on-target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/welfare-sanctions-ken-loach-uk-benefit-system>
.


During his ill-fated quest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/daniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants>
 forEmployment and Support Allowance 
<https://www.gov.uk/employment-support-allowance/what-youll-get>, Daniel 
doesn’t go hungry, but he’s stripped of his identity as a person. The welfare 
bureaucracy requires him to fill in forms intended to convert him into a set of 
crudely devised attributes. These are to be matched to official criteria which 
will classify him as a potential destination for benefits, instead of embracing 
him as a complex human being.


Daniel finds this process difficult, confusing and time-wasting. Its 
inefficiency delays the delivery of his entitlements and forces him to jump 
through pointless hoops. Yet inconvenience isn’t his real concern: what matters 
most to him is that the system steals his dignity.


“I am not a client, a customer, nor a service user,” he asserts in the 
manifesto <https://www.facebook.com/events/937910449646798/> he inscribes on a 
wall. “My name is Daniel Blake, I am a man, not a dog. As such, I demand my 
rights. I demand you treat me with respect.” This protest against the state’s 
handling of the individual echoes Kafka, Orwell and many more. It seems to cry 
out for remedy. Yet we should be careful what we wish for.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fwhy-baftas-frontrunner-ken-loach-i-daniel-blake-may-betray-its-own-cause%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6708aafb9ee743ea33e9565452f3ddc43b92e1ab%2F0_89_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20British%20Baftas%20frontrunner%20I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%20may%20betray%20its%20own%20cause%20%7C%20David%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fwhy-baftas-frontrunner-ken-loach-i-daniel-blake-may-betray-its-own-cause%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20British%20Baftas%20frontrunner%20I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%20may%20betray%20its%20own%20cause%20%7C%20David%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fwhy-baftas-frontrunner-ken-loach-i-daniel-blake-may-betray-its-own-cause%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6708aafb9ee743ea33e9565452f3ddc43b92e1ab%2F0_89_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 A jewel of social realism ... a scene from I, Daniel Blake. Photograph: Joss 
Barratt/AP 
A programme of energetic reform might encourage officials to be a bit less 
officious, though even those Daniel encounters seem to be doing their best. 
Perhaps forms could be simplified a little, and assessments made more 
sophisticated. If funding were increased, caseloads might be lightened and 
delays thereby reduced. Yet none of this would dispose of Daniel’s real 
complaint.

Box-ticking would have to continue. Profiling would remain imprecise. 
Arbitrary rules would still have to be applied to all-comers, and hard cases 
would doubtless still emerge. Since public money would remain limited, 
claimants might well be expected to fill in forms online rather than over a cup 
of tea with a friendly face.

Work Capability Assessments 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/capability-for-work-questionnaire>, 
like the one to which Daniel is subjected, couldn’t just be abandoned. Benefit 
cheats go unmentioned in I, Daniel Blake, but they would still need to be 
weeded out. Equally, claimants who failed to comply with conditions imposed on 
them would still have to be somehowsanctioned 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/conditionality-sanctions-and-hardship-impact-assessment>
. Without such measures, the whole system would become a soft touch and lose 
public support.

These then are the necessary characteristics of a public welfare system. If, 
like Daniel, you find them unacceptable, well, there’s an alternative.


The state hasn’t always been our bulwark against adversity. Before it strode 
in, we relied on thecharity 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/modern/field_01.shtml> of family, 
friends, church, local volunteers and Lady Bountiful. Impersonality wasn’t a 
problem. On the contrary, these potential benefactors knew us all too well. 
They understood our weaknesses and foibles and subjected us to human 
judgements. That meant they helped those of us they liked or considered 
deserving and shunned those they didn’t.

Universal basic income is not a magic solution, but it could help millions | 
Anthony Painter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/universal-basic-income-welfare-employment-scotland-canada-netherlands>
Our prospects of assistance depended on begging the favour of our fellows and 
conforming to whatever requirements they chose to impose. It was a personal 
service but it didn’t accord us the dignity Daniel craves. Instead it was cruel 
and degrading.

By turning to the state we’ve managed to end our dependence on such capricious 
benevolence. Instead we enjoy the right to anonymised public support that 
Daniel so proudly proclaims; the facelessness of which he complains is a vital 
part of the package. It bestows a kind of dignity of its own, however limited 
this may seem.


In spite of its bleak demeanour, our welfare system is perhaps a greater 
social triumph than the NHS. We all need healthcare; welfare requires the 
healthy to succour the less lucky.

Today, the achievements Loach celebrated in The Spirit of ‘45 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/ken-loach-cannes-2016-palme-dor-win-i-daniel-blake>
 are all under growing threat as their costs rise. This year, social security 
will consume £113bn <http://www.ukpublicspending.co.uk/current_spending>. At 
14% of public spending, that’s getting on for the cost of the NHS. There are 
those who want to see this figure cut and charitable activity take up the 
slack. Now, Loach himself has provided them with an argument.

I, Daniel Blake isn’t a progressive milestone; it’s a reactionary blow against 
collective provision. Doubtless it’s made its tearful admirers feel better 
about their moral worth, yet for that dubious service it’s surely been already 
honoured enough.

 