
Le’Veon Bell, the Pittsburgh Steelers’ running back, may be the most 
mystifying player in theNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>. He is not 
a head-scratcher in the manner of, say, the New York Giants’ Odell Beckham, 
whose ocean of talent seems to evaporate at inopportune times; Bell produces 
with remarkable consistency. It’s just that theway he produces makes little 
sense, even as proof of it comes straight through your television.

Here is an example from the Steelers’ 18-16 win over the Chiefs in Kansas City 
on Sunday night, in which Bell rushed for 170 yards on 30 carries.Early in the 
second quarter <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lBfyg_cJexw>, Bell took a 
handoff and, at just the moment every other running back on earth would 
accelerate, slowed. He hopped in place, waited for the bruising Pittsburgh line 
to part the Chiefs’ front, and then sneaked through. The play went down as a 
six-yard gain up the middle, a description that usually means shoulders have 
been lowered and helmets have collided. Bell’s run, though, looked like 
hypnosis.

The Seattle Seahawks' decline is an inside job | DJ Gallo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/17/seattle-seahawks-decline-russell-wilson-pete-carroll-nfl>
NBC’s seen-it-all-before announcing crew crowed. “He’s making that famous now 
– that hesitation, instead of just bursting through the hole,” play-by-play man 
Al Michaels said. Cris Collinsworth joined in: “That patience has become his 
trademark, and something I’m going to guess a lot of high school and even 
younger kids start trying to do.”

Bell is a variably gifted runner – quick in space and tough in traffic, with a 
physique that seems able to alter itself to fit the scenario – but the pause is 
now his calling card. It has helped make Bell the NFL’s best running back and 
the Steelers one of the four teams left in the Super Bowl hunt. It has also, as 
Collinsworth suggested, redrawn the parameters of the position. Watching Bell 
run feels like watching the future.

Quarterbacks have traditionally monopolized football’s evolution; think of 
Peyton Manning duping opposing defenses with pre-snap audibles, or Aaron 
Rodgers disputing the very idea of a difficult throw. The job description for 
running backs, on the other hand, has stayed pretty consistent. They try to run 
away from defenders, or over them. The best of them tend to be admired not for 
their play-to-play ingenuity but for their reliability. They stick in the 
memory by their repeated maneuvers: Adrian Peterson’s jump-cuts through the 
line, Marshawn Lynch’s stiff-arm.

Bell is perhaps the first running back in NFL history who is most captivating 
in moments of inaction. When he stops at the line of scrimmage and scans the 
blockers and defenders shifting around him, he looks like nothing so much as a 
quarterback surveying routes and coverages. When he finally moves, it is as if 
he’s moving a chess piece (Bell is anavid player 
<http://www.nbcsports.com/video/leveon-bell-explains-peter-king-how-football-chess>
). The actual motion is a formality; the real work was in spotting the 
opportunity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8UoOp-EyZE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8UoOp-EyZE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8UoOp-EyZE&media=>
Bell does not lack for physical gifts. Even those, though, seem unexplainable 
by traditional measures like 40-yard-dash times and bench press totals. 
Standing 6ft 1in and 225lbs, he has a downhill skier’s swiveling hips, a 
ballerina’s iron toes, and a rower’s grip. He maintains immaculate balance amid 
the wreck of the average play; where other players take hasty aim and heave 
themselves, he can adjust his path by the seeming millisecond. His athleticism 
might be less obvious than that of his faster or burlier counterparts – Bell 
was, tellingly, only a two-star recruit in high school, sought after by the 
likes of Bowling Green and Eastern Michigan before landing at Michigan State – 
but it is no less impressive, and by his fourth season, he has built a style 
that suits it.

If Pittsburgh beats the favored New England Patriots in Sunday’s AFC title 
game and reaches the Super Bowl, that style will figure heavily. Bell’s massive 
rushing total kept the Steelers afloat in the game against Kansas City, in 
which they managed six field goals but no touchdowns, but he may have to do 
even more for Pittsburgh to maintain pace with the high-scoring Pats. Both 
teams recognize his importance. “He’s a man for all situations or 
circumstances,” Pittsburgh coach Mike Tomlinsays 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/08/sports/football/pittsburgh-steelers-miami-dolphins-nfl-playoffs-2017.html?_r=0>
 of Bell, and New England coach Bill Belichickechoes 
<http://www.bostonherald.com/sports/patriots/2017/01/patriots_defensive_preparation_for_steelers_begins_with_le_veon_bell>
 the sentiment in his terse way: “He is good all of the time.”

Regardless of the outcome on Sunday, Bell will play a dual role, as a key 
offensive weapon and as a generational innovator. Before his outburst against 
the Chiefs, Bellsaid 
<http://www.espn.com/nfl/story/_/id/18446797/leveon-bell-pittsburgh-steelers-changing-nfl-stephen-curry-changed-nba>
: “I think I’m changing the game. In that sense, I’m what Steph Curry is to 
basketball. He changed the game so he’s going to always go down as being 
remembered.”

As with Curry, the things-to-come element of Bell’s play can be so fascinating 
that it overshadows the present. Much will be said and written about whether he 
is an anomaly or blueprint, whether his style is teachable or learnable, and 
whether coaches at lower levels of football will be willing to let their most 
gifted athletes practice patience when they could simply rumble for 10 yards. 
There is also an unavoidable element of danger to the approach; asking a runner 
to stand still while players 100lbs heavier try to take out his knees carries 
more risk than asking a point guard to shoot a 30-footer.

At the very least, though, Bell has allowed for fresh possibilities. When he 
carries the ball against the Patriots on Sunday, he will induce in football 
fans not the old eye-widening awe, but a breath-catching sense of suspense. He 
will weave, not dash. He will pick, not hammer. It remains to be seen how many 
imitators Bell inspires, but for now it is enough that he himself is not one. 
He is altogether new.
 