
It is the early 1950s. A travelling salesman named Ray Kroc, played in the 
forthcoming biopicThe Founder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/michael-keaton-the-founder-mcdonalds-ray-kroc-trailer>
 by Michael Keaton, sells milkshake machines to restaurants all over the US. 
Then he discovers an extraordinary little place in California called 
McDonald’s, run by the McDonald brothers, who have revolutionised the fast-food 
business with menus limited to burgers, fries and soda, walk-up counters, huge 
grills and fryers for speedy, short-order volume. In a blinding flash, Kroc 
sees how the brothers can franchise their operation around the country. They 
could be an American church, as ubiquitous as decent people’s houses flying the 
stars’n’stripes. When we saw Ray in his scuzzy hotel room, listening to a 
self-motivation LP on a portable record player, we could have guessed he would 
have corporate-imperial ambitions.

Might The Founder come to be seen as the first example of Trump-era cinema? 
After all, poor Ray, with his how-to-win-friends-and-influence-people LP, would 
be a prime candidate forTrump University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/trump-university-settlement-twitter>
. And it wasn’t long ago that McDonald’s was shorthand for evil big money in 
the cinema. In 2004 Morgan Spurlock made a documentary calledSuper Size Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/jul/16/foodanddrink.shopping>, about Big 
Mac gluttony and the profit motive. But The Founder is basically sweet on a 
great American adventure. It’s theBirth of a Salesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/mar/30/arthur-miller-death-of-a-salesman-in-pictures>
.

In Andrea Arnold’s American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold>
, Shia LaBeouf plays Jake, a guy who recruits rootless teens to sell 
semi-fraudulent magazine subscriptions. He models his trousers and braces 
explicitly on Donald Trump. He’s not a thousand miles away from fiction’s 
greatest Trump fan, the serial killer Patrick Bateman in Bret Easton Ellis’s 
novelAmerican Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwhy-a-film-celebrating-mcdonalds-is-the-perfect-start-for-trump-cinema%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab0d31a756c54a2dc1bb174baf1d71e25edfd280%2F0_107_5060_3036%2F5060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20a%20film%20celebrating%20McDonald's%20is%20the%20perfect%20start%20for%20Trump%20cinema&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwhy-a-film-celebrating-mcdonalds-is-the-perfect-start-for-trump-cinema%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20a%20film%20celebrating%20McDonald%27s%20is%20the%20perfect%20start%20for%20Trump%20cinema&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwhy-a-film-celebrating-mcdonalds-is-the-perfect-start-for-trump-cinema%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab0d31a756c54a2dc1bb174baf1d71e25edfd280%2F0_107_5060_3036%2F5060.jpg>
 Steven Mnuchin, Hollywood producer and now Trump’s choice for treasury 
secretary. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
If you think there is no such thing as Trump cinema, consider this: the 
president-elect’s controversial treasury secretary nominee (and former Goldman 
Sachs honcho)Steven Mnuchin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
 is a hugely powerful movie investor, withexecutive producer credits 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm6518391/> including Mad Max: Fury Road, Collateral 
Beauty, Inherent Vice, Sully, The Lego Ninjago Movie, Midnight Special, Batman 
v Superman: Dawn of Justice and many more. Mnuchin even has an acting cameo as 
a banker in Warren Beatty’s forthcoming Howard Hughes film, which has the very 
Trumpian title ofRules Don’t Apply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/11/rules-dont-apply-review-warren-beatty-as-howard-hughes-a-strangely-compelling-vanity-project>
. (Mnuchin is a producer on that, too.)

So Mnuchin really is Trump cinema. He has technically stepped back from 
showbiz, handing over his RatPac-Dune company to fellow producers Brett Ratner 
and James Packer, but there’s nothing to stop him returning. Writers with 
anti-Trump movie projects might well thoughtfully bear in mind how much they 
could annoy a powerful Hollywood producer who is also treasury secretary. In 
his banking days, Mnuchin was known as the “foreclosure king” for buying up bad 
mortgages and evicting homeowners. So perhaps the film he should have produced 
was Ramin Bahrani’s99 Homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/29/99-homes-review-andrew-garfield-and-michael-shannon-flog-the-foundations-of-america>
, with Michael Shannon as the sinister realtor making cash out of the home-loan 
crisis.

Waiting for Trump to trickle down to the cinema in a larger sense could take a 
while. Even if The Donald scores two terms, he could be gone before anything 
comes through the pipeline. But the point is that cinema has always been in 
tune with Trump. It’s an intensely capitalist business, mythologising 
capitalism, famously run by (and often celebrating) charming/horrible male 
monsters letting their id run riot. Billy Bob Thornton did so inBad Santa 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/bad-santa-2-review-same-old-dirty-tricks>
; Robert De Niro will be a grumpy older comic inArt Linson’s The Comedian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/12/the-comedian-review-de-niro-leslie-mann-afi>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLQXUmzXuEo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLQXUmzXuEo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLQXUmzXuEo&media=>
The cinema screen has long been populated by nobodies making it big, or 
somebodies making it small, but gaining emotional victories along the way: it’s 
full of success stories and satirical nightmares about male idiots fluking 
their way to the top. A naive, learning-impairedgardener called Chance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FcPQ9gww_qc> mouths banal platitudes that get 
mistaken for profundity and take him to the heart of political power.A goofy 
lookalike <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PTTe-rxTyh0> of the US president 
called Dave is called upon to impersonate the ailing C-in-C permanently, 
despite being hilariously unqualified and unsuitable. A star newsreader has a 
breakdown live on TVand incites everyone to yell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/23/network-40-years-reality-tv-donald-trump>
: “I’m as mad as hell and I’m not going to take it any more!” A rackety 
Broadway producer stages a crass, pro-Hitler musical that needs to fail to 
conceal his profits from the taxman, butit becomes a terrifying success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/16/comedy.theproducers>. A plutocrat 
with aspirations to high office bullyingly promises a special prosecutor to get 
his opponent, “Boss” Jim Gettys, locked up, but also has an enigmatic wound, 
deep in his soul, relating tosomething called Rosebud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/citizen-kane>.

Look for Trump motifs in the cinema and they are everywhere. But the man 
himself is everywhere as well. Actors from Alec Baldwin to Johnny Depp have 
derisively played him, though not on the big screen: the hair, the red tie, the 
suit, the snuffly voice. Yet this is how Trump has been playing himself and 
promoting his celebrity brand. He has doneloads of movie cameos 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/president-donald-trump-all-of-his-film-and-tv-cameos-a7407816.html>
, generally as living shorthand for the glitzy razzmatazz of New York City – 
films such as The Job (in which America’s future grabber-in-chief asks Denis 
Leary if he is “banging” Liz Hurley) and Two Weeks Notice (he has an acid 
exchange with Hugh Grant).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyosAVMB47-Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyosAVMB47-Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyosAVMB47-Y&media=>
Politics meshes with Hollywood. They are arguably two wings of the same 
eternal display of power and prestige – liberalism coexisting uneasily with 
conservatism. Joe Kennedy (father of JFK) was briefly involved in the movie 
business in the 1920s, and did not trouble to conceal his antisemitism when he 
said to a colleague: “Look at that bunch of pants-pressers in Hollywood making 
themselves millionaires. I could take the whole business away from them.” 
Conversely, and in fine Joe Kennedy style, Donald Trump contemptuously took the 
whole business of the Republican party and then the presidency away from the 
“establishment”. Interestingly, Rupert Murdoch, owner of 20th Century Fox, Fox 
News andperhaps soon Sky TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-pay-tv>
, is nowadays a restrained, almost mandarin figure compared with Trump, despite 
having presided over the populism that was to create him.

You could, of course, find a lot of Reagan or post-Reagan cinema – anything 
with a decent, aw-shucks guy winning out in the end. Forrest Gump is an example 
(though the rhyme with Donald Trump is unsettling), and I would say alsoSully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/sully-clint-eastwood-hudson-river-plane-crash-ntsb>
, despite the Mnuchin connection. But it strikes me that quasi-Trump cinema is 
something different: harsher, more dyspeptic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwhy-a-film-celebrating-mcdonalds-is-the-perfect-start-for-trump-cinema%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa47e27c73424562f1d8956cf8d87655e105d0810%2F1714_550_1825_2282%2F1825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20a%20film%20celebrating%20McDonald's%20is%20the%20perfect%20start%20for%20Trump%20cinema&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwhy-a-film-celebrating-mcdonalds-is-the-perfect-start-for-trump-cinema%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20a%20film%20celebrating%20McDonald%27s%20is%20the%20perfect%20start%20for%20Trump%20cinema&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwhy-a-film-celebrating-mcdonalds-is-the-perfect-start-for-trump-cinema%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa47e27c73424562f1d8956cf8d87655e105d0810%2F1714_550_1825_2282%2F1825.jpg>
 Jesse Eisenberg as Mark Zuckerberg in The Social Network. 
When Daniel Day-Lewis’s oilman is seen in Paul Thomas Anderson’s There Will Be 
Blood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/08/paulthomasanderson.drama> 
fanatically hacking away with a pickaxe, and later locked in a strange twilight 
of mega-rich unhappiness and eccentricity, it is a very Trumpian narrative arc, 
but perhaps not Trump cinema, exactly, because the man himself isn’t seen as a 
winner. Perhaps closer isThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/14/the-social-network-review>, 
written by Aaron Sorkin and directed by David Fincher, an unbridled capitalist 
success story about the creation of Facebook, the network that was to mobilise 
millions of Trump supporters outside the establishment “mainstream media” and 
of course spreadfake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/18/what-is-fake-news-pizzagate> – a 
development unguessed at in the film.

Again, the comparison isn’t exact. Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> is supposed to be an 
intimidatingly smart Harvard guy, and the point about Trump is that he does not 
have these elitist credentials; he is the friend of the dumb. We talk about
post-truth <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>; how about 
post-satire? Sacha Baron Cohen’s creationBorat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/oct/27/comedy.sachabaroncohen> was 
allowed to say and do outrageous things, on the understanding that he was 
horrible. Donald does them unsatirically. Broad comedy in Hollywood now often 
includes outrageous stuff: drugs, booze, inappropriate behaviour. Hollywood 
lovesHorrible Bosses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/27/horrible-bosses-2-review>. Trump 
campaigners, Trump supporters and Trump activists relentlessly trolling people 
online might see themselves as comedians, as Will Ferrell wild men. But in the 
final analysis, Trump is anti-comedy, as shown bythe grisly troll Milo 
Yiannopoulos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/03/milo-yiannopoulos-250000-book-deal-fury-leslie-jones-simon-schuster-breitbart-alt-right>
, who incited online abuse against Ghostbusters star Leslie Jones. Trumpism has 
the anarchism of Hollywood comedy without the humour or talent.

Network at 40: the flawed satire that predicted Trump and cable 'news porn'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/23/network-40-years-reality-tv-donald-trump>
We arguably come back to Peter Finch in Network in 1976, playing the TV star 
who is promoted as a celebrity ranter, telling people to scream out of their 
windows that they’re as mad as hell. Those were the days when people could only 
shout out of their windows.The host of The Apprentice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/trump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv>
 got them to shout into their smartphones and laptops, their screams of 
futility and alienation amplified and recirculated on social media, and 
converted into votes. A season of Trump cinema must start with a 40-year 
anniversary showing of Network.
 