
In 2016, 21st-century virtual reality really arrived. From cheap mobile 
experiences to exuberant desktop machines, if you wanted to dive into a virtual 
world, there was a way. But while the headsets opened up possibilities, the new 
breed of touch controllers are the virtual hands drawing you in.


When you first don a VR headset you’re transported to another world, but 
suspending disbelief is required to keep you there. With the simple wand-like 
controllers or joypads, that’s pretty hard – you know you’re using a controller 
on the outside rather than your hands on the inside, which drags you out of the 
moment. Once that happens, you then start noticing the pixels of the display, 
the pressure of the headset on your face, the growing motion sickness and the 
chance to lose yourself in virtual reality disappears.

Now Oculus <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/oculus>, the high-powered 
Facebook-owned VR maker, has brought out dedicated Touch controllers. They have 
buttons joysticks and triggers, but they also track movement in a 3D space – 
rotational, positional, depth and height – as you might expect. Then they go 
one stage further, detecting the very presence of your individual fingers 
around the controller.

When you point, so do your virtual hands. When you lift your thumb, they give 
you a thumbs up. You can tighten or loosen your grip, and do so individually 
with your index finger, all while having almost as manydegrees of freedom 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degrees_of_freedom_(mechanics)> as your flesh 
and blood hands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Foculus-touch-control-future-vr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc5ce84943fafc2244bc14de24117f334c965c0a%2F1_0_4602_2762%2F4602.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20future%20of%20VR%20is%20all%20down%20to%20touch%20control&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Foculus-touch-control-future-vr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20future%20of%20VR%20is%20all%20down%20to%20touch%20control&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Foculus-touch-control-future-vr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc5ce84943fafc2244bc14de24117f334c965c0a%2F1_0_4602_2762%2F4602.jpg>
 Oculus Touch controllers marked by impact with a desk. Photograph: Samuel 
Gibbs for the Guardian 
It is so natural, so intuitive, that very soon you forget there are 
controllers, it’s just whatever you happen to have picked up in your virtual 
world, be that a broom, a bottle, a can, a disk or, almost inevitably, a gun.

This is transformative. While the view around you tracking the motions of your 
head tells your brain that you’re no longer in Kansas, it is the almost tactile 
nature of doing things rather than simply witnessing them that makes you 
believe.

When you’re moving through a puzzle-based shooting world in Super Hot, where 
every twitch of your hands, face, body or head makes a difference, when you’re 
picking out bullets from the air like a virtual Neo in the Matrix, or climbing 
up a rock face where every handhold is key, you’re transported to another realm.

The pixels of the display, the cable attaching you to a computer and the 
awkward feeling of looking like a prat fades away – until you hit something in 
the earthly plane, which is easier than you might think.

And that’s what VR needs to tackle next, the ability to move freely in space. 
For the holy grail of virtual reality –Star Trek’s Holodeck 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holodeck> – you’re going to need something as 
good for your feet as the Oculus Touch controllers are for your hands. As 
attempts so far fromgiant balls <http://www.virtusphere.com/> to rolling floors 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7uO8Z34f0xE> show, when it comes to VR, feet 
are harder to cater for than hands – so sadly don’t expect to be roaming the 
digital plains any time soon.


 