
I’d like to begin by shelving the obvious, contemporary answer to the question 
“Why don’t I enjoy life?”: “Because you have a chemical imbalance in your 
brain, which can be fixed with medication.” I wouldn’t want to put anyone off 
doing anything that might help their suffering, but this answer needs to stop 
being so pushy and get to the back of the queue: there are plenty of perfectly 
valid reasons for not enjoying life.

How would the Stoics cope today? | Ryan Holiday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/11/how-would-the-stoics-cope-today>
The curious thing about this question is that it’s asked in the negative. “Why 
do I enjoy life?” could be considered equally perplexing. The use of the 
negative seems to suggest that enjoyment is the norm and non-enjoyment a 
deviation. But is life really meant to be fun? Or is it far too intrinsically 
difficult? Some schools of thought, such asstoicism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/11/how-would-the-stoics-cope-today?CMP=fb_us>
, might advise you to stop even trying to have a great time. Others, like 
hedonism, take enjoyment to be the main aim.

While old-fashioned stoics may look a bit sour-faced and grumpy to people 
who’ve grown up with Coca-Cola ads, it doesn’t take much of a psychic 
somersault to come to the conclusion that perky, neoliberal pleasure-seeking 
can also be a downer.

How enjoyable is life supposed to be? Perhaps it would be wise to ask what 
“life” is. Do we mean the series of events that begins with birth and ends with 
death and gets all fiddly in the middle? Or is it more helpful to go back to 
the earliest specks of living matter? There’s something mind-bogglingly strange 
and exciting about the very improbability of it all. Why did those little 
ignitions keep happening? And why did they start to happen more and more, 
lasting for longer and adding bits on? Did the cells somehow “like” what they 
were experiencing, and to try to cling on to it? Is “life” in the primeval 
sense a pleasure or a pain?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fwhy-dont-i-enjoy-life-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b42c29aeaf619fa4435ef0135a2f8fb7616911%2F0_174_4845_2908%2F4845.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20I%20enjoy%20life%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Anouchka%20Grose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fwhy-dont-i-enjoy-life-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20I%20enjoy%20life%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Anouchka%20Grose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fwhy-dont-i-enjoy-life-google-autocomplete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b42c29aeaf619fa4435ef0135a2f8fb7616911%2F0_174_4845_2908%2F4845.jpg>
 ‘Guzzle your medicine and stop whining’ does not necessarily deal with the 
incredible weirdness of life on this planet.’ Photograph: Jonathan Nourok/Getty 
Images 
The pre-Socratic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/17/socrates-philosopher-man-for-our-times>
 philosophers are nice people to think about because they are like us in that 
they were talkative, self-aware humans, but unlike us in that they didn’t have 
access to detailed empirical information about primordial fossil formations and 
brain chemistry. They had to answer questions about existence based on what 
they saw in front of them. Unlike people in most other cultures and at most 
other moments in history, they chose not to turn to supernatural explanations 
but to try to understand the world in physical terms.

One of the nicest, and maddest, of all pre-Socratics was Empedocles 
<http://www.iep.utm.edu/empedocl/>, who thought that the world was composed of 
four “roots” – earth, air, fire and water – that were constantly being formed 
and reformed according to the universal principles of Love and Strife. While it 
might sound a bit naive and wacky, it’s also not completely off the mark.

Empedocles is credited with presaging quantum physics, with its notion of 
particles affected by the forces of attraction and repulsion. (Although even 
the ancient physicists could see that, in a lot of ways, he was wrong. Not to 
mention actually quite religious.)

He was also one of the last philosophers to put down his ideas in verse, and 
overall his vision of the cosmos is fantastically poetic: once upon a time 
there was just a big ball of emulsified Love, which then became fractured by 
Strife. The reason we aren’t just soup is that the “roots” attracted and 
repelled each other to produce the complex world we now live in. In other 
words, something likebig bang theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2006/may/05/spaceexploration.universe>. 
The end point of all this Strife was a strictly layered world in which all the 
elements were fully separated out. (Perhaps we will get there some time in the 
next four years.) Still, it’s OK because once the roots are separated, Love 
comes along and starts mixing things up again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fwhy-dont-i-enjoy-life-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3ffa873c3dc3775ff77e55477d96f66e2806525%2F0_484_5524_3315%2F5524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20I%20enjoy%20life%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Anouchka%20Grose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fwhy-dont-i-enjoy-life-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20I%20enjoy%20life%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Anouchka%20Grose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fwhy-dont-i-enjoy-life-google-autocomplete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3ffa873c3dc3775ff77e55477d96f66e2806525%2F0_484_5524_3315%2F5524.jpg>
 ‘Now we are told that ‘experiences’ are the aim of the discerning consumer. Be 
existentially smart and go zorbing. This will surely placate your troubled 
soul.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Explanations like this might not have the laboratory-tested and easily 
actionable appeal of the “take Prozac” answer, but they do at least have 
something thoughtful to say about the incredible weirdness of life on this 
planet. Something better than: “Guzzle your medicine and stop whining.”

Neoliberalism is naughty in that it pretends not to be a cunning scheme but an 
extension of the natural way of things. Likewise, biological explanations for 
unhappiness. Both might initially appear non-ideological, simple extensions or 
descriptions of the way things are. However, the underlying implication of so 
many diagnoses of depression is that you should be happy because you live in a 
culture in which everything is allowed and possible. Therefore, if you’re 
unhappy, there must be something wrong with you. This is an extremely cruel 
proposition, made worse by the fact that our sneaky culture offers any number 
of purchasable objects that promise to uplift us.

In other words, contemporary capitalism breeds dissatisfaction, then tries to 
sell us a bogus antidote – and when that doesn’t work, it drugs us. To add 
insult to injury, now most of us have worked out that unnecessary material 
goods don’t generally make that much difference to our overall happiness, we 
are told that“experiences” are the aim of the discerning consumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/27/spend-less-on-stuff-experiences-materialism-experientialism>
. Don’t be an idiot and spend all your money in Topshop or John Lewis, be 
existentially smart and eat jellied fish skin in a hot air balloon/pretend to 
be Sherlock Holmes for a night/gozorbing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/09/zorb-ball-ski-slope-russian>. 
This will surely placate your troubled soul.

Rather than accepting the terms of our current state of Love and Strife, it 
may be better to think back to the prehistoric swamps and wonder what on earth 
those feisty protozoa were getting out of it, and also to remember the words of 
that lovely, hokey bathroom-wall poemDesiderata 
<http://mwkworks.com/desiderata.html>: You are a child of the universe,/ no 
less than the trees and the stars. And whoever said trees and stars were 
supposed to enjoy themselves?
 