
The release of a quarter of a million US diplomatic cables leaked by Chelsea 
Manning, the US army whistleblower whose 35-year sentence wascommuted by 
President Obama on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-sentence-commuted-barack-obama>
, had a powerful impact on the practice of diplomacy around the world.


Chelsea Manning: majority of prison sentence commuted by Obama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-sentence-commuted-barack-obama>
From November 2010 on, the knowledge that their classified reports might 
ultimately go viral online made US diplomats think twice about what they wrote 
back to Washington and made their foreign contacts think twice about what they 
told the diplomats.

The cables may even have played a part in sparking the Arab Spring revolt. The 
colourful accounts of the opulent lifestyles of the family of Tunisian 
president Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, circulated on Twitter and Facebook, acted as 
an accelerant to the rage of the country’s disaffected youth.

In one of the more colourful cables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/218324> of the 
cache, the US ambassador to Tunisia, Robert Godec, described a 2009 dinner with 
Ben Ali’s daughter and her husband, a wealthy businessman, Mohammad Sakher El 
Materi, who owned a pet tiger, fed on a constant supply of chickens, which 
reminded Godec of Uday Hussein’s lion in Baghdad.

“After dinner, [Materi] served ice cream and frozen yoghurt he brought in by 
plane from Saint Tropez, along with blueberries and raspberries and fresh fruit 
and chocolate cake,” the cable reported.

The report spread instantly and far around a country where it was estimated 
that 2 million out of 10 million people were Facebook users. It is impossible 
to say whether it had been read by Mohammed Bouazizi, the fruit seller who set 
himself on fire a few days after the Godec cable was published in protest at 
harassment by the municipal authorities, but it had certainly been seen by a 
large number of the rioters who came out to the streets in response to his 
suicide.

The cables were a window into how the world’s elites acted and talked behind 
closed doors. King Abdullah of Saudi Arabiawas reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/28/us-embassy-cables-saudis-iran> 
as having “frequently exhorted the US to attack Iran to put an end to its 
nuclear weapons programme”, according to one cable.

“He told you [Americans] to cut off the head of the snake,” said the Saudi 
ambassador to Washington, Adel al-Jubeir, according to a report on Abdullah’s 
meeting with US Gen David Petraeus in April 2008.

The leaks also revealed that US diplomats had been ordered to take part in an 
intelligence-collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/28/us-embassy-cables-spying-un> 
operation at the United Nations targeted at the secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, 
and the permanent security council representatives from China, Russia, France 
and the UK.

How Chelsea Manning lifted lid on harsh facts of US wars and military justice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-whistleblower-us-military-justice>
Washington wanted diplomats as well as the intelligence agencies to pick up 
details such as credit card numbers, email addresses, phone, fax and pager 
numbers and even frequent-flyer account numbers of UN figures as well as 
“biographic and biometric information on UN security council permanent 
representatives”.

The secret “national human intelligence collection directive” was sent to US 
missions at the UN in New York, Vienna and Rome; 33 embassies and consulates, 
including those in London, Paris and Moscow.

The cable raised questions about the dividing line between diplomats and spies 
in Washington’s eyes, and without doubt made UN and other foreign officials 
think very carefully about subsequent meetings with US diplomats.

US officials have asserted that the release of the material endangered the 
lives of US diplomats’ foreign sources. The state department legal adviser at 
the time, Harold Kohargued 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-wikileaks-usa-letter-idUSTRE6AR1E420101128> 
the document dump “could place at risk the lives of countless innocent 
individuals” as well as “ongoing military operations”.

He accused WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> of 
endangerment “without regard to the security and the sanctity of the lives your 
actions endanger”.

There are no proven cases of deaths directly attributable to the release of 
the cables. But there was no doubt about the breadth and depth of the 
embarrassment.
 