
Between the legions of scoop-necked DJ bores and the sub-Sheeran mopers it’s 
easy to get disheartened about the lack of personality in modern British pop. 
But at least we haveWiley <https://www.theguardian.com/music/wiley>. Even 
within grime’s playpen of extroverts, he is a wildcard, a high priest of 
obstreperousness who seemingly lives to upset applecarts – playing games with 
persona and reality, rampaging through the music industry, pouring out an 
endless stream of consciousness through his lyrics but also whatever social 
media platform takes his fancy at the time. He’s constantly walked a line 
between gangster coldness and a childlike openness, and between truly avant 
garde brilliance and shameless pop ambition.

He’s picked fights with almost everyone in grime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/02/the-guardian-view-on-grime-music-sound-of-protest>
, from the most spectacularly petty to the deadly serious, yet somehow as he 
matures (he just turned 37) he manages to retain his place as the scene’s 
patriarch. He should probably be a bigger national and international star than 
he is, but the way he has constantly splurged out his work, self-sabotaged and 
evaded expectation means that he displays the polar opposite of the gimlet-eyed 
ambition of his one-time brother-in-arms Dizzee Rascal, and can be very 
confusing to all but the most avid observer. Nonetheless, he has just released 
one of the best and most focused albums in his career,The Godfather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/12/wiley-the-godfather-review-grime-originator-delivers-a-blockbuster>
, and against all odds seems as energised as he’s ever been.

Trying to do a “best of Wiley” is a fool’s errand, as aside from the vastness 
of his official and unofficial work, his moments of greatness are as likely to 
be a Twitter outburst as a lyric, and some high points are often entirely 
dependent on understanding the context within the soap opera of his life and 
the grime scene. However, here are five moments out of many where he shines 
bright, each of which offers a window into the world of one of the truest 
individualists of the modern musical world.

1. Back and forth with Eksman
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCBR7o1pg4iU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCBR7o1pg4iU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCBR7o1pg4iU&media=>
It’s worth having a dig through YouTube for recordings of Wiley MCing on 
drum’n’bass DJ sets in the 90s for two main reasons. First, as an indicator of 
just how long he’s been honing his craft: the first ones are from 1996, and 
already on this rapid-fire to-and-fro with drum’n’bass mainstay Eksman from 
1998 his flow and enunciation are impeccable. And, second, to understand that 
his roots are in the rave. This was his school, where he learned the weird and 
extreme sonorities that would feed into his groundbreaking electronic 
productions, and you can also see the hyperspeed patter of drum’n’bass as the 
launching of the relentless stream of verbal momentum that has characterised 
his entire life since. Although his style is pretty much standard for the time, 
and the subject matter is hype, threats and boasts, you can already see his 
leftfield inventiveness in throwaway oddities like “wipe my feet on your face 
just like a doormat, I’m coming through the catflap”.

2. Working with Dizzee
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEXQgLYs9PuE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEXQgLYs9PuE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEXQgLYs9PuE&media=>
 Where it all coalesced. Having earned his stripes in drum’n’bass and achieved 
stardom in UK garage as part of Pay As U Go Cartel, the years 2001 and 2002 saw 
Wiley find his voice in all respects. The eerie “Eskibeat” instrumentals he was 
selling by the tens of thousands on white label 12in singles, and the varied MC 
talent of the original lineup of Roll Deep Crew were among grime’s defining 
sounds. But it was his to-and-fro with his young friend and protege Dizzee 
Rascal on rave sets and tapes that probably did more than anything else to 
signal to the world that something new had arrived. Their falling out – 
apparently over hot-headedness and petty crew politics that led toDizzee’s 
stabbing in Ayia Napa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/jul/19/cyprus.travelnews> – is one of the 
great creative tragedies of modern pop.

3. Sorry Sorry Pardon What
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6M1wDNqbO_o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6M1wDNqbO_o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6M1wDNqbO_o&media=>
In a typical flurry of activity, Wiley released five album-length Tunnel 
Vision mixtapes in just six months at the end of 2006. This one opened the 
last, as well as forming a B-side to an official single release later in the 
year. In a multilayered bit of self-referentiality, he samples Dizzee’s 
vocaling of his own 2003 Ice Rink instrumental – which itself was possibly the 
most perfect expression of the deep emotional complexity of his Eskibeat style 
– then rides the rhythm himself on some of the most cantankerous, 
I’ll-fight-the-lot-of-yer form of his life. Notable for world-class language 
mangling like “blood, you’re the one who got smacked in the grilliam”.

4. Step Three Freestyle
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQ_tn3rDQP0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQ_tn3rDQP0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQ_tn3rDQP0&media=>
And, talking of language mangling, here’s one of those classic moments where 
Wiley’s musical vividness of expression just seems to spill over, beyond the 
meaning his words are capable of containing. At the same time as he was having 
his biggest major label pop hit,Heatwave 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qimiWfZAtXw>, he was also returning to the Big 
Dada label to say: “Let’s go and make magic / I couldn’t quit grime if I wanted 
to / it’s been a long time, I’m an addict / for me it’s just a habit / and this 
fire in my belly right now / rudeboy you have never had it / had it, had it, 
never had it / had it, had it, never had it / never never never never never 
never never never.” It’s that rave MC glossolalia – also constantly resurgent 
in his tendency to burst out with “budududu badadadada” as part of lines – that 
will never leave him and which keeps the momentum going within the track and 
his career.

5. Bring Them All/Holy Grime ft Devlin
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgcroTw04i-w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgcroTw04i-w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgcroTw04i-w&media=>
And here he is, in 2016, with a fellow rapper with whom who he’s fought and 
bickered over the years. For every time Wiley has wistfully looked to the big 
money of US success, or found himself at the top of the British charts with a 
dance track by accident or design, he can’t stop himself falling back to the 
pleasures of just MCing over a soundsystem-testing beat. As ever, he’s 
commentating on his own life and on anything that falls into his field of 
vision, prodding, testing, trying ideas out. For all that grime,at the start of 
the century <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/may/23/urban1>, seemed like 
an explosion that couldn’t possibly do anything other than burn out, a decade 
and a half on, Wiley and his fellow elder statesmen Skepta, JME, P Money, 
Ghetts, Devlin, Flowdan and a whole lot of others are doing a shockingly good 
job of making it look like there’s life in the old dog yet.
 