
At London’s Frieze art fair last autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/05/frieze-art-fair-2016-review-everyones-a-performer-in-the-boozy-fruity-house-of-fun>
 some friends from Vienna and Lahore took me to the Deutsche Bank VIP lounge. 
There we ate – what else? – micro portions of fish and chips, an ironically 
British gourmet snack in surroundings that stressed the global nature of the 
art economy.

Now the postmodern canapes are going cold in London’s art world, as the terror 
of a hard Brexit sends chills through some of the most sophisticated businesses 
in the capital.

A survey 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/arts/londons-future-as-an-art-market-leader-relies-on-free-movement-a3441681.html>
 of galleries represented at the London art fair has found that 49% believe the 
best way the government can help the art trade cope with Brexit is by 
preserving free movement of people and goods. Hopes of any such market 
liberalism are fading fast as the prime minister puts control of the UK border 
high on her agenda and Britain is toleave the European single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/theresa-may-to-confirm-uk-exit-from-eu-single-market-speech>
.

Key points from May's Brexit speech: what have we learned?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
The art market’s anxiety that it will be damaged by any restriction to free 
movement may seem to fly in the face of more bullish claims for its post-Brexit 
future. Last autumn, leave campaigners were claiming that London does far more 
art business with the rest of the world than it does with Europe, and freedom 
from EU controls could be a great thing. “Now is the time to eliminate or 
reduce the regulatory burdens that have piled up over recent decades, adding 
costs and compromising London’s competitive position,”enthused 
<http://www.artmarketmonitor.com/2016/09/21/for-the-uks-art-market-brexit-could-be-an-opportunity/>
 art dealer Anthony Browne. Well, such opinions easily get an airing in certain 
sections of the British press.

There is even some evidence of a patriotic boom in historical British art: 
last year <https://www.bonhams.com/press_release/22089/> a long-forgotten 
self-portrait by the 17th-century British artist William Dobson set a £1m-plus 
auction record. The most unexpectedly potent factor in revitalising Britain’s 
art market may, however, be the fall in the pound’s value since the Brexit 
vote, which means London’s galleries can offer bargains to international art 
collectors.

None of that seems to reassure the 49% of art galleries convinced that free 
movement is a crucial benefit of the EU. The survey confirms my own impressions 
from conversations with art world professionals who clearly think the 
closing-down of Britain will be a disaster. And these people understand money.

No business in Britain is more intricately international than the art trade, a 
specialised industry so completely globalised that going into a big gallery can 
feel like entering a VIP airport lounge or perhaps a space station. Interns 
from everywhere, dealers who may be in Dubai today, Los Angeles tomorrow, and 
masterpieces from all over the planet all make London’s art trade a 
cosmopolitan wonder.

It is also a stonking success. In the 1980s London had only a few art dealers, 
most of them around the Cork Street area in the West End. OnlyAnthony d’Offay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/mar/02/artnews.anthonydoffay> 
played an important part in the global contemporary art scene with his 
representation of Andy Warhol, Joseph Beuys and Jeff Koons. The explosion of 
artistic creativity in London at the end of that decade revolutionised 
metropolitan galleries, with Matt’s Gallery, Maureen Paley and White Cube among 
those leading the way. By the time Tate Modern opened in 2000 London was in the 
midst of a surge that has made it one of the world’s artistic capitals, with 
every major world gallery seeking to get in on its booming business.

The likes of Michael Gove might well ask: So what? What good does all this 
elitist contemporary art do for ordinary British people? And is it not harmful 
to Britain’s true cultural identity, making us worshipgiant bums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/30/gaetano-pesce-turner-prize-andrea-hamilton>
 when we should be looking atConstable’s Salisbury Cathedral 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salisbury_Cathedral_from_the_Meadows#/media/File%3AConstable_Salisbury_meadows.jpg>
?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fhard-brexit-london-art-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42a6a4995878fadc5579fa68c3b43ba653915fd8%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20a%20hard%20Brexit%20spell%20disaster%20for%20London's%20cosmopolitan%20art%20scene%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fhard-brexit-london-art-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20a%20hard%20Brexit%20spell%20disaster%20for%20London%27s%20cosmopolitan%20art%20scene%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fhard-brexit-london-art-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42a6a4995878fadc5579fa68c3b43ba653915fd8%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Sculptures in the grounds of the Hauser & Wirth gallery at Bruton, Somerset. 
Photograph: Sam Frost 
I don’t always get the deepest of aesthetic satisfactions from art fairs and 
the like, but consider this: if you live in deepest Somerset and want to see 
interesting art, you can, because the international art dealership Hauser & 
Wirth runsa rural gallery and art centre <http://www.hauserwirthsomerset.com/> 
in Bruton that puts on top-quality exhibitions. It is about to open one by the 
respected British 20th-century sculptor Elisabeth Frink. Hauser & Wirth 
Somerset also has a public garden, restaurant and bar, and with talks by 
leading intellectuals (Germaine Greer will speak about Frink) provides the area 
with a full-scale cultural hub. Thus the global art market is directly 
enriching Somerset.

The vogue for art sustained by the rise of the London art market has also 
energised galleries and festivals in Liverpool and Manchester, andsustains the 
Scottish art scene <http://www.gagosian.com/artists/richard-wright>. Free 
movement is obviously essential to this most worldly of businesses. The paradox 
is that it is precisely the parts of British life we can be most honestly 
patriotic about that Brexit will smash. Since its “cool Britannia” takeoff in 
the 1990s, London has now kept its status as a world cultural capital for 20 
years. That is a much longer period of artistic eminence than it enjoyed in the 
1960s. It is in fact the most spectacular age of global eminence in art it has 
ever enjoyed. We are rubbish at football but good at art – and selling art.

Brexit could make it harder and harder for globalised London successes like 
the art world to shine. Everything will become smaller, narrower and uglier in 
a prejudiced future forged in the name of independence. Theresa May might be 
talking up a “global Britain”, but the general mood in the wake of the Brexit 
vote is that we are against outsiders, and also against London, our most 
important national asset. This could end up being a very little Britain indeed.
 