
I’ve always quite liked Alec Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/21/from-green-day-to-alec-baldwin-celebrities-against-trump-video-explainer>
, but like many liberals I now regard him with something approaching 
hero-worship for his series of brilliant Donald Trump impersonations during the 
latest season ofSaturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/16/saturday-night-live-baldwin-is-back-as-trump-for-worst-ever-presidential-debate>
. The last sketch before Christmas was especially sharp. After the 
president-elect has been visited in Trump Tower by a bare-chested Vladimir 
Putin, who generously declares that he doesn’t want a gift from Trump because 
“You are the gift, Donald”,Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin>
 (played by John Goodman) arrives, and soon huddles into a corner with Putin to 
discuss the carving up of Russian oilfields in return for lifted sanctions.

‘None of the old rules apply’: Dave Eggers travels through post-election 
America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/18/none-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america>
Trump/Baldwin listens in, bewildered, out of his depth and out of the loop. 
“What are you guys talking about?” he asks. Putin says “Don’t worry about it”, 
before resuming his chat with Tillerson, getting ever more technical until 
Trump butts in with: “And then we destroy Vanity Fair, right? Terrible 
publication, just terrible.” Putin and Tillerson give him withering, indulgent 
looks – toleration of this buffoon being the price they have to pay for a new, 
mutually beneficial relationship between Russia and Exxon.

When I viewed this clip on YouTube, two days after broadcast, it had had 5 
million views and attracted more than 10,000 comments. Impressive that a piece 
of modern satire should hit its target so accurately – the sketch really nails 
the vanity and ignorance that seem to drive Trump, and that will no doubt allow 
his cabinet free rein – while reaching such a large audience. On the other 
hand, the audience may be large, but is it wide? Most satire preaches to the 
converted. Writing about Beyond the Fringe as early as 1963, Michael Frayn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/29/michael-frayn-skios-interview> 
pointed out that the effect of the boom in political comedy that it spawned “is 
not to undermine but to confirm the audience’s prejudices, and has less in 
common with satire than with community hymn-singing – agreeable and 
heartwarming as that may be”. A quick glance through the comments on YouTube 
beneath the Baldwin sketch shows that this is still true, and reveals a 
tedious, predictable confirmation bias: the posts are evenly split between 
people praising the skit and those expressing contempt for the liberals who 
find it funny.

It’s one of the perennial paradoxes of satire that it only gives pleasure to 
those who already share its point of view. (Those on the left who doubt this 
assertion should try sitting throughAn American Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/sep/30/an.american.carol>, David 
Zucker’s abysmal 2008 lampoon of Michael Moore, featuringKelsey Grammer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/mar/23/kelsey-grammer-starting-over>
 and Paris Hilton among others.) George S Kaufman famously claimed that “satire 
is what closes on Saturday night”, and by and large he was right: who wants to 
pay good money, after all, to have their core beliefs challenged and insulted? 
Nonetheless, closing the door on 2016, this feels like a time when satirists 
are really needed to step up to the plate: not just to provide a bit of 
pleasure for progressives and liberals the world over, who suddenly find 
themselves wrong-footed by history and crave the consolation of that “community 
hymn-singing” more than ever; but also to offer some much-needed moral clarity, 
a rough and ready, cartoonish shortcut to the truth – a way of exposing the 
ridiculousness of the lies that currently frame bigots and racists as 
straight-talkers, and unaccountable elites (such as Trump’s billionaire backers,
the Koch brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/donald-trump-koch-brothers-cabinet-transition-power>
 and Robert Mercer) as friends of the ordinary people. In short, the present 
moment calls for absurdism, caricature and tomfoolery, because these are the 
only ways to capture our current reality.

The problem for today’s satirist, though – and I feel this keenly myself, as 
an occasional practitioner – is keeping up with that reality in the first 
place. If your stock-in-trade is comic exaggeration, you face new challenges 
all the time. To give just a small example: in my novelNumber 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/11/number-11-jonathan-coe-review-what-a-carve-up>
, wanting to satirise the silliness of prize culture, a culture in which 
artists and others can only be ascribed worth by being put in competition with 
one another, I invented what I thought was the stupidest idea imaginable: the 
Winshaw prize, a prize for the best prize, in which the Booker, the Turner, the 
Pulitzer and others fight it out for supremacy every year. A few months later 
in Private Eye I read that an outfit called the Global Conference Network is 
setting up the “Awards awards”. “With directors of awards companies as judges,” 
their website proclaims, “this is a long overdue chance to receive recognition 
for the best awards initiatives and ceremonies.” (That “long overdue” is 
especially astounding.) What’s a satirist to do?

The problem for today’s satirist is keeping up with the reality in the first 
place

It’s only a short step from this to realising that the corrupt, greedy Winshaw 
family I originally created for my novel What a Carve Up! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/09/jonathan-coe-carve-book-club> is 
far outstripped by our own David Cameron, who, having reduced the country to 
chaos with his foolish referendum has now signed up with the Washington 
Speakers Bureau and is giving talks in the US on his Brexit disaster for a fee 
of $120,000 (£98,000) an hour, while the rest of us flounder around at home 
trying to clear up the mess.

Wondering how satirists might deal with all this – and thinking of the US 
situation in particular – I’ve been revisiting a novel that made a big 
impression on me as a teenager, Joseph Heller’s Good As Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1998/mar/01/fiction.josephheller>. Back in 
1979, its year of publication, this was seen as Heller’s return to the savage 
irony ofCatch-22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/10/catch-22-50-years-joseph-heller>
. (The New York Times called it a “huge and honourable risk” and “a nightmare 
of abuse and opportunism, of surreal graffiti”.) Into the maelstrom of 
Washington power games it thrusts its amoral academic protagonist, Bruce Gold, 
a man who doesn’t so much want to drain the swamp as trawl it for financial and 
sexual opportunities. Gold is a man who never starts anything, let alone 
finishes it. His book on the “Jewish experience” remains perpetually unwritten, 
just as his Washington career flourishes even though he never learns his job 
title, or why he keeps being promoted, or why everyone prefers him not to write 
the reports he is commissioned to write, or why his gloomy jokes are taken as 
brilliant policy pronouncements.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjonathan-coe-will-satire-save-us-in-the-age-of-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcca01f75fd147a76c0b027332cb1e3bd738881a%2F1281_0_2591_2592%2F2591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Coe%3A%20will%20satire%20save%20us%20in%20the%20age%20of%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjonathan-coe-will-satire-save-us-in-the-age-of-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Coe%3A%20will%20satire%20save%20us%20in%20the%20age%20of%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjonathan-coe-will-satire-save-us-in-the-age-of-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcca01f75fd147a76c0b027332cb1e3bd738881a%2F1281_0_2591_2592%2F2591.jpg>
 Russian-American novelist Gary Shteyngart, who recently tweeted: ‘The NY Times 
piece about Rick Perry’s nomination as energy sec can be read as satirical 
fiction.’ Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Solo 
“You’re boggling my mind!” his mentor Ralph Newsome keeps telling him, after 
hearing the phrase from Gold’s own lips (“I don’t think I’ve ever heard boggle 
used with an animate subject before”), and the reader’s mind is boggled, too, 
by Heller’s portrait of a political class characterised not so much by 
corruption as endless vacuity, self-contradiction and lack of serious 
principle. And yet I wonder ifGood As Gold would be adequate as a response to 
the Washington of 2017, in an age when the boundaries between reality and 
caricature have become so thoroughly blurred; an age when (as the 
Russian-American novelistGary Shteyngart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/09/featuresreviews.guardianreview4> 
recently tweeted) “Every single line in the [New York] Times piece aboutRick 
Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rick-perry-donald-trump-energy-department>
’s nomination as Energy Sec can be read as satirical fiction.”

In fact, rereading Good As Gold filled me with nostalgia more than anything 
else, because it depicts an America that, for all its venality, sits at the 
head of a stable world order. That world order started to unravel in 2016 – for 
better or worse. (Guess which one I’m betting on.) Perhaps such epoch-defining 
events are best portrayed not in satirical terms but through the lens of magic 
realism: the kind of rueful, ironic magic realism that you find, say, in 
Bohumil Hrabal’s masterpieceI Served the King of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/may/11/culture.comedy>, which tells the 
story of mid 20th-century Europe through the eyes of Ditie, an ambitious Czech 
waiter, and proceeds via a succession of haunting, pivotal moments when “the 
unbelievable came true”. The culmination of these occurs when Ditie, newly 
released from prison, accompanies a fellow inmate – a murderer – back to his 
home village. “We walked up to the top of a small rise, not much more than a 
sigh in the earth, and he said that from here we should be able to see his 
native village. But … not a single building was visible.” It turns out that 
they are searching for Lidice, which has been razed to the ground by the Nazis, 
and has vanished completely from the face of the earth. The murderer falls to 
the ground in disbelief, his knees trembling.

I confess that when I think of the way history turned on its axis in 2016, my 
satirist’s impulse threatens to desert me, and I wonder instead how Hrabal 
would have dealt with it. Consider the cases ofAlexander Dugin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/23/ukraine-crimea-what-putin-thinking-russia>
, the neofascist Russian philosopher, andSteve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
, the former editor ofBreitbart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/14/breitbart-how-trump-pravda-muddied-the-waters-and-surfed-wave>
 US. Until recently, these people were considered near-lunatics, deluded 
dreamers on the very fringes of acceptable political thought, lost in fantasies 
of white supremacy, ultra-conservatism and denial of hard-won equal rights for 
ethnic and sexual minorities.

Now, one of them whispers policy into the ears of Vladimir Putin, and the 
other is chief strategist to the White House. 2016 was indeed the year in which 
the unbelievable came true. It should, in the words of Ralph Newsome, boggle 
all of our minds.
 