In which city do the Blue and White Nile meet?  Juba  Cairo  Khartoum  Luxor 
Based on average daily usage in the developed world, what uses most water?  
Showering  Washing up  Drinking  Toilet flushing A 'bog standard' loo uses 3.6 
gallons a flush, but older toilets can use up to seven. The most efficient ones 
use 1.28 gallons a flush “Water, water, every where, Nor any drop to drink” – 
which poet wrote this?  Carol Ann Duffy  Samuel Taylor Coleridge The line is 
from The Rime of the Ancient Mariner  Benjamin Zephaniah  Dorothy Wordsworth 
What does the Arabic word sahra' mean?  Camel  Desert  Water hole  Sand Where 
is the most difficult place in the world for households to access clean water?  
Papua New GuineaAccording to a 2016 Water Aid report, Water: At What Cost? The 
State of the World’s Water  Kyrgyzstan  Chad  Yemen In ancient Rome, cold baths 
were "frigidarium" and warm baths were "tepidarium". What were hot baths?  
Temparium  Soldarium  Thermarium  Caldarium Lago de Maracaibo is the largest 
lake in South America. Which country is it in?  Paraguay  Venezuela The lake is 
technically a bay, as it leads into the Gulf of Venezuela through an artificial 
canal  Suriname  Mexico Transpiration in plants is similar to what process in 
humans?  Digestion  Evaporation  Absorption  Perspiration Transpiration is 
essentially evaporation of water from plant leaves; perspiration is sweating 
What percentage of the world’s water is salt water?  97%  37%  67%  17% What is 
the wettest capital city in the world?  Monrovia The capital of Liberia  Ottawa 
 Lima  Amsterdam  You got…  An ocean of knowledge  A deluge of knowledge  
You're conquering your thirst for knowledge  You've certainly tapped into your 
knowledge bank  A drop in the ocean of knowledge  Time to get your sea legs  A 
bit of a drip  You've not made a big splash here  You need some wet sponge 
treatment  A damp squib  A complete washout  Challenge your friends Submit 
answers  