
World Rugby has reiterated its disappointment with Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> for their handling of the 
George North head-injury incident in the match against Leicester last month, 
accusing the club of “failing to manage the injury appropriately”.

Northampton have not been punished by the world governing body, which does not 
have jurisdiction over the domestic game, but World Rugby found that the club 
failed to apply the correct protocols.

It also noted that the Saints medical staff were preoccupied with a possible 
spinal injury to North who, after the incident which appeared to knock him 
unconscious, said that he lay motionless to protect his neck. World Rugby also 
emphasised that the Wales wing should have been immediately and permanently 
removed from the field of play.

Failure to punish anyone over George North injury sends wrong message | Robert 
Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/21/george-north-concussion-northampton-premiership-rugby-rfu>
As it was North, who suffered four head injuries in five months between 
November 2014 and March 2015, was allowed to return to the pitch following a 
head injury assessment (HIA) eight minutes after he had appeared to be knocked 
unconscious against Leicester on 3 December. A statement from the governing 
body read: “World Rugby remains disappointed that there was a failure in this 
case to identify and manage the injury appropriately, in particular considering 
North’s medical history.”

World Rugby intervened last month after a joint RFU and Premiership Rugby 
concussion-management review panel found that Northampton were wrong to let 
North back on to the pitch but decided to take no action against the club. The 
ruling body also expressed its disappointment at Northampton’s “apparent 
non-compliance” with its protocols and Monday’s review sends what amounts to 
the same message.

Essentially, it is a stern rebuke for the 2014 Premiership champions but again 
no individual blame has been apportioned for allowing a player to return to the 
field with a potential head injury. Instead, World Rugby has focused on its 
protocols, in particular that “any clear or suspected symptom of concussion 
results in immediate and permanent removal of the player”.

Bill Beaumont, the World Rugby chairman, added: “While we acknowledge that 
errors in the correct application of the process may happen from time to time, 
we must continue to strive to make our game as safe as possible for players at 
all levels of the game. The head injury management process, including the HIA, 
is successfully protecting players and what this case shows is that all 
stakeholders must redouble their efforts to ensure they are implemented fully 
and correctly.

“I’d like to thank our colleagues at the RFU for their full cooperation in 
this matter and for conducting a thorough review. World Rugby will continue to 
work closely with all unions to ensure an environment of compliance in this 
important area.”

Furthermore, World Rugby also expressed its satisfaction, that the RFU and 
Premiership panel – which took more than two weeks to present its findings – 
had “acted swiftly and appropriately to implement measures with Northampton 
Saints and other clubs to reduce the probability of future non-compliance”.

In particular the governing body praised the panel for steps taken to avoid a 
repeat of the incident – rather than highlighting its failure to sanction 
Northampton – and reiterated the need for further education on concussion.

Premiership Rugby welcomed World Rugby’s review. “Within the English game – 
and in collaboration with the RFU and RPA [the players’ union] – we are setting 
new standards in dealing with concussion risk in education, prevention and 
treatment, and driving a change of culture in the game,” said a spokesman. “We 
are 100% behind our clubs in the way they have tackled concussion – player 
welfare is theirs and our No 1 priority.”

Northampton have not added any further comment to that which followed the 
concussion-management review panel’s verdict last month. That statement read: 
“The club’s management remains absolutely confident in the expertise, 
professionalism and commitment of our medical teams and is encouraged to see 
that the [panel] has found that the medics had nothing other than player 
welfare in mind during this incident.”
 