
Even the planet’s smallest elephants, tucked away on the island of Borneo, are 
no longer immune to the global poaching crisis for ivory.

On New Year’s Eve, wildlife officials in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo, found the 
bones of a beloved male elephant, nicknamed Sabre for his unusual tusks that 
slanted downwards like the extinct sabre-toothed tiger’s canines.

The discovery of Sabre – he was probably killed in late November – came just 
days after wildlife officials found a freshly slaughtered male elephant with 
its face cut off to get at the tusks. Both Sabre and the unnamed male perished 
within 1.5km of one another, though a month apart.

Prior to these events, elephant poaching had not been considered a major issue 
in Sabah. Benoit Goossens, director of Danau Girang Field Centre in Sabah, said 
the grisly finds indicated a professional hunter and trader may be setting up 
business in Sabah.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwborneo-pygmy-smallest-elephants-pygmy-killed-for-ivoryorlds-smallest-elephants-killed-for-ivory-in-borneo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc84084c9e3028c84d81fe1a8432db79999266cde%2F0_0_815_638%2F815.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%20smallest%20elephants%20killed%20for%20ivory%20in%20Borneo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwborneo-pygmy-smallest-elephants-pygmy-killed-for-ivoryorlds-smallest-elephants-killed-for-ivory-in-borneo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%20smallest%20elephants%20killed%20for%20ivory%20in%20Borneo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwborneo-pygmy-smallest-elephants-pygmy-killed-for-ivoryorlds-smallest-elephants-killed-for-ivory-in-borneo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc84084c9e3028c84d81fe1a8432db79999266cde%2F0_0_815_638%2F815.jpg>
 This elephant earned the nickname Sabre for his unusually downward curved 
tusks. He was subsequently killed by ivory poachers. Photograph: Danau Girang 
Field Centre and Wildlife Rescue Unit 
First discovered on a palm oil plantation by conservationists in early 
October, Sabre had been rescued and moved to Kawang Forest Reserve. 
Conservationists fitted the bizarrely-tusked pachyderm with a satellite collar 
and released him into the wild, thinking him safe.

“We were obviously wrong,” said Goossens.

“There are no words to express our sadness,” said wildlife vet Pakeeyaraj 
Nagalingam. A member of Sabah’sWildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Rescue Unit, Nagalingam 
aided in Sabre’s rescue and translocation in October.

“It looks like there is no safe place for elephants in Sabah any more. The 
relevant authorities who are responsible for enforcement of illegal wildlife 
poaching and other illegal activities must work harder and smarter,” he said.

Sabre’s tuskless skeleton was found just one day after China announced it would
ban the ivory trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/30/china-ban-ivory-trade-2017-elephants-wwf>
 by the end of 2017.

“The loss of these elephants is especially sad when the world is waking up to 
the African elephant crisis and closing its domestic ivory markets,” said 
Elizabeth Bennett, vice president of species conservation at the Wildlife
Conservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society. 
“Only when all ivory markets are closed and demand for ivory ceases will all of 
the populations of elephants across Africa and Asia be safe from such poaching.”

Why the Guardian is spending a year reporting on the plight of elephants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/12/why-the-guardian-is-spending-a-year-reporting-on-the-plight-of-the-worlds-elephant-population>
The taxonomic status of the Bornean pygmy elephant, as it’s popularly known 
because they are about one fifth smaller than other Asian elephants, is in 
limbo. Genetic data shows it may have evolved independently for 300,000 years. 
Some have proposed that the animal should be listed as a separate subspecies.

However they wind up classified, the Borneo’s elephants are gravely 
endangered: only 1,500 to 2,000 survive today in a decreasing habitat fractured 
by industrial palm oil plantations. Deforestation and habitat loss remain the 
smallest elephants’ biggest threat.

Although considered pests to the state’s expansive palm oil plantations, the 
elephants are a tourist draw to the region and ecologically support the forests 
and floodplain through seed dispersal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwborneo-pygmy-smallest-elephants-pygmy-killed-for-ivoryorlds-smallest-elephants-killed-for-ivory-in-borneo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb31f4c35c75939d2587b6a60b39162701e6fb71f%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%20smallest%20elephants%20killed%20for%20ivory%20in%20Borneo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwborneo-pygmy-smallest-elephants-pygmy-killed-for-ivoryorlds-smallest-elephants-killed-for-ivory-in-borneo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%20smallest%20elephants%20killed%20for%20ivory%20in%20Borneo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fwborneo-pygmy-smallest-elephants-pygmy-killed-for-ivoryorlds-smallest-elephants-killed-for-ivory-in-borneo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb31f4c35c75939d2587b6a60b39162701e6fb71f%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 The skeleton of Sabre, a male pygmy elephant killed on the island of Borneo 
for his tusks. Photograph: Danau Girang Field Centre and Wildlife Rescue Unit 
Asian elephants have faced far less poaching than their African cousins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/26/african-elephant-numbers-plummet-during-worst-decline-in-25-years>
 over the centuries, since only some male Asian elephants sport tusks – whereas 
all African elephants have tusks. Asian ivory is also considered less valuable 
than African ivory, due to its brittleness and propensity to yellow.

“My hope is that Sabah wakes up … we are losing our megafauna, the rhino is 
gone, the banteng [wild cow] is going, the elephant will be next,” Goossens 
said. “Those crimes should not go unpunished. Let’s not lose our jewels, the 
next generation will not forgive us.”

 