
China’s president, Xi Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping>, 
has delivered a strong defence of globalisation, serving notice toDonald Trump  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>that Beijing will seek to 
usurp America’s traditional role as the champion of free trade and open markets.

Xi used an hour-long address to the World Economic Forum (WEF) to take a 
number of sideswipes at the US president-elect, attacking Trump’s protectionist 
views without mentioning him by name.

Davos 2017: global elite wonder why middle classes are so angry - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/18/davos-2017-global-elite-angry-middle-classes-climate-change-joe-biden-day-2-live>
After later meeting US vice-president Joe Biden on the sidelines of the Davos 
summit, Xi said that the world neededChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and the United States to have a 
stable and cooperative relationship.

He added that links between the two countries had “weathered wind and rain, 
but generally have continued to forge ahead”, saying that under Barack Obama 
there had been a “correct” development in relations.

In the first speech by a Chinese president at the annual Davos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> meeting of global political and 
business leaders, Xi said China would keep its borders open, stressed that 
there would be no winners from a trade war, and urged that all countries 
continued to support the 2015 Paris climate change accord.

With Trump preparing for Friday’s inauguration in Washington, Xi used the 
opportunity to make clear that China was keen to take a bigger role on the 
global stage if the US lapsed into isolationism.

“Pursuing protectionism is like locking oneself in a dark room,” he said. 
“Wind and rain may be kept outside, but so is light and air.”

Trump campaigned on a strongly protectionist platform, pledging to protect US 
firms from unfair overseas competition and threatening tariffs on goods from 
China and Mexico.

“No one will emerge as a winner in a trade war,” Xi told a packed hall at the 
WEF.

Xi said originally globalisation had been seen as Ali Baba’s treasure trove 
but for many had become a “Pandora’s box”. He added, however, that the economic 
liberalisation of the past quarter or a century was not the root cause of the 
world’s many problems and that the financial crash of 2008 was the result of 
excessive pursuit of profit.

IHS Markit’s chief economist, Dr Nariman Behravesh 
<https://twitter.com/N_Behravesh>, said: “President Xi gave a very rigorous and 
articulate defence of globalisation.

“Very importantly, he made commitments about opening China up to more imports 
and foreign direct investment and making sure that China’s exchange rate policy 
didn’t destabilise the global economy. All this is very encouraging.

“However, actions speak louder than words. A lot will depend on what China 
does. This is a good start. This is a good set of commitments on his part. It 
is encouraging, but we will see what the follow-through is.”

Xi likened the global economy to a big ocean from which it was impossible to 
escape. “Any attempt to cut off the flow of capital, goods, and people between 
economies, and channel the waters into the ocean back into isolated lakes and 
creeks is simply not possible.


China’s move towards open markets had been choppy, with plenty of whirlpools 
and choking along the way,” Xi added. “But we have learned to survive, and we 
must have the courage to keep swimming in the global market.”

 Xi sought to counter fears that the US and China were heading for a currency 
or trade war. Beijing would keep its doors open and would not seek to drive 
down the value of its currency, the yuan.

WEF founder Klaus Schwab said Xi’s presence was a sign of the shift from a 
uni-polar world dominated by the US to a more multi-polar system in which 
rising powers such as China will have to step up and play a bigger role.


Li Shuo, <https://www.wilsoncenter.org/person/li-shuo> senior global policy 
adviser at Greenpeace East Asia, welcomed the commitment on global warming.


“Given the current volatility of global politics, President Xi Jinping’s 
address helped calm nerves. His reference to climate change highlights a 
growing sense of China’s international responsibility, and the country’s 
evolving calculus towards taking action on the issue.

“As Trump drops Obama’s climate legacy, Xi might well establish one of his 
own. 2017 presents a real opportunity for China to rise to the challenge of 
responsible climate leadership. Having moved from climate villain to a 
reluctant leader in five short years over the first half of this decade, it’s 
reasonable to expect China to become a true leader by its end.”

Davos: the best quotes from day one

Paul Sheard, chief global economist at S&P, on trade wars

“If you did go into a trade ice age, who would be better placed to survive it, 
economically? I think the answer is the US, because the US is a very large 
economy, resource rich, with a very large population.

China has got more to lose ... But it’s not clear that Trump has the upper 
hand. You’ve got the mid-term elections in two years. If it’s like ‘oh my God 
this guy screwed up’, he’s on a short fuse.”

US secretary of state John Kerry, on the Iran nuclear deal

“Take Iran. If the US were to decide suddenly that we’re not going to pursue 
this, I bet you that our friends and allies who negotiated this with us will 
get together, and Russia, China, Germany, France and Britain will say ‘this is 
a good deal, we’re going to keep it’.

“And we’ll have done a great injury to ourselves.

“There are now no longer 19,000 centrifuges spinning and enriching, there are 
5,000, which is the agreement.

“There is no longer a 12,000 kg stockpile that could produce 10 to 12 bombs. 
There’s 300kg, measurable every day. And you can’t build a bomb with 300kg.”

Douglas Flint, chairman of HSBC, on globalisation

‘Someone’s got to make the counterargument for ‘What has globalisation ever 
done for us?’.

“The benefits of globalisation in terms of more competition, better 
productivity, the fact that medium incomes haven’t moved as much as people 
thought they might, but those medium incomes are buying a great deal more 
because of the benefits of globalisation in terms of the cost of imported goods.

“The fact that the world’s a healthier place than it was before.”

John Nelson, chairman of Lloyds of London, on Brexit

“We’ve had all the arguments about the various options. We are leaving. We’ve 
got to get used to it. Let’s get cracking. The sooner we get negotiations going 
the better. We need decisions at the top.

“We need to make the best of it. It doesn’t make sense to discriminate against 
the UK as a punishment.

“It is in everyone’s interests to have as much free trade as possible. But I 
don’t expect a special deal.”

Matt Damon on raising money for his Water.org charity

“We’ve tried humour. A few years ago I went on a toilet strike for an entire 
year.


“One of the first hurdles we’ve had to clear in the west is that it’s very 
hard for people to relate to this issue. If you grew up in Europe, if you grew 
up in America, you’ve never been thirsty in your entire life and you’ve never 
been five metres away from a clean drink water.

“The water in our toilet is cleaner than the [drinking] water that 663m people 
have access to.”

Shakira on building schools in Columbia

“Sometimes we encounter a tremendous lack of infrastructure. No potable water 
in many cases, no electricity, no paved roads, so it definitely means that we 
have to work twice as hard in order to offer a quality education.

“Not only that, but many of the children concerned are affected by violence or 
have lost family members.”
 