
As recent weeks have shown, hospitals are in crisis, with ill people lying in 
corridors, in pain, as treatment is held back for hours. Those images are why 
the public worries about the NHS and almost always supports extra cash for it.

School crises are less visual. No one photographs the child with learning 
difficulty, sobbing as the teaching assistant they worked with for the past 
three years is booted out. No one sees the cuts in music lessons, the special 
needs children who are told to go somewhere else because the school cannot 
afford to take them, the extra pupils in a class – or 10.

But make no mistake: schools really are heading for a budget crisis. Last 
year, more than half of secondary schools overspent. The average secondary 
academy that is in the red has a bank balance of minus £363,000. The situation 
is so dire theNational Audit Office 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/nao-school-finances-report-headteachers-face-3-billion-in-cuts-and-10-other-key-findings/>
 has warned that by 2020 schools will be worse funded than at any time since 
the mid-90s.

Luckily, the Department for Education has everything under control. It told 
the NAO 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/nao-school-finances-report-headteachers-face-3-billion-in-cuts-and-10-other-key-findings/>
 that mainstream schools can cut their “workforce” (read: teachers) by £1.7bn 
over the next three years. Plus £1.3bn of savings in “procurement spending” are 
possible (everything else).

Ministers have failed to explain where schools will find savings, watchdog says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/14/ministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says>
There’s just one catch. When the NAO asked the DfE how these savings were 
possible, itcouldn’t give any detail 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Financial-sustainability-of-schools.pdf>
. No tests have been done to see if schools can run at lower costs. The 
government failed to cut back procurement spending by just £1bn over the last 
parliament (costs actually went up by half a billion), so £1.3bn in the next 
three years seems like a finger-in-the-air plan. What it all adds up to is 
this: schools are heading towards mass bankruptcy and the only government plan 
for solving it is optimism.

Theresa May did a similar thing with the police. In 2015, as home secretary, 
she told the Police Federation they were“crying wolf” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/20/stop-scaremongering-and-prepare-for-further-cuts-theresa-may-tells-police>
 over budget cuts given crime was falling. Less cash did not necessarily mean a 
poorer quality service, seemingly. There is not going to be a similar fall in 
demand in schools. If anything, May’s new plan to make schools a key figure in 
identifying mental health problems in children means their responsibilities are 
only likely to grow.

Headteachers, pressured to keep academic results high, will scramble to save 
pounds while fighting tooth and nail to keep delivering a quality education. 
But, as head Lorraine Heath wroterecently 
<https://heathldotcom.wordpress.com/2017/01/09/when-fairer-funding-isnt/>, 
things are getting raw: “There is nowhere else to cut. It will hurt and it will 
fester, and it will infect and contaminate everything that we do. It’s easy to 
lead when things are going well and we have been very lucky. And I also know 
that it is in times of adversity when leaders really have to step up and show 
their worth. I’m just not sure that I want to.” As the demands on schools grow, 
people like her will become so demoralised they start to think about walking 
away – along with many other teachers already flockingoverseas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/29/teachers-deserting-uk-michael-wilshaw-ofsted>
.

Here’s a question, though. Let’s imagine it is 2020 and almost all schools in 
England are in deficit, with no plan for improving. What then? Will the 
government close them all? Will it sack every head who fails to adhere?

The DfE does not have a plan. It would be a brave headteacher who refused to 
make the cuts but, if it comes to it, there may be merit in calling the DfE’s 
bluff, at least until the brains who said the savings were possible come up 
with a strategy for delivering them.
 