
The government has demonstrated a “signal breach of faith” in cutting the 
pensions of recently appointed judges, an employment tribunal has been told.

Presenting a claim on behalf of six high court judges against the Ministry of 
Justice, Michael Beloff QC said it was irrelevant that they earned more than 
most other public sector workers or that “there is a need to cut public 
expenditure”. High court judges get a salary of about £180,000 a year.

What was significant, he said, was that older judges were allowed to retain 
more generous pension arrangements while younger judges had suffered a “double 
whammy” because their payments on retirement had been reduced and a harsher tax 
regime had been introduced.

Pension changes deter would-be judges, says lord chief justice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/27/pension-changes-deterring-would-be-judges-says-lord-chief-justice>
As well as the six high court judges, another 204 crown court judges, district 
judges, sheriffs and tribunal judges are jointly challenging the MoJ’s pension 
cuts.

The six high court claimants are Sir Nicholas Mostyn, 59, Sir Roderick Newton, 
58, Sir Philip Moor, 57, Dame Lucy Theis, 55, Sir Richard Arnold, 55, and Sir 
Rabinder Singh, 52.

They allege they are being discriminated against on the basis of age. Theis 
and Singh additionally claim gender and race discrimination respectively. The 
hearing at the central London employment tribunal is scheduled to last 10 days.

Opening the case, Beloff explained that barristers normally incurred a large 
drop in income, on average approximately 68%, when they become judges.

He added: “The drop in income is the price paid by those who leave private 
practice and join the public service.

“What they could not have anticipated is that the terms on which they were 
appointed in respect of their pensions, which are recognised to be the 
compensating benefit, would be cut by the government to their substantial 
financial detriment.”

The old judicial pensions – which before 2012 did not require any employee 
contributions – provided an income of a 40th of a judge’s final pensionable pay 
multiplied by his or her length of service. It also gave a lump sump on 
retirement, after the age of 65, of two and a quarter times the annual rate.

The new judicial pensions include no lump sum payments. They accumulate at the 
slower rate of a 43rd of the final pensionable pay per year of service, and 
include contribution rates that are due to rise to up to 8% of pensionable pay.


Beloff quoted from a letter sent by former lord chancellor Chris Grayling 
which acknowledged that reform of pensions rights raised “important 
constitutional principles”.

Beloff said: “Judges are not in the same position as other public sector 
workers. Judges have a constitutional role which other public sector workers do 
not face. That is not to disparage other public sector workers. They just work 
differently. Once embarked on a career as a judge, there’s no turning back. 
It’s a one-way street.”

No judge can return to the bar or act as a solicitor again after being 
appointed. Judges are also banned from supplementing their income, he added.

Andrew Short QC, counsel for the 204 other judges in the case represented by 
the law firm Leigh Day, suggested the idea that older judges should be spared 
changes because they have less time to adjust before retirement was illogical 
because the older appointees would be exposed to the changes for a shorter 
period of time.


Martin Chamberlain QC, for the lord chancellor and the MoJ, said there was no 
constitutional principle requiring sitting judges to be insulated from adverse 
pension changes when other public servants were not.

He told the tribunal it was legitimate to enforce a transitional protection 
period for those judges who, being closer to retirement, were more likely to 
have made “concrete plans” about their financial futures based on the existing 
scheme.


Chamberlain also outlined alternatives considered by government before 
legislating the changes, including an “expensive option” of staggering their 
introduction, which would have cost £4bn in the first year.


The hearing continues.
 