
“When I started out, people were like: ‘Oh just take it off, it’s no big 
deal.’ But I like wearing a headscarf,” says Yunalis Mat Zara’ai, better known 
as Yuna, the Malaysian-born pop star who is the face of Uniqlo’s first hijab 
line in the UK.


“Muslim girls, we love fashion! Whether we wear the hijab or not – it’s our 
choice – and it’s time the industry took note. Finally, fashion stores are open 
to that idea,” says the 30-year-old, who has bossed the US Billboard charts as 
well as those in south-east Asia.

“There’s a lot of buying power from the Middle East,” she says. “Girls from 
Dubai want to be able to wear Asos, and you have people travelling all the way 
to the States just to go shopping.”

 I’m speaking to Yuna on the phone from Kuala Lumpur – where she is queuing at 
a KFC drive-through. She says: “There might not be many Muslim singers out 
there doing what I do, but I feel like 90% of the artists here are Muslim. So 
to me, the world is catching up.”

“Doing what I do” for Yuna means releasing three critically acclaimed albums 
of soul-inspired pop, working with Pharrell and DJ Premier, and all the while 
picking up various Malaysian accolades. She sings in English and Malay, and 
sells out shows in London as easily as Singapore. She has had tracks in the US 
Billboard R&B chart, including Crush, a duet withUsher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/usher>.

Yuna’s breakout began when she moved to Los Angeles aged 24 to work in music, 
and says she compromised on nothing. “Normally, if you’re a girl doing [pop 
music], you have to be ‘pretty’ – meaning showing off your body, your hair. 
That’s a normal thing. I get it, I have nothing against it, but it’s just not 
me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fyuma-malaysian-popstar-hijab-fashion-i-feel-like-the-world-is-catching-up-uniqlo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d48c805da6aadb283d49f60fb05adde67360cda%2F0_38_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yuna%20on%20hijab%20style%3A%20'I%20feel%20like%20the%20world%20is%20catching%20up'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fyuma-malaysian-popstar-hijab-fashion-i-feel-like-the-world-is-catching-up-uniqlo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yuna%20on%20hijab%20style%3A%20%27I%20feel%20like%20the%20world%20is%20catching%20up%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fyuma-malaysian-popstar-hijab-fashion-i-feel-like-the-world-is-catching-up-uniqlo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d48c805da6aadb283d49f60fb05adde67360cda%2F0_38_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Yuna plays at the Camp Flog Gnaw Carnival in LA last November. Photograph: 
Scott Dudelson/WireImage 
The fashion thing came almost as an adjunct to the music, and her success has 
surprised her: “I honestly don’t know how it started, this hijabi fashion 
thing, but I’m glad it has. I like the style that I have, it’s my identity.”

Growing up, she was always into style. “I used to read a lot of fashion 
magazines: my favourite was Nylon. I used to cut out all the pictures from 
magazines and I had this book where I would keep all of the stuff that inspired 
me.”


Two icons in particular inspired her fashion sense. “I love Gwen Stefani. I’d 
watch what she’d wear over and over again and think, how do I nail this style? 
And then, I like that classic beauty, too. Audrey Hepburn, she’s so elegant. I 
think I learned that from her – there was something about that style I really 
loved. When I’m thinking about what to wear, it has to be kind of fun and edgy, 
but elegant and classy, too.”


And then she still steals her mum’s stuff. “As she got older, her fashion 
sense changed a little bit, but I still always want to wear her clothes. She 
will find these chequered palazzo pants and I will be like: ‘Those are dope, 
where did you get them?’, and she will have picked them up from some market for 
$20. Her scarves, I also take them.”


D&G’s hijab range is aimed at people like me – so why do I feel excluded? | 
Ruqaiya Haris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/11/dolce-gabbana-hijab-collection-muslim-women-western-fashion>
Scarves are the focus of another recent Yuna collaboration, this time with the 
Malaysian modest clothing label, LosraVelda. “I had rarely collaborated on 
hijab fashion,” she says. “Then, when they came to me, they were so passionate 
and hungry for new ideas that I got inspired by them.”


These scarves come in almost every colour. Some feature her lyrics, others 
intricate floral prints and bold graphic designs. “I’m very green,” she says. 
“My style is experimental. We didn’t want to focus on just hijabs, either: this 
is for everybody.”

Yuna’s current favourite designers hail from Malaysia. “I really like Hatta 
Dolmat. He’s one of my best friends and he’s always down to try something new,” 
she says. “For an awards show, he did this dress that’s made with silver 
chains. I was mad at him because it was so heavy! His collections are so over 
the top in the best way. And he really listens. If I give him an idea he will 
listen. Craftsmanship is my No 1 thing with designers, and he has that down.” 
She also recently co-founded a lifestyle shop,November Culture 
<http://novemberculture.com/>, which is based in Malaysia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fyuma-malaysian-popstar-hijab-fashion-i-feel-like-the-world-is-catching-up-uniqlo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc65464f57a3f0e7c7c973d4ae496b6687bee1d29%2F0_227_4859_2917%2F4859.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yuna%20on%20hijab%20style%3A%20'I%20feel%20like%20the%20world%20is%20catching%20up'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fyuma-malaysian-popstar-hijab-fashion-i-feel-like-the-world-is-catching-up-uniqlo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yuna%20on%20hijab%20style%3A%20%27I%20feel%20like%20the%20world%20is%20catching%20up%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fyuma-malaysian-popstar-hijab-fashion-i-feel-like-the-world-is-catching-up-uniqlo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc65464f57a3f0e7c7c973d4ae496b6687bee1d29%2F0_227_4859_2917%2F4859.jpg>
 Yuna onstage in Berlin last September. Photograph: Frank Hoensch/Redferns 
Then there is Bernard Chandran. “He’s a huge name in the Malaysian fashion 
scene and one of the few Malaysians who has made it outside ofMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>. Lady Gaga has worn his designs 
once or twice – he is super talented and a really nice guy.”

Last year, following a successful run in Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and 
Thailand,Uniqlo <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/uniqlo> launched its hijab 
line in the UK, by British designer Hana Tajima, and Yuna was its face. So what 
does she look for in a hijab?


“Material is key. You have to find the right one according to how you like to 
style your scarf. So for me, I like wearing the turban, so I would need 
something that’s not so slippery. So satin isn’t a good choice for me but the 
sheen on it is really nice, so you can tie a head wrap with those kinds of 
materials and use some pins to help you out. Which kind of sucks sometimes but 
you have to do it!

“I like viscose, and cotton works really well. Stay away from thick materials: 
you can’t wear pashmina material as a head scarf. It would just get so thick 
and heavy.”

She shops for material wherever she is, and is always on the lookout. “I 
normally just go to fabric stores. We have them in Malaysia but in LA, I really 
love the prints and the cotton material. If I’m in LA before going on tour, I 
always pay a visit to the nearest store and get two yards of each print. That’s 
what I wear on tour. There’s one called The Fabric Store, which is close to 
where I live. That’s my favourite: it has such cool stuff.

London show reflects global boom in Islamic fashion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/29/london-show-reflects-global-boom-in-islamic-fashion>
“My favourite scarf I’m wearing right now – it’s something I got from Muji. 
They have really good scarves in strong, solid colours, and the material is 
amazing. I like the texture, it’s kind of wrinkly. I bought them in every 
colour. I shop a lot in Muji.”

Yet, before she moved to the US, it could have all been so different. People 
warned her that Islamophobia was huge there, and the transition from national 
to global pop star could not have been an easy one for a young Muslim girl, 
right?

 Wrong, apparently. “There’s no real challenge being a Muslim singer,” Yuna 
says. “If you think it’s difficult then it will be, but I’ve always been 
positive. When I first moved, people said: ‘Are you sure you want to?’

“I guess the hardest thing is, people know one part of me and they want to 
talk about that instead of my music – but if people have questions, I’m here to 
answer them.”

 * Yuna’s third album, Chapters, is out now
 