
In a book published in 2000, the Polish-born sociologist Zygmunt Bauman, who 
has died aged 91, deployed a metaphor since taken up by the anti-globalisation 
movement around the world.Liquid Modernity 
<http://routledgesoc.com/category/profile-tags/liquid-modernity> analysed the 
disappearance of the solid structures and institutions that once provided the 
stable foundations for well-ordered modern societies, and the consequences for 
individuals and communities.

Bauman, professor of sociology at Leeds University 
<http://baumaninstitute.leeds.ac.uk/> (1971-91, and then emeritus), argued that 
our “liquid modern” world was unable to stand still and keep its shape for 
long. Everything seems to change – the fashions we follow, the events that 
catch our attention, the things we dream of and the things we fear. An 
increasing polarisation between the elite and the rest, our growing tolerance 
of ever-expanding inequalities, and a separation between power and politics 
remained constant themes in his writings – in all he produced more than 60 
books. As the state and the market vie for supremacy within the space of global 
capitalism, the fate of poor and vulnerable people assumes particular 
importance. As he put it: “When elephants fight, pity the grass.”

His work was especially influential among progressive young activists in 
Spain, Italy and across central and South America. “See the world through the 
eyes of society’s weakest members,” he said, “and then tell anyone honestly 
that our societies are good, civilised, advanced, free.”

His best-known book, Modernity and the Holocaust 
<http://www.cornellpress.cornell.edu/book/?GCOI=80140100404950> (1989), 
provided a stark warning of the genocidal potential latent within every modern 
bureaucratic society to privilege process, order and efficiency over morals, 
responsibility and care for the other. It was shaped by the memoir Winter in 
the Morning (1986) by his wife, Janina (nee Lewinson), later revised as Beyond 
These Walls: Escaping the Warsaw Ghetto – A Young Girl’s Story (2006), and his 
own experience of 20th-century horrors.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEG63MkQb1r4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEG63MkQb1r4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEG63MkQb1r4&media=>
 Behind the World’s ‘Crisis of Humanity’: Zygmunt Bauman interviewed on Al 
Jazeera 
Always wary of offering any alternative blueprint for the future, Bauman 
declined to profess any concrete solution to our common plight. But he retained 
a commitment to a form of socialism that remained counter-cultural, even when 
an avowedly socialist government was pulling the levers of power. He believed 
that a truly good society was one that could never be satisfied that it was 
good enough.

As people choose to manage their individualised concerns as consumers, hoping 
to find solutions to their private troubles by shopping, they have largely 
ceased to act collectively as citizens who share common public issues. In his 
words: “Can notions of equality, democracy and self-determination survive when 
society is seen less and less as a product of shared labour and common values 
and far more as a mere container of goods and services to be grabbed by 
competing individual hands?”

With the evacuation of trust from political leaders has come a loss of faith 
and a demand to “take back control” from self-interested elites. Bauman 
pointed, for instance, to the bank bailout of 2007-08 as the instantaneous 
creation of “a welfare state for the rich”. Having lived through two forms of 
totalitarianism, he warned that the change demanded would be authoritarian in 
character.

A native of Poznań, in western central Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>, he was first a victim of the Nazis, 
then the communists. The son of Moritz Bauman, an accountant, and his wife, 
Sophia (nee Cohn), he fled with his family at the outbreak of the second world 
war to the Soviet Union, and was awarded Poland’s Military Cross of Valour for 
fighting against the Nazis.

He married Janina in 1948 and lectured in sociology at Warsaw University, 
becoming a professor in 1964. Four years later he and his family – now with 
three daughters, Lydia, Irena and Anna – were exiled as a consequence of an 
antisemitic campaign by the ruling communist regime. He thus became a refugee 
for a second time and his experiences of poverty, marginalisation and exile led 
him towards an explicitly morally driven sociology.

After temporary posts at universities in Tel Aviv (despite being a critic of 
the treatment of Palestinians), and then more briefly in both Haifa and 
Melbourne, Australia, in 1971 Bauman and his family settled in Britain. There 
he headed the sociology department at Leeds.

A prolific and disciplined writer, he started before sunrise. In the 1980s, 
those tidying up after a staff-student party recall him striding purposefully 
into the building at 4.30am and into his office to start work. He continued to 
publish for the rest of his life.

In recent years Bauman analysed the refugee crisis and the rise of rightwing 
populism across Europe and the US as a “crisis of humanity”. The promise of a 
socially progressive Europe meant a great deal to him. He believed ardently 
that theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> stood as a 
safeguard for hard-won rights and for shared protection against war and social 
insecurity. In what proved to be his final lecture at Leeds last October, he 
drew parallels between the Holocaust and the capacity of today’s populism to 
make everyone “other”, without compassion or remorse.

His many honours included the Theodor W Adorno prize (1998). For the award 
ceremony in Frankfurt, neither the Polish nor British national anthems seemed 
appropriate to him, feeling a stranger in both lands, and so he settled on the 
Ode to Joy, the anthem ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

His work serves as a reminder that our world has been made by human hands and 
so it can be remade by them too. For all his passion and pessimism, he wrote 
because he believed that that challenge could and should be confronted.

Janina died in 2009. Six years later Bauman married Aleksandra Jasińska-Kania, 
also a sociologist. She survives him, along with his daughters, three 
granddaughters and three grandsons.

• Zygmunt Bauman, sociologist, born 19 November 1925; died 9 January 2017
 