
Pod 39 Hotel

In an elegant brick building in Manhattan’s Murray Hill, this excellent budget 
option opened following the success of sister hotel, The Pod. It trumps the 
elder sibling – now renamed Pod 51 – as all its rooms are en suite and it has a 
fabulous brick-pillared rooftop bar serving tacos and a warm atmosphere amid 
fairylights and stunning views. The rooms, some with bunk beds, are called pods 
given their compact size and may not suit everyone. But with prices among the 
most competitive in Manhattan, budgeters will be happy. Other nice touches 
include free passes to customised group walking tours of the city, held four 
days a week by guidesStreetwise New York <http://www.streetwisenewyork.com/en/>.
• Doubles from $95 room only, 145 East 39th Street, New York, NY 10016, +1 212 
865 5700,thepodhotel.com <http://www.thepodhotel.com/>

BKLYN House Hotel

Proclaiming itself “a Bushwick-inspired hotel”, this no-frills boutique 
property opened late last year on the fringes of the neighbourhood long dubbed 
“the new Williamsburg”. It features works by Brooklyn artists on rotation and 
has joined forces with local businesses for things such as coffee. The 116 
rooms are good value – and Manhattan is only 20 minutes away by taxi or subway. 
The immediate surroundings feel urban – the hotel is by a high-rise public 
housing project while the nearest commercial street is under elevated subway 
tracks – but Bushwick’s best bars and cafes/restaurants are nearby. The 
minimally furnished, wood-floored rooms have a cool, sparse style; some have 
decent views of the distant city skyline. The project will benefit from a 
planned rooftop bar and front terrace, but could also do with an additional 
elevator (housekeeping and guests currently share one).
• Doubles from $99 B&B, 9 Beaver Street, Brooklyn, NY 11206, +1 718 388 4433, 
bklynhousehotel.com <http://bklynhousehotel.com/>

Hampton Inn Brooklyn/Downtown
 Photograph: Alex Hayden 
A chain hotel, but not as you know it. This Hilton brand subsidiary was opened 
two years ago near the busy and slightly out-the-way approach to the Manhattan 
bridge. Given its Brooklyn setting, the 117-room property has tried to avoid 
the cliched soullessness attached to many franchise hotels. Hence the 
full-service fireside bar, local photography and artwork on the walls, and 
gourmet chocolate-covered pretzels by local firm Fatty Sundays as arrival 
treats. A pair of top-floor terrace rooms with wraparound patios offer stunning 
Manhattan views – the kind you’d pay far more for on the other side of the 
bridge.
• Doubles from $136 B&B, 125 Flatbush Avenue Extension, Brooklyn, New York, 
11201, +1 718 875 8800,hamptoninn3.hilton.com 
<http://hamptoninn3.hilton.com/en/hotels/new-york/hampton-inn-brooklyn-downtown-NYCBOHX/index.html>

The Brooklyn – A Hotel

This boutique offering opened in 2015 and is in the fast-gentrifying 
Bedford-Stuyvesant area. It is a 30-minute subway ride from Manhattan, and, as 
the name suggests, it’s going all-in on the famous borough’s brand, stencilling 
summaries and images of its neighbourhoods on walls amid modern and minimal 
decor, such as polished hardwood ceilings. The hotel does not offer room 
service, and its location on a big, perpetually busy road may prove too noisy 
for some, but it does offer in-room fridges, microwaves, Nespresso coffee 
machines, and continental breakfast. Atlantic Avenue can feel a little shady at 
night but, hey, it’s proper “Brooklyn”.
• Doubles from $139 B&B, 1199 Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11216, +1 718 789 
1500,thebrooklynny.com <http://thebrooklynny.com/>

Z NYC Hotel

One of several hotels to open recently in Long Island City, Queens, Z NYC 
beats out its competitors with unrivalled views of the Manhattan skyline from 
many of its 100 west-facing rooms, a few blocks from the East river. 
Floor-to-ceiling windows maximise the views – though the direct sunlight 
streaming in can leave the somewhat antiquated air-conditioning units 
struggling to keep things cool. The rooms – a touch overly sleek (black 
headboards and red leather couches) are nonetheless welcomingly big for New 
York. A spacious basement bar-restaurant is in the process of a revamp, while a 
sprawling rooftop bar opens in the summer. A handy complimentary shuttle 
service between the hotel and Manhattan leaves every hour in both directions 
7am-11.30pm.
• Doubles from $145 room only, 11-01 43rd Avenue, Long Island City, NY 11101, 
+1 212 319 7000,zhotelny.com <http://www.zhotelny.com/>

The Boro Hotel

Another of the recent additions to the Long Island City hotel scene, The Boro 
opened in the middle of 2015 on a predominantly residential street a couple of 
subway stops into Queens. Contemporary by design, guests arrive to a 
beautifully airy glass-walled lobby, where fresh pastries and good coffee are 
served alongside other continental breakfast offerings. A rooftop deck has 
expansive views of the growing Queens skyline nearby, as well as Manhattan and 
the iconic 59th Street bridge in the background. Rooms, described as 
“industrial chic”, also feature floor-to-ceiling windows. A small number of 
guest reviews have complained of rowdy rooftop parties, and problems heating 
rooms in the depths of a New York winter. But the overwhelming majority praised 
the hotel’s cool aesthetic and friendly staff.
• Doubles from $153 room only, 38-28 27th Street, Long Island City, NY 11101, 
+1 718 433 1375,borohotel.com <http://www.borohotel.com/>

CitizenM New York Times Square

 This is the first US location for a Netherlands-based concept hotel chain – 
CitizenM – that specialises in what it refers to as “affordable luxury”. The 
21-floor hotel, which opened in 2014, features self check-in at its 230 compact 
but comfy rooms via touchscreen “MoodPads”. A soaring, art-filled lobby is 
styled like an oversized living room by Swiss furniture brand Vitra, while 
Amsterdam’s leading creative bookshop, Mendo, also has an outpost here. There’s 
a rooftop bar with panoramic views, a 24-hour grab-and-go cafeteria, a stylish 
cocktail and coffee bar, and an area with communal iMac workspaces. Although 
New Yorkers avoid nearby Times Square like Londoners shun Leicester Square, all 
the lights, cameras and action can make it a fun tourist experience.
• Doubles from $170 room only, 218 West 50th Street, New York, NY, 10019, +1 
212 461 3638,citizenm.com <http://www.citizenm.com/>
 <http://www.operahousehotel.com/>

Edge Hotel

A new boutique option in less-visited uptown Manhattan, the 11-floor Edge 
towers over a hodgepodge of adjacent brownstone houses, apartment buildings and 
churches. The exterior is unexciting but the hotel comes to life in its 54 
small-but-stylish rooms, complemented by splashes of colour, wood finishes and 
great views of the Hudson river to the north and the city to the south. The 
surrounding Washington Heights area, traditionally home to Latino communities – 
particularly those originating from the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico – is 
well worth exploring. Among the highlights: the recently restoredHigh bridge, 
New York City’s oldest standing bridge 
<https://www.nycgovparks.org/park-features/highbridge-park/planyc> connecting 
Manhattan and the Bronx; theMet Cloisters 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/visit/met-cloisters>, featuring medieval European art 
and architecture in beautifulFort Tryon park 
<https://www.nycgovparks.org/parks/fort-tryon-park>; and Malecon restaurant 
<http://maleconrestaurants.com/>, serving authentic Caribbean food.
• Doubles from $179 B&B, 514 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, +1 212 543 
0005,edgehotelnyc.com <http://www.edgehotelnyc.com/>

Leon Hotel

A good, new boutique choice in lower Manhattan – rebranded in 2015 from a 
previous incarnation as Be Hotel – Leon is well liked for its affordability, 
location and 40 stylish rooms with handmade furniture. The hotel is named after 
Leon Moisseiff, a Latvian immigrant and one of the architects of the nearby 
Manhattan bridge, and puts you close to the bars and restaurants of the Lower 
East Side and Nolita, but also on the edge of Chinatown. Worth visiting there:
Nom Wah Tea Parlor <http://nomwah.com/>, its oldest and still finest dim sum 
spot; theChinatown Ice Cream Factory <http://www.chinatownicecreamfactory.com/>
, for unusual flavours such as red bean and black sesame; and Mr Fong’s, which 
the New York Times calls “Chinatown’s unlikely new ‘it’ bar 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/30/fashion/mr-fongs-is-chinatowns-unlikely-new-it-bar.html?_r=0>
.”
• Doubles from $175 room only, 125 Canal Street, New York, NY 10002, +1 212 
390 8833,leonhotelnyc.com <http://leonhotelnyc.com/>

Archer Hotel

Visitors eager to stay in the heart of Manhattan should try to snag one of the 
bargain-priced rooms at this boutique hotel that opened in the garment district 
in 2014. Rates run the gamut from great value to expensive; some start from as 
low as $179 a night (if prepaying in full). Rooms are small but tasteful, with 
nice touches such as exposed brick, and smartly laid out, with storage space 
beneath beds. Some have close-up views of the Empire State Building (a few 
blocks to the south), and of the city’s quaint wooden water towers ubiquitously 
atop tall buildings.Spyglass <http://archerhotel.com/new-york/spyglass>, the 
trendy outdoor bar at the top of this 22-storey brick, glass and steel 
structure, has the same view south, as well as great cocktails and a limited, 
but inventive, mix of snacks and small plates to nibble at. Ground-floor 
restaurantDavid Burke Fabrick <http://archerhotel.com/new-york/fabrick> offers 
fancier dining.
• Doubles from $199 room only, 45 West 38th Street, New York, NY 10018, +1 212 
719 4100,archerhotel.com <http://archerhotel.com/>
 