
Journalist Nellie Bly jumped off the page at me as I was researching Victorian 
female travellers. The more I got to know her, the more I was intrigued by this 
fearless character who wouldn’t take no for an answer. Her crusades in print 
brought reforms in women’s asylums, orphanages, sweatshops and prisons.

The story that brought Bly the most acclaim was circling the globe in 72 days 
in 1890, beating the fictitious record in Jules Verne’s Around the World in 80 
Days. One hundred and twenty five years later, I followed in her footsteps.

We both travelled alone with one small bag. She went by ocean liner and train. 
I flew. She journeyed through the Victorian age. I travelled through the 
information age,blogging along the way 
<https://nelliebly125.wordpress.com/author/rosemaryjanebrown/>. Tracing Bly’s 
race around the planet expanded my own world of adventure, and I became a 
fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. The UK and Ireland have produced many 
bold female travellers. My goal is to put them “on the map” as role models 
encouraging us to travel out of our comfort zones.

Anna McNuff
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F684ce1496cc0c44425afc8b285c1263714ae02cb%2F1114_0_2671_3341%2F2671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F684ce1496cc0c44425afc8b285c1263714ae02cb%2F1114_0_2671_3341%2F2671.jpg>
Just start; that’s the best way to get going on an adventure, according to 
Anna McNuff who urges people to leave their fears at home and get outside. She 
would know. In 2013, she cycled seven months and 11,000 miles on a pink bike 
taking in every state in the US. Last year she ran 1,911 miles along New 
Zealand’sTe Araroa trail <http://www.teararoa.org.nz/>. McNuff calls them her 
mega-adventures, but she’s also a fan of mini-adventures, such as running along 
Hadrian’s Wall, rollerblading 100 miles around Amsterdam, and midweek camping 
escapades around London. She recently walked out of her back gate with a bivvy 
bag, backpack, and an open European itinerary to be decided by votes from her 
followers on social media. McNuff is also on a mission to get children outdoors 
and exploring. Through her endurance challenges, she’s raised awareness, as 
well as more than £20,000 for the charitiesRight to Play 
<http://www.righttoplay.org.uk/Pages/default.aspx> and The Outward Bound Trust 
<https://www.outwardbound.org.uk/>. “I’m inspired by people who dive so deep 
into their personal well of self-belief that they achieve things which most 
would deem impossible,” she says.
• annamcnuff.com <http://annamcnuff.com/>

Justine Gosling
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3551b4536ba077e4d7f0471f3d9eb0639ce3815%2F0_188_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3551b4536ba077e4d7f0471f3d9eb0639ce3815%2F0_188_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Gosling is a time traveller: she fuses all the things she loves best – 
history, exercise and inspiring stories – into momentous challenges that 
reignite the past. She had never been on an expedition when she set off in 
August 2015 to travel 5,000 miles on foot and bicycle along the 15 countries 
bordering the iron curtain separating western Europe from the former Soviet 
Union. Postwar history came alive for her, an NHS physiotherapist, who was 
four-years-old when the Berlin Wall came down. Gosling will be closer to home, 
but further back in history, with a 240-mile Tudor-themed run from Bosworth 
Field, site of the last battle of the War of the Roses, to Westminster Abbey, 
final resting place of Elizabeth I. She’ll be running 12-15 miles a day over 
two weeks (she started 26 March) – and she wants you to join her along the way. 
Follow the routeon Justine’s blog <http://www.justinegosling.com/blog/>.
• justinegosling.com <http://www.justinegosling.com/>

Belinda Kirk

Kirk’s quest is to get people to live more adventurously. She has walked 
across Nicaragua, searched for camels in China’s Taklamakan desert, so-called 
Desert of Death, discovered rock paintings in Lesotho and was skipper of the 
first female crew to row non-stop around Britain, in a punishing 2,101-mile, 
51-day voyage. An expert expedition leader, she has managed remote trips for 
outdoor survival gurus Ray Mears and Bear Grylls. She launchedExplorers Connect 
<http://www.explorersconnect.com/>, a social enterprise connecting people to 
adventures in the UK and overseas in 2009. It’s now a community of 25,000 from 
total beginners to experienced explorers who can link up with adventures, 
team-mates and adventure industry jobs. Currently, she’s establishing Britain’s 
first national day of adventure, Wild Night Out, to help disadvantaged kids get 
outdoors. “I’ve seen adventure change people’s lives, by giving inspiration and 
building confidence, creativity and a reconnection with nature,” she says.
• belindakirk.com <http://www.belindakirk.com/>

Hannah Engelkamp

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa65f4fab0c9402cde7e59a499a026e1f2799f2c8%2F0_159_2396_1437%2F2396.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa65f4fab0c9402cde7e59a499a026e1f2799f2c8%2F0_159_2396_1437%2F2396.jpg>
Engelkamp trekked 1,000 miles around the circumference of Wales with a 
headstrong donkey named Chico. The pair walked for nearly six months in 2013 
starting and ending in Engelkamp’s hometown of Aberystwyth. Although the 
inspiration for her journey came from the fact that Wales had recently become 
the first country in the worldencircled by a continuous footpath 
<http://www.walescoastpath.gov.uk/?lang=en>, she discovered, a little too late, 
that her donkey couldn’t manage the 964 stiles and 783 kissing gates ahead of 
them. With no set course and no itinerary, they travelled as close to the coast 
and borders as they could; mainly wild camping, and sometimes sleeping in 
tipis, yurts and hay barns. Engelkamp embarked on a dream and returned with a 
plan to capture the journey in a book and film through crowdfunding. Eight 
hundred and twenty nine backers pledged £35,000 to make it happen.Seaside Donkey
 <http://seasidedonkey.co.uk/> recounts the story of Hannah and Chico’s odyssey 
in print and DVD. Engelkamp says: “Walking with a donkey was only strange by 
being about 60 years late. We were walking on green lanes and drove roads made 
for animal traffic – get out of your car and that history is still there, and 
easily revived.”
• hannahme.com <http://hannahme.com/>

Jacki Hill-Murphy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84ec37c1b1decb34fc76b64483d6ff248760c158%2F0_37_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84ec37c1b1decb34fc76b64483d6ff248760c158%2F0_37_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Jacki Hill-Murphy is greeted by villagers – who had arranged a welcome 
ceremony for her – in Chinyke, Yakutia, eastern Siberia . Photograph: Ulyana 
Vasilieva 
Former English and drama teacher Hill-Murphy has travelled to inhospitable 
places to recreate the journeys of daring female adventurers from the past. In 
tracking four valiant women who left inhibition at home and headed into the 
unknown, she pays tribute to their spirit and achievements. She has followed in 
the footsteps of Victorian explorers Isabella Bird, who travelled by yak across 
the Digar-La Pass in Ladakh, India, and Mary Kingsley – who pioneered the route 
to the summit of the volcano Mount Cameroon; and also Kate Marsden, who trudged 
from Moscow to Siberia in search of a cure for leprosy (a doctor had tipped her 
off about the curative properties of a herb there). Hill-Murphy also braved 
piranha-infested waters in a canoe to replicate the 1769 expedition of Isabel 
Godin, the only survivor of a 42-person, 3,000-mile expedition along the 
Amazon. Hill-Murphy’s travels and those of her heroines come to life in her 
recent book Adventuresses. She’s now writing a biography ofKate Marsden 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kate_Marsden>.
• jackihill-murphy.co.uk <http://jackihill-murphy.co.uk/>

Karen Darke
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3725af3da58475c98920ba462aca5788669fff%2F0_97_1088_653%2F1088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3725af3da58475c98920ba462aca5788669fff%2F0_97_1088_653%2F1088.jpg>
 Karen Darke crossing Greenland sitting on skis. Photograph: Pasi Ikonen 
A fall on a rock-climbing expedition in 1992 almost changed everything for 
Karen Darke. She thought she would rather be dead than paralysed; that her 
adventures were over. But with friends, creativity and perseverance, she has 
found that most things are possible, including becoming a Paralympics silver 
medallist and an irrepressible traveller. Among other astonishing feats, she 
has crossed Greenland’s ice cap sitting on skis, using her arms to propel her; 
kayaked from Canada to Alaska over three months, and handcycled over the 
Himalayas. She denies being an adrenalin junkie, but admits to an addiction to 
the outdoors. Now she’s on the Road to Rio, training with the British 
paracycling team for the 2016 Paralympics in Brazil. Along the way, she’s 
squeezing in adventures on wheels, water and snow. Darke is the author of If 
You Fall … andBoundless: An adventure beyond limits 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/boundless-an-adventure-beyond-limits.html>. 
She explains: “I think adventures can be anything – small or large – in your 
garden or on the other side of the world. It’s all about entering into the 
unknown and doing something that seems to some degree unachievable.”
• karendarke.com <http://www.karendarke.com/>

Sarah Outen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20a21bd2899014cf18e55c56eb23210d3292ffca%2F0_90_1987_1192%2F1987.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20a21bd2899014cf18e55c56eb23210d3292ffca%2F0_90_1987_1192%2F1987.jpg>
 Outen, and her bicycle, in the Gobi Desert. Photograph: EPA 
Outen set out from Tower Bridge in April 2011 on her global expedition 
London2London via the World. Her body was her only engine. Four and a half 
years and 25,000 miles later she had rowed, cycled and kayaked her way around 
the northern hemisphere. Nothing stopped her; not even hurricanes, typhoons or 
loneliness. Outen’s first major expedition was a solo row across the Indian 
Ocean in 2009, where she set records as the first woman and youngest person to 
accomplish such a feat. She has captured her epic expeditions in the booksA Dip 
in the Ocean: Rowing Solo Across the Indian Ocean 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dip-in-the-ocean.html>, and Dare to Do – 
chronicling her world journey and due out in November 2016. She was named 
Adventurer of the Year at theNational Adventure Awards 
<http://www.scottishadventureawards.com/> on 16 March in Glasgow.
• sarahouten.com <http://www.sarahouten.com/>

Sarah Williams
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b3124edfafed12d29b54e55d4a24080b0931c9c%2F0_158_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b3124edfafed12d29b54e55d4a24080b0931c9c%2F0_158_960_576%2F960.jpg>
She’s a runner, skydiver, bungee jumper, climber, cyclist and world traveller 
… and a former banker. In 2013 she swapped the rat race for marathons and other 
gruelling challenges and is currently training for the world’s toughest 
footrace, the 200-mileMarathon des Sables <http://www.darbaroud.com/en> across 
the Sahara. Now an adventure aficionado, Williams’ new vocation is to motivate 
and inspire women and girls to challenge themselves. She’s the founder and host 
of theTough Girl podcast 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/tough-girl-podcast/id1024977070?mt=2>, 
weekly interviews where female adventurers share their journeys first-hand. 
From gold medallists to grandmothers, Williams’ podcasts include celebrated 
polar explorers Ann Daniels and Felicity Aston, and dozens of other female 
adventurers.
• toughgirlchallenges.com <http://www.toughgirlchallenges.com/>

Emma Timmis
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf10ff97ef3e7f63cd9fd2c8029bacef6400edfa%2F0_84_1280_769%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf10ff97ef3e7f63cd9fd2c8029bacef6400edfa%2F0_84_1280_769%2F1280.jpg>
Timmis is a runner, cyclist and climber, she was honoured in the 2015 National 
Adventure Awards for physical endeavour. At 32, she’s already tackled some of 
the world’s toughest challenges, but takes it all in her stride. Last May, 
Timmis discarded her running shoes and rollerskated across the Netherlands in 
seven days with her friend Emily Pitts. Thanks to couchsurfing and imaginative 
budgeting, they only spent £245 each – proving that adventures can be created 
on a shoestring.
• emmatimmis.com <http:>

And one travel great who spans the 20th and 21st centuries …




Dervla Murphy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3995586fb17ec6f3a059aa1e5936433c4521f1b6%2F0_33_960_1203%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20inspiring%20contemporary%20female%20adventurers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Ftop-10-inspiring-contemporary-uk-female-adventurers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3995586fb17ec6f3a059aa1e5936433c4521f1b6%2F0_33_960_1203%2F960.jpg>
 Murphy in India, around the time of writing Full Tilt 
A travel legend, Murphy has always blazed her own trails. Now in her 80s, she 
continues to journey around the world as she has for more than five decades – 
usually alone and mostly on a bicycle. She is Ireland’s most prolific travel 
writer and is best known for her 1965 bookFull Tilt: Ireland to India with a 
Bicycle <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/full-tilt.html>. Another 20 titles 
have followed, most recently Between River and Sea: Encounters in Israel and 
Palestine (2015). She travels with the bare minimum, counting on the 
hospitality of local people. Her daughter Rachel and three grand-daughters live 
in Italy and join Murphy on her journeys when possible. Thedocumentary Who is 
Dervla Murphy? 
<http://www.iftn.ie/news/?act1=record&only=1&aid=73&rid=4288994&tpl=archnews&force=1>
 is released on 23 April. “Choose your country, use guidebooks to identify the 
areas most frequented by foreigners – and then go in the opposite direction,” 
says Murphy.
• dervlamurphy.com <http:>
 