
Before the casinos and Donald Trump’s now-bankrupt hotel and gambling 
properties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/09/bernie-sanders-atlantic-city-casino-donald-trump-capitalism>
made Atlantic City the pre-eminent Jersey Shore resort, Wildwood was the place 
to be for vacationers from New York, Baltimore, and Philadelphia. With its 
sandy beaches and amusement piers the Wildwoods (there are five individual 
towns Wildwood, Wildwood Crest, North Wildwood, West Wildwood and Diamond 
Beach) still attract nine million summer visitors. In its heyday, during the 
1950s and 60s, hundreds of new motels were created for postwar families driving 
their shiny new cars past brash neon signs promising exotica and escape from 
workaday blues. By the 1990s, these motor-hotels were largely redundant, with 
many bulldozed to make way for bland condominiums. However, their neon sparkle 
was never fully extinguished, and now it’s blinking back to life.

This is where Chubby Checker first did The Twist and Bill Haley’s Comets 
rocked around the clock. The look is more kiss-me-quick than Palm Springs’ 
artful mid-century modern, and less niche than Googie, Populuxe, or Tiki 
architectural styles.

Today, nostalgia is the mantra. New motels, and even Acme supermarkets, 
Walgreens pharmacy stores and gas stations, all are designed in futuristic doo 
wop 1950s style. The tide has turned.

 The Caribbean Motel
 Photograph: MyLoupe/UIG via Getty Images 
With a retina-burning palette of lemon yellow and lime, this isn’t a pastiche 
of the 1950s, this is the 1950s spruced up and gleaming. A classic two- storey 
U-shaped motel 50 metres from the beach with crescent pool, it was the first to 
have the area’s now ubiquitous plastic palms (winter winds blow down the real 
thing) and beaming rooftop neon. A wafer-thin concrete spiral walkway connects 
the floors. Bedroom colours are bold, lit by Jackson Pollock-style spattered 
lamp fittings. Original bathrooms are pink and chunky. There are no iPod 
stations here; piped music (doo-wop, natch) comes through the original ceiling 
speaker, with volume controlled by a single Bakelite knob. Outside on the 
street, a multicoloured Vacancy/No Vacancy neon sign may look original but was 
made recently by local neon craftsman F Dominick Musso, a giveaway being the 
word “Wi-Fi” (available throughout the property). Televisions are, 
disappointingly, colour.
• Doubles from $89, +1 609 522 8292, caribbeanmotel.com 
<http://www.caribbeanmotel.com/>

The Shalimar Resort Motel


Motels of the 1950s and 1960s were basic boxes brightly painted to attract 
passing motorists, seducing them after dark with garish flashing lights. The 
Shalimar’s vivid cobalt blue turns the saturation level up to 11. Its five 
storeys accommodate penthouse duplexes for views of the ocean by day, the 
nearby neon signs by night. An equally vibrant swimming pool is squeezed 
between the main building and street, with just enough space for a line of tall 
plastic palms. Utilitarian rather than simply nostalgic, the rooms have their 
own balconies, kitchenettes and modern bathrooms. Design geeks will love the 
exact reproduction of original ashlar brickwork on the upper floors as well as 
the massive rooftop neon beacon visible for several miles out to sea.
• Doubles from $80, +1 609 522 0609, shalimarresortnj.com 
<http://www.shalimarresortnj.com/>

The Starlux 

 Photograph: Mary Godleski/AP 
This is an aluminium space-age fantasy slap bang in the centre of Wildwood, 
facing the beach. An old property refurbished, it mixes 1950s futurism with 
21st-century irony, down to its own 27-hole luxury crazy golf, an acid-hued 
version of the Shore’s more sober courses. A dazzling interior palette of 
turquoise and purple requires the use of RayBans. The glass and metal poolside 
lounge is a remodelled Jetsons interior, with plastic palms hugging the ribbed 
metal walls as architectural statement rather than just garden decor. The 
choice of rooms includes two superb vintage airstream trailers.
• Double rooms start from around $90 B&B, airstream trailer from $80, +1 609 
522 7412,hotels.moreyspiers.com/starlux <http://hotels.moreyspiers.com/starlux>

The Doo Wop Experience Museum

 Photograph: Alamy 
Close to the Starlux Hotel and the Boardwalk, this home to the Doo Wop 
Preservation League is housed in a 1960s space-age restaurant,The Surfside 
<http://thesurfsidemotel.com/>, which was dismantled in 2002 and stored for 
three years until being rebuilt in its present location. A curious 
pinwheel-shaped roof of jutting angles and glass walls gave it landmark status 
back in the day. Inside, at first glance, it appears to be a random assortment 
of junk. But the furniture, neon signage, artefacts and pop memorabilia that 
have been rescued for posterity represent a trove of modern historic treasure 
from dozens of motels lost to the wrecking ball. This is where to pick up your 
map of the doo wop district, which catalogues the 220 motels still standing 
nearby. The museum is also the starting point for a twice-weekly evening bus 
tour (Tuesdays/Thursdays) which takes in all the neon it’s possible to ingest 
as well as extensive new murals celebrating stars of the 1950s and 60s like 
Bobby Rydell, Bill Haley and Chubby Checker.
• Free, +1 609 523 1958, doowopusa.org/museum/index.html 
<http://www.doowopusa.org/museum/index.html>

Summer Nites


In North Wildwood, the Summer Nites B&B is at first glance a straightforward 
condominium with a peaceful veranda. Inside, the ebullient Sheila Brown has 
created a raucous shrine to the 1950s and 60s, with bedrooms dedicated to Elvis 
(his room has a library of all his movies), Marilyn Monroe, surfing and retro 
TV/movies, using airbrushed artwork and memorabilia. Each year Sheila organises 
a garden party with Elvis impersonators that blocks surrounding streets. 
Breakfast is served in a boxcar diner straight out of Happy Days (quarters are 
supplied for the juke box) and the playroom consists of period pinball machines 
and tabletop 10-pin. All that’s missing is the Fonz and the cast of Grease.
• Double rooms from $115 B&B, +1 609 846 1955, summernites.com 
<http://summernites.com/>

Maui’s Dog House

 Photograph: Alamy 
Acid yellow and vibrant red, this is the home of the smokin cheesy drunk 
($4.65) and the sausage soprano ($6.95), two of several dozen different 
hotdogs, burgers and sausage creations served with sides of cardiac fries and 
rootbeer floats. Once featured on Guy Fieri’s down and dirty TV show,Diners, 
Drive-Ins and Dives 
<http://www.foodnetwork.com/shows/diners-drive-ins-and-dives.html>, it serves 
generous portions – in dog bowls. A neon sign shouts “Salty Balls” at potential 
clientele. These turn out to be rather innocent baby new potatoes cooked in 
heavily salted brine and spices. The nearest you’ll get to health food is the 
macaroni salad (mayo, tuna, spices) and the only greenery is a sausage-sized 
pickle ($1.65).
• 806 New Jersey Avenue, +1 609 846 0444, mauisdoghouse.com 
<http://www.mauisdoghouse.com/>

Cool Scoops Ice Cream Parlor

 Photograph: Alamy 
This million-dollar collection of 1950s music and design includes fin-fringed 
car booths from chopped-up Cadillacs and Chevrolets. There’s so much 
memorabilia the ice-creams (nearly all under $10) seem almost secondary but the 
place offers countless flavours including 35 sugar-, dairy- and gluten-free 
versions plus sundaes such as scoop deville and wild-woody. Hot dogs are served 
in hot rod paper cars and the burgers are called Doo-Woppers. The owner is 
former New York architect Paul Russo, who left his native Brooklyn after 9/11. 
He already had a vast collection of jukeboxes, concert posters, figurines and 
signage, which are on display. The neon sign outside is an unmissable giant 
green gas guzzler.
• 1111 New Jersey Avenue, +1 609 729 2665, coolscoops.com 
<http://coolscoops.com/>

Boardwalk

 Photograph: Alamy 
Here, there’s 2.5 miles of raucous entertainment and ceaseless noise day and 
night as shrieking punters indulge themselves on roller coasters or partake of
Breakfast in the Sky 
<http://www.wildwood365.net/2016/04/moreys-piers-dishes-up-special-serving.html>
 aboard a giant ferris wheel. There are three piers along its length, 
accommodating versions of every fairground ride you’ve even seen, from 
nostalgic super scooters and teacups for the fainthearted, to the SkyCoaster 
(“soar through the air over the beach!”) and the frankly terrifying SlingShot. 
History still squeaks out, most notably from 1930s World Fair electric trams 
which glide past and announce “Watch the tram car please” (they have no horns) 
and stores such asDouglass Fudge <http://douglasscandies.com/>, where a 
seventh-generation Scot is still mixing sugar and butter into the tooth 
tingling fudge so beloved by his forebears. At night the dazzle of neon and 
School of Rock soundstage make Brighton Pier look like a village fete.
• Free entry, moreyspiers.com <http://www.moreyspiers.com/>

Vegas Diner


A vast neon roadsign announces this old-school diner four blocks – and several 
decades – away from the Boardwalk. It’s a bring-your-own-bottle diner, and the 
charming waitresses will happily telephone the nearest liquor store for you to 
make sure they’re open. The food is roadside classic without a twist: meatball 
sandwiches and turkey Reubens are appreciated by the mostly local clientele, 
and this is reflected in the prices, which hover around $15 for a variety of 
the broiled or the battered inclusive of help-yourself salad bar, bread, water, 
vegetables, fries or spaghetti and dessert. Shrimp and scallop, for example, 
come with added tilapia fish, stuffed mushrooms and extra stuffed scallops. 
Choose from early bird specials, lunch specials, blackboard specials and weekly 
lunch/dinner specials. Everything here is special.
• 14th & New Jersey Avenues, North Wildwood, +1 609 729 5511, on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/vegasdinerandrestaurant/>

Cycle round the neon

 Photograph: Alamy 
The best way to see all the neon is by bike in the evening. Motels generally 
provide their guests with free bikes but hirers such as Zippy’s rents cycles, 
tandems, trikes and e-bikes. Most of the motel signage is concentrated in the 
Wildwood Crest area, which stretches along the oceanfront for about 20 blocks. 
Styles vary greatly, from the exotic to the gaudy, with faraway place names 
featuring heavily: Hawaii, Tahiti, Singapore, Pyramids and Tangiers. History 
features in the Crusader, the Jolly Roger and the Aztec, as well as space age 
travel in the Pan American and Satellite. Out in North Wildwood, the Lollipop 
and Chateau Bleu are of note, the latter being one of two properties on 
America’s National Register of Historic Places. TheBoardwalk is open to cyclists
 <http://www.wildwoodsnj.com/wildwood-attractions-results.cfm?show=5259&> from 
5am to 11am (10.30am at weekends) and there’s an11-mile Bikeability route 
<http://www.wildwood365.net/2012/09/new-bike-path-connector-project.html> that 
takes in further sights.
• Bicycles from $30 a day (half day from noon $20) at Zippy’s zippysbikes.com 
<http://www.zippysbikes.com/>

• Flights were provided by Virgin Atlantic 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com/us/en.html>. 
 