
Bakewell, Derbyshire

You’d expect the home of the Bakewell pudding to know a thing or two about 
keeping its visitors cosy and well-fed, and in this attractive market town, 
you’re never more than a few steps away from a tea room or pub. And to walk off 
all the cake and ale, the spectacular Peak District is on the doorstep. In the 
run-up to Christmas, the town will be hosting a traditional Christmas market to 
coincide with its lights switch-on (26 & 27 Nov) and, new for 2016, a Winter 
Wonderland event (18-20 Nov and 9-11 Dec, advance tickets £5, under-fives free,
bakewellshow.org <http://www.bakewellshow.org/winter-wonderland>), at the 
Bakewell Showground, with Christmas grotto, craft marquee, reindeer, market 
stalls, ice rink, funfair and fireworks. For something more sedate, check out 
thecandlelit tours of Haddon Hall 
<http://www.haddonhall.co.uk/special-events/christmas-candlelight-tours/> 
(selected dates 7–13 Dec, £22pp), a romantic medieval manor house which has 
starred in countless films. The nearby Chatsworth Estate (chatsworth.org) 
always puts on a good display for Christmas, with beautiful Nutcracker-themed 
decorations in the house, special evening openings and, until 30 Nov, a 
Christmas market.

Eat/drink The Manners <http://www.mannersbakewell.co.uk/> is a traditional 
stone-built pub a few minutes’ walk from the town centre, serving well-executed 
pub fare such as local venison with root veg and red wine sauce, and apple and 
plum crumble.Wyes Waters <https://www.facebook.com/wyeswatertearoomsbakewell/> 
(Unit 8, Granby Road)is a charming little cafe with gingham table cloths and a 
great-value menu of homemade pies, sandwiches and cakes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b983aa09be208b313871da32e237ea7d2e23b76%2F0_243_5888_3534%2F5888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b983aa09be208b313871da32e237ea7d2e23b76%2F0_243_5888_3534%2F5888.jpg>
 Christmas in Bakewell. Photograph: Alamy 
Shopping Bakewell’s thriving Monday market is always popular and its 
attractive cobbled courtyards and market square are home to independent shops 
and galleries. And of course, no visit to Bakewell is complete without a visit 
to theOld Original Bakewell Pudding Shop <http://www.bakewellpuddingshop.co.uk/>
 which will gift-wrap and post sweet treats to anywhere in the world. Out of 
town, the excellentChatsworth Estate farm shop 
<http://www.chatsworth.org/plan-your-visit/shop-and-eat/chatsworth-estate-farm-shop/>
 is the place to stock up on Derbyshire specialities such as oatcakes, handmade 
chocolates from family-run business Holdsworth, and bottled ales brewed on the 
estate.

Stay On the river in the centre of Bakewell, One Castle Street 
<http://onecastlestreet.co.uk/> (doubles from £90 B&B), is a quaint B&B in a 
Grade II listed building, where substantial breakfasts will set you up for a 
day exploring. Alternatively, three miles out of town,Haddon Grove Farm 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/www.haddongrovefarmcottages.co.uk> has 
11 attractive holiday cottages in converted farm buildings (from £490 for a 
four night December break in a cottage for four). There’s a communal games room 
and indoor heated pool, making it a perfect winter escape for families. 
Cottages sleep between two and 10.
Joanne O’Connor

Bradford on Avon, Wiltshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4b3c4cc13331d813e493c9ed4863615c08eab8c%2F0_0_6048_3629%2F6048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4b3c4cc13331d813e493c9ed4863615c08eab8c%2F0_0_6048_3629%2F6048.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
This pint-size town deserves more attention than it gets. Its pretty Georgian 
houses and former textile mills frame streets lined with small independent 
shops and cafes. An ancient bridge straddles the Avon at its heart and, just 
beyond the town’s striking Tithe Barn, a towpath follows one of the prettiest 
stretches of canal in the country. It’s a half-hour walk to Avoncliff, with its 
18th-century aqueduct or a longer nine-mile hike to Bath, but there are trains 
back to Bradford from both. The first weekend in December sees aChristmas 
Floating Market <https://www.facebook.com/kacanalfloatingmarket>(on Facebook) 
along the Bradford stretch of the canal (expect local crafts, carols, mulled 
wine and roast chestnuts). For evening entertainment theWiltshire Music Centre 
<http://www.wiltshiremusic.org.uk/> puts on quality classical, jazz and folk 
concerts: December’s performers include Swedish-Brazilian-Slovenian trioElda 
<http://www.wiltshiremusic.org.uk/whatson/eldaaw16>.

Eat/drink Dining pubs are the order of the day in Bradford, with several cosy 
firesides to choose from. The best is the chicBunch of Grapes 
<http://www.thebunchofgrapes.com/>, whose owners have brought the concept of 
village bar bistros from south-west France to south-west England. Smoked and 
brined poussin cooked in a beer can is a speciality, but there’s also a feast 
of small plates: cheese beignets, homemade Charentais sausage, rabbit 
rillettes, and mixed leaves with preserved lemon, mint, toasted hazelnuts and 
feta. For a more Spanish accent,Pablo’s Tapas <http://www.pablostapas.com/> has 
good jamón, manchego and gambas. For a pint of Rusty Lane ale (from theKennet & 
Avon Brewery <http://www.kennetandavonbrewery.co.uk/our-beer/rusty-lane/>) in 
eccentric but cosy surroundings, head to theLock Inn 
<http://www.thelockinn.co.uk/> and sup by the fire surrounded by a squall of 
vintage advertising signs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fede5c2081822060af932d6f079d24ed99aad8752%2F0_0_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fede5c2081822060af932d6f079d24ed99aad8752%2F0_0_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 The Bunch of Grapes pub. Photograph: Mark Bolton 
Shopping Start at just-opened Silver Street Studio  
<https://www.facebook.com/silverstreetstudio>(on Facebook) for scarves, 
ceramics and spoons from British makers. Further down the road, independent 
wine storeRuby Red <http://rubyredwines.co.uk/> sells Somerset Pomona (a 
moreish cider brandy) and beers from local microbrewery Kettlesmith. Then 
wander through the quaint Shambles, past posh pet shopFetch 
<http://www.fetchpetshop.co.uk/>, to The Cheese Shop 
<http://www.cheese-shop.co.uk/> at 5 Market Street for chutneys and cheeses 
from local makerIn a Pickle <http://www.inapicklefoodco.co.uk/>. Finally, 
stroll past arts co-operativeMade in Bradford 
<https://www.facebook.com/MadeInBradfordOnAvon>, over the bridge and right 
along the towpath to the art, pottery and antiques stores ofTithebarn Workshops 
<http://www.tithebarnartscrafts.co.uk/> (tithebarnartscrafts.co.uk).

Stay Timbrells Yard <http://timbrellsyard.com/> (doubles from £95 B&B) calls 
itself a gastropub with rooms but feels more like a cool provincial hotel, with 
a cafe-bar, a restaurant overseen by ex-River Cottage chef Tom Blake, and chic 
bedrooms. It’s a five-minute walk from the station. The foodieGeorge  
<http://thegeorgebradfordonavon.co.uk/>pub is a 15-minute walk out of town and 
has two one-bedroom flats (from £110 B&B). Families might prefer theGeorgian 
Lodge <http://georgianlodge.co.uk/> (sleeps four from £110 a night), a 
two-bedroom flat beside the town’s bridge, with green velvet sofas, painted 
shutters and free parking.
Rhiannon Batten

Shrewsbury, Shropshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4a7ebb08dc56d16c8668308c7e102a37e997497%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4a7ebb08dc56d16c8668308c7e102a37e997497%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Shrewsbury offers a good idea of what London might have looked like without 
the ravages of the Great Fire. Almost looped by the river Severn, Shropshire’s 
county town (and birthplace of Charles Darwin) is home to more than 650 listed 
buildings, many of them half-timbered Tudor or Jacobean marvels, some of them – 
including its castle – medieval. Its higgledy-piggledy streets and elegant 
riverside parks aren’t stuck in the past, however. A vibrant music and arts 
scene makes this compact town a dynamic weekend destination. On the second 
weekend of December,Shrewsbury Winterfest  
<http://www.shrewsburychristmas.co.uk/>will involve festive crafts and carols 
in the Quarry park, a gingerbread-spiced food trail around the market and a 
ring of Christmas trees at the circular St Chads church.

Eat/drink Shrewsbury’s culinary influences are surprisingly diverse. Ramen bar 
Momo No Ki <http://momonoki.co.uk/> does a peppy line in noodles, from a 
Japanese-inspired miso-crusted salmon version to a Korean BBQ rice noodle 
salad. Also good isHouse of Yum <http://houseofyumshrewsbury.com/>, a Thai 
streetfood cafe in the covered market that vies with neighbourThe Bird’s Nest 
<http://thebirdsnestcafe.uk/> to be the town’s best lunch spot. For veggie 
comfort food (parsnip and butterbean soup, beetroot and chocolate cake) there’s
The Good Life <http://goodlife-shrewsbury.co.uk/> in Barracks Passage, off Wyle 
Cop.The Bakehouse <https://twitter.com/shrewsburybread> does spiced plum 
danishes and other seasonal pastries, whileAvatar 
<http://avatardining.com/index1.php/> serves refined Indian and Nepalese food 
courtesy of a chef formerly from the Oberoi and Taj Hotels. Chicken momos come 
with tomato and sesame dipping sauce, and Gurkha lamb is spiked with red 
chilli, shallots, ginger and coriander. For more local flavours, head just out 
of town for a steak and oxtail pie or trio of pork with black kale at the
Haughmond Hotel <http://thehaughmond.co.uk/> in Upton Magna, which also has a 
small farm shop and cafe. On Friday and Saturday nights, there’s a pop-up 
supper at coffee shopGinger & Co <https://www.facebook.com/gingerandcocoffee> 
(message for bookings) in the town centre. Or hunker by the open fire at the
Golden Cross <http://goldencrosshotel.co.uk/>. With its mullioned windows, 
damson walls, theatrical table settings and soft lighting, this “oldest pub in 
Shrewsbury” is magical in winter and the cooking is adept. Classic dishes 
include confit duck and venison fillet. For a pintThe Three Fishes 
<http://www.realaleshrewsbury.co.uk/> is a good bet: stop in at neighbouring 
Pengwern Books <https://www.facebook.com/Pengwern-Books-163744553682787/> (1 
Fish Street) then enjoy your purchases over a guest ale from the Salopian 
Brewery or the Three Tuns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ab250d08d44f75481fa06887f9ec18c073f0dec%2F0_273_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ab250d08d44f75481fa06887f9ec18c073f0dec%2F0_273_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
 The Golden Cross. Photograph: Polly Lovegrove 
Shopping The main road, Wyle Cop, sweeps into town with a flourish of 
independent stores in overhanging Tudor buildings. They include Appleyards deli 
(at no 85), kitchenware shopCooking Kneads 
<https://www.facebook.com/cookingkneads> (no 3), wine store Tanners  
<https://www.tanners-wines.co.uk>(no 26) and clothing and accessories stores 
Oberon <https://www.facebook.com/OberonWyleCop> and Hibiscus 
<https://www.facebook.com/hibiscus84>. The town’s market hall 
<http://markethallshrewsbury.co.uk/> on Claremont Street is far more impressive 
than its brutal 1960s exterior promises, with great local produce.

Stay The Lion & Pheasant (doubles from £115 B&B) breathed new life into 
Shrewsbury’s hotel scene when it opened, bringing a dose of soft-edged Scandi 
style, with exposed timbers, pale grey paint and glowing candles – to what had 
once been a car dealer’s depot. Still going strong six years on, it offers 
self-catering as well as rooms and a stylish restaurant – ideal if you want a 
cocktails-and-gin-cured-salmon kind of evening. Cheaper is B&BHardwick House 
<http://www.hardwickhouseshrewsbury.co.uk/index.html> (doubles from £85 B&B), a 
fine Georgian home just inside the town walls with wood panelling, dainty 
antique armchairs and a peaceful walled garden (have afternoon tea by the fire 
in the summerhouse).RB

Corbridge, Northumberland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6b073c8a97c2e5ce042e6e5b708fc3f1e8d7790%2F0_248_3998_2398%2F3998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6b073c8a97c2e5ce042e6e5b708fc3f1e8d7790%2F0_248_3998_2398%2F3998.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
With its ancient stone houses, market cross, shops, pubs and banks, this 
Northumberland village, should surely be reclassified as a town. The fact it 
has so much infrastructure is thanks to its past as a crossroads on busy 
north-south and east-west routes, from coaching days to the later half of the 
20th century. Though the busiest roads now bypass its heart, Corbridge (see
visitcorbridge.co.uk <http://www.visitcorbridge.co.uk/>) is very 
well-connected: half an hour by car (or train) from Newcastle, 50 minutes from 
Carlisle and two hours from Edinburgh and Leeds. Following serious flooding 
last winter, much repair work has been done to restore the village’s spirit as 
well as its bones. There’s good walking along the banks of the Tyne, and trips 
back in time at Coria, the remains ofCorbridge Roman Town 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/corbridge-roman-town-hadrians-wall/?utm_source=Google%20Business&utm_campaign=Local%20Listings&utm_medium=Google%20Business%20Profiles&utm_content=corbridge%20roman%20town>
 just south of Hadrian’s Wall. Medieval Aydon Castle is also worth seeing on 
summer visits (it closes October-April).

Eat/drink Restaurant Il Piccolo <http://ilpiccolo.co.uk/> is known for its 
pizzas and gelato, though you can go the full Italian hog, from pan-fried 
sardines to spaghetti with homemade meatballs. For coffee and a slice of 
homemade treacle tart, there’sWatling Coffee House 
<https://www.facebook.com/watlingcoffeehouse>, while the coffee shop up the 
road atActiv Cycles <https://www.facebook.com/ActivCyc> (both on Facebook) is a 
great spot for breakfast or lunch (bacon and cheese crumpets, Moroccan lamb 
wraps, coconut and butternut squash soup). Walkers could pick up a beetroot 
bread sandwich or Northumbrian pasty fromGrants Bakery 
<http://grantsbakery.co.uk/>, or a DIY deli lunch from The Corbridge Larder 
<http://www.corbridgelarder.co.uk/>. For dinner by the fire, head to the Angel 
of Corbridge <http://theangelofcorbridge.com/#> for potted shrimp, wood pigeon 
or venison ragu. There’s also a fish and chip shop,Angelfish 
<http://www.angelfishshop.com/>, in the courtyard behind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F704b4a85e3b2e47cbc3df70a061683bc2de22683%2F0_263_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F704b4a85e3b2e47cbc3df70a061683bc2de22683%2F0_263_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Homewares store RE, Corbridge 
Shopping Corbridge punches above its weight when it comes to shopping, with 
kitchenware, antiques, fashion, shoe and jewellery shops. Two of the best are 
dynamic independentForum Books <http://forumbooksandkids.com/> (8 Market Place, 
children’s books at 20 Watling Street), and the only walk-in branch of the cult 
mail-order homewares storeRE <http://www.re-foundobjects.com/> in Bishop’s 
Yard. From tiny spoons in a rainbow of shades to kitsch pompom Christmas 
decorations and light shades made from recycled jelly moulds, it’s perfect 
present-hunting territory. The village shops stay open late on 5 Dec for 
Corbridge Christmas Late Night Shopping and stalls jostle for space in Market 
Place alongside carol singers.

Stay A minute’s walk from the railway station (which is over the river half a 
mile from the village), dog-friendlyDyvels Inn <http://thedyvels.co.uk/> 
(doubles from £75 B&B) was refurbished after the flooding and now has four 
comfortable guest rooms. In the evening, order a pint ofPennine Pale 
<http://www.allendalebrewery.com/beers/pennine-pale> (from nearby Allendale 
Brewery), a trio of Northumberland sausages with mash and onion gravy and dine 
by the open range. Or, try22a Hill Street 
<http://www.visitcorbridge.co.uk/business/holiday-lets/22a-hill-street/> (from 
£220 for two nights), a two-bedroom self-catering apartment above a shop in the 
centre of town.RB

Melrose, Scottish Borders
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9cf441126b9f07e664561028881b49c18ad8d57%2F512_164_4562_2737%2F4562.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9cf441126b9f07e664561028881b49c18ad8d57%2F512_164_4562_2737%2F4562.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Last year’s rebirth of the Borders Railway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/04/scotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley>
 has opened up an easy, not to mention scenic, route to Melrose, the pick of 
the trim Borders market towns. Melrose’s lineage stretches back to the Romans 
and its romantically ruined Cistercian abbey is home to Robert the Bruce’s 
heart. It’s a place for hikes in the Eildon Hills 
<http://www.walkhighlands.co.uk/borders/eildon-hills.shtml>, frost-kissed 
strolls along the salmon-rich Tweed and a visit toAbbotsford 
<http://www.scottsabbotsford.com/> the remarkable home Sir Walter Scott built 
on its banks. Melrose also does a good line in independent shops, cosy pubs 
and, if you are lucky, the hills that Scott so loved will be sporting a dusting 
of snow.

Eat/drink Foodie specialities include Borders lamb, smoked Tweed salmon (local 
producerTeviot <http://www.teviotgamefaresmokery.co.uk/> is superb) and the 
sweet, fruity Selkirk bannock. The Henderson family runsBurts 
<http://www.burtshotel.co.uk/>, a hotel on the Market Square with a relaxed 
bistro and a more formal restaurant. Borders lamb is the star in both. The cafe 
at Scott’s house,Abbotsford, <http://www.scottsabbotsford.com/eat> is an ideal 
lunch option, with braised brisket or smoked salmon on the menu, as well as 
views down to the writer’s grand mansion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7f2b0c86bbf9e44e04a8088e30b9e24f69f376a%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7f2b0c86bbf9e44e04a8088e30b9e24f69f376a%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Roulotte Retreat, Melrose. Photograph: Helen Abraham 
Shopping The villagers who flock from Melrose’s hinterland to do their 
shopping are catered for with a brace of butchers, a fishmonger, antique shops 
and a sprinkling of other small independent businesses. A cosy jumper or 
cashmere scarf fromAbbey Mill 
<http://www.simplythebestdestinations.co.uk/Scotland/17Melrose> makes a good 
Christmas present.Abbey Wines 
<http://www.melrose.bordernet.co.uk/traders/abbeywines/> (17 Market Square) is 
the place for a special bottle of whisky (Glenkinchie is the local malt), while 
theCountry Kitchen <http://countrykitchendeli.co.uk/> offers great additions to 
a festive cheeseboard from Kelso’s Brenda Leddy (ofStichill Jerseys 
<https://food.list.co.uk/place/30383-brenda-leddy-stichill-jerseys/>, a 
runner-up in BBC Radio 4’s Food and Farming Awards).

Stay Burts (see above) is also a good stylish bolthole with a roaring fire to 
sip a wee dram by. It is offering awinter special for £146pp for a two-night 
break including dinner each night 
<http://www.burtshotel.co.uk/offers-and-events/>. A fun option for those with a 
car or bikes isRoulotte Retreat  <http://roulotteretreat.com/>(two-night stay 
for two is £250). This adults-only glampsite has seven gloriously furnished 
Gypsy-style caravans dotted around a meadow. All have wood-burning stoves and 
two also have wood-fired hot tubs, for cosy readings of Scott’s Waverley novels 
– despite your frosty hair.
Robin McKelvie

Totnes, Devon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4db6a5646fdfe29d16df53a79f6b095fb3913575%2F0_483_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4db6a5646fdfe29d16df53a79f6b095fb3913575%2F0_483_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Photograph: Frederic Soltan/Getty Images 
This riverside town, on the Great Western Railway main line and National 
Express’s Plymouth coach route, has a glut of independent shops and cafes and 
more listed (Norman, medieval and Tudor) buildings than any town of comparable 
size. These make a photogenic backdrop for itsChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> street markets (Tuesdays 
6, 13 and 20 Dec, till late). Dining options are not extensive, but a handful 
of newish openings have raised the bar for beer, coffee and gastronomy.

Eat/drink The best coffee is found at The Curator (2 The Plains), where 
baristas serve single-estate brews and wholemeal, fruity, not-too-sweet cakes. 
Upstairs isCurator Kitchen <http://thecurator.co.uk/>, a “modern osteria” 
opened in March 2015 and offering excellent Italian fare (set dinner £30). Ten 
minutes’ walk up Fore Street is family-runJano 
<http://janotasteofsunshine.co.uk/>, another Italian restaurant, which makes 
its own pastas, imports fine meats and cheeses, and does set menus from £13.
Rumour <http://rumourtotnes.com/> boasts a family-friendly atmosphere and good 
burgers. TheTotnes Brewing Company 
<https://www.facebook.com/Totnesbrewingcompany/>, which opened late in 2015 and 
recently expanded, is the cosiest drinking den in town, with a dozen draught 
and lots of bottled craft beers. Look out forNew Lion 
<https://www.newlionbrewery.co.uk/> ales, a local venture that resuscitated an 
extinct brand. The Pandit IPA is fruity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fbb3ad708790ac8bb163f796e8a643c3530fcd7%2F0_130_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fbb3ad708790ac8bb163f796e8a643c3530fcd7%2F0_130_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Photograph: Greg Taylor/Totnes Times 
Shopping Totnes is a good place for Christmas food shopping. Riverford Farm 
<http://riverfordfarmshop.co.uk/>, the award-winning organic producer, recently 
opened a shop at 8 High Street for fruit and veg, plus local salmon, crab, hams 
and Sharpham wines. ButcherAW Luscombe <http://www.luscombebutchers.com/> has 
been selling quality Devon lamb and beef since 1788; down the road at no 5,CM 
McCabe <http://www.mccabesbutchers.co.uk/> is known for its game. For prezzies, 
the High Street has enough “stuff” shops to service a city. Standouts include
Little Blue Budgie <http://riverfordfarmshop.co.uk/> for arty crockery and home 
furnishings,Greenfibres <http://www.greenfibres.com/> for pricey, but ethical 
woollens,Drift <https://driftrecords.com/> for cool vinyl and the Devon Harp 
Centre <http://www.devonharpcentre.co.uk/> if you need a new hobby.

Stay Totnes lacks a boutique hotel. The Royal Seven Stars 
<https://www.royalsevenstars.co.uk/> hotel (doubles from £100 B&B) has homely 
rooms, is dog-friendly and close to everything. A mile away in Dartington, the 
14th-century thatched-roofedCott Inn <http://cottinn.co.uk/> (doubles from £95 
B&B) is known for its pub grub and has three snug bedrooms (weekend 
availability limited).
Chris Moss

Holt, Norfolk
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8f08a77423451df03d7a8877910cf2384f7832e%2F9_0_5176_3105%2F5176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8f08a77423451df03d7a8877910cf2384f7832e%2F9_0_5176_3105%2F5176.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
In summer, this handsome Georgian town heaves with holidaymakers who use it as 
a base for exploring the beaches of north Norfolk. But in winter, when the 
crowds are gone and the attractive high street is lit by thousands of fairy 
lights, it takes on an entirely different character. Shop for presents in the 
town’s many independent shops, wrap up warm for walks on the seafront at nearby 
Sheringham, and see thousands of overwintering birds gather on the saltmarshes 
at Cley and Blakeney. Families might like a steam trip on the North Norfolk 
Railway, which runsSanta Specials on selected dates 
<http://www.nnrailway.co.uk/page.php?pid=6> in December, or a boat trip to see 
the seal pups at Blakeney 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/blakeney-national-nature-reserve>.

Eat/drink The Folly Tea Room in Hoppers Yard <http://www.follytearoom.co.uk/> 
serves delicious sandwiches and cream teas in a cosy, vintage-themed setting. 
TheKings Head pub <http://www.kingsheadholt.org.uk/> on the High Street is the 
place to go for pub classics, such as sausage and mash, slow-roast pork belly 
and steak-and-ale stew with dumplings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feda11c2792fb4f7ed790c11b7385e0b41c7085fa%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feda11c2792fb4f7ed790c11b7385e0b41c7085fa%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 The Folly Tearoom 
Shopping Holt is renowned for its independent shops and galleries, many of 
which are in yards and alleys off the High Street. Don’t miss the excellentHolt 
Bookshop <http://www.holtbookshop.co.uk/> (10 Appleyard) and the food hall at 
Bakers & Larners <http://www.bakersandlarners.co.uk/> (8 Market Place, ), a 
family-run department store which has been trading since 1770. Shop for local 
crafts, gourmet foods and unusual gifts at theChristmas Fair in Holt Hall 
<http://www.holthallchristmasfair.co.uk/> (26-27 Nov, booking recommended, £2, 
), where there will be more than 50 stalls, a huge Christmas tree and a log 
fire.

Stay Byfords Posh B&B <http://www.byfords.org.uk/> (doubles from £155 B&B) 
offers 16 comfy and characterful bedrooms (exposed brick-and-flint walls, 
wooden floors and ceiling beams) above the town’s popular deli and bakery. For 
stylish and cosy self-catering, the fourCartshed Cottages in the grounds of 
Sharrington Hall <http://www.sharringtonhall.com/> (from £450 for three nights, 
sleep 4), a Jacobean manor house two miles from the centre of Holt, are hard to 
beat, with log-burners, roll-top baths and four-poster beds.
JO’C

Wells, Somerset
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42291410a6f2e6b1359d2ed55e96c4e0fe6f99b%2F0_103_3565_2139%2F3565.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42291410a6f2e6b1359d2ed55e96c4e0fe6f99b%2F0_103_3565_2139%2F3565.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
OK, one city has snuck into this list, but compact Wells is the smallest city 
in England, with a small-town feel. It’s gorgeous at any time of year, but in 
winter it really turns on the charm, with tasteful twinkling lights, a towering 
Christmas tree and, for the first time this year, a four-day Christmas market 
with stalls selling gifts, local produce and mulled wine (Market Place, 21-24 
Dec). The candlelit carol service at the medieval cathedral (27 Nov) is one of 
the highlights of the local calendar. The moatedBishop’s Palace and Gardens 
<https://bishopspalace.org.uk/whatson/>, which has been home to the Bishops of 
Bath and Wells for over 800 years, will also be getting into the Christmas 
spirit, with workshops on creative gift-wrapping and wreath-making. Wander 
around the medieval streets, including the perfectly preserved Vicar’s Close, 
or for something more energetic, climb Tor Hill and join theEast Mendip Way 
<https://www.ldwa.org.uk/ldp/members/show_path.php?path_name=East+Mendip+Way> 
for a bracing walk across the hills.

Eat/drink The Good Earth <http://www.thegoodearthwells.co.uk/> offers 
wholesome lunches as well as gifts such as Neal’s Yard toiletries and St Eval 
scented candles from Cornwall.Ensemble <https://www.ensemblewells.co.uk/>, the 
newest addition to Wells’ dining scene, has already proved a big hit with 
locals for its simple but well-executed menu with its emphasis on local produce 
. The two/three-course set lunch for £15/£17.50 is particularly good value.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9f71032c9ab0dc34118f988784bad45742e8d49%2F0_147_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9f71032c9ab0dc34118f988784bad45742e8d49%2F0_147_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Wells Cathedral choristers. Photograph: Alamy 
Shopping As you’d expect from a well-heeled cathedral city with a healthy 
tourist trade, Wells has more than its share of chichi shops and galleries. 
Stock up on Somerset cheeses and chutneys at theQueen Street Deli 
<http://www.queenstreetdeli.co.uk/> at number 14, last-minute presents and 
traditional children’s toys atCadeaux & Co <http://www.cadeauxandco.co.uk/> (5 
High Street), and retro and vintage clothes, trinkets and furniture at the 
Wells Trading Post in the 12th-century Priory Mill. In addition to the 
Christmas market, there will be aChristmas brocante fair 
<http://www.glastonbrocante.net/> in the Market Place (11 Dec) selling 
antiques, crafts and unusual gifts.

Stay Don’t be put off by the name: Beryl <http://www.beryl-wells.co.uk/> (from 
£110 B&B) is a gem of a B&B in a Victorian gothic mansion set in parkland on 
the outskirts of town. Guests are greeted by roaring open fires, old-fashioned 
(in a good way) hospitality and huge bedrooms that ooze character.JO’C

Saffron Walden, Essex

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68821fd7e49452a1b6d3ccbce0fa77979453e514%2F0_244_5360_3216%2F5360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68821fd7e49452a1b6d3ccbce0fa77979453e514%2F0_244_5360_3216%2F5360.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
This medieval market town offers the perfect antidote to the pre-Christmas 
frenzy. Locals start getting into the spirit on 2 Dec, when the Christmas 
lights are switched on and Santa takes up residence in his town hall grotto. 
The beautiful 15th-century parish church, St Mary’s, is the largest in Essex 
and a suitably atmospheric setting for a carol service 
<http://www.stmaryssaffronwalden.org/services/christmas-services/> (27 Nov). 
Pack your wellies for walks from the town into the rolling parkland surrounding
Audley End 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/audley-end-house-and-gardens/>
, a beautiful Jacobean country house which will be hosting seasonal events, 
from wreath-making to carol concerts. At Saffron Hall, author Michael Morpurgo 
will be narrating his Christmas story,The Best of Times 
<https://saffronhall.com/calendar/michael-morpurgo-best-times/>, (11 Dec). And 
if that’s not enough to get you in the mood for Christmas, theSaffron Screen 
<http://saffronscreen.com/>, the town’s indie cinema, will be showing festive 
classics such as Elf, The Polar Express and It’s a Wonderful Life throughout 
December

Eat/drink Bicicletta – Coffee con Velo <https://www.biciclettavelo.com/> is 
the town’s first cycling cafe and the perfect pitstop, offering great coffee, 
wholesome food (poached eggs and avocado on toasted sourdough is a house 
speciality) and the chance to browse top-brand bikes and cycling gear.The Eight 
Bells <http://www.8bells-pub.co.uk/> is a cosy pub with log fires, chesterfield 
sofas, real ales on tap and a dining room in a beautiful 16th-century 
timber-framed barn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b5dbb9ed97df9b0d3584e00fb389a9f6b730c46%2F0_40_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b5dbb9ed97df9b0d3584e00fb389a9f6b730c46%2F0_40_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 The Cross Keys Hotel. Photograph: Alamy 
Shopping Saffron Walden’s twice-weekly market (Tues and Sat) has been held in 
the town since the 12th century and has stalls selling everything from artisan 
cheese to vintage tools.Hart’s Books <http://www.hartsbooks.co.uk/?reload> (26 
King Street), the town’s much-loved independent bookshop, recently reopened in 
new premises after an absence of several years.

Stay The Cross Keys restaurant-with-rooms 
<http://www.theoldcrosskeys.co.uk/sleeping/> (doubles from £110 B&B) may be 
housed in a building which dates back some 850 years, but the nine en suite 
bedrooms are kitted out in a contemporary style, with comfortable beds, iPod 
docks and freestanding baths or monsoon showers.JO’C

Abergavenny, Monmouthshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0abea314a76dde62ed9e345629318291cb6e3865%2F0_69_4752_2851%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0abea314a76dde62ed9e345629318291cb6e3865%2F0_69_4752_2851%2F4752.jpg>
 Arts and Crafts market, Abergavenny Market Hall. Photograph: Alamy 
At the junction of the rivers Usk and Gavenny, beneath the mountain peaks of 
Blorenge and Sugar Loaf, near the border between England and Wales, the market 
town of Abergavenny is a particularly picturesque spot to hole up for a 
weekend. It’s easy to get to, too, with good road and rail links – and once 
you’re there, everywhere’s walkable. Without a massive “to-do” list of 
attractions to tick off, it’s a perfect place to really get away from it all. 
Wander around the atmospheric ruins of the castle and small museum and climb 
one of the neighbouring hills to sharpen the appetite and savour some of the 
finest views in southern Britain.

Eat/drink The Abergavenny Food Festival 
<http://www.abergavennyfoodfestival.com/christmas/christmas-2016> hosts a 
one-day Christmas Fair on 11 Dec, with local producers selling their wares, 
workshops for kids (from Christmas tree decorations to lantern making) plus a 
musical procession, carol singing and a light parade after dark. The legacy of 
the renowned food festival may not be obvious on the town’s high street at 
first glance, but there are some interesting places to eat. For lunch, try the
Art Shop and Chapel <http://artshopandgallery.co.uk/kitchen-at-the-chapel/>; 
the menu changes, but salmon fishcake, spinach and lovage sauce, and 
caramelised onion, pea, chorizo and anya potato frittata are favourites. If 
you’d rather pack a snack and go for a hike, there is an excellent selection of 
local cheeses (try Gorwydd Caerphilly and Golden Cenarth) and real ales at
Marches Delicatessen <http://www.marchesdeli.co.uk/>. For dinner, tuck yourself 
away in a corner of the Foxhunter’s Bar at the Angel Hotel and watch the locals 
parade in and out for such delights as glass noodle, pawpaw and peanut salad or 
Lancashire hot-pot with braised red cabbage. And if you would rather make your 
food than eat it, spend a day learning to bake with theAbergavenny Baker 
<http://www.abergavennybaker.co.uk/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2efa018331df60ac5524ea4adeb92bff2902dee%2F0_53_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20best%20small%20UK%20towns%20for%20winter%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2F10-best-small-uk-towns-for-winter-christmas-breaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2efa018331df60ac5524ea4adeb92bff2902dee%2F0_53_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 The Angel Hotel, Abergavenny. Photograph: Keith Davies 
Shopping There’s a decent mix of independent shops dotted between the 
high-street names, offering some inspired Christmas shopping. Try theArt Shop 
<http://www.artshopmaterials.co.uk/> (8 Cross Street) for everything from 
drawing accessories to lino-cutting tools, then head next door tothe Wool Croft 
<http://www.thewoolcroft.co.uk/> for yarns and fine Welsh wool. The Model Centre
 <http://abergavennymodelcentre.co.uk/> (1 Brecon Road) might just have the 
radio-controlled plane you always wanted. For couture hats, visitAlison Todd 
<https://www.facebook.com/AlisonTodMilliner/>’s award-winning millinery shop 
(13 Cross Street), and for beautiful Italian shoes tryAmanda Jayne 
<http://www.amandajayneshoes.co.uk/>) up the street at no 16. There is also the 
excellentCooks Galley <http://www.cooksgalleyltd.co.uk/> (6 Nevill Street) for 
stylish kitchen supplies.

Stay The Angel Hotel <http://www.angelabergavenny.com/> (doubles from £95 
room-only) is a historic coaching inn and now the chic heartbeat of the town, 
with a range of rooms and several neighbouring cottages.
Rob Penn
 