
Guardian city guides - KUT radio's soundtrack to Austin 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/GuardianTravel/guardian-city-guides-kut-radios-soundtrack-to-austin/?utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=resource_link>
 byGuardiantravel 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/GuardianTravel/?utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=profile_link>
 on Mixcloud 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/?utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=homepage_link>

13th Floor Elevators – You're Gonna Miss Me

In Austin you can stroll into the Magnolia Café <http://themagnoliacafe.com/> 
on South Congress in the middle of the night and find yourself sipping coffee 
alongside a genuine rock icon like Roky Erickson, leader of the 13th Floor 
Elevators. His 1966 regional hitYou're Gonna Miss Me 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2W1iA2g2RUg> has taken on international cult 
status as the first true psychedelic rock 45: a bona-fide acid trip preserved 
on vinyl. Though Erickson almost lost it all as a result of the excesses of the 
1960s, interest in his music has been rekindled by vocal admirers – from ZZ 
Top's Billy Gibbons to Okkervil River's Will Sheff and indie rock band Black 
Angels.

Stevie Ray Vaughan – Cold Shot 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvQxxBGb2uSE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvQxxBGb2uSE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvQxxBGb2uSE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
For years, Austinites didn't really notice Little Stevie – he was just another 
hotshot kid playing six-string in6th Street 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sixth_Street_(Austin,_Texas)> blues bands. But 
when David Bowie singled out the Texas guitar slinger for his Let's Dance 
sessions, the world took notice. Stevie Ray Vaughan – and Austin music – would 
never be the same again.Cold Shot <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQxxBGb2uSE>, 
written by members of the long-forgotten Austin blues group Triple Threat, was 
SRV's tip of the hat to the local scene where he cut his chops. Today, a trip 
to theStevie Ray Vaughan statue 
<http://www.austin360.com/music/gone-20-years-stevie-ray-vaughan-stands-forever-881973.html>
 overlooking Lady Bird Lake is a must: larger than life, just like his music.

Gary P Nunn – London Homesick Blues
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ37rSz6JVVk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ37rSz6JVVk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ37rSz6JVVk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Penned in a London hotel room, this song is often considered the de facto 
anthem of theOutlaw Country movement  
<http://www.roughstock.com/history/outlaw-country>that put Austin music on the 
map. Indeed,London Homesick Blues <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q37rSz6JVVk> 
was the opening song onAustin City Limits <http://austincitylimits.com>, the 
longest-running music show on American TV. The line in the chorus, "I wanna go 
home with the Armadillo", was long thought to be a reference to the world-famous
Armadillo World Headquarters <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KuijBpTVvD0>music 
hall, where the rednecks and the hippies first joined forces in the 1970s. Nunn 
later confessed that he wasn't even thinking of Austin when he wrote this song. 
But don't tell the locals. They still whoop and holler whenever it's played.

Spoon – Sister Jack 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FY8M24F5LUYc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FY8M24F5LUYc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FY8M24F5LUYc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Few indie bands fall into that rarefied critical space occupied by the likes 
of Radiohead – but incredibly, Austin is the birthplace of just such a group. 
Over the years, Spoon's jagged alt-rock gelled into a thinking-person's hard 
rock, equal parts quirky and accessible. Though the creative metamorphosis 
continues (Britt Daniel's new side project,Divine Fits <http://divinefits.com/> 
notwithstanding),Sister Jack <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y8M24F5LUYc> from 
Spoon's 2005 album Gimme Fiction best captures the thrill of the ascent, 
bristling with guitar hooks dissolving into an electronic frenzy to a steady 
big rock rhythm. If there's a better song for a cruise down South Congress on a 
summer night with the sunroof open ... get back to me.

Alejandro Escovedo – Always a Friend
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAVuu9aJXp9E%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAVuu9aJXp9E%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAVuu9aJXp9E%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Though Alejandro is one of the kings of Americana roots music, he's a rocker 
at heart. On this standout track from his critically acclaimed album Real 
Animal, Escovedo's swagger here is one of a Texas Springsteen in rolled-up 
sleeves, pounding away at a Telecaster and inviting the world to sing along 
(indeed, The Boss invited Escovedo on stage to performAlways a Friend 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AVuu9aJXp9E> during a recent Houston concert 
and played on Alejandro's latest album). It's always a treat to catch one of 
Austin's premier artists burning down a place like theContinental Club 
<http://www.continentalclub.com>, but hearing this song blasting over the 
loudspeakers at an airport on the other side of the world is enough to make any 
Austinite a little homesick – and proud.

Okkervil River – Lost Coastlines
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQZGYaghnkyI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQZGYaghnkyI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQZGYaghnkyI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
In Austin's Red River music district 
<http://www.austinchronicle.com/gyrobase/Guides/RedRiver>, skinny jeans and 
ironic tees were cool way before music bloggers got obsessed with Brooklyn. 
Okkervil River certainly paid their dues along Red River – but their rise to 
national prominence owes far less to fashion than to a reputation for literate 
lyrics and smart pop culture references imbedded in indelible melodies.Lost 
Coastlines <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QZGYaghnkyI> is a case in point: 
cosmopolitan college-town rock that's graduated to the big time … with barely a 
trace of a Texas accent.

Willie Nelson – Shotgun Willie
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVsw5D3C071M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVsw5D3C071M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVsw5D3C071M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It's hard to convey what a shock it was for buttoned-down 1970s-era record 
company execs in Nashville to have heard the line, "Shotgun Willie sits around 
in his underwear". Nelson had been a mainstay of the country music world, 
penning classics likeCrazy <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K-wJNpWgss8> for the 
likes of Patsy Cline. ButShotgun Willie  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vsw5D3C071M>was a musical declaration of 
independence: Nelson grew his hair out, draped a bandanna around his head and, 
with a joint burning somewhere in the background, he proceeded to give the 
virtual finger to the country music establishment. Better yet, he did it with a 
gentle smile. Willie didn't just reinvent himself, he reinvented a genre of 
music – indeed, a whole "do your own thing" ethos that defines the Austin 
attitude to this day.

Grupo Fantasma – Gimme Some
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJwT5bUZm2a4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJwT5bUZm2a4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJwT5bUZm2a4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Grupo Fantasma takes Tex-Mex to a whole 'nuther level, effortlessly mixing 
uptown Houston funk with bouncingcumbias straight outta Laredo (literally – 
that's where many of the band members grew up). With a roaring horn section, 
it's little surprise Prince brought the group into his fold as a backing band a 
few years back. But in Austin, Grupo commands top billing with shows that 
become instant cross-cultural dance parties. Brush up on your Spanglish, or 
just give in to the funk. Either way, you can't go wrong.

Townes Van Zandt – To Live is to Fly 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ5wrzwINOJM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ5wrzwINOJM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ5wrzwINOJM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Townes was not just (arguably) the last great Texas troubadour, he was the 
stuff legends are made of. Sharp as a razor. Perpetually inebriated. The 
would-be scion of a wealthy Texas family who spent most of his adult days 
bumming places to sleep from friends. Dead by his mid-50s, Townes's personal 
story casts a tragic shadow over a musical legacy that ranks right up there 
with that of the greatest American songwriters of the 20th century – in the 
words of protégé Steve Earle: "I'll stand on Bob Dylan's coffee table in my 
cowboy boots and say that!" Close your eyes, turn it up, and there you are 30 
years ago at a joint likeThe Hole in the Wall 
<http://holeinthewalltx.tripod.com/index.html> – with five or six other people, 
slack-jawed by Townes's effortless genius.

Doug Sahm – Texas Me
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFCzi8-H08Jw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFCzi8-H08Jw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFCzi8-H08Jw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The Sir Douglas Quintet was initially just a vehicle for the talents of Doug 
Sahm <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doug_Sahm>; a way for a San Antonio 
wunderkind to capitalise on the British Invasion. "Sir" Douglas was a 
long-haired dervish with a Texas drawl and an insatiable appetite for all 
things musical. Though he once migrated with other Texas musicians to San 
Francisco (joining the likes ofJanis Joplin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C-GFqhCq2HA>, Boz Scaggs  
<http://www.youtube.com/artist/boz_scaggs>and Steve Miller to name but three), 
he quickly yearned to come home.Texas Me 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FCzi8-H08Jw> was the anthem Sahm wrote to fill 
the hole - an emptiness that would eventually lead him to the place he'd spend 
the rest of his life. He called it "Groover's Paradise". The rest of us just 
call it Austin.

• David Brown is the host and executive producer of Texas Music Matters on the 
National Public Radio affiliate stationKUT Austin <http://kut.org/>
 