
Days before he was elected to the Russian presidency in 2000, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> told the BBC that Russia was 
“part of European culture” and that he “would not rule out” the possibility of 
it joining Nato.

“I cannot imagine my own country in isolation from Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and what we often call the 
civilised world,” said Putin, who was still acting president after Boris 
Yeltsin’s sudden resignation on New Year’s Eve 1999.

A generation later, as Putin marks the 15th anniversary of acceding to power 
on 7 May 2000,Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has changed 
beyond all recognition from the chaotic, open free-for-all it was under 
Yeltsin. Internationally it faces isolation, sanctions, a new cold war even. At 
home, despite economic decline Putin enjoys perhaps the highest popularity 
rating of any Kremlin leader – an approval rating that topped 86% in February.


Love him or hate him, it’s hard to deny that Putin has made a huge impact on 
his country and the world.

Ukraine, Georgia and the ‘near abroad’

The “near abroad” just got a little nearer. The Ukrainian conflict has 
ruptured relations between Russia and the west over the past year, but in fact 
it is merely the latest example of Putin asserting Russia’s “rights” in its 
former backyard, known in Russia as “the near abroad”. Those who were surprised 
by Putin’s annexation of Crimea and the subsequent Russian-fuelled conflict in 
eastern Ukraine should have remembered: six years earlier he set the mould for 
the “Putin doctrine” inGeorgia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/georgia-news>
. Russia would use troops to protect its interests in a sphere of influence 
increasingly hemmed in by Nato’s advance. The US blinked first.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910341168%2Ffc83bb89-c0aa-44c5-b8dc-76d72d89cfb2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910341168%2Ffc83bb89-c0aa-44c5-b8dc-76d72d89cfb2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Russian troops enter the Georgian town of Gori in August 2008. Photograph: 
Jonathan Alpeyrie/Getty Images 
The Ukraine gambit has been more risky. Public opinion certainly favoured the 
Crimean manoeuvre, but in Donetsk and Luhansk,Russians have died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/19/russia-official-silence-for-families-troops-killed-in-ukraine>
.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/19/russia-official-silence-for-families-troops-killed-in-ukraine>

Sanctions as well as falling oil prices have hurt the Russian economy. Putin 
has his country on his side, for now, and has achieved his strategic aims, but 
not without some cost.


Opposition to Nato 


Under Yeltsin, Russian pursued a policy of grudging cooperation with Nato. All 
that changed under Putin. Since his first interview with the BBC, Putin has 
insisted that Nato’s eastward expansion represents a threat to his country. Now 
Moscow finally has the military muscle to push back. According to a November
report on the rise of close military encounters between Russia and the west 
<http://www.europeanleadershipnetwork.org/dangerous-brinkmanship-close-military-encounters-between-russia-and-the-west-in-2014_2101.html>
, Nato states had scrambled fighter jets to intercept Russian aircraft more 
than 100 times as of late October, more than three times more than in 2013. The 
newly aggressive stance has worried Poland and the Baltics, as well as the 
Nordic countries. Even Sweden and Finland have started musing aloud about 
joining Nato.

Putin’s position has huge backing in Russia – and plenty of support from those 
in the west who believe that Nato only exists to deal with the insecurities 
that its existence creates.


A suspected Russian submarine in the Stockholm archipelago prompted a huge 
hunt by the Swedish navy in October, and a Scandinavian Airlines plane with 132 
passengers taking off from Copenhagen in March nearly collided with a Russian 
reconnaissance aircraft that had not transmitted its position.

Autocracy


While Putin may have flip-flopped on economic issues, he has consistently 
moved toward greater consolidation of his own power. In 2004, he signed a law 
allowing the president to appoint regional governors, a privilege he mostly 
retains despite reforms prompted by street protests in 2011-12.

Putin’s famous “castling” with Dmitry Medvedev allowed him to return to the 
presidency in 2012. In the meantime, Russia’s lapdog parliament had passed a 
law in extending the presidential term from four to six years. Putin has said 
he won’t rule out running again in 2018, and if he wins, his time in power 
could surpass that of Leonid Brezhnev – 18 years – and even Joseph Stalin.

Cult of personality


Well, not quite a cult. But don’t underestimate how much damage 10 years of 
Yeltsin, his antics, ailments and slurring on television, did to Russians and 
their view of themselves. Putin has given them something much more in keeping 
with the macho spirit of the Russianmuzhik: a horse-riding, bare-chested, 
tiger-wrestling, clean living, straight-talking action man.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910447508%2Fffb47c5f-3a29-4121-8e05-f7d261ab118d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910447508%2Fffb47c5f-3a29-4121-8e05-f7d261ab118d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Vladimir Putin rides a horse in southern Siberia. Photograph: RIA 
Novosti/Reuters 
At least, that’s what his image makers have done for him. Behind the scenes, 
who knows? Rumours fly thick and fast about his affection for Botox and his 
alleged relationship with an Olympic gymnast half his age. These are stories 
that don’t make the Russian press.

It’s the economy, durak! 


When Putin arrived in office, Russia was just emerging from the disastrous 
market reforms of the 1990s and the 1998 financial crisis. The new president 
had no grand economic vision: while he slashed taxes to benefit business, he 
also renationalised key sectors, starting with the breakup of political foe 
Mikhail Khodorkovsky’s Yukos oil company in 2003. Nonetheless, unused 
manufacturing capacity and rising prices for oil, Russia’s main export, helped 
usher in an era of unprecedented prosperity that Putin is still remembered for, 
with real disposable income doubling between 1999 and 2006.

The global financial crisis brought this growth crashing to a halt. While oil 
wealth had stimulated growth, little progress had been made in diversifying the 
economy or modernising Russia’s industries. Even before oil prices dropped and 
western sanctions over theUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> 
crisis came into effect in 2014, economists were predicting long-term 
stagnation.

Although Putin recently called his government’s response to the rouble crisis 
of late 2014 “optimal”, many blame the central bank’s sudden interest rate 
rises and a shady bond issue by state oil company Rosneft for sinking the 
national currency.

As former finance minister Alexei Kudrin reminded Putin during the president’s 
annual call-in show in April, the 7% annual GDP growth at the end of his first 
presidential term fell to just 0.6% in 2014, and the country’s economy is 
expected to enter recession this year. Not a great result for a man whose 
initials – VVP – stand for GDP in Russian.


Population growth? 


Putin took over a country whose population was falling at an alarming rate. 
Russia – a population of about 150 million people at time of the fall of the 
Soviet Union – was losing people at a rate of almost a million a year, a 
combination of a reluctance to procreate and a proclivity, from men at least, 
to die young.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910489399%2F6e937018-9792-45b1-8753-f4165e32d8b3-2060x1640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910489399%2F6e937018-9792-45b1-8753-f4165e32d8b3-2060x1640.jpeg>
 Vladimir Putin visits a maternity hospital in Lapino, near Moscow. Photograph: 
Sasha Mordovets/Getty Images 
But the decline gradually bottomed out, and in 2010 the population started 
growing again. The secret to this reversal was largely economic: as their 
financial situation improved during Putin’s reign, Russians began having more 
children. According to the state statistics service, the country now has more 
than 146 million people, up from 142 million in 2008. Even if you don’t count 
the 2.2 million people it gained by annexing Crimea, it’s still a positive 
trend.

But now that the econom ic outlook is uncertain, that trend may be reversing, 
with births down by 4% in January.

Pivot to Asia

Always a vocal proponent of a multipolar world, Putin has shifted in recent 
years toward greater economic and military cooperation with Asian countries, 
whose growing economies are hungry for Russia’s energy and whose governments 
are less judgmental of its human rights record. Last year, he brokered two huge 
deals to supply China with gas, one worth $400bn. (First he has to build a 
pipeline through 2,500 miles of mountains, swamps and seismic hotspots.) Later 
this month, the two countries will hold joint naval exercises in the 
Mediterranean Sea. He’s also exporting Russian railroad technology to North 
Korea, which in the meantime has been opening quasi-slave-labour logging and 
farming camps in Russia’s far east.

Worsening relations with the European Union, which in December forced Russia to
cancel a pipeline to Bulgaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/01/russia-blames-eu-as-it-abandons-plans-for-south-stream-gas-pipeline>
 that was already being built, has only sped up its pivot to Asia.

Crackdown


With the imprisonment of oil tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the 
assassinations of several prominent opposition voices, Putin’s Russia was 
already a place where dissent was not particularly welcome.

But the pivotal moment came during the winter of 2011-12. Rolling opposition 
protests briefly threatened an Arab spring of sorts in Moscow. Putin moved 
quickly. A slew ofcriminal cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/24/russian-opposition-leader-jailed-bolotnaya-square-sergei-udaltsov-putin>
 on dubious charges were opened against anti-corruption campaigner Alexei 
Navalny and 27 protesters from the May 2012 Bolotnaya Square rally.

Since Putin’s return to the Kremlin in 2012, new laws have raised the fines 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/foreign-affairs-defense/putins-way/putins-legal-crackdown-on-civil-society/>
 for those taking part in protests not sanctioned by the authorities to as much 
as 1m roubles (£13,000) or up to five years of forced labour or prison for 
repeat violations.

Amid growing patriotic fervour and rhetoric about traitors– Putin suggested in 
December that opposition members could be part of a “fifth column” undermining 
the country – the popular opposition movement is all but dead. Symbolically, 
one of its leading voices, former deputy PM Boris Nemtsov, was assassinated in 
front of the Kremlin in February. The crime was allegedly committed by security 
officers loyal to Chechnya’s ruler, Ramzan Kadyrov, who was awarded a medal by 
Putin shortly afterwards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910658445%2F8ccfd6a6-cd0b-4492-8fce-46550dac8d99-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910658445%2F8ccfd6a6-cd0b-4492-8fce-46550dac8d99-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Russian police officers detain an opposition activist outside a court in 
Moscow in the wake of the Bolotnaya Square rally. Photograph: Anadolu 
Agency/Getty Images 
In Putin’s third term, authorities have also tightened the screws on 
non-governmental organisations that receive funding from abroad, whom Putin has 
previously disparaged as “jackals” and traitors. According to a 2012 law, such 
groups must label themselves “foreign agents” in their publications and submit 
to audits, with stiff fines for failure to meet these onerous requirements.

Once an oasis of free speech, the Russian internet is now subject to vague 
laws that allow the government’s communications watchdog to block sites deemed 
to publish “extremist” material or content harmful to children. As a result, 
several major opposition sites were blacklisted in 2013. According to a 2014 
law, popular bloggers must now register their true identities with the state 
and face potential libel suits.

The crackdown has, of course, extended to the Chechen separatists whose 
destruction (“Should we catch them in a shithouse, we’ll whack them in a 
shithouse!”he once said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/27/vladimir-putin-profile-putinism>
) was Putin’s first real claim to leadership fame. His campaign against the 
Islamic insurgency in the wider North Caucasus region has led to a reduction in 
violence – but also to a litany of human rights abuses.

‘Moralistic’ vision


Alongside a crackdown on the opposition, NGOs and the internet, Putin’s third 
term has seen a wave of legislation inspired by his vision of Russia as a 
bastion of traditional morals. The most egregious example was the 2013 ban on 
gay propaganda, which LGBT rights activists say has contributed to a rise in 
homophobic harassment in the country, includingvigilante group violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/01/russia-rise-homophobic-violence>.

Under Putin, the second world war has become a patriotic rallying point, and a 
2014 law criminalises the “distortion” of the Soviet Union’s role in the war. 
Other legislation imposedfines for the use of expletives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/27/russia-cracks-down-swearing-public-performances>
 on television, radio and in films shown in theatres, drawing criticism from 
musicians and directors.

A multipolar world?


The charitable view of Putin’s foreign policy is that he stands up to western 
hegemony and, with China, acts as a balance to the overweening military and 
political power of the US. If Yeltsin was consistently in America’s pocket, 
then Putin has been on its back.

However, while the Russian president can plausibly claim to have history on 
his side in opposing Washington over the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, his stance 
on Syria and unwavering support for Bashar al-Assad has been open to greater 
criticism.

It’s not all about opposition. Putin’s diplomats have worked constructively 
with international allies and adversaries to help bring Iran in from the cold, 
and – until recently at least – to work at further nuclear arms reductions.


Londongrad

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430911064422%2F92f74295-2b6b-4db1-bb33-9b75908738d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430911064422%2F92f74295-2b6b-4db1-bb33-9b75908738d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich embraces John Terry after the Champions League 
final in 2012 Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA 
Under Putin, the Anglo-Russian relationship has turned into a paradox: at the 
same time as official relations hit new, icy depths over espionage andmurder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/05/russia.politics>, record numbers 
of Russians and their cash were flooding west – and London was their favourite 
second home.


Oligarchs parked their kids in swanky schools, listed their companies on the 
stock market and bought football clubs, some perhaps as an insurance policy, 
others because it became ultra-fashionable. But London also becamea bolthole 
for the out of favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/01/russian-opposition-activist-is-granted-asylum-in-uk>
, home to an entire dissident community of anti-Putinistas, further straining 
relations between London and Moscow.


New-found sporting prestige


The Sochi Winter Olympics in 2014 were a triumph for Putin, who had campaigned 
aggressively to host the event. Russia won the medal count with 13 golds, and 
no major security breaches or organisational embarrassments – besides a few 
unfinished hotel rooms – marred the event. Joined by faded action star Steven 
Seagal, Putin later presided over a Formula One race held on a course built 
around the Olympic park, and in 2018, the country will host the Fifa World Cup.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910582302%2F4fa0bec3-b867-4ca5-8f43-0d06cdaa91d3-1020x863.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=15%20years%20of%20Vladimir%20Putin%3A%2015%20ways%20he%20has%20changed%20Russia%20and%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fvladimir-putin-15-ways-he-changed-russia-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430910582302%2F4fa0bec3-b867-4ca5-8f43-0d06cdaa91d3-1020x863.jpeg>
 Vladimir Putin poses with a fan at the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympics. Photograph: 
Getty Images 
But such state-backed events involving huge construction projects have been a 
goldmine for crooked officials in Russia. Nemtsov, who had written a scathing 
report on the preparations for the Sochi Olympics, estimated that $30bn of the 
record $50bn spent on the games had been lost to corruption. This was in 
addition to the poor labour conditions and environmental damage reported during 
pre-Olympic construction. Fifa’s lead investigator quit after the football 
organisation cleared Russia of allegations of corruption in the World Cup 
bidding process, accusing it of a “lack of leadership”.

Corruption 


Despite a state campaign against corruption, Putin’s Russia has failed to 
shake off accusations of being fundamentally dishonest. In 2014, Russia was 
ranked 136 out of 175 in Transparency International’scorruption perceptions 
index <https://www.transparency.org/cpi2014/results>, down from 127 in 2013 and 
133 in 2012. The Organised Crime and Corruption Reporting Project also named 
Putin its“person of the year” <http://occrp.org/person-of-the-year/2014/> after 
its investigations found that he had engaged with the mafia to create what it 
called a “military-industrial-political-criminal” complex to launder money and 
promote his interests abroad, including in the transfer of weapons to rebels in 
eastern Ukraine.

Although little information is available on his personal wealth, many expect 
that Putin himself has benefited from state corruption. Allegations have 
swirled for years that an extravagant palace being built on the Black Sea coast 
– reportedly guarded by the presidential secret service and now owned by a 
Putin confidant – secretly belongs to him and was paid for with embezzled funds.

Military


Putin inherited an army that was not fit for purpose. During his second term, 
he set out to reform the outdated conscript-based army, a process that only 
quickened after its unconvincing victory in the Georgian war. Russia now spends 
a higher percentage of its GDP on defence than the United States, and has 
allocated a record $81bn in 2015.


While the increased spending and reorganisation has created a force able to 
react relatively quickly when former Soviet republics get too uppity, new 
equipment – in particular a new stealth fighter and a next-generation tank – 
are still on the way. It has not helped that France recently withdrew its offer 
to sell Russia two Mistral warships.

New propaganda

Even as independent media found themselves on the run, Putin appointed Dmitry 
Kiselyov, a television presenter known for his anti-American conspiracy 
theories, head of the state news agency Rossiya Segodnya. In this post, 
Kiselyov has overseen an expansion of Sputnik News and Russia Today, which 
peddle the Kremlin’s talking points in foreign languages. While state-backed 
news outlets are nothing new, the Kremlin’s new propagandistic media have been 
criticised for their journalistic standards. In November, the UK media 
regulator Ofcomthreatened RT with sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/10/russia-today-ofcom-sanctions-impartiality-ukraine-coverage>
 over news reports that failed to comply with impartiality rules.
 