
1. On the ground

Someone once told me that this phrase exists to differentiate perspectives 
from ivory towers. But to me, it feels more commonly used as a lazy, somewhat 
self-righteous substitute for “parachuting into a developing nation.” I get 
countless pitches from writers who tell me they’re “on the ground in [insert 
country in Africa, Asia, or Latin America].” A question: When they return home, 
do they not walk on the ground?


Related, people talk about the research they are conducting “in the field.” 
Are they researching the growth patterns of organic wheat? Or the nighttime 
behaviors of field mice?

2. Empowerment

This is one of those words that has great intentions — who doesn’t want to, 
say, empower women? — but has lost its edge with overuse. It will also forever 
remind me of a photo I once saw taken by an NGO in rural India, in which 
several women gathered around a poster that said, “Thanks to [name redacted] 
workshop, we are EMPOWERED.”

Empowerment isn’t like a light switch; it’s a long and messy process, and it 
certainly won’t be completed in a workshop

First, I’m not sure the women in the photo read English. Second, empowerment 
isn’t like a light switch; it’s a long and messy process, and it certainly 
won’t be completed in a workshop.

3. Income-generating activity 

Because for some reason poor people can’t just have a job. Also see 
“livelihood opportunities”.

4. Photos of children chasing after a jeep

There’s something about this particular photographic choice that, to me, 
reinforces thewhite saviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/19/secret-aid-worker-who-will-save-the-white-saviours-from-themselves>
 narrative.

5. Capacity building 

For those of you who aren’t familiar with this cringe-worthy phrase, the World 
Health Organisation defines it as “the development and strengthening of human 
and institutional resources.” Whatever that means.

6. Global citizen 

Ever noticed how most people who give themselves this epithet are white and 
citizens of countries withpowerful passports 
<https://www.passportindex.org/byRank.php>? Until people begin referring to 
Syrian refugees as global citizens, we’re avoiding the term altogether.

7. Villages v towns 

Several months ago, I received a draft that started with, “In towns across 
Europe and villages in Africa….” What distinguishes a town from a village? And 
why “across” Europe but “in” Africa? On a related note, I implore writers to 
think twice before using loaded terms like “tribe.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2F17-global-development-cliches-to-avoid-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87c8fc907d9af421954282d02b1c5396c601dd4e%2F0_0_3400_5100%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=17%20global%20development%20clich%C3%A9s%20to%20avoid%20in%202017%20%7C%20Sarika%20Bansal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2F17-global-development-cliches-to-avoid-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=17%20global%20development%20clich%C3%A9s%20to%20avoid%20in%202017%20%7C%20Sarika%20Bansal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2F17-global-development-cliches-to-avoid-in-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87c8fc907d9af421954282d02b1c5396c601dd4e%2F0_0_3400_5100%2F3400.jpg>
 Cliched development image Photograph: age fotostock / Alamy/Alamy 
8. Photos of Maasai warriors with cell phones 

What a pithy way to convey the ways in which traditional cultures are adapting 
to the 21st century.#ict4d  <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23ict4d&src=typd>

9. Stories that focus more on the “do-gooder” than the actual work 

I love profiles of impressive people who have effected tremendous social 
change. But I don’t love stories that serve as glorified hero worship, or that 
treat the worthiness of someone’s work as evidence of the work’s success.

10. Do-gooder 

Let’s not turn powerful individuals who work on social change into teachers’ 
pets.

11. Do good and do well 

Such a grammatically awkward way to talk about a for-profit organisation with 
a social mission.

12. Giving voice to the voiceless

Yes, one of the intentions of The Development Set 
<https://thedevelopmentset.com/> is to publish underreported stories that will 
increase visibility of historically marginalised populations. But the word 
“voiceless” at best reminds me of Ariel in The Little Mermaid— and at worst, 
feels condescending.

13. Liaising with key local stakeholders 

Jargon police here. As with most jargon, this can be solved through 
specificity. Instead of “stakeholder,” tell me who matters when a decision is 
being made. And when you say “liaise,” do you mean you’re having a conversation?

14. Silver bullet 

There are none, and certainly not in the complicated world of social impact. I 
commit to never rhetorically asking in a headline whether an innovation is a 
silver bullet. The answer is no.

15. Stories in which black/brown people are used as flat, colourful characters

Louise Linton's Zambia is not the Zambia I know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/06/louise-lintons-zambia-is-not-the-zambia-i-know>
I’m reminded here of Binyavanga Wainaina’s essay in Granta, “How to Write 
about Africa <https://granta.com/how-to-write-about-africa/>”:

Among your characters you must always include The Starving African, who 
wanders the refugee camp nearly naked, and waits for the benevolence of the 
West. Her children have flies on their eyelids and pot bellies, and her breasts 
are flat and empty. She must look utterly helpless. She can have no past, no 
history; such diversions ruin the dramatic moment. Moans are good. She must 
never say anything about herself in the dialogue except to speak of her 
(unspeakable) suffering. Also be sure to include a warm and motherly woman who 
has a rolling laugh and who is concerned for your well-being. Just call her 
Mama.

On the other hand, too many “experts” quoted in health/development stories are 
dripping with privilege, especially compared to the quintessential Starving 
African. I implore writers to think about the people you’re choosing to 
interview for your stories, and the ways in which you plan to use them. You may 
also want to check the list ofAspen New Voices 
<https://medium.com/u/8b9463ad080e> and Global Health Corps 
<https://medium.com/u/17f9ab95d4ec> fellows for experts from Africa and Asia.

16. Beneficiaries 

Poverty porn vs empowerment: The best and worst aid videos of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/dec/08/radiator-award-poverty-porn-vs-empowerment-the-best-and-worst-aid-videos-of-2016>
Wayan Vota <https://medium.com/u/b32c9ae97d12> has written about 
<http://www.ictworks.org/2013/10/23/please-stop-using-the-term-beneficiaries-in-ict4d/>
 the inherent problems with this term: “The definition of the term 
“beneficiary” means a person who derives advantage from something, usually a 
will, trust or other financial instrument. The implication is that this 
recipient is a passive recipient of largesse. And somehow, we have adopted this 
term in development. That the people we are working with should be passive 
recipients of our financial gifts.”

17. Third world 

This term originated during the Cold War to define countries that were neither 
aligned with NATO nor the Communist Bloc. It’s now used as shorthand for 
“non-industrialised” countries — though according to its definition, it also 
includes neutral countries like Switzerland. Like several of the other phrases 
in this list, “third world” also feels quite paternalistic.

But I’m not sure how to replace it. We typically use “developing country”, but 
recognise that there’s an increasingly false divide between “developed” and 
“developing” countries. I’ve had crystal-clear Skype connections in Tanzania 
and Thailand, while I’ve struggled with public transportation to New York 
City’s JFK airport. Other terms, like least developed countries and global 
south also have their pitfalls.

What’s the most cringe-inducing of this list? What phrase are you actually OK 
with? And did I miss any tropes or clichés?

This article was first published on The Development Set 
<https://thedevelopmentset.com/17-development-clich%C3%A9s-ill-be-avoiding-in-2017-46c2345a507f#.6ory09a3i>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 