
January


10th The Oscar nominations are announced unusually early this year. Keep an 
eye out for a bumper crop of literary adaptations, including David Mitchell's
Cloud Atlas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780340822784/cloud-atlas>, 
Yann Martel'sLife of Pi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781841953922/life-of-pi>, 
the David Nicholls-scriptedGreat Expectations, as well as Les Miserables, Anna 
Karenina and The Hobbit.

18th A new stage adaptation of Henry James's The Turn of the Screw at the 
Almeida theatre in London. In the year of the centenary of Benjamin Britten's 
birth, his musical version will also feature around the country in both concert 
and stage performances.

24th The finalists for the fifth Man Booker International prize will be 
announced at the Jaipur festival. Philip Roth's victory last time was preceded 
by a resignation from the judging panel and followed by much recrimination. 
Will this year's jury chaired by Christopher Ricks and comprising Elif Batuman, 
Aminatta Forna,Yiyun Li <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/yiyun-li> 
andTim Parks <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/tim-parks> be more 
collegiate?

28th The 200th anniversary of publication of Pride and Prejudice in 1813. It 
is a truth universally acknowledged that such an anniversary will be 
accompanied by re-issues, mash-ups, adaptations and many, many tributes.

29th The announcement of the winner of the overall Costa award will this year 
be accompanied by the crowning of the first winner of the new short story prize.

Fiction

Pow! by Mo Yan <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/mo-yan> (Seagull 
Books). The first new novel in English from the Chinese author awarded the 2012 
Nobel literature prize for his "hallucinatory realism" is a riotous carnival of 
food, sex and death in rural China.

Tenth of December by George Saunders 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2013/jan/03/tenth-of-december-george-saunders-review>
(Bloomsbury). A welcome return for the master of the surreal short story. 
Disturbing drug trials; a morale-boosting memo to a bizarre workforce; a very 
strange garden decoration … In this new collection Saunders uses comic 
bureaucracy to hint at atrocity, and spins poignant parables out of his 
characters' hesitation and inarticulacy.
 dd 
Wool by Hugh Howey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781780891231/wool> 
(Century). Will SF be the newFifty Shades? Howey's post-apocalyptic dystopia, 
in which the remnants of humanity have built a claustrophobic civilisation in 
underground silos, took off online after being self-published as a serial in 
2011. Film rights have been snapped up by Ridley Scott.

How Should a Person Be? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781846557682/how-should-a-person-be>
 by Sheila Heti (Harvill Secker). A beguiling "novel from life" about 
creativity and authenticity that's been taking the States by storm. Mixing real 
conversations and emails with bedroom confessionals, self-help mantras and 
doses of pure fiction, this portrait of Toronto playwright "Sheila" and her 
artist friends has been characterised as "Girls in book form".

Non-fiction

The World Until Yesterday by Jared Diamond 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781846147586/the-world-until-yesterday-what-can-we-learn-from-traditional-societies>
 (Allen Lane). Diamond's mega-bestsellingGuns, Germs and Steel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780099302780/guns-germs-and-steel-a-short-history-of-everbody-for-the-last-years>
 made it so far into the cultural mainstream that Mitt Romney quoted it during 
his election campaign. Not surprisingly he got it all wrong, and Diamond told 
him so. In this book, the popular science writer considers what we can learn 
from "traditional" societies in areas such as child-rearing, the treatment of 
the elderly and diet.

Play It Again: An Amateur Against the Impossible 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/music/9780224093774/play-it-again-an-amateur-against-the-impossible>
 by Alan Rusbridger (Cape). In 2011 Rusbridger, the editor in chief of Guardian 
newspapers and a keen amateur pianist, set himself the tough challenge of 
learning to play Chopin'sBallade No 1 – this during a hectic year that featured 
the Arab Spring, the English riots and the Guardian breaking two major stories: 
Wikileaks and the News of the World hacking scandal.

Poetry

Quick Question 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9781847772282/quick-question> 
by John Ashbery(Carcanet). This might be his 25th collection, but a new Ashbery 
still remains an event. It will be followed in August bynew selections of his 
translations of other writers' poetry and prose.

Newspaper Taxis: Poetry After the Beatles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9781781720271/newspaper-taxis-poetry-after-the-beatles>
(Seren). Beatles 50th anniversaries will come thick and fast until the end of 
the decade. This anthology ofpoetic responses to the songs features work by 
Simon Armitage, Carol Ann Duffy, Philip Larkin, Roger McGough and many more.

February
 dd 
5th Based on Hemingway's debut novel The Sun Also Rises, Fiesta opens at the 
Trafalgar Studio 2 in London featuring the quintessential Hemingway mix of 
young bucks in Paris, jazz and bullfighting.

11th Fiftieth anniversary of the death of Sylvia Plath in 1963. Carol Ann 
Duffy has already introduced a new selection of Plath's poetry and a re-issue of
The Bell Jar 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571081783>
 will coincide with the anniversary.

22nd The film adaptation of David Mitchell's Cloud Atlas is released in UK

Fiction

Gone to the Forest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781846689239/gone-to-the-forest>
 by Katie Kitamura (Clerkenwell Press). A white family implodes in an unnamed 
colonial country on the brink of civil war. Kitamura's second novel has shades 
of Coetzee and Cormac McCarthy, with a compelling power all her own.

A Hologram for the King 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780241145876/a-hologram-for-the-king>
 by Dave Eggers(Hamish Hamilton) A failed American businessman sits in a Jeddah 
hotel hoping to rescue his career and personal life by winning a lucrative IT 
contract for King Abdullah. But Abdullah, like Godot, may never come … Eggers's 
latest is both a portrait of modern Saudi Arabia and an allegory of the decline 
of American power in a globalised world.

The Blind Man's Garden by Nadeem Aslam (Faber). The author of The Wasted Vigil 
returns with a lyrical novel set after 9/11, as two Pakistani foster brothers 
sneak into Afghanistan to treat wounded civilians.

Exodus by Lars Iyer (Melville House). The final volume in Iyer's gloomily 
brilliant trilogy about a toxic friendship between unfortunate philosophy dons, 
boozing and bitching in the great tradition of Beckett's double acts.

Harvest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780330445665/harvest> by 
Jim Crace(Picador). A powerfully resonating fable about the destruction of a 
village, the enclosure of England's fields and the lost rhythms of the natural 
world that is likely to garner prize nominations.

Non-fiction

Return of a King 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781408822876/the-return-of-a-king-the-battle-for-afghanistan>
 by William Dalrymple (Bloomsbury). A history, from the popular author of White 
Mughals, of the first Anglo-Afghan war, which began in 1839 and ended in 1842 
with Britain's greatest military humiliation of the 19th century. Modern-day 
parallel, anyone?
 ff 
Benjamin Britten: A Life in the 20thC by Paul Kildea (Allen Lane). Kildea, a 
conductor as well as a writer, and an expert on the composer – arguably 
Britain's greatest in the 20th century – has written an important biography 
that promises at least one dramatic revelation.

Give Me Everything You Have 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780224096621/give-me-everything-you-have-on-being-stalked>
by James Lasdun(Cape). A striking account by this feted writer and poet of 
being cyberstalked. An obsessed former student of Lasdun's began trying – 
through posting messages online and making public accusations of theft and 
sexual misconduct – to "ruin him".

Far From the Tree: A Dozen Kinds of Love by Andrew Solomon (Chatto). Solomon 
writes for the New Yorker and made a splash a decade ago with his book on 
depression,The Noonday Demon. Most children are like their parents; this book 
looks at those who are radically different from them.

Poetry

In the Hill of Doors by Robin Robertson (Picador). Robertson brings his 
customary assured intensity to longstanding preoccupations with Scandinavia, 
Greek myths and his north-east coast of Scotland childhood.

March


7th World Book Day 2013. A Unesco-designated celebration of books marked in 
more than 100 countries. In the UK more than 14m book tokens will be 
distributed to children under 18.

29th UK release of the adaptation of a non-Twilight Stephenie Meyer novel, The 
Host 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780751540642/the-host>
, an SF love story set on an earth conquered by aliens.

Fiction

Life After Life by Kate Atkinson (Transworld). Atkinson gives her rueful 
detective Jackson Brodie a break for this playful, profound novel about fate, 
destiny and alternative realities. On a snowy night in 1910, a baby girl is 
born, and dies. And lives again …

The Childhood of Jesus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781846557262/the-childhood-of-jesus>
by JM Coetzee (Harvill Secker). A man, a woman and a boy must make a new life 
in an unknown country, stripped of old memories and identity. After clashing 
with the authorities, they go on the run, in the new novel from the Nobel 
laureate.

How to Get Filthy Rich in Rising Asia by Mohsin Hamid (Hamish Hamilton). 
Hamid's followup toThe Reluctant Fundamentalist is a joyously barbed satire on 
entrepreneurialism and the juggernaut of globalisation. Written as a self-help 
book in the second person, it traces its unnamed hero's rise from rural poverty 
to corporate tycoon through exemplary life lessons – "Move to the city", "Don't 
fall in love", "Be prepared to use violence". Will be one of the standout 
novels of the year.

Secrecy by Rupert Thomson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/rupert-thomson> 
(Granta). Thomson's books are always distinctive and surprising. Set in 
17th-century Florence, this novel explores desire and artistry through the 
figure of a brilliant sculptor who is commissioned by the Medici court to 
create a life-size Venus in wax.

The Infatuations 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780241145364/the-infatuations>
 by Javier Marias(Hamish Hamilton). A metaphysical murder mystery from the 
Spanish author acclaimed by Coetzee and Sebald.

Non-fiction
 dd 
Fractured Times by Eric Hobsbawm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/eric-hobsbawm> (Little, Brown). The final 
book from Britain's most distinguished historian, who died last year. Its 
essays, several of which are previously unpublished, focus on high culture and 
its fragmentation, and range from surrealism to the women's movement to cowboys.

Kith 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780241144343/kith-the-riddle-of-the-childscape>
by Jay Griffiths (Penguin). Asking why it is that so many western children seem 
unhappy – unhappier than those in "traditional" societies –Kith is part travel 
book, part polemic. Griffiths, who won admirers for her previous bookWild 
(consumer culture is bad, get in harmony with nature!) assembles observations 
and evidence from West Papua, the Arctic, Britain and elsewhere.

Noise: A Human History of Sound and Listening by David Hendy (Profile). 
Accompanying a 30-part BBC R4 series, this study by a professor of media has 
the widest-possible scope, from prehistoric drumming to train whistles to the 
cacophony of a 21st-century metropolis. Many people apparently consider the 
most irritating sound to be their neighbours' windchimes.

Fanny and Stella by Neil McKenna (Faber). Fanny Park and Stella Boulton were 
Victorian cross-dressers, defendants in the notorious trial of "the Young Men 
in Women's Clothes". The Met had launched a secret campaign to bring about 
their downfall. Dodgy practices on the part of the police? Never.

Poetry 

Uncollected Poems by RS Thomas (Bloodaxe). In the centenary of his birth a 
gathering of the surprisingly large and elusive body of Thomas's work 
previously scattered in newspapers, obscure journals and private editions.

The Word on the Street 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/poetry/9780374261085/the-word-on-the-street-rock-lyrics>
by Paul Muldoon (Faber). A new collection of words intended to be sung through, 
in which Muldoon, that most musical of poets, playfully explores the essential 
meaning of the term "lyric".

April

4th Granta's Best of Young British Novelists 4 issue. Who will follow the 
classes of 1983 (Amis, Barnes, McEwan, Rushdie et al), 1993 (Hollinghurst, 
Ishiguru, Winterson et al) and 2003 (Smith, Cusk, Waters et al)?

15th London Book Fair opens. Last year's choice of China as "market focus" 
nation prompted some agonising over who was and wasn't a state-sanctioned 
writer. This year's focus is on Turkey.

23rd The great book giveaway that is World Book Night this year features the 
usual wide variety of titles from authors includingSebastian Barry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sebastian-barry>, Ian Fleming, EH Gombrich, 
Andy McNab, Jojo Moyes, RL Stevenson and Rose Tremain.

Fiction

Ghana Must Go 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781594204494/ghana-must-go> 
by Taiye Selasi (Viking). The much-anticipated debut novel by the author of the 
explosive story "The Sex Lives of African Girls" is a multi-generational saga 
about a Ghanaian surgeon, his Nigerian wife and their four children. It's taken 
years for the family to make it good in the US, but their lives fall apart in 
an evening.

Americanah by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie> (Fourth Estate). A 
young couple flee the military dictatorship in Nigeria for America and London. 
Can their relationship survive distance, globalisation and the passage of time?

The Roundhouse by Louise Erdrich (Corsair). This novel about a young teenager 
investigating his mother's assault beatDave Eggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dave-eggers> and Junot Diaz to the US 
National Book award last year, and has been called a Native AmericanTo Kill a 
Mockingbird.

Non-fiction

She Left Me the Gun by Emma Brockes (Faber). This memoir of Brockes's 
relationship with her recently dead mother becomes a travelogue and 
investigation into shocking family history. It begins: "My grandmother thought 
she was marrying someone vibrant and exciting, a man with wavy hair and 
tremendous energy. He was a talented carpenter, a talented artist, a convicted 
murderer and a very bad poet."

The Democracy Project by David Graeber (Allen Lane). The latest thinking on 
dissent and anti-capitalism from Graeber, author of the much-admiredDebt: The 
First 5,000 Years and a leading member of the Occupy movement.

A Place in the Country by WG Sebald (Penguin). A newly translated book from 
perhaps the most studied of late-20th-century European writers, author of
Austerlitz 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780241951804/austerlitz> and
The Emigrants. This is a collection of essays about his own favourite writers, 
from Rousseau to Walser, but he does some travelling and pondering about place 
too.
 ma 
Levels of Life by Julian Barnes (Cape). An affecting, profound (if slim) 
volume in three parts: the first history, the second fiction, the third memoir.

Mom and Me and Mom by Maya Angelou (Virago). Angelou was, as we know from I 
Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, raised by her grandmother. This is the first 
time she has confronted head-on her relationship with the mother who sent her 
away – and who was, among other things, the first black woman officer in the 
merchant marines and a player in the gambling business.

Poetry

Pluto by Glyn Maxwell (Picador). The peculiar status of the ex-planet provides 
the impetus for Maxwell's most directly personal work to date.

May

5th 200th anniversary of the birth of Søren Kierkegaard in 1813. "Life can 
only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards", etc.

16th The Regents Park Open Air Theatre presents its adaptation of Harper Lee's 
To Kill a Mockingbird. In June it stages a version of Pride & Prejudice.

17th The much-anticipated, and much-delayed, release of Baz Luhrmann's film of 
The Great Gatsby

24th Premiere of Royal Ballet production of Raven Girl, a collaboration 
between Audrey Niffenegger and choreographerWayne McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wayne-mcgregor>.

Fiction

The Hive by Gill Hornby (Little, Brown). After mummy porn, mumlit? This comic 
debut about playground politics is being pushed as the next big thing, but it's 
not mere hype – the book is genuinely interested in female friendship, and 
properly funny to boot.

All That Is by James Salter (Picador). The first novel in 34 years from the 
master stylist and author of modern classicThe Hunters is the story of one 
man's love and regrets set in the publishing world of postwar America.

A Delicate Truth by John le Carré (Viking). The details of a delicate 
counter-terror operation in Gibraltar emerge in Cornwall years later. Success 
or cover-up?

And The Mountains Echoed by Khaled Hosseini (Bloomsbury). Afghan epics The 
Kite Runner and A Thousand Splendid Suns were both international bestsellers; 
now Hosseini promises another multi-generational family story, "this time 
revolving around brothers and sisters, and the ways in which they love, wound, 
betray, honour and sacrifice for each other".

Non-fiction

The Serpent's Promise by Steve Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/stevejones> (Little, Brown). Britain's 
favourite geneticist updates the Bible from the point of view of modern 
science, asking such questions as: was the biblical great flood really a memory 
of the end of the ice age?

Modernity Britain: Opening the Box 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780802779793/modernity-britain-opening-the-box>
 1957-1959by David Kynaston (Bloomsbury). The third volume in Kynaston's 
projected multi-volume social history of Britain from the end of the second 
world war to Thatcher. The preceding two volumes sold in large numbers and were 
rated among the best British non-fiction books of the last decade.

Ten Billion by Stephen Emmott (Allen Lane). Emmott has made waves with his 
insistence that overpopulation is the root of all our troubles: 10 billion is a 
conservative estimate of how many people there will be at the end of this 
century. This book had an earlier incarnation as a show, directed byKatie 
Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/katie-mitchell>, at the Royal Court 
in London.

Feral: Rewilding the land, sea and human life by George Monbiot (Allen Lane). 
The Guardian columnist and author ofCaptive State explores projects of positive 
environmentalism – how damaged ecosystems on land and sea can be restored and 
species protected.

Poetry

The Taken-Down God: Selected Poems by Jorie Graham (Carcanet). Following her 
Forward prize win forP L A C E last year, Graham chooses work from her last 
five books.

June

5th Presentation of first Women's Prize for Fiction, successor to the Orange 
prize; the 2013 panel is chaired by Miranda Richardson.

29th 400th anniversary of Globe theatre burning down during production of 
Shakespeare and Fletcher'sHenry VIII in 1613.

Fiction Last Friends by Jane Gardam (Little, Brown). Witty, tender and humane, 
Gardam'sOld Filth and The Man in the Wooden Hat brilliantly anatomised the long 
marriage of characters forged in England's colonial past. The final volume in 
the trilogy focuses on Filth's rival in work and love.

The Ocean at the End of the Lane by Neil Gaiman (Headline). From the author of 
American Gods, a new novel about, he says, "childhood and memory and magic, the 
power of stories and how we face the darkness inside each of us". With two new 
children's books, aSandman prequel, a Doctor Who episode and Neverwhere 
dramatised for Radio 4, Gaiman wil be everywhere next year.

Non-fiction

The Faraway Nearby by Rebecca Solnit (Granta). Solnit, perhaps best known for 
her history of walking,Wanderlust, crosses the borders of disciplines and 
genres; she is admired by Robert Macfarlane, Geoff Dyer and many others. These 
personal reflections on storytelling, inspired by theArabian Nights, form a 
companion-piece to her celebratedA Field Guide for Getting Lost.
 kenneth 
Money: The Unauthorised Biography by Felix Martin (Bodley Head). Martin, who 
has worked forGeorge Soros <https://www.theguardian.com/business/george-soros> 
and the World Bank, has written a study of money which, ambitiously, claims 
that everything we think we know about it is wrong. No wonder we got into such 
a pickle.

The North by Paul Morley (Bloomsbury). In which the music journalist and 
cultural pundit explores what it means to be northern.

The Boys in the Boat by Daniel James Brown (Macmillan). Kenneth Branagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-branagh> is directing the film 
version of this story, which tells of Joe Rantz, born into a poor family during 
the great depression, who won a gold medal in rowing at the 1936 Berlin 
olympics. It has epic written all over it.

Poetry

Correspondences by Anne Michaels and Bernice Eisenstein (Bloomsbury). Best 
known for her novelFugitive Pieces, Michaels also written three volumes of 
poetry. This book-length poem is set "in conversation" with a series of 
portraits by artist Eisenstein.

July

Fiction Carnival by Rawi Hage (Hamish Hamilton). In the third novel from the 
Impac winner, a taxi driver – Hage's job when he was writing his debut – 
observes his city and his passengers: criminals, prostitutes, madmen and 
magicians. When Carnival begins, anything could happen.

August

10th Now 30 years old, Edinburgh's International Books festival again fills 
Charlotte Square with readers and writers

Fiction

MaddAddam by Margaret Atwood <https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>
(Bloomsbury). FollowingOryx and Crake and The Year of the Flood, the final 
novel in her apocalyptic trilogy.

Non-fiction

Birds and People by Mark Cocker (Cape). From the author of the praised Crow 
Country (and seven other books), this is an international study of the 
relationship between birds and people.

September

Fiction

Doctor Sleep 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781451698879/doctor-sleep> 
by Stephen King (Hodder & Stoughton). Danny Torrance was the young boy with 
psychic abilities at the centre ofThe Shining. Now, in this much-heralded 
sequel, he's a middle-aged drifter using his "shining" power to comfort the 
dying – until a tribe of child-torturing paranormals and a young girl in peril 
reawaken his demons.

The Guts by Roddy Doyle <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roddydoyle> 
(Jonathan Cape). Doyle revisitsCommitments hero Jimmy Rabbitte, now in his late 
40s, with a wife and four children, a business resurrecting old bands (with the 
charming domain name oldshite.com), and bowel cancer.

Arcadia by Ian Pears (Faber). The latest historical extravaganza from the 
author best known forAn Instance of the Fingerpost is not a book but a 
purpose-built app, in which intersecting narratives, characters and eras can be 
explored in different ways. The paper version is promised for 2014.

Expo 58 by Jonathan Coe (Penguin). The title of this romantic espionage comedy 
refers to the great international exhibition, held that year in Belgium. A 
naïve civil servant is plucked out of his Whitehall job to run the pub on the 
British stand.

Non-fiction

The Message by Naomi Klein (Allen Lane). The Canadian darling of literate 
social activists, author ofNo Logo and The Shock Doctrine, turns her attention 
to climate change.

American Smoke by Iain Sinclair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/iain-sinclair> (Penguin). Choice phrasemaker 
and Hackney laureate Sinclair ventures to the US on the trail of the Beats.

Courtney Love: The Autobiography (Macmillan). This book's title might change, 
but it's bound to contain some hair-raising stories, of the "let's snort Kurt's 
ashes" variety.

The History of the Jews by Simon Schama (Random House). This is apparently the 
book Schama has always wanted to write.

October

5th Robert Macfarlane chairs a panel consisting of Martha Kearney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/martha-kearney>, biographer Robert 
Douglas-Fairhurst, classicist and comedian Natalie Haynes and writer and critic 
Stuart Kelly.

Fiction

New Bridget Jones by Helen Fielding (Jonathan Cape). Will she be counting up 
bibs and dirty nappies rather than fags and booze? Seventeen years after her 
diaries of a singleton's comic mishaps were first published,Helen Fielding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/helenfielding> promises to explore "a 
different phase" in Bridget's life.

Sixty years after James Bond made his first fictional appearance in Casino 
Royal, William Boyd <https://www.theguardian.com/books/william-boyd> is the 
latest author – following Jeffery Deaver and Sebastian Faulks – to acceptthe 
mission from the Fleming estate to write a new Bond novel. The title is still 
top secret – known only as Untitled (Jonathan Cape) so far – the only thing 
Boyd has revealed about his endeavour is that it will be set in 1969.

Non-fiction

The Beatles – The Complete Story, volume one by Mark Lewisohn (Little, Brown). 
Has ever a book been more eagerly awaited (in certain circles, at least)? 
Lewisohn has taken an age to write his definitive history of the band, but for 
a very good reason – in order to "get it right".

Not That Kind of Girl by Lena Dunham (Fourth Estate). The proposal for a 
skewed self-help book subtitled "A Young Woman Tells You What She's Learned" 
netted flavour of the momentGirls writer and director a $3.7m advance. Look out 
for essays on "dieting, dressing, friendship and the two existential crises I 
had before the age of 20".

David and Goliath by Malcolm Gladwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/malcolm-gladwell> (Allen Lane). This latest 
from the man himself (rather than the hordes of copycat authors) had its 
origins (surprise, surprise) in a New Yorker article. Why, it asks, are we so 
often surprised when underdogs win?

Command and Control by Eric Schlosser (Allen Lane). The author of Fast Food 
Nation takes on nuclear weapons.

Think Like a Freak by Steven D Levitt and Stephen J Dubner (Allen Lane). The 
latest batch of counterintuitive thoughts from the authors ofFreakonomics.

Turning Out the Lights by Margaret Macmillan (Profile). Beginning a slew of 
first world war centenary books, this is an analysis of the decisions that led 
to the catastophe by the author of the award-winningPeacemakers.

Year Zero by Ian Buruma (Atlantic). And so on to the second world war. This 
book unusually looks at the weeks after the end of the war, and, as you would 
expect from Buruma, concentrates as much on Asia as on Europe.

November

The Samuel Johnson prize will be awarded. This month also sees the 100th 
anniversary ofbirth of Albert Camus on the 7th and the 50th anniversary of 
death of Aldous Huxley on the 22nd, although Huxley might enjoy comparatively 
little attention as the 22nd is also the 50th anniversary of theassasination of 
JFK.

December

The next Hobbit movie, The Desolation of Smaug, is released this month, as is 
Jack Ryan, directed by Kenneth Branagh and based on theTom Clancy character. 
Sherlock will return to BBC TV.
 