
Every year, around this time, I write my amusing annual guide to “Christmas 
presents you might buy for the big names from the last 12 months”.

You might not find it amusing. But you can’t deny it’s annual.

I’ve been doing this since 2003, when I discovered a “present picking” website 
that suggested possible gifts based on the characteristics you typed in about 
prospective recipients.

That year, the site and I came up with presents for David Gest  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/12/david-gest-tv-celebrity-and-music-producer-dies-big-brother>
(“a set of devotional candles”), David Blaine (“green tea soap and an alarm 
clock”), Tony Blair (“a Privacy Guard paper shredder and a miniature biplane”), 
Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez (“satin bedsheets and a set of steak knives”) 
and Saddam Hussein (“lemongrass aftershave, a fur hat and a genuine Turkish 
bathrobe”.)

I believe this was a useful Yuletide piece. Its sparkling topical 
entertainment factor aside, if you have an uncle who’s a bit like Saddam 
Hussein – and let’s face it, who doesn’t? – that would have been a genuinely 
helpful list of gift ideas. If your sister is reminiscent of Jennifer Lopez, or 
indeed of David Gest, you might be inspired in that crucial final week of 
Christmas shopping.

But this year, it isn’t working. I can’t do it. There is nothing jolly or 
festive to be constructed around “the big names of the year”. The only people I 
remember looming large in 2016 are those who did so for being evil, dangerous 
or unexpectedly dead. You might say that the same applies to Saddam Hussein 
(not that he was dead in 2003; had he been, it would’ve taken more than 
lemongrass aftershave to pep him up) but it felt different somehow.

Maybe the suffering in Iraq under Hussein was as terrible as that in Aleppo; 
maybe his overthrow in 2003 was the start of all this heartbreaking, desperate, 
fatal movement of families around the world; I’m not smart enough to know or 
understand. But at the time, I think – although we feared what might happen – 
we didn’t know it. There was plenty of hope and silliness. Looking back for 
that Christmas piece, the year seemed equally full of David Blaines and J-Los.

Can you do it now? I can’t. When I try to think of jolly entertainment names 
from 2016, it’s just dead people.David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/obituary-david-bowie>, Terry 
Wogan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/31/terry-wogan>, Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-obituary>, Ronnie 
Corbett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/31/ronnie-corbett-obituary>, 
Prince: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/11/prince-remembered-by-amma-asante-genius-gentleman-feminist-obituary>
 take your pick whose fall upset you most, in that great Becher’s Brook of 
death from the beginning of the year; we all have one we’re saddest about, like 
the bleak inverse of having a favourite Spice Girl or member of the Beatles.

Each bereavement was dreadful, but for me the deepest cut was Victoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-obituary>, that 
sparkling creature of joy, energy, music and laughter whose extinction seemed 
almost unbearable.

That was the beginning of the year and, as we near its end, another sparkling 
62-year-old has vanished into the dark:AA Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/11/aa-gill-said-nhs-could-not-give-him-new-cancer-treatment>
, greatest newspaper columnist of a generation, brimming with beans and 
brilliance and wit in print, kind and gentle and wise in person. I knew him 
well enough to feel the sadness personally, but not well enough to feel this 
devastated; I find I’m sort ofdesolate at his passing.

It all rolls together: Victoria Wood and Terry Wogan, Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-obituary> and the 
frightening American election and thoughts of nuclear war and environmental 
ruin, and Aleppo, and Adrian: it’s just all so f***ing terrible. Everything is 
so f***ing terrible. It’s like Stop All the Clocks has come true.

Does it feel like this for you, too? Does it feel like the end of days? I 
really hope it doesn’t. I was howling out all this stuff to a friend the other 
night and he said: “It’s because you’ve had a child. Something likeAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> has been happening every year for 
ever. Everything’s always awful. But when you have a child, it feels even 
sadder and more painful and frightening.”

And so what I actually want to write about, instead of jolly Christmas gifts – 
and I know I’ve only reached my subject 600 words in, but Adrian Gill is dead 
so life has got a lot less competitive for Sunday columnists – is a study 
presented at a conference in London last week which found that “the positive 
glow of parenthood lasts only 12 months”.

You what? I’m glad those scientists didn’t come to find me in the first few 
months – dizzy with sleep deprivation, aching in every corner and crevice, 
baffled by breastfeeding, terrified of cot death, riddled with guilt about 
every failure, nervous and tearful, ravaged with misery at the news of any 
slightly negative thing happening to anybody anywhere in the world – and talk 
about “the positive glow of parenthood”. And I say that as someone who believes 
that it’s all going fine.

I mean seriously, these scientists’ summary sounds like a joke. “Is that the 
positive glow of parenthood? Ah no, my mistake – it’s just the vomit in your 
hair catching the light.”

Women do laugh about the physical disintegration, so you know about that in 
advance. But nobody tells you about the sadness and the terror. Not really, 
anyway. I’m so grateful for (and besotted by) my daughter, but I was the freest 
person I’d ever met and I’ll never be free again. I’m frightenedall the time.

Of course, my parenthood might be coinciding with the saddest, scariest year 
in history. But I think all parents feel like that. That’s what I’d tell my 
younger self, when she was scared of not being a mother: it isn’t better. It’s 
amazing, but it isn’t better. Not having children is alsocompletely amazing. 
Not having them can be sad and frightening too, for many, but it’s also amazing.

It feels like a weird Christmas message: not having children is amazing! But 
no weirder, I guess, than recommending you buy Benedict Cumberbatch a golf bag.

Here’s to a better 2017.
 