
Hosts Gabon were handed a favourable draw for January’s Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>, with Pierre-Emerick 
Aubameyang’s side to face Cameroon, Burkina Faso and the debutants 
Guinea-Bissau in Group A while the heavyweights Algeria and Senegal will face 
off in Group B.

The buildup to the tournament, which begins on 14 January, has been dominated 
by doubts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/africa-cup-of-nations-draw-algeria-senegal-gabon>
 over where it will be staged as the aftershocks of Gabonese presidential 
elections continue to be felt.

Political unrest in Gabon casts shadow over 2017 Africa Cup of Nations draw | 
Jonathan Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-gabon-draw-football>
President Ali Bongo – who defeated the challenger Jean Ping to retain the post 
he has held since 2009 – was at the draw in Libreville on Wednesday night and 
he saw Les Panthères given a great chance of progressing past the 
quarter-finals for the first time in their history.

Elsewhere, the holders and favourites Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> were drawn in Group C and 
will face Togo, Morocco and DR Congo, while Algeria and Senegal – ranked second 
and third in Africa by Fifa – will contest Group B with Zimbabwe and Tunisia.

Ghana’s hopes of winning a first title since 1982 will rest of coming through 
a group that contains the seven-time winnersEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt>, Mali and Uganda, who are also in 
the Black Stars’ World Cup qualifying group and played them in their last 
finals appearance in 1978, when Ghana triumphed 2-0 in the final.

2017 Africa Cup of Nations draw

Group A Gabon, Cameroon, Guinea-Bissau, Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso>

Group B Algeria, Senegal, Zimbabwe, Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tunisia>

Group C Ivory Coast, Togo, Morocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/morocco>, DR Congo

Group D Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana>, Uganda, Egypt, Mali
 