
Three hundred million of the world’s children live in areas with extreme air 
pollution, where toxic fumes are more than six times international guidelines, 
according to new research byUnicef <http://www.unicef.org/>. 

The study, using satellite data, is the first to make a global estimate of 
exposure and indicates that almost 90% of the world’s children - 2 billion - 
live in places where outdoor air pollution exceeds WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation (WHO) limits.

Unicef warned the levels of global air pollution contributed to 600,000 child 
deaths a year – more than are caused by malaria and HIV/Aids combined. Children 
are far more vulnerable to air pollution, Unicef warned, pointing to enduring 
damage to health and the development of children’s brain and urging nations 
attending aglobal climate summit 
<http://unfccc.int/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/meeting/9567.php> next month to 
cut fossil fuel burning rapidly.

“The magnitude of the danger air pollution poses is enormous,” said Anthony 
Lake, Unicef’s executive director. “No society can afford to ignore air 
pollution. We protect our children when we protect the quality of our air. Both 
are central to our future.”
Deaths of under-fives linked to air pollution 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-30T18:07:51/embed.html>
Air pollution is world’s single biggest environmental health risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/25/air-pollution-single-biggest-environmental-health-risk-who>
, according to the World Health Organisation (WHO), andis getting worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/air-pollution-rising-at-an-alarming-rate-in-worlds-cities>
, with levels of toxic air rising 8% in the last five years. More than 3 
million people a year die as a result of outdoor air pollution – six every 
minute on average – and this isset to double by 2050 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/16/more-people-die-from-air-pollution-than-malaria-and-hivaids-new-study-shows>
 as fast growing cities expand. Indoor air pollution, mainly from wood or dung 
stoves, causes another 3 million deaths a year.


Children are especially at risk, the Unicef report says, because they breathe 
more rapidly than adults and the cell layer in their lungs is more permeable to 
pollutant particles. The tiny particles can alsocross the blood-brain barrier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/05/toxic-air-pollution-particles-found-in-human-brains-links-alzheimers>
, which is less resistant in children, permanently harmingcognitive development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/13/air-pollution-linked-to-increased-mental-illness-in-children>
 and their future prospects. Even the unborn are affected, as the particles 
inhaled by pregnant women can cross the placental barrier, injuring fetuses.

Prof Jos Lelieveld, at the Max Planck Institute in Mainz, Germany, said the 
report was excellent: “Air pollution is typically a problem in developing 
countries, where infants have little resistance due to poor nutrition and where 
health care is insufficient.”

World's children breathing dangerous air - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/oct/31/worlds-children-breathing-dangerous-air-in-pictures>
The Unicef study combined particle pollution data from a range of satellites 
with ground-level monitors to estimate the number of children in polluted 
areas. Of the 300 million exposed to levels of pollution six times over WHO 
limits, 220 million live in south Asia, whereIndia hosts many of the world’s 
most polluted cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/calls-for-action-mount-as-six-indian-cities-hit-top-10-of-air-pollution>
.

Another 70 million children living with very toxic air live in east Asia, 
mainly in China. But more children are exposed to air pollution levels above 
the WHO limit in Africa - 520 million - than in east Asia.

The air pollution crisis is worst in low and middle income nations, where 98% 
of cities do not meet WHO guidelines, but over half the cities in rich 
countries also fail to meet the guidelines. In Europe, 120 million children 
live in areas where outdoor air pollution exceeds international limits, and 20 
million suffer levels over double the limit.

Dr Penny Woods, chief executive of the British Lung Foundation, said: “In the 
UK, we know that children’s health is being put at risk every day by unsafe 
levels of pollution in many of our towns and cities. At least 3,000schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/01/children-at-nearly-90-london-secondary-schools-exposed-to-dangerous-air-pollution>
 are located within illegal levels of pollution. Yet very few of these schools
have monitors around them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/councils-failing-to-monitor-most-british-schools-for-dangerous-air-pollution>
. It’s time for the government to enact a newclean air act 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clean_Air_Act_1956> to tackle this modern 
pollution problem and protect all our health.”

In the report, Unicef urges all countries to cut air pollution by reducing 
fossil fuel burning in power plants and vehicles, which also helps tackle 
climate change. This double benefit has led tosignificant action in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/25/china-coal-peak-hailed-turning-point-climate-change-battle>
 in recent years. Tackling air pollution is also cost-effective: theWorld Bank 
estimates that the welfare losses from air pollution 
<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/781521473177013155/The-cost-of-air-pollution-strengthening-the-economic-case-for-action>
 are more than $5tn a year.

Unicef also recommends minimising children’s exposure by ensuring sources of 
pollution such as busy roads and factories are not sited near schools and 
playgrounds and by the roll-out of cleaner cooking stoves.
 