
There is much natural beauty to be found within an hour’s drive of Melbourne: 
Mount Macedon, Ferntree Gully, Yarra valley and the Mornington peninsula to 
name a few.

With so many choices, attractions that may be too far for a day trip but 
perfect for a weekend away often get overlooked. The Grampians (Gariwerd), a 
national park about three hours’ drive from Melbourne, combines almost 
everything those destinations closer to the city have to offer.

There are stunning mountain ranges, panoramic views, hikes for people of all 
fitness levels, wineries, boutique cafes, Aboriginal art,rock sites 
<http://www.visitgrampians.com.au/attraction/bunjil-shelter> and culture, and a 
mix of camping grounds and luxury accommodation.

Too stunning @thegrampians @grampianspeaks #grampians 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL2ieMfgFIn/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Oct 21, 2016 at 9:41pm PDT

Though it could be tempting to spend a weekend in the Grampians indulging in 
food and wine, the views seen while walking the 33km Grampians peaks trail are 
among the most spectacular in the state.

The central section of the trail, or “section one”, is open for spring. You 
can opt for a hike of three days and two nights and the journey will take you 
to the ancient rock features of the Grand Canyon, the Pinnacle lookout and 
views of mountain peaks from the top of Mount Rosea. But there are plenty of 
shorter walks for those who prefer a couple of hours easy strolling.

Planning and construction is also under way for an extended 144km Grampians 
peaks trail, which when complete will bea 13-day, 12-night experience 
<http://parkweb.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/663341/Grampians-Peaks-Trail-Master-Plan.pdf>
 connecting some of the park’s most famous peaks, from the massive sandstone 
outcrops around Mount Zero in the north to Mount Abrupt overlooking Dunkeld and 
the volcanic plains in the south. This work is expected to be complete in 2019, 
with staged openings until then.


Thank you Billie from Grampians Peak Walking Company and @thegrampians for a 
phenomenal bush trek. I've been so looked after. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL2KnnBAcvi/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Oct 21, 2016 at 6:13pm PDT

Friday

11am – arrive at the Halls Gap visitor information centre, 117-119 Grampians 
Road, Halls Gap

I meet my tour guide for the two-day hike, Billie Radoicic 
<https://www.instagram.com/biljanaradoicic989/> from the Grampians Peaks 
Walking Company. She’s also a tour guide withAbsolute Outdoors 
<http://absoluteoutdoors.com.au/>, and helps tourists organise canoeing, 
rock-climbing, camping and mountain-biking.

But Radoicic has some bad news: there is severe weather and hail forecast. Not 
wanting to be responsible for a journalist perishing in the wilderness, she 
says there will be no camping tonight. Instead, we’ll tackle a few of the 
smaller walks, take the 4WD to a couple of waterfalls, and retreat when the 
weather gets too bad.

I’m told rescues of tourists ill-equipped for the elements or who have taken 
on a more difficult trail than they were prepared for are fairly common.

And if you do venture out to the trail, don’t forget to register your hike 
<http://parkweb.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/662813/Grampians-Peaks-Trail-Brochure.pdf>
.

12pm – lunch at Harvest Halls Gap Cafe and Provedore, 2 Heath Street

One year ago, Carly Wallman and Richard Flecknoe ditched their corporate city 
jobs and openedHarvest <https://www.facebook.com/harvesthg/>, a restaurant that 
brings the great cheese, wine and produce from the region together under one 
roof to provide locally sourced, fresh food.

Today Harvest has extended its opening hours to include dinner twice a week, 
has a slightly revamped menu, andtwo beautifully appointed villas 
<http://www.harvesthg.com.au/accommodation/> out the back. 


All-day breakfast prices range from $7.90 for the toast to $17.90 for the 
bubble and squeak, which includes poached eggs and ham off the bone on a potato 
and vegetable hash.

Bushwalking fuel #grampians <https://www.instagram.com/p/BL0HSSFgpv5/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Oct 20, 2016 at 11:05pm PDT

There’s a cheese plate featuring Grampians and Otway sheep and cow’s milk 
cheeses and spreads ($21) and house-marinated red rock olives ($6.90) to 
accompany a glass of wine.

I go for the breakfast super salad, which for $16.90 (including added feta) 
gets you two perfectly poached eggs atop a bed of roasted mushrooms, tomato, 
rocket, homemade hummus and toasted pumpkin seeds.

1pm – Brambuk cultural centre, 277 Grampians Road, Halls Gap

Throwback to Brambuk <https://www.instagram.com/p/BMTat-XAmvd/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Nov 2, 2016 at 2:52am PDT

It’s bucketing with rain so we head to the Brambuk national park and cultural 
centre, which is owned and operated by Aboriginal people and is the longest 
running Aboriginal cultural centre in Australia. Aboriginal occupation of the 
Grampians dates back more than 5,000 years and the area contains rock art sites 
that are still being discovered today.

The culture of the Aboriginal communities of western Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> are on display at the 
centre through multimedia shows, art exhibitions, artefact displays, and 
cultural talks, and you can attempt the didgeridoo and throw a boomerang.

There’s also a bush tucker cafe for those who want to try kangaroo, emu, and 
crocodile.

You can do a self-guided tour but today a volunteer, John Rawnsley, offers to 
take us around the centre.

“People leave here with a totally different attitude towards Aboriginal people 
after coming through here and learning what they’ve been through for the past 
couple of hundred of years,” he says.

How do you buy Indigenous Australian art ethically?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/18/how-do-you-buy-indigenous-australian-art-ethically>
“A lot of the Dreamtime stories and the culture from the area was lost, not 
just through slaughter of Aboriginals but through starvation. When the 
Europeans came with their cattle and sheep, the impact on the land was 
devastating and took away a lot of their food. The settlers chased the 
kangaroos away, and a lot of Aboriginals starved to death.

“Aboriginal people were disease-free until the settlers came, and they had no 
immune system equipped to fight diseases like typhoid. I’ve had English 
tourists come up to me in tears after touring through Brambuk, and they say: 
‘I’m so sorry about what happened.’ ”

3pm – Silverband Falls walk, Silverband Road, Bellfield

Radoicic says although recent heavy rains may not be great for camping, 
waterfalls throughout the park will be flowing strong. Many of them slow to a 
trickle or dry up by the time summer hits. From the carpark, Silverband falls 
is an easy 1.4km return stroll through pristine forest and over a rock crossing.

So many waterfalls, so little time #grampians 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL0HNFFg152/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Oct 20, 2016 at 11:05pm PDT

The chances of spotting wildlife on your treks is high. The park is home to 
about 40 species of mammals, 30 reptiles, 11 amphibians, and at least 230 
birds. And you’ll definitely see plenty of kangaroos and wallabies.


4pm – Venus baths loop, Halls Gap

This is an easy 2.3km circuit that starts from the main carpark and follows 
the Venus baths rock pools. It also takes you through the quirky, art-filled 
botanical gardens.

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL0HZFcAiBe/> on Oct 20, 2016 at 11:06pm PDT

You can slide down rock formations (at your own risk) in this natural water 
park, and you are likely to stumble upon Aboriginal rock art among the rock 
pools. There are some pretty spectacular sandstone cliffs too.

5.30pm – check-in at Boroka Downs, 51 Birdswing Road, Halls Gap

My disappointment at not camping under stars evaporated pretty quickly when I 
was taken to my alternative accommodation for the next two nights,Boroka Downs 
<http://borokadowns.com.au/en/tariffspackages/our-rates/>. I was allocated one 
of the five-star and secluded residences on the property, nestled among the 
bush about a 10-minute drive from the national park.

Floor-to-ceiling windows allow an uninterrupted view to the mountains, while 
birds and wallabies meander outside. The award-winning villas are eco-friendly 
and feature a whirlpool and fireplace, with fresh kindling left with the daily 
newspaper each morning.

My rough and rugged outdoor experience nestled among nature had turned into a 
luxurious getaway in seclusion. This is easily the nicest accommodation I have 
ever stayed in. It’s not suitable for children so the peace and quiet is 
totally uninterrupted. Would I pay the $350-$400 a night to stay here again? 
I’m already saving.

7.30pm - fireplace, spa, and a home-cooked dinner at Bokoka Downs

Yeah look I'd be lying if I said I didn't feel exposed. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL2vkU4gwwy/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Oct 21, 2016 at 11:36pm PDT

I’m pretty tired after a day of driving and hiking and I want to make the most 
of this ridiculously gorgeous villa and its mountain views. I cook up a basic 
spag bol and get some rest before the longer trek tomorrow morning.

Saturday 

9am – Halls Gap to Bugiga walk

This 8.6km, roughly five-hour walk starts from the carpark in Halls Gap. We 
follow signs to the walking track near Stony creek and follow the creek along 
the formed track to Venus baths. Just before the rock pools at Venus baths, 
there is a track that heads towards Splitters falls. A small detour takes us to 
them.

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL2SzJyAgkY/> on Oct 21, 2016 at 7:24pm PDT

We return to the main track and climb up through a rocky gully to the Grand 
Canyon. This climb is a lot of fun, and we have to watch our step on the rocks 
still slippery from the wild weather overnight.

At the top of the steps we turn left, and follow the signs up to the rocky 
platforms. The winds pick up, the weather gets colder and the rain starts to 
fall again. We climb and through the rocky corridor of Silent Street until we 
finally reach the glorious pinnacle lookout. From up here we can see Mount 
William, Halls Gap and Fyans valley.

It's me on a rock. Awesome four hour trek uphill climbing rocks and to the 
pinnacles. Gorgeous day. @thegrampians #grampians 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL2Ka6vA1T3/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Oct 21, 2016 at 6:11pm PDT

From here we follow the Grampians peaks trail signs south to Lakeside lookout 
and then to the Sundial carpark. From Sundial carpark there is a roughly 250m 
track that heads towards the lookout. Eventually we hit the Bugiga link track 
which leads to the sustainableBugiga campsite 
<http://walkingdroid.com.au/bugiga-hiker-camp-grampians-peaks-trail/>, high in 
the Wonderland range and with views of Mount Rosea. This is where we would have 
stayed last night if not for the dangerous weather.

Advance bookings <http://www.parkstay.vic.gov.au/grampians-peaks-trail> are 
required for Bugiga, a series of 12 circular camping platforms, each with room 
for a small two-person tent. There are toilets, but no showers, and fires are 
not permitted. One night will set you back just $31.60 for two.

2pm – lunch at Livefast Lifestyle Cafe <http://www.livefast.com.au/contact/>, 
5/97 Grampians Road, Halls Gap

Livefast is the place to stop for a bite if you’re vegan or have food 
allergies, and if you like to wash your lunch down with some beer or wine.


Prices range from $5 for a bowl of fries to $17 for the lamb back-strap 
strips. I opt for the zucchini, yellow squash and parmesan fritters with smoked 
salmon and creme fraiche ($16).

4pm – drive to Boroka lookout

About 10 minutes’ drive from Halls Gap and up Mount Difficult Road is Boroka 
lookout. There are two lookout platforms with 180-degree views of western 
Victoria, looking out over Halls Gap and Lake Bellfield. It’s an easy 
five-minute stroll from the carpark and is ideal for those with limited 
mobility.

As if on cue the rain clears and a rainbow emerges as we step on to the 
platform.

Rainbow!!! @grampianspeaks #grampians 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL2f-ftgIm-/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Oct 21, 2016 at 9:19pm PDT

You can also cycle there – a roughly 15km ascent from the intersection of the 
Grampians and Mount Victory roads. And it would be pretty spectacular at 
sunrise.

5pm – Harvest Halls Gap Cafe and Provedore, 2 Heath Street

I return to Harvest and select wine, cheeses and produce for dinner. I return 
to my accommodation armed with a cabernet sauvignon from the nearby Fallen 
Giants vineyard, a pungent mountain man soft cheese, a pre-made meal of braised 
lamb shanks and a big slice of gluten-free lemon tart.

Thank you Harvest for my gorgeous hamper. @thegrampians 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BL2r58nAMhw/>

A photo posted by Melissa Davey (@melissdavey) on Oct 21, 2016 at 11:04pm PDT

8pm – live music at Livefast Lifestyle Cafe 
<http://www.livefast.com.au/contact/>, 5/97 Grampians Road, Halls Gap

Later I head for some live music as part of a jazz and blues festival. Pubs 
and cafes are hosting intimate shows throughout the festival, and tonight we 
drink red wine and watch Bendigo-born blues musicianBill Barber 
<https://www.facebook.com/BillBarberMusic/?fref=nf> belt out some classics on 
the acoustic.

Sunday 

10am – checkout and drive to Great Western for a winery tour at Best’s Wines, 
111 Bests Rd, Great Western

Great Western is a quaint township about 30 minutes’ drive from Boroka Downs 
on the road o Melbourne. It was first settled in the 1840s by sheep graziers, 
rapidly developed through the discovery of gold, and today is known as a 
historic wine region.

Best’s Wines <http://www.bestswines.com/> is one of Australia’s oldest 
continually family owned and operated wineries, founded in 1866. This year it 
celebrates its 150th anniversary. It has a reputation for producing top shiraz, 
a sample of which goes down a treat before hitting the road back to Melbourne.

• The author stayed in the Grampians courtesy of Grampians Tourism 
<http://www.visitgrampians.com.au/>. Travel expenses covered by the writer. 
 