Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fwivo94ylmhE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fwivo94ylmhE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fwivo94ylmhE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Thirty-six years ago, Keith Jarrett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/keith-jarrett>, the now 65-year-old pianist 
and composer from Allentown, Pennsylvania, crossed a chasm usually unbridgeable 
for either jazz or classical performers – and this virtuoso happens to be both.

Jarrett's message from the keyboard took off from the small enclave of an 
informed and dedicated minority audience, and reached the huge worldwide 
constituency of listeners. His albums would turn up in the collections of 
people who would otherwise cross the street to avoid buying a jazz record. From 
the mid-70s on, his concerts began to resemble religious rituals, attended by 
flocks of devotees for whom his music had a meditative, spiritual and 
transformative power. And all this stemmed from the recording of a single album 
– conceived as a live concert by a sleep-deprived Jarrett on a faulty grand 
piano – made in Köln, Germany, on 24 January 1975. Sales of The Köln Concert, 
on Munich's fledgling new-music label, ECM, broke records of all kinds. It 
remains the bestselling solo album in jazz, and the bestselling solo piano 
album in any genre.

From the glistening, patiently developed opening melody, through sustained 
passages of roaring riffs and folksy, country-song exuberance, the pianist is 
utterly inside his ongoing vision of the performance's developing shape – a 
fusion of the freshness of an improvisation with the symmetries of a 
composition that's central to the album's communicative power. Harmonically and 
melodically, it wasn't a particularly "jazzy" record by the piano-jazz 
standards of that time, which might also have eased its progress across the 
sectarian divides of jazz, pop or classical tastes. There had been, however, an 
earlier clue to the possibilities of this journey into the largely uncharted 
waters of improvised solo-piano performance. The great pianist Bill Evans, one 
of the young Jarrett's jazz models and an artist similarly steeped in classical 
music, had recorded the meditative solo improvisation Peace Piece 16 years 
before, and built it around a simple two-chord vamp in which the harmonies 
stretched increasingly abstractly as the performance progressed. Much of 
Jarrett's playing on The Köln Concert similarly developed around repeating 
hook-like motifs, instead of unfolding over song-structure chord sequences as 
most bop-based jazz solos did.

Jarrett's improvisation was also hypnotically rhythmic, bordering on 
mantra-like. He was unafraid to locate a compelling idea and stick with it, 
building intensity on a single rhythmic notion in a manner that still sounds 
urgently contemporary. A pop-like deployment of repetition, and a reassuringly 
anchored sense of tonal consistency – the latter occasioned by the pianist's 
hugging of the acceptable middle-register of an otherwise tinny piano he had 
almost cancelled the gig to avoid – contributed to the music's astonishingly 
organic feel.

Jarrett's desire to make a solo-piano album had led to his earlier departure 
from Columbia Records, and to his relationship with the compatible Manfred 
Eicher of ECM (with whom he was travelling around Europe, jammed into a Renault 
5, on the tour that included Köln), a visionary producer who heard new music in 
the same eclectic way. Though he was only 29 at the time of The Köln Concert, 
Jarrett had already had a brief flirtation with electronics in Miles Davis's 
fusion band (declaring afterwards that he wouldn't touch a plugged keyboard 
again) and rich regular-jazz and early-fusion experiences in the popular bands 
of saxophonistCharles Lloyd <> and drummer Art Blakey. He had also made some 
compositionally distinctive and now highly regarded postbop recordings of his 
own, in the legendary early-70s "American quartet" with saxophonist Dewey 
Redman, bassist Charlie Haden and drummer Paul Motian. But Köln was Jarrett's 
moment, and a turning point for the immensely influential ECM label too, which 
the album helped to bankroll for years to come.

The Köln Concert isn't universally admired by jazz listeners. Some find it 
close to easy listening in its repetition of catchy melody, or a irreconcilable 
split from the jazz tradition in its avoidance of many of the genre's familiar 
materials. But Jarrett's remarkable output in the years since, his 
interpretations of classical works, reinvention of the Bill Evans-inspired 
conversational trio, engagement with everything from symphony orchestras to 
cathedral organs, and through it all an enduring popularity that sells out the 
world's great concert halls months in advance, testify to his creativity and 
eloquence.

In 2006, he released a similarly unpremeditated solo-piano concert from 
Carnegie Hall that ran to 90 minutes and five encores. When I discussed it with 
him for the Guardian, Jarrett said: "My glasses were falling off, my pants were 
twisted up, I was sweating, crouching, standing up, sitting down, and I was 
thinking 'nothing can stop me now'." He also said he'd had the same feeling – 
of total trust in his imagination – on The Köln Concert more than 30 years 
before.
 