
The appointment of Breitbart Media’s executive chairman, Stephen Bannon, as 
Donald Trump’s campaign CEO has been greeted as a turning point in that 
presidential bid, and perhaps in conservative politics in America. We have been 
told that it “marks theofficial entree 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Politics/2016/0819/Trump-hands-his-campaign-to-the-alt-right-movement>
 of the so-called ‘alt-right’ into the Republicans’ top campaign”, and that 
Trump’selection strategy 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/politics/ct-trump-campaign-alt-right-20160820-story.html]>
 “now resembles the alt-right dream of maximizing the white vote”. Hillary 
Clinton will address Trump’s alleged turn to the alt-right in a speech in 
Nevada thisThursday 
<http://%20https//www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/08/23/clinton-plans-thursday-address-in-nevada-on-trump-and-the-alt-right>
.

Donald Trump appoints Breitbart chief Stephen Bannon to lead campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/17/donald-trump-stephen-bannon-breitbart-news-kellyanne-conway>
But what is the alt-right? It is new, difficult to pin down, and hard to 
understand. But it’s important to try to get a handle on who is involved, what 
they believe, and what their possible influence might be on the immediate 
future of rightwing politics.

A movement that lives and breathes – and taunts – online

The alt- (or alternative) right has surged as a (so far) mainly online 
movement, occupying positions beyond the pale of many conservatives. It has no 
centralised organisation or official ideology – it has beendescribed 
<http://www.weeklystandard.com/what-exactly-is-the-alternative-right/article/2000310>
 as “scattered and ideologically diffuse”.

The alt-right has been involved in fleeting street protests, but its online 
activities are well-organised and relentless. It recruits by opposing 
progressive ideas about gender, sexuality, and especially race and immigration. 
Adherents congregate on message boards like 4chan and 8chan, comment on 
websites likethe Right Stuff <http://therightstuff.biz/> and American 
Renaissance <http://www.amren.com/>, and lurk on Twitter, where they taunt 
progressives (or “shitlibs”) and mainstream conservatives (“cuckservatives”).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Falt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15dbfa3e43ecf803331e39425ff01d361dec222d%2F0_128_4864_2919%2F4864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98A%20sense%20that%20white%20identity%20is%20under%20attack%E2%80%99%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20the%20alt-right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Falt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98A%20sense%20that%20white%20identity%20is%20under%20attack%E2%80%99%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20the%20alt-right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Falt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15dbfa3e43ecf803331e39425ff01d361dec222d%2F0_128_4864_2919%2F4864.jpg>
 Stephen Bannon, Breitbart Media’s executive chairman and now Donald Trump’s 
campaign CEO. Photograph: Danny Moloshok/Invision/AP 
The association with Breitbart comes from the efforts of Milo Yiannopoulos to 
appropriate and popularise the term. At the height of his Twitter-driven 
notoriety, Yiannopoulos wrote amanifesto 
<http://www.breitbart.com/tech/2016/03/29/an-establishment-conservatives-guide-to-the-alt-right/>
 introducing the tendency to mainstream conservatives. But are Breitbart and 
Bannon really a part of the movement? Some of its most hardcore activists say 
no.

Race realism and ethno-nationalism: what the alt-right believes

Richard Spencer, who coined the term “alt-right” in 2008, says he intended the 
term to describe a diverse, heterodox group whose members were “deeply 
alienated, intellectually, even emotionally and spiritually, from American 
conservatism”.

They were disillusioned at the end of the Bush presidency by Republican 
policies on war and immigration. They sought to draw on currents like the 
European New Right to transform what they saw as a moribund conservative 
movement. He and others connected with the succession of websites he edited – 
such as Taki magazine and alternativeright.com – wrote extensively, focusing 
the alt-right into a more definite ideology, with increasingly hardline ideas 
about race.

The alt-right has been involved in fleeting street protests, but its online 
activities are well-organised and relentless

Spencer says that the term is still flexible, but affiliation has some minimum 
requirements. “Someone who is really alt-right recognises the reality of race, 
and the fact that race matters, and that race is an essential component of 
identity.”

Shane Burley, a journalist and researcher who has covered the far right 
extensively, says that Spencer’s orientation “is clearly under the umbrella of 
what we would call fascism”. Spencer’s so-called “race realism” underpins 
theories of racial hierarchy, and the idea that it has a basis in biology. 
Related ideas of “human biodiversity” attempt to buttress the notion that race 
is destiny, and the primary organising category of society and history.Radix 
<http://www.radixjournal.com/> is full of articles that link race with IQ or 
crime. This revival of previously discredited scientific racism is another 
recurring feature of alt-right thought.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Falt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a4364882f7174ff22edb6f0490cafee43d17504%2F0_157_4186_2513%2F4186.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98A%20sense%20that%20white%20identity%20is%20under%20attack%E2%80%99%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20the%20alt-right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Falt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98A%20sense%20that%20white%20identity%20is%20under%20attack%E2%80%99%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20the%20alt-right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Falt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a4364882f7174ff22edb6f0490cafee43d17504%2F0_157_4186_2513%2F4186.jpg>
 Milo Yiannopoulos popularised the term ‘alt-right’ in a manifesto published on 
Breitbart. Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
Burley says that the very fact that these ideas were once so thoroughly 
discredited opens up a gap for them to be promulgated again. “Right now the 
arguments against their race and IQ position are less well-known, so they have 
the ability to plant the seed in the public imagination.

“Almost all of the studies that they cite are marginal, construct-sweeping 
theories on the basis of very little data, and don’t demonstrate the causal 
links that they claim for them.”

Other adherents emphasise their desire for racial separatism. Mike Enoch, from 
the site the Right Stuff, a major hub for the dissemination of alt-right 
materials, says: “The core principle, in my view, is ethno-nationalism, meaning 
that nations should be as ethnically and racially homogeneous as possible.”

As for Breitbart, Enoch thinks that it “is the closest thing to sympathetic to 
our position that is out there in the mainstream, and there may be some people 
that share our views that work there, but the official editorial line of 
Breitbart is not alt-right”.

Chip Berlet, a veteran researcher of the far right and the coauthor of 
Right-Wing Populism in America, says that the idea of ethno-nationalism is 
derived from the European New Right. It’s the claim that “every ethno-religious 
nationalist group has the right to its own homeland”.

This willingness to make open racial appeals is reflected in another 
fundamental claim on the alt-right that, as Spencer puts it, is the 
preponderance of “Jewish power and Jewish influence”. This antisemitism 
dovetails with other kinds of conspiracy thinking – in the last week, alt-right 
Twitter accounts have been pushing the claim that Hillary Clinton is hiding
serious health problems <https://twitter.com/hashtag/HillarysLeaks?src=hash]>.


Conspiracy theories make them into heroes who have exposed a plot.
Chip Berlet 
Berlet says antisemitism has “always been a dividing line on the US right”, 
separating the fringes from more mainstream groups, and “rightwing movements in 
the US have been obsessed with conspiracies since the Salem witch-hunts and the 
anti-Masonic scares. Nativist movements have always embraced the motif of 
subversion. It’s normal for them: it makes them into heroes who have exposed a 
plot.”

‘A sense that white identity is under attack’

Perhaps the most potent element of alt-right activism is the effort to build a 
sense of a specific white identity, and to claim that this identity is under 
attack.

“Anti-white animus in society at large is palpable,” says Spencer. Demands for 
diversity in the workplace mean “less white males in particular”. More openly 
extreme alt-right accounts on Twitter talk about immigration in terms of “white 
genocide <https://twitter.com/hashtag/WhiteGenocide?src=hash>”.

This sense of injured white identity is what defines the alt-right, according 
to Dan Cassino, a Fairleigh Dickinson University political scientist and the 
author of a new book on Fox News andAmerican politics 
<https://www.amazon.com/Fox-News-American-Politics-Psychology/dp/1138900125/ref=asap_bc?ie=UTF8>
. “The founding myth of the alt-right is that the disadvantaged groups in 
American politics are actually running things through a combination of fraud 
and intimidation. By doing this, they’re actually oppressing white men.”

The “original sin” of current American politics, according to Cassino, is that 
neither liberals nor conservatives have a very good answer to the question of 
what is to be done about “the people who get screwed over” by economic policies.


If these sentiments are growing, it may mean a larger and more receptive 
audience for the more radical message of the alt-right. Adherents claim that 
the movement is expanding.

Spencer does not have solid figures, but claims to have seen many new faces at 
his events, including young people who have been “redpilled” – or racially 
“awoken” – in the last year. Enoch claims that the Right Stuff’s suite of 
podcasts gets more than 100,000 listeners a week.

It may be that a growing audience for these ideas is pulling Breitbart in a 
more hardline direction. Spencer calls Breitbart “alt-right lite”, and says 
that its fundamental populism has led them to tentatively begin to express 
ideas similar to his.

Berlet says just because Bannon is not a card-carrying member of the alt-right 
does not mean that progressives should be relaxed about Trump’s erratic and 
intermittently fascist-sounding campaign.

Berlet does not think that American politics has been in such a dangerous 
place vis-a-vis the far right for almost a century. For him, the parallels 
between the Trump campaign and the alt-right are “the most important pushback 
against having a multicultural and pluralistic society since the 1920s Klan”.




 