
“Frankly I am not terribly surprised at the reactions,” said Peter Maxwell 
Davies <https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies> yesterday, 
characteristically cheerful after many people had walked out on his new work, 
Worldes Blis, at the Prom on Thursday.

“A very special sort of listening is required,” he explained with evangelical 
enthusiasm. As he said, this is a long work which deliberately avoids the sort 
of rhetorical gestures which have made works by Berio and Stockhausen - 
composers at least as advanced as Davies - highly popular with Promenaders this 
season.

Expansive
“The whole experience of Worldes Blis,” he admits, “is a very dark one” and 
that may have made it out of place at a Prom.” Nor, when he was writing it, did 
he know how long it was going to last. It came out finally at just over 37 
minutes, which was longer than he had originally planned, and markedly longer 
than the less sympathetic Promenaders were prepared to take, when the 
conventional signposts of nineteenth-century (and for that matter 
twentieth-century) music were almost entirely lacking.

But then, Davies admits that almost always when he plans a work lasting ten 
minutes, it turns out to be twenty in performance. He finds that encouraging on 
the whole, for he feels that a composer should be able to expand to match the 
size of his vision. Certainly his expansiveness is welcome after the 
constriction of a period when Webern’s influence was paramount.

The fact remains that where his own recent works have made a wide-ranging 
appeal through just the sort of gimmicks he mentions in Berio and Stockhausen -
Revelation and Fall <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/03/14/27_Feb_1968.jpg>had 
a scarlet nun yelling through a loud-hailer - Worldes Blis, reflects an 
entirely new aim. He feels that anyone who is prepared to listen to it two or 
three times, or can muster concentration intense enough even at a first 
hearing, will appreciate its point readily.

The “special sort of listening” requires, as he explains, a concentration on 
the relationship of pitches, rather than on the rhetorical rhythmic gestures 
which have been a focus of attention in the past. His “continuum of sound” 
deliberately involves the folding of phrases over one another, on and on, and 
though he realises that this may not be fashionable and he himself will not 
always be writing in such a style, it was an exploration he had to make.

Autographs
He was grateful on Thursday for the backing the orchestra was able to give, 
though he realised from the start that some of the players felt they were 
“being taken for a rlde.” The balance was difficult in the Albert Hall, and he 
looks forward to giving the piece somewhere with a clearer acoustic. At the 
time, he objected less to the fact that people went out than to the noise they 
made as they did so.

Afterwards he was gratifyingly pestered by autograph hunters (no irate 
colonels there to horsewhip the revolutionary) before he made quickly for his 
taxi. The life of the avantgarde involves no pining of appreciation these days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ffrom-the-archive-peter-maxwell-davies-worldes-blis-1969%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14c9e0aaf6b803a28d6a271958f01e6a936de53c%2F0_0_1021_613%2F1021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=from%20the%20archive%20August%201969%3A%20'A%20special%20sort%20of%20listening%20is%20required'%3A%20Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%20on%20Worldes%20Blis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ffrom-the-archive-peter-maxwell-davies-worldes-blis-1969%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=from%20the%20archive%20August%201969%3A%20%27A%20special%20sort%20of%20listening%20is%20required%27%3A%20Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%20on%20Worldes%20Blis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Ffrom-the-archive-peter-maxwell-davies-worldes-blis-1969%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14c9e0aaf6b803a28d6a271958f01e6a936de53c%2F0_0_1021_613%2F1021.jpg>
 The Guardian, 30 August 1969. 
See also: Worlde’s Blis and the Promenaders 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/03/14/7_sept_1969.jpg>, Peter Heyworth’s 
Observer review of Peter Maxwell Davies’ “tough and demanding” new work.
 