
The Chinese government is a despicable, parasitic, brutal, brass-knuckled, 
crass, callous, amoral, ruthless and totally totalitarian imperialist power 
that reigns over the world’s leading cancer factory, its most prolific 
propaganda mill and the biggest police state and prison on the face of the 
earth.


That is the view of Peter Navarro, the man chosen by Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> to lead a new presidential 
office for US trade and industrial policy, a move likely to add to Beijing’s 
anxieties over the billionaire’s plans for US-China relations.

China’s rulers initially appeared to embrace the possibility that improved 
ties with Washington could be negotiated with the deal-making US 
president-elect.

Trump and China: fears that deal-making will consign human rights to political 
'roadkill'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/trump-and-china-fears-deal-making-consign-human-rights-to-political-roadkill>
“We must welcome him,” said one prominent foreign policy expert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/trump-and-china-fears-deal-making-consign-human-rights-to-political-roadkill>
.

But that enthusiasm has dimmed after Trump angered Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/donald-trump-no-idea-how-to-run-superpower-chinese-state-media>
 with a succession of controversial interventions on sensitive issues including 
Taiwan and the South China Sea.

The appointment of Navarro 
<https://greatagain.gov/navarro-national-trade-council-c2d90c10eacb>, a 
University of California, Irvine business professor, to run the White House’s 
newly created national trade council, represents a further blow to those hopes.

Trump’s team described the 67-year-old academic 
<https://twitter.com/JasonMillerinDC/status/811704403069571072>, who is 
infamous in China watching circles for being a radical hawk, as “a brilliant 
policy mind and a tireless worker”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbrutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd03643cbcd9e8899d265f6f948155edb06e1d8bc%2F0_48_2000_2497%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Brutal%2C%20amoral%2C%20ruthless%2C%20cheating'%3A%20how%20Trump's%20new%20trade%20tsar%20sees%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbrutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Brutal%2C%20amoral%2C%20ruthless%2C%20cheating%27%3A%20how%20Trump%27s%20new%20trade%20tsar%20sees%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbrutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd03643cbcd9e8899d265f6f948155edb06e1d8bc%2F0_48_2000_2497%2F2000.jpg>
 Peter Navarro Photograph: Courtesy of Peter Navarro 
But Beijing is unlikely to second such emotions.

Navarro has penned a number of vociferously anti-China tomes including Death by
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and Crouching Tiger: What 
China’s Militarism Means for the World.

In The Coming China Wars – a 2006 book that Trump has called one of his 
favourite on China 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/washington/2011/05/donald-trump-i-understand-the-chinese-mind.html>
 – Navarro portrays the Asian country as a nightmarish realm where “the raw 
stench of a gut-wrenching, sweat-stained fear” hangs in the air and myopic, 
venal and incompetent Communist party officials rule the roost.

Top Trump adviser: News Corp bashes him due to commercial interest in China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/donald-trump-china-adviser-peter-navarro-news-corp-murdoch>
The Harvard-educated hardliner accuses “cheating China” of destroying both 
American factories and lives by flooding the US with illegally subsidised and 
“contaminated, defective and cancerous” exports.

American politicians must “aggressively and comprehensively address the China 
problem” before it leads to full-blown conflict, Navarro writes.

In a 2012 Netflix documentary <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mMlmjXtnIXI> 
based on Death by China, whichTrump has described as “right on” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/trumps-muse-on-u-s-trade-with-china>
, Navarro blames Beijing for the loss of 57,000 American factories and 25m jobs.

“The repressive communist government [is] now victimising both American and 
Chinese citizens alike,” the film claims.

“Help defend America and protect your family: don’t buy made in China,” 
Navarro tells viewers in an introduction to the 80-minute polemic, which is 
narrated by Martin Sheen.

Navarro, who has also dubbed China a “global pollution factory” and “disease 
incubator”, made no secret of his distaste for its rulers during Trump’s 
election campaign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbrutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a3785bec6797f31af3021f485625c61722a461a%2F0_0_1127_676%2F1127.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Brutal%2C%20amoral%2C%20ruthless%2C%20cheating'%3A%20how%20Trump's%20new%20trade%20tsar%20sees%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbrutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Brutal%2C%20amoral%2C%20ruthless%2C%20cheating%27%3A%20how%20Trump%27s%20new%20trade%20tsar%20sees%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbrutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a3785bec6797f31af3021f485625c61722a461a%2F0_0_1127_676%2F1127.png>
 An image from Peter Navarro’s 2012 documentary Death by China Photograph: 
Netflix 
Speaking to the Guardian in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/donald-trump-china-adviser-peter-navarro-news-corp-murdoch>
 at a resort near his home in Laguna Beach the academic railed against how 
China’s “brutal, authoritarian communist government” had decimated the US 
economy.


He painted China as a ravenous bully and said he agreed with Trump’s claim 
that Beijing was guilty of“raping our country” over trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/02/donald-trump-in-indiana-accuses-china-of-raping-the-us-over-trade-video>
.

“It’s an apt description of the damage and carnage that China’s trade policies 
have wrought on the American economic heartland. What’s happening is 
rapacious,” Navarro said.

Speaking shortly before Navarro’s appointment was confirmed, Andrew Nathan, a 
China expert at Columbia University, said Trump’s plans for relations with 
Beijing remained an enigma despite the presence of several prominent China 
hawks in his camp.

“Trump has shown two sides to his personality in dealing with everybody. One 
is: ‘Let’s make a deal, we are deal-makers.’ And the other one is: ‘You hurt my 
feelings and I’m going to bomb the shit out of you because I never lose – I 
always win’,” said the political scientist.


“I don’t know whether he is setting up China for a deal. In fact, I don’t know 
if he is that deliberate or whether his mood just changes from time-to-time 
depending on how the other side treats him.”

Nathan, the author of a book on foreign policy called China’s Search For 
Security 
<https://cup.columbia.edu/book/chinas-search-for-security/9780231140508>, said 
he believed Beijing would still be banking on its ability to win over the 
tycoon.

“I think predominantly they understand Trump as a businessman – and that for 
them is a glimmer of hope,” he said.


Christopher Balding, a Peking University finance professor, said that for all 
Navarro’s “alarmist” and “inflammatory” musings on China, he was unlikely to be 
able to follow through on his most radical beliefs once in government.


Australia, China, and the lunacy of Trump's talk of a trade war | Bob Carr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/12/australia-china-and-the-lunacy-of-trumps-talk-of-a-trade-war>
“I think Navarro is going to quickly realise the constraints that he is 
under,” he said.

“They come as professors, they come as businessmen and they get into office as 
the secretary-of-whatever and they quickly realise ... that they cannot just 
implement their pet idea or their classroom theory,” Balding said, predicting 
there would be “strong push-back” from the US business community were hefty 
tariffs to be imposed on imports from China.

Li Yonghui, the head of the school of international relations at the Beijing 
Foreign Studies University, said Navarro’s rise was consistent with Trump’s 
hawkish thoughts on China and would leave Beijing “a little worried” even if he 
still believed a radical shake-up of US-China relations was unlikely.

“We should stay vigilant. We have to be prepared,” the academic said. “Trump 
will certainly place unprecedented pressure on China.”

Asked for Beijing’s reaction to Trump’s hire, a spokesperson for China’s 
foreign ministry replied only that it was closely monitoring the transition and 
possible policy directions.

“As two superpowers, China and the US have extensive common interests,” Hua 
Chunying told reporters. “Cooperation is the only correct choice.”


Additional reporting by Christy Yao 

 