
Rhiannon Beauregard, 33, is visiting New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> for a few days. But the sex and 
marriage therapist is not here for a vacation, to see the sights or visit 
friends in the city where she once went to college. She is here to freeze her 
eggs.

Beauregard lives in Austin, Texas where she runs her own practice, but has 
opted to come to New York to use the services offered byExtend Fertility 
<http://extendfertility.com/>. The clinic is the first of its kind – focusing 
only on egg freezing and not offering any other fertility services and 
treatments such as in vitro fertilization. By doing that, the clinic has been 
able to cut costs of its services to $5,000 while offering personalized service 
to each one of its clients.

One of the barriers to egg freezing becoming mainstream is the cost. The 
procedure was still deemed to be experimental until just a few years ago and 
was mostly an accepted way to extend fertility for older women, cancer patients 
or those diagnosed with fertility disorders.

Since it is considered to be an elective procedure, egg freezing is typically 
not covered by health insurance. The average cost of the procedure isabout 
$10,000 <http://www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/freeze-eggs/> with an additional 
$2,000 to $5,000 for the necessary medication and another couple of thousand 
dollars for storage. If the frozen eggs are actually to be used for IVF later 
on, that would costan additional $12,000 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/learnvest/2014/02/06/the-cost-of-ivf-4-things-i-learned-while-battling-infertility/#c2519092a797>
.

Silicon Valley tries egg-freezing perks. How about just hiring more women?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2014/oct/19/silicon-valley-egg-freezing-perks-hiring-women>
Altogether, that adds up to more than $25,000 – not exactly chump change. 
Aware of the costs, two years ago, Facebook and Apple announced that they would 
coverup to $20,000 in costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2014/oct/14/apple-facebook-pay-women-employees-freeze-eggs>
 for any female employee that wanted to freeze their eggs.

While Extend Fertility is unable to cut the costs of medicine (the clients are 
required to pay for it on their own) or the future costs of IVF, its founders 
hope that by cutting the cost of the initial procedure in half they will make 
the procedure accessible for more women.

“It’s expensive either way. We know that,” says Joshua Klein, co-founder and 
chief medical officer of Extend Fertility. He points out that $5,000 is still 
half as expensive as $10,000 and adds that the Extend is “working with 
financing partners” so that those interested could opt to pay $200 or $300 a 
month for a while instead of a one-time payment. “We are trying to be 
innovative and thoughtful about that,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd838b809bc4ce8d45c75bc3eb3cd6f0a5b09a60a%2F119_0_729_564%2F729.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Eggs%20in%20the%20bank'%3A%20how%20one%20clinic%20is%20making%20egg%20freezing%20less%20expensive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Eggs%20in%20the%20bank%27%3A%20how%20one%20clinic%20is%20making%20egg%20freezing%20less%20expensive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd838b809bc4ce8d45c75bc3eb3cd6f0a5b09a60a%2F119_0_729_564%2F729.jpg>
 Joshua Klein, co-founder and chief medical officer of Extend Fertility. 
Photograph: Extend Fertility 
Should women view egg freezing as some kind of down payment on their future? 
Klein would prefer that they think of it an investment for both the future and 
the present. Many women worry about meeting the right guy because “they hear 
that biological clock ticking loudly”, he says. That ticking is a stress factor 
in their lives. By freezing their eggs and knowing that they have preserved 
their fertility, they can silence that ticking and receive the immediate 
benefit of “peace of mind”.

On 8 August, two days before the clinic officially opened, Beauregard was on 
the fourth day of her pill regiment.

Beauregard has to inject herself daily with some very expensive drugs. Prior 
to starting the regimen, she had to come off her birth control pills, which 
resulted in a couple of days of feeling “weepy”. She is bloated and on the 
mornings that she goes in for checkups at Extend, she ends up watching an 
ultrasound of her uterus – staring at her eggs instead of a baby.

However, she says, the staff at Extend have been extremely supportive. Every 
client is assigned their own fertility specialist and is available to accompany 
them to all of their meetings. The Extend office, just a block or two south of 
Central Park, also does not resemble a typical fertility clinic. The walls are 
light blue. The rooms look more like small conference rooms with round tables 
and a handful of chairs. There are no big tables with stirrups, no posters with 
uteri or models of babies nestled in a uterus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64921b002487d0ae758c62bc86c0938846f79d25%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Eggs%20in%20the%20bank'%3A%20how%20one%20clinic%20is%20making%20egg%20freezing%20less%20expensive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Eggs%20in%20the%20bank%27%3A%20how%20one%20clinic%20is%20making%20egg%20freezing%20less%20expensive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64921b002487d0ae758c62bc86c0938846f79d25%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A meeting room at Extend Fertility. Photograph: Courtesy of Extend Fertility 
“Even the way this room is set up, we are trying to build into our experience 
the idea that this is not an illness thing, that we are not trying to cure a 
disease,” says Klein, sitting in one of the meeting rooms. “Here we don’t want 
to make people feel that they have a problem. They are just a woman living in 
the 21st century, coming to the doctor about preserving options for the future. 
It shouldn’t feel like a problem.”

For some, it might be a combination of the two. A while back Beauregard was 
diagnosed withpolycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS 
<http://womenshealth.gov/publications/our-publications/fact-sheet/polycystic-ovary-syndrome.html>
) – an disorder that affects hormone production and can affect woman’s 
fertility in women of reproductive age. She was 32 at that time and single.

“I didn’t really have any plans to go out and find me a partner to have a 
child with,” she says. She began thinking about what would happen over the next 
10 years. PCOS can lead to complications during pregnancy, increased chances of 
miscarriage, infertility and high levels of estrogen, which can cause cancer of 
the uterine lining. Beauregard realized that if she wants to have children in 
the future, she might have to undergo treatments such as IVF at that time. “I 
started to think about what the difference would be between now and later and 
the biggest difference between now and later is that after 35 my eggs start to 
... age, I guess, for the lack of better term.”

Klein agrees.

“We know without a shadow of the doubt that when you freeze eggs when you are 
younger, you are going to be putting away something that’s much, much, much 
more likely to be helpful for you than if you wait to do it as a reactionary 
measure when you are older,” he says.

According to him, the profile of women interested in egg freezing is slowly 
shifting from “panic-mode 40-year old” to “a proactive 
smart-thing-to-do-because-I am-a-young-aspiring-woman 30-year-old”. Fertility 
company EggBanxx, which targets younger career-focused women with slogans like 
“Lean in, but freeze first!”, estimates that by 2018,76,000 women will have 
frozen their eggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/turning-back-biological-clock-comes-at-price-egg-freezing>
.

Beauregard says she would have eventually considered freezing her eggs even 
without the PCOS diagnosis.

“Since I am single now I don’t want to put that kind of pressure on a new 
relationship,” she says. “If I hadn’t frozen my eggs, it would be one of the 
first things we talk about: ‘Hey, how do you feel about kids? Because we have 
to start making decisions in the next four to five years.’ I feel like a lot of 
pressure has been lifted off of me.”

I had my eggs frozen. I wish someone had told me how difficult it was | 
Eleanor Morgan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/21/women-fertility-egg-freezing>
The cost was the only thing that made Beauregard think twice. While 
researching her options, she often felt that this was a moneymaking scheme for 
doctors and clinics.

The $5,000 price tag at Extend seemed affordable in comparison. Despite that, 
the procedure and the drugs cost all her savings.

“Most women in their mid-30s do not have a large savings to fall back on and 
because we do not have any other support like a partner. The big risk for me 
was less about the procedure and more about ‘OK, I don’t have any savings 
left’,” she says. Then laughing, she continues: “There is a risk of walking out 
into the world with some eggs in the bank but no money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f888a794dae295030df89b28d2fc3c96fb7ba44%2F0_221_3692_2213%2F3692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Eggs%20in%20the%20bank'%3A%20how%20one%20clinic%20is%20making%20egg%20freezing%20less%20expensive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Eggs%20in%20the%20bank%27%3A%20how%20one%20clinic%20is%20making%20egg%20freezing%20less%20expensive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fegg-freezing-less-expensive-extend-fertility-clinic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f888a794dae295030df89b28d2fc3c96fb7ba44%2F0_221_3692_2213%2F3692.jpg>
 ‘I drained my savings to do this.’ Photograph: Royalty Free/Getty Images 
Beauregard admits she underestimated the cost of the drugs, which she assumed 
would be a few hundred dollars. It turned out to be closer to a couple of 
thousand dollars, instead. Additionally, she has to pay for storing of her 
eggs. At Extend, storage for one year costs $450. For five years, it’s $2,000 
and $3,500 for 10.

To Talia Zapolanski, freezing her eggs is akin to an insurance policy. 

Zapolanski, who worked in finance for 11 years and now works for a real estate 
investment firm, had been thinking of doing this for about a year and had gone 
in for a consultation at another hospital before being referred to Extend by a 
friend of one of the clinic’s doctors.

“I definitely know that I want children. That’s something I feel strongly 
about. I haven’t found the right person yet. I am not dating anyone now and I 
don’t know when I will find the right person,” says the 33-year-old New Yorker. 
“You start hearing a lot more about egg freezing these days and I thought I 
would look into it. It seems like a good idea. Hopefully I will be able to, 
when the time comes, get pregnant and have kids the natural way but you never 
know.”

Egg freezing should not be one of those things that we don’t talk about, 
according to both Beauregard and Zapolanski.

“When I was telling people that I was freezing my eggs, a lot of people didn’t 
know what to say. It makes people uncomfortable – eventually they will get 
curious about it, but a lot of people are a little dumbfounded that I am so 
open about it,” said Beauregard. “I want to make sure that people feel 
comfortable talking about these options.”

Zapolanski says she has encouraged “no less than five friends to go do the 
same”.

Recently, when she was visiting Los Angeles, she shared with a friend from 
college that she recently froze her eggs.

“She kind of paused and looked at me in shock that I had shared that and she 
said: ‘I am glad you said that, I am about to go through the process and I am 
so nervous about and I have nobody to talk to’,” she said. “It’s a very taboo 
subject.”
 