
Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> has hit back in the verbal 
trade war with Donald Trump, hitting out at the use of “fear or threats” to 
deter companies from investing in the country.

The US president-elect has threatened to slap import tariffs on US automaker 
General Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/trumps-tweets-keep-us-manufacturers-on-their-toes>
 for importing cars it makes in Mexico andJapan’s Toyota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/we-contribute-billions-to-us-economy-toyota-politely-tells-donald-trump>
 for planning a new factory there.


'Just the beginning': Trump may disrupt 20-year boom for Mexico auto industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/mexico-auto-industry-jobs-donald-trump-manufacturing-cars>
Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> also announced that it was 
cancelling a $1.6bn new factory in the northern state of San Luis Potosi that 
had been criticised by Trump, though the company said the decision was 
business-related.

Without mentioning Trump or any government, Mexico’s economy ministry 
nonetheless said in a statement that it “categorically rejects any attempt to 
influence the investment decisions of companies on the basis of fear or 
threats”.

Trump has vowed to renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) 
with Mexico and Canada as well as impose tariffs on companies that ship jobs 
out of the United States.

“The investments that are made in Mexico, the United States and Canada benefit 
the three countries thanks to the integration of our chains of production,” the 
economy ministry said. This, the statement said, did not cause “the loss of 
jobs for any of the participating countries”.

Ford’s abrupt move to scrap its $1.6bn plant in San Luis Potosi has sent 
shockwaves through the factory’s likely network of suppliers. Many of them had 
already started to expand in anticipation, in a state where industry is “easily 
70%” dependent on the auto sector, according go Julian Eaves, managing director 
of Preferred Compounding de Mexico, a US-owned maker of rubber compounds 
operating in central Mexico .

“It’s going to have a huge impact on the local community,” said Eaves, 
calculating the loss to the economy could run into the hundreds of millions or 
billions of over the next five years, as manufacturing, contracting and 
indirect jobs all fall short of plans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffear-and-threats-mexico-hits-back-over-trumps-bullying-of-automakers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1103bca85b3f5343509896498adeb3c03921c2d4%2F0_141_3075_1845%2F3075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Fear%20and%20threats'%3A%20Mexico%20hits%20back%20after%20Trump%20pressures%20automakers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffear-and-threats-mexico-hits-back-over-trumps-bullying-of-automakers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Fear%20and%20threats%27%3A%20Mexico%20hits%20back%20after%20Trump%20pressures%20automakers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffear-and-threats-mexico-hits-back-over-trumps-bullying-of-automakers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1103bca85b3f5343509896498adeb3c03921c2d4%2F0_141_3075_1845%2F3075.jpg>
 Billboard welcoming Ford at the San Luis Potosi industrial park. Photograph: 
Reuters 
In a matter of days, Ford’s retreat has turned the factory site into a barren 
plain bereft of its economic promise. “It now looks like a cemetery,” said 
Fernando Rosales, 28, a hydraulic hoses contractor preparing to abandon the 
site. “[There is] only death here, we are all leaving.”

Ford’s decision also puts the brakes on Detroit automakers’ push to build 
small cars in Mexico to reduce labour costs while using higher-paid US workers 
for larger, more expensive vehicles.

Not far from the doomed Ford site, other major players from the global 
automotive industry are in the midst of multi-million dollar investments, 
includingGeneral Motors <https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalmotors> 
Co, which Trump has also repeatedly berated for investing in Mexico.

German carmaker BMW is assembling a $1bn plant, and a few miles from the Ford 
site Goodyear is busy building a $550m tyre factor.

Auto industry's Trump fear: 'Everyone dreads being subject of a tweet'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/auto-industry-donald-trump-twitter-jobs-outsourcing-mexico>
The US president-elect’s broadsides against Mexico have shown how exposed 
companies in the supply chain are to the whims of US automakers under pressure 
not to offshore production.

Shares in Kansas City Southern, one of the main railroad operators in Mexico, 
fell following news of the Ford cancellation and have lost 3.3% since Tuesday 
morning.

Between 40 and 50,mostly foreign-owned suppliers had been ready to come and 
supply the San Luis Potosi plant, said Sergio Resendez of real estate broker 
Colliers International.

“This was going to catapult us,” Gustavo Puente, the state economy minister of 
San Luis Potosi, said of the plant Ford originally announced in April of last 
year. Ford told him the plan was off about an hour before it went public with 
the news, he said.

Around 12 to 14 of the suppliers had already invested money buying land or 
signed a contract with developers, said Resendez of Colliers, though Puente 
suggested the number was fewer.

“It’s a very, very complicated hole,” Resendez said. “The suppliers, depending 
on their level of advancement, will lose money. They had already made big 
investments.”
At the Ford premises shocked and dejected workers packed up construction 
materials and prepared to leave. “This is a massive kick in the teeth,” said 
Rosalio Rocha, 52, a construction worker on the site from a nearby town.

“It looks like he is going to keep going on about it,” he added, referring to 
Trump.
Some of the ground at the 280-hectare site had already been levelled and the 
skeletons of two large white buildings stood out against a rusty brown and 
green backdrop.

Workers said they had heard plans for an industrial park opposite the site for 
suppliers had also been suspended. The park’s developers were not immediately 
available to comment.

The auto sector is at the heart of a Mexican industrial boom since the 1994 
Nafta agreement.

“It hurts because we’re partners in trade, culture, sports, we’re partners in 
everything,” said Puente, the San Luis Potosi economy minister. “It hurts 
because [Trump] is pushing a policy that wants to break those ties.”

With Reuters and Agence France-Presse
 