
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has launched legal action 
against the manufacturers of “flushable” wet wipes over allegations that they 
falsely claimed the products would break down in the sewerage system.

The ACCC filed separate actions against Kimberly-Clark Australia and Pental 
Products in the federal court on Monday on the grounds that the label 
“flushable” had misled customers to believe that thewipes could be safely 
flushed down the toilet, just like toilet paper.

Unlike toilet paper, said the ACCC chairman, Rod Sims, the wipes did not 
disintegrate when flushed and could clog the sewer.

“Australian water authorities face significant problems when non-suitable 
products are flushed down the toilet as they contribute to blockages in 
household and municipal sewerage systems,”Sims said 
<https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/accc-takes-court-action-on-%E2%80%9Cflushable%E2%80%9D-wipes>
.

Wet wipes marked as ‘flushable’ still pose blockage threat, research finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/wet-wipes-marked-as-flushable-still-pose-blockage-threat-research-finds>
Water authorities in New South Wales have blamed disposable wet wipes for 
causing “fatbergs” – big clumps of non-flushable items that coalesce with fat 
and oils to form sewer-blocking clogs.

In February a one-tonne fatberg took out the pumping station near Lake 
Macquarie and had to be partially removed by hand, bucket by bucket.

“Wet wipes are responsible for around 80% of all sewer blockages in Hunter 
Water’s system,” the corporation’s spokesman, Nick Kaiser,told Fairfax Media at 
the time. 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/fatbergs-one-tonne-balls-of-wet-wipes-and-fat-block-sewers-20160224-gn2xnx.html>

In June the consumer group Choice blamed the fatbergs on wet wipes that had 
been marketed as “flushable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/wet-wipes-marked-as-flushable-still-pose-blockage-threat-research-finds>
, saying that despite manufacturers changing the formula to make the wipes 
disintegrate more readily they still held together after “hours of testing”.

Choice gave “flushable” wipes a Shonky award in 2015, saying claims the 
product could be safely flushed away were false and misleading. That award 
tipped off the ACCC’s investigation.

The ACCC claims that between May 2011 and May 2013, Kimberly-Clark advertised 
its Kleenex Cottonelle Flushable Cleansing Cloths as being “completely 
flushable”, “able to be flushed in the toilet” and able to “break down in 
sewerage system or septic tank”. It has also alleges that the products were 
falsely advertised as being made in Australia.

Its allegations against Pental are that between February 2011 and August 2016 
it advertised its White King Power Clean Flushable Toilet Wipes as a “flushable 
toilet wipe” and claimed they were “made from a specially designed material, 
which will disintegrate in the sewage system when flushed, just like toilet 
paper”.

In a statement to Fairfax Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/consumer-affairs/accc-takes-legal-action-over-claims-cleaning-wipes-flushable-20161212-gt9bdb.html>
, Kimberley-Clark Australia said it would fight the allegations on the basis 
that “our claims that these products are flushable are accurate”.

The eco guide to wet wipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/20/the-eco-guide-to-wet-wipes>
“These products and the current Kleenex Cottonelle Flushable Wipes meet or 
exceed the requirements set out in [internationally recognised] flushability 
guidelines, which are the only widely accepted guidelines for assessing 
flushability,” it said.

Pental said it had inherited the packaging from another company and removed 
the claims about the product disintegrating like toilet paper after conducting 
its own review in 2014. “This was well prior to any ACCC investigation,” it 
said.

“Pental is therefore disappointed that the ACCC has decided to issue 
proceedings, despite Pental’s proactive approach in removing the claims of 
concern to the ACCC and the fact that other larger multinational companies 
continue to sell similar products labelled as ‘flushable’”.
 