
Stephen King <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> has said that 
listening to Donald Trump’s speeches “is like listening to a piano fall down 
stairs”, as he admitted that the Republican presidential candidate has a “real 
shot” of winning this November’s presidential election.

The horror novelist was speaking at the National book festival in Washington DC
 <https://www.facebook.com/libraryofcongress/videos/10153921112813059/> on 
Saturday, where he was being honoured by the Library of Congress for his 
lifelong work promoting literacy. King has long been an outspoken critic of 
Trump,putting his name to a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/25/stephen-king-joins-hundreds-of-authors-petitioning-against-donald-trump-colm-toibin-lydia-davis>
 opposing “unequivocally, the candidacy of Donald J Trump for the presidency of 
the United States” earlier this year, and needling him regularly on Twitter. 
Earlier this month, he joked that “Donald Trump is actually Cthulhu. The absurd 
hairdo isn’t absurd at all. It hides the tentacles.” On Sunday, he added that 
“Texas may go for Trump, but they have a saying for guys like him: ‘He’s so 
low, he could put on a top hat and crawl under a rattlesnake.’”
Stephen King (@StephenKing) 
The most basic fact about Donald Trump: If brains were black powder, the guy 
couldn't blow his nose.
 <https://twitter.com/StephenKing/status/768557766231425024> August 24, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/StephenKing/status/768557766231425024> 
Stephen King joins hundreds of authors petitioning against Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/25/stephen-king-joins-hundreds-of-authors-petitioning-against-donald-trump-colm-toibin-lydia-davis>
On Saturday, King attacked Trump from a different angle: as a former English 
teacher, the author spoke about the joys and importance of reading – and how a 
decline in literacy means that politicians are able to voice meaningless 
statements.

“I don’t believe in the so-called dumbing down of America, but as everyday 
reading declines – and it has – analytical thought also declines. Reading is 
for fun and for me that’s a big deal, but it also sharpens the nose for the 
unmistakable odour of bullshit,” said King.

“We live in a society where many believe that libraries and other cultural 
endeavours, everything fromShakespeare in the Park 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shakespeare_in_the_Park_festivals> to poetry 
slams and free concerts, are of minor importance. As if learning to think is a 
thing that just happens naturally, like learning to walk. Believe me, it’s not. 
Learning to think is the result of hard work and steady effort.”

This “disregard” for culture, said King, leads to “illiteracy or semi-literacy 
in a national population where large numbers of people are lazy thinkers 
without any of that nose for bullshit”.

This means, he said, that politicians “are allowed to slide by with 
generalities rather than specifics”, and “elected officials who are supposed to 
be the best, the smartest, often resort to outright misinformation”.

“Note the way that Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> falls back on saying 
this-and-such is going to be huge or this-and-such is beautiful. Any writer or 
reader worth his salt will say those words by themselves mean absolutely 
nothing,” he said. “Trump makes me wince not as a Democrat, which I am, but as 
a writer and reader. Listening to his speeches is like listening to a piano 
fall down stairs. It’s all dissonance and no music. God, I’m going to miss 
Obama … There was poetry, always music, in what he said.”

In an interview with Ron Charles at the Washington Post, also this weekend, 
King admitted to being frightened that Trump might actually win this November.

“A Trump presidency scares me more than anything else,” he told Charles 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/09/24/master-of-horror-fiction-stephen-king-says-trump-presidency-scares-me-to-death/>
. “I would have laughed three or four months ago, but I think that Trump has a 
real shot. I think that Hillary Clinton has been a lacklustre candidate, 
frankly, and there’s been a sense of entitlement about her campaign like: ‘Ah, 
it’s my turn and I’m running against a buffoon therefore I am already 
president.’”

King, author of novels from It to The Shining, said he believed that the key 
to the situation was fear. “We’re afraid the government is going to take away 
our guns, we’re afraid that Mexico is going to invade the United States, we’re 
afraid of this, we’re afraid of that, we’re afraid of taxes, we’re afraid of 
transgender bathrooms – the whole thing,” he told Charles. “As long as people 
are fearful, it’s hard to have a rational discussion.”

Speaking at the festival, King also singled out the governor of Maine, his own 
state, Paul LePage, for criticism. LePagesaid earlier this year that asylum 
seekers were bringing the “ziki” [LePage’s words] fly to Maine 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/paul-lepage-ziki-fly_us_56c4eaf1e4b0b40245c8e429>
.

Paul LePage: is this one outburst too many for Maine's Trump-like governor?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/31/paul-lepage-maine-trump-like-governor>
“The statement is mind-boggling in its own right. That governor LePage might 
have believed it is more so. That many accept it as a fact is the most 
mind-boggling of all,” said King, urging his listeners to support reading and 
libraries, because “the ability to think clearly and logically leads to good 
decision-making, and I believe that the ability to think clearly grows along 
with the ability to read.”

“For my wife and me, libraries were a lifeline at a time when we could rarely 
afford books … and the same is true for others today. We live in a rural state 
where many, most even, small-town libraries are flat broke. It’s because the 
small towns can’t afford to support them; and the reason they can’t is because 
the people in those towns vote for the dough to go to other places.Libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> are not seen as a priority when 
there are potholes in the road. Sure, cash is tight but it always is,” said 
King. “The question becomes how to grow literacy in America, and supporting 
those small-town libraries is the way my wife and I chose to do it.”
 