
There is no greater calling to American youth than the road. In high school 
English lessons we read John Steinbeck’s Grapes of Wrath and rode with the 
Joads along the migrant route to California. At universities across the 
country, freshmen follow Dean Moriarty inJack Kerouac 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2012/04/literature-howl-in-farsi.html>
’s novel On the Road. Over generations, the American road trip has grown into a 
rite of passage.

Baptism by travel in Iran is different. It is written in rhyming couplets and 
memorised by the masses. In 1010 Ferdowsi captured 1,000 years of Iranian 
identity in theShahnameh 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2010/03/ferdowsis-shahkar.html>
. Two hundred years later Saadi travelled like a vagabond between city states 
that no longer exist. Their poetry has become sacred texts, their stories fixed 
in memory and passed down generation to generation as a collective experience.

The American road comes on fast. It is direct, hurtling itself forward and 
launching the traveller into a new place - the next town, a rest stop, 
somewhere else to exist. In 1956 President Dwight D Eisenhower signed the 
Interstate Highway Act and extended the road 41,000 miles into the American 
identity. Rural became suburban and suburban sprawl stretched across the land 
like a blanket.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443204167551%2F1a541518-5579-4de2-92b3-e2742fd18520-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hum%20of%20soft%20rubber%20over%20asphalt'%3A%20on%20the%20road%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hum%20of%20soft%20rubber%20over%20asphalt%27%3A%20on%20the%20road%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443204167551%2F1a541518-5579-4de2-92b3-e2742fd18520-2060x1373.jpeg>
 In Iran, the road is a slow trip to the past 
The Iranian road doesn’t come on so fast. It unfurls at the pace of history. 
Travel in Iran takes you to different eras and different parts of a turbulent 
history – whether slow-speed trains or single-lane sagging highways that wind 
through mountain passes and endless desert salt flats. Hours and miles in any 
direction correspond nonlinearly to time. The silk road crossedIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> for millennia and its remains litter 
the highways of the country. Some towns died off, others fell to conquest.

The road didn’t create Iran and Iranians didn’t create the road, it is just 
there. Unlike America where the road races into the future, the road in Iran 
goes back so far it’s hard to contemplate a day when there was no road and no 
people. The American frontier lends itself oddly to untamed nature. The Iranian 
landscape is pocked everywhere with the remains of things: an abandoned 
village, ruins of a temple, a caravanserai on the road to nowhere.

The first road trip I took in Iran was in the summer of 2012 with two friends 
in a Peugeot 405 assembled by the Iran Khodro company. We headed west from 
Tehran along the main highway. Outside the capital, honking and haggling is 
replaced with golden fields of matted grass, a concrete plant and occasional 
gas stations, until you drive into Qazvin, which feels more like a town than a 
city. We stopped to visit the covered bazaar which was closed for renovations, 
but we had a chance encounter with the chief engineer who gave us a private 
tour.

Later we travelled north along the Caspian Sea, which glowed turquoise as we 
crossed estuaries on Sassanid-era bridges. Rising into the Alborz mountains, 
the air was cooler and the road undulated softly, sagging heavily under the 
weight of trucks as they dipped in and out of towns and villages.

In Sarein, known for its thermal springs, there were other passenger cars. We 
drove up, down and across the main road through town for an hour before we 
found a place to stay for the night. We stretched our legs and bodies in 
thermal baths that smelt of sulphur with throngs of half-naked men who jumped 
in and out of different temperature pools, laughed and rough housed, and gave 
each other massages.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F9%2F1447065177163%2F71ece250-0896-45b6-bad8-7aece9a282c3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hum%20of%20soft%20rubber%20over%20asphalt'%3A%20on%20the%20road%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hum%20of%20soft%20rubber%20over%20asphalt%27%3A%20on%20the%20road%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F9%2F1447065177163%2F71ece250-0896-45b6-bad8-7aece9a282c3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The north side of the Kandovan pass 
We turned west at Astara and back up into the mountains in a convoy of 1950s 
Mercedes trucks. We drove for hours on end and the only other vehicles we saw 
were trucks filled to the brim with goods covered in canvas and slogans like 
‘Ya Ali’ and ‘Ya Abolfaszl’ stencilled on their mudflaps.

In Ardebil province, birthplace of the Safavid dynasty, we followed the wake 
of a 6.4-magnitude earthquake that crushed mudbrick mountain villages. We drove 
slowly through Ahar one evening - transformed into a tent city overflowing with 
people seeking help, too afraid to go home.

Everyone was on the main road through town. Yellow excavators idled neatly 
next to empty trucks; children longed anxiously to play; adults lined up at the 
Red Crescent tent for food or medicine or both; and conscripted soldiers in 
faded green fatigues lingered everywhere. It seemed they were waiting for time 
to start up again.

And so we settled into the rhythm of the Iranian road. One day, just after 
midnight, we accidentally drove up to the border of Azerbaijan at Jolfa and 
were turned back by a nervous young soldier and told to look for a place to 
stay a few towns over. Again we cruised the main drag of a small town until we 
settled on an unfurnished room with blankets and pillows for the night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F9%2F1447065500047%2F1c55f873-8dc3-4afd-8122-a5eba20a1a85-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hum%20of%20soft%20rubber%20over%20asphalt'%3A%20on%20the%20road%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hum%20of%20soft%20rubber%20over%20asphalt%27%3A%20on%20the%20road%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F9%2F1447065500047%2F1c55f873-8dc3-4afd-8122-a5eba20a1a85-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Tehran Chalus Pass at Nowrooz 
We travelled along the Aras river near where the prophet Zoroaster was born in 
1300BC. The road was blocked by neatly stacked rocks wrapped in barbed wire and 
another conscript flagged us to a stop. He was young and lonely, and waved off 
his superior who yelled from a lookout to move us along. Further west along the 
Aras from here lie the St Thaddeus monastery and St Stephanus church, both 
founded in the 1st century.

The open road was a relief from the isolation I felt in the city and a chance 
to reflect on the chaos of emotions that is love in Tehran. In the quiet I 
could listen to my own thoughts and I began to express them. At Kandovan, a 
village built directly into the mountains, I made a confession, the type you 
can make only to someone on the road. It was a confession born in the bond that 
comes from hours of silence and the hum of soft rubber over asphalt. And then 
there were no more roads left except the one we had come down and it was time 
to go back home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443204506205%2F2bb91e34-73fa-4a16-9a9b-3a07f4188e30-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hum%20of%20soft%20rubber%20over%20asphalt'%3A%20on%20the%20road%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hum%20of%20soft%20rubber%20over%20asphalt%27%3A%20on%20the%20road%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fon-the-road-in-iran-in-pictures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443204506205%2F2bb91e34-73fa-4a16-9a9b-3a07f4188e30-2060x1373.jpeg>
 A boy on the other side of the pass, Semnan province 
We took a route through Zanjan, stopping at Soltaniyeh to see the remains of a 
walled city built by a grandson of Genghis Khan. Then one last stop for a tea 
and something to eat at dusk before we started back on the main highway. The 
last unknown road of our trip was a service track along an irrigation canal.

Over the next year and a half I spent in Iran there were other road trips and 
confessions. As much as I opened myself up to the road, it opened up to me. In 
that way I was an American, carving out my future. And yet I was an Iranian, 
walking through my past.

The Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the 
Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 