
The US election campaign was a bitter battle that left the country divided. 
While recent figures show 26.4% of the electorate backed Donald Trump and 26.5% 
backedHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> 
(who won the popular vote), 42% of eligible voters didn’t vote at all.

The Guardian did a call-out for non-voters, and received just over 100 
responses, with 28% saying they regretted not voting, and 65% saying they 
didn’t regret it. Others were unsure if they had made a mistake.

Among the Democrats who replied to us, many said they would have voted if 
Bernie Sanders’ name had been on the ballot. Republican voters thoughtDonald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was not fully qualified 
for the job. Many of those who responded said they wanted change and that the 
electoral college and two-party voting system no longer worked (2.7% of the US 
electorate cast their vote for third-party candidates). Here are a selection of 
views.


Brooks Boyd, 57, Texas: ‘I’ve always voted Republican but could not stomach 
Donald Trump’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6cb935b7d8a2f6477ce9220e0b7680bf9b340a1%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20never%20thought%20Trump%20would%20win'%3A%20meet%20the%20Americans%20who%20chose%20not%20to%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20never%20thought%20Trump%20would%20win%27%3A%20meet%20the%20Americans%20who%20chose%20not%20to%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6cb935b7d8a2f6477ce9220e0b7680bf9b340a1%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 A protest against Donald Trump’s appointments. Photograph: David 
Mcnew/AFP/Getty Images 
I am a Republican and have always voted for my party, but not this year. I put 
Mitt Romney’s name down on the ballot, a candidate who wasn’t running.


What put me off about Donald Trump was the fact he has no clue how to run a 
country. I also dislike the way he treats women and everyone around him. He is 
a charlatan. I don’t even think he is a good business person and he’s 
definitely not smart.

I don’t think he ever expected to be elected; it was as much a surprise to him 
as everyone else. There is no way he is going to build a wall along the 
southern US border. It would not make sense, because it would not be 
impenetrable – anyone from Texas knows that. Trump just spewed rubbish and 
people believed it. It didn’t matter what he said. People ate it up.

I don’t think he ever expected to get elected – it was as much a surprise to 
him as everyone else
Brooks 
That said, I couldn’t bring myself to vote for Hillary Clinton. If there was 
another Democratic candidate I might have voted for their party for the first 
time ever. The problem with Clinton is that people couldn’t stomach her lies 
and cronyism. While no one knows what to expect with Trump, we know with 
Clinton and are tired of it.

What would have got me to vote is quite simple. I wanted a candidate to say 
things that made sense. Talk about helping everyone and not excluding people. 
Nothing too far left and nothing too far right. Presidents who are able to 
reach across the aisle and compromise get things done – whether Democrat or 
Republican.

I do not have any regrets about not voting. My conscience would not allow me 
to vote for either candidate. Texas is a red state so I knew Trump would win 
anyway.

David, 31, New Jersey: ‘I regret not voting, I never thought Donald Trump 
would win’

I would have voted for Hillary Clinton, but I didn’t. I thought she would win 
the White House.


I feel heartbroken for those disenfranchised Americans who voted for Trump, 
not because of his divisive rhetoric, but in spite of it. Hillary is a genius 
diplomat, but she proved, once again, to be an ineffectual communicator. She 
could not reach those desperate to put food back on their table. I used to 
drive past the front-lawn Trump signs in my town and dismiss the homeowner as a 
lunatic, but my own liberal elitism has blown up in my face. They are not 
lunatics, they are people with a different experience to me, and that has 
swayed how they vote.

I hope we will begin to understand how Trump voters’ experiences, not their 
ignorance, led them to this position. But I am scared to death for our 
environment, for those among us who are in need of care and, most of all, for 
those who cast their vote for Trump. They thought he was their last chance for 
prosperity. For these middle-Americans, the past was greater than the present. 
They remember a time when they, and their entire extended family, had 
decent-paying jobs. When every storefront in their now-deserted town had a 
thriving local business.


There was a stark disparity of views in this election, and why was the result 
so unexpected? Because when the liberal establishment of this country drove by 
front-lawn Trump signs, they had the same response as I did.


Maria Cincotta, 38, from California: ‘My vote for Clinton wouldn’t count, 
because California is a blue state, so why bother?’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b062a6eff8eccbc3b1d866c00710f7afee26daf%2F0_0_3655_2470%2F3655.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20never%20thought%20Trump%20would%20win'%3A%20meet%20the%20Americans%20who%20chose%20not%20to%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20never%20thought%20Trump%20would%20win%27%3A%20meet%20the%20Americans%20who%20chose%20not%20to%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b062a6eff8eccbc3b1d866c00710f7afee26daf%2F0_0_3655_2470%2F3655.jpg>
 Photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images 
I despise Trump and Clinton disappoints me, even though she’s quite 
well-spoken and on-point on many issues. I would have voted forBernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> if I had the chance. I am 
more of an anarchist and not a fan of the US political system at all. I wanted 
to vote, but I know that my vote for Clinton wouldn’t count, as California is a 
blue state, so why bother? As I’m on the road, it would have been difficult for 
me to receive my mail-in ballot.

I am not apathetic – far from it. But the electoral college eliminates the 
chance for me to make a difference. My state is blue, and my vote won’t make it 
any more blue than it already is. My Republican mom’s “red” vote was also 
effaced by a sea of blue in California, according to the electoral college 
system. But she doesn’t mind – her “side” had the last laugh this time.


I do have regrets now about not voting. I am furious, embarrassed, disgusted, 
and afraid. I fear for the future of my home country and the world. I fear for 
the safety of anyone who is not a gun-toting white heterosexual cis-gendered 
male in the United States. I am once again embarrassed to be American. When I 
moved to Europe in 2007, George W Bush was in power, and many Europeans 
responded to me negatively because of this. I didn’t support him, but the 
president serves as the face of the nation, and it’s usually quite an ugly face 
to behold.


Obama made it acceptable to be an American in Europe for eight years. That was 
a bit of a relief. Now we’ve come full-circle; another sorry excuse for a 
leader is taking power.

We need to take advantage of this historic moment to reevaluate our system in 
the broadest way possible. Getting rid of the electoral college system would 
ensure that every vote counts. To get more involvement in the system we should 
allow same-day voter registration and let former felons vote in every state.


To prevent the same people getting into power we also need to look at campaign 
finance reform. It’s time to replace the two-party system with a multi-party 
one. This would ensure greater representation of our diverse population, paving 
the way for real social change.

Rafiell Jones, 55, from Washington, DC: ‘I wanted Hillary over Trump. I wholly 
expected her to win’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5001e2830f6d6d0a717cf5fd42f2680ac0ec2a9%2F0_0_3500_2420%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20never%20thought%20Trump%20would%20win'%3A%20meet%20the%20Americans%20who%20chose%20not%20to%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20never%20thought%20Trump%20would%20win%27%3A%20meet%20the%20Americans%20who%20chose%20not%20to%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-win-americans-not-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5001e2830f6d6d0a717cf5fd42f2680ac0ec2a9%2F0_0_3500_2420%2F3500.jpg>
 Protester Molly Gosline, who wants to get rid of the electoral college. 
Photograph: Philip Sears/Reuters 
I did not vote because as a follower of Christ I could not give my vote to 
such a morally bankrupt person as Donald Trump. But I also could not lend my 
approval to Hillary Clinton after how her husband’s policies affected the black 
community. I also believe that the two-party system does not work any more. I 
usually vote for an independent (read: progressive) candidate at elections, but 
this year I simply abstained as no one really stood out to me.

Hillary and her party have walled themselves away from the common folk who 
needed them so desperately. They have walled themselves in with corporate money 
while we realise less and less of the America dream. Instead, we get more 
overtime and fear.

Having said that, I wanted Hillary over Trump, and I wholly expected her to 
win. I feel my community should discuss the president-elect because we will 
need each other more than ever now. I am angry that others voted for him, given 
his racist and misogynistic views. I could not in good conscience give my vote 
to either him or Clinton. I did not want to choose the lesser of two evils, but 
I am still unhappy with the result. I am sad that race still plays such a 
divisive role in America.
 