
Andrea ‘Andy’ Lankford

Andrea “Andy” Lankford often came close to death during her twelve years as a 
ranger for the National Park Service. But there was nothing quite as horrific 
as the time she ended up with parts of a human brain in her hand.

Lankford, now 52 years old and retired from the park service, was in the Grand 
Canyon in the 1990s, responding to the calls of a woman who was “very 
precariously clinging for her life at the edge of the canyon”. The young woman, 
who worked nearby, had been walking along a rock wall and slipped, launching a 
tense rescue mission and “real-life cliffhanger”, the former ranger recalled.

Other rangers arrived before Lankford and risked their lives to save the woman 
– but they were too late. She wanted to make sure the staff who had the 
traumatizing experience of watching the woman fall did not have the grim task 
of recovering the body.

In my career, it would get rather dark. I would deal with tragic, violent 
things
Andrea Lankford 
 “In my career, it would get rather dark. I would deal with tragic, violent 
things,” she recalled.

With gloves on, she helped put the woman into a body bag – and ended up 
carrying parts of her brain that had splattered during the fall. It was 
difficult, but she had learned to remain calm in crisis. “We were very gentle 
and professional.”

Being a park ranger wasn’t always so harrowing. Lankford first fell in love 
with the job when she began rescuing baby sea turtles at Cape Hatteras in North 
Carolina from hazardous ATVs or hungry seagulls.

Lankford also thrived on the adrenaline-inducing adventures the wilderness – 
and its human visitors – thrust upon her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F663174db3a812642d483436893f2c3494a042760%2F0_245_4019_2412%2F4019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20born%20to%20do%20this'%3A%20national%20park%20rangers%20on%20their%20triumphs%20and%20tragedies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20born%20to%20do%20this%27%3A%20national%20park%20rangers%20on%20their%20triumphs%20and%20tragedies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F663174db3a812642d483436893f2c3494a042760%2F0_245_4019_2412%2F4019.jpg>
 Andrea Lankford, right, with a colleague in front of a rockslide in Yosemite 
Valley. Photograph: Courtesy Andrea Lankford 
At Zion national park in Utah, she had to confront a group of white 
supremacists who claimed they were going to take over the park, warning that 
they would shoot any law enforcement who tried to stop them.

“Skinheads waiting for war at Zion,” blared one newspaper headline that 
Lankford keeps on file.

'We need to preserve this beauty': your memories of US national parks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/25/national-parks-centennial-stories-photos-experiences>
The ranger wasn’t scared. At one point, she even managed to pull one of the 
leaders over, citing a busted headlight.

“He didn’t shoot me.”

Then there was the time she helped arrest bank robbers who had gotten lost in 
the middle of the night and became so frightened that they were pleased to be 
taken into custody.

At Yosemite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/aug/25/10-best-places-to-stay-us-national-parks>
 national park in California, Lankford learned how to de-escalate human-bear 
conflicts, though dealing with humans was typically the harder part. One time, 
she had to rescue a cub without upsetting the nearby mother. A crowd of 
onlookers watched as Lankford tried to remove the cub from a dumpster, and the 
tourists ignored Lankford’s repeated demands that they step back.

During one failed attempt, the mama bear charged in her direction, prompting 
Lankford to deploy her pepper spray. Lankford did not, however, hit the 
intended target. The coughing visitors learned their lesson.

By the end of her career, however, it was some of her male colleagues who 
caused her the most grief – forcing her to confront sexism, discrimination and 
harassment, she said.

Whether supervisors were telling her jobs were too dangerous for women or 
colleagues were making sexual remarks, Lankford refused to be intimidated.

“I fought fire with fire. When one of the guys made a joke about showing me 
his penis, I said, ‘Well, wait, let me get a microscope,’” she recalled. “It 
was so part of the culture. You knew if you complained you were going to be 
retaliated against.”

Lankford learned how to demonstrate she was more than capable of handling the 
duties that were once exclusively the domain of men – whether life-threatening 
rescues or arresting criminals.

“I survived – and I did a good job.” 

Mary Hinson 

“We’re getting rescued by a chick?”

Those were the first words park ranger Mary Hinson heard when, after waiting 
patiently for years, she was finally given the opportunity to do a rescue 
mission at El Capitan at Yosemite.

A favorite destination for experienced rock climbers, El Cap rises more than 
3,000ft above the floor of Yosemite Valley and regularly requires rangers to 
save visitors in near-death predicaments.

I felt like I was born to do this, and it’s my chance, and I’m going to prove 
myself.
Mary Hinson 
Hinson, now 51 years old and a police chief in Nevada, was an experienced rock 
climber and trained emergency medical technician when she was hired in 1993. 
But despite her qualifications, supervisors initially didn’t give her a chance 
to do a high-stakes rescue mission. It took time for any new ranger to break 
into the rescue teams, but as a woman, Hinson felt particular pressure to prove 
herself. It was especially frustrating given her skill set.

“There would be all these big technical rescues going on ... and I would get a 
great assignment to do administrative duties and clean up.”

During one particularly bad winter storm, however, two rescue teams had 
struggled to reach the stranded climbers, and Hinson was called in.

“It was pretty dicey conditions,” recalled Hinson, who put on a bright yellow 
suit and helmet headed out with as much confidence as she could muster.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03c1a97e7364a6b8e7764aa0a17aef13ead2cf88%2F0_17_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20born%20to%20do%20this'%3A%20national%20park%20rangers%20on%20their%20triumphs%20and%20tragedies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20born%20to%20do%20this%27%3A%20national%20park%20rangers%20on%20their%20triumphs%20and%20tragedies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03c1a97e7364a6b8e7764aa0a17aef13ead2cf88%2F0_17_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Mary Hinson and her colleagues. Photograph: Courtesy Mary Hinson 
“I felt like I was born to do this, and it’s my chance, and I’m going to prove 
myself.”

She was the first to reach the climbers, who had lost their sleeping bags and 
were screaming for help as it snowed and rained on them. She shouted back that 
she would be throwing a rope in their direction. The men were shocked to hear a 
female voice and one immediately whined about a “chick” saving them.

Another man, however, interjected: “I prefer to look at it as they sent an 
angel from above.”

They all laughed – and the mission was ultimately a success. Hinson believes 
she was the second woman to ever complete an El Cap rescue.

Celebrating 100 years of the National Park Service: readers' photo and stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/aug/25/100-years-national-parks-service-readers-photo-stories>
She rose in the ranks and eventually became chief ranger at Lake Mead national 
recreation area in southern Nevada. But she had to confront rampant sexism 
along the way. Male coworkers joked about her mascara running during a mission. 
She said she felt forced to hide her pregnancy to avoid discrimination. 
Supervisors suggested she find a safer line of work.

As a woman in the field, she said, all you can do is “climb better, run faster 
and jump higher”.

Despite the struggles – Hinson said sexism in the field played a big part in 
her decision to leave – working for the park service was a dream come true, she 
said.

“Being a park ranger is probably one of the coolest possible jobs anyone can 
have.”

Billie Patrick

Billie Patrick worked hard to earn her nickname, “horse patrol queen”, as a 
park ranger at Yosemite from 1983 to 2012.

Patrick, now 60 and retired from the park service, quickly learned that in 
many ways, her mode of transportation – by horse – was far superior to her 
colleagues’ cars or bikes.

“Put it this way: how many people have you see walk up to a patrol car and pet 
it and then have a conversation with the police officer inside?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dab6bc7713d749f1c981816b2e32f6c5d87a140%2F0_322_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20born%20to%20do%20this'%3A%20national%20park%20rangers%20on%20their%20triumphs%20and%20tragedies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20born%20to%20do%20this%27%3A%20national%20park%20rangers%20on%20their%20triumphs%20and%20tragedies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dab6bc7713d749f1c981816b2e32f6c5d87a140%2F0_322_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Billie Patrick earned the nickname ‘horse patrol queen’. Photograph: Courtesy 
Billie Patrick 
“The horse was the conduit and the connector to the public,” she added. 

It wasn’t just that the public responded better to a ranger on horse. 
Patrick’s horse, Danny, could speedily gallop on certain terrain where 
motorized vehicles could not travel.

One time, she and another ranger on horse patrol were able to chase after four 
young men who had shoplifted from a park store.

“We ran across the meadow to get them.” 

The men gave up and sat down on the ground for questioning, with the horses 
standing nearby.

You're a teacher. You're a law enforcement person. You're search and rescue. 
You're a confidante
Billie Patrick 
“When you have a 1,000lb horse, they don’t want to mess with you,” she said. 
Horses are “able to de-escalate a volatile situation because of their size”.

Patrick also fondly recalled the process of teaching her horse how to chase 
bears – training that involved horses playing with giant stuffed bears.

“People thought we were crazy,” she said. 

Her best Danny memory was a quiet moment. One day, a young boy with cerebral 
palsy approached the horse and wanted to pet him, she said.

What happened next felt magical to her: “Danny laid his head in this little 
boy’s lap in his wheelchair. It just amazed me how this horse knew that this 
little boy needed him to do that ... It’s not anything earth-shattering, but it 
was really touching.”

One thing Patrick loved most about the job was the diversity of her 
assignments, she said.

“You’re a teacher. You’re a law enforcement person. You’re an emergency 
medical person. You’re search and rescue. Oftentimes, you’re a coroner. You’re 
a confidante. You’re a peer counselor,” she said. “You wear all of those hats.”

Don Stanko
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F496c37e1e1ccda87265718aa660105003d7cfc05%2F0_299_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20was%20born%20to%20do%20this'%3A%20national%20park%20rangers%20on%20their%20triumphs%20and%20tragedies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20was%20born%20to%20do%20this%27%3A%20national%20park%20rangers%20on%20their%20triumphs%20and%20tragedies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnational-park-service-100-rangers-interviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F496c37e1e1ccda87265718aa660105003d7cfc05%2F0_299_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Don Stanko is often asked: ‘Who is buried in Grant’s tomb?’ Photograph: Nicole 
Pugliese for the Guardian 
The largest unofficial mausoleum in North America is in New York City’s 
Riverside Park. The General Grant national memorial, the final resting place of 
Ulysses S Grant and his wife, Julia, is colossal – a pristine, pillared mass of 
white marble and granite that stands 150ft tall.


On a hot Wednesday in July, a handful of tourists wandered its cool interior, 
perusing civil war-themed artwork as they circled the Grants’ red granite 
sarcophagi. Ranger Don Stanko answered their questions (and mine) about the 
oft-maligned president.

“Wasn’t Grant an alcoholic?” asked one. “Who is buried in Grant’s tomb?” asked 
another – the reference to Groucho Marx’s 1950s quiz show, You Bet Your Life, 
is a frequent inquiry.

Through his job as an interpretive ranger with the National Park Service, 
Stanko has become something of a history expert, and not just about the 18th 
president. In his 12-year career, the 40-year-old has worked at parks all 
around the country – from Montezuma’s Castle in Arizona to Independence Hall in 
Philadelphia to Cape Hatteras national seashore in North Carolina – absorbing 
stories from each place. “Each park is its own master’s degree,” he jokes.

The most common thing I've heard is: 'I’ve lived here my entire life and I’ve 
never visited'
Don Stanko 
In 2008, Stanko was stationed at the National Mall in Washington DC. Once, he 
took Sarah Palin on a tour of the Jefferson memorial. He did crowd control 
while then senator Barack Obama visited the Lincoln memorial with a young Malia 
and Sasha Obama. “You could see him reading the second inaugural and the 
Gettysburg address to his older daughter,” Stanko recalled. “His younger 
daughter just wanted to bounce around.” At the end of Stanko’s time in the 
capital, the Martin Luther King Jr memorial was just being built, and Stanko 
helped to research the training manual for the site.

Though he has lived in eight different regions of the country so far, Stanko 
said he thinks people are the same everywhere, just with different scenery. He 
even hears a lot of the same comments. “The most common thing I’ve heard at 
every single park I’ve worked at is: ‘I’ve lived here my entire life and I’ve 
never visited,’” Stanko said.

Dan Stevenson

Wrangell St Elias, in Alaska, is America’s largest national park. At 13.2m 
acres, it measures about the size of New Hampshire and Vermont put together – or
Yellowstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/25/yellowstone-national-park-wyoming-bears-wolves-remote>
, Yosemite, and Switzerland combined.

When it opened nearly 40 years ago, “the park service really didn’t know what 
was out there, as far as trails and cabins and old mines”, said Dan Stevenson, 
who has worked as a park ranger since its inception. Rangers were sent in 
conservation units to document small areas, Stevenson said. “You name it, we 
were trained to document it.”

10 of the least-visited US national parks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/aug/24/10-least-visited-us-national-parks>
Stevenson arrived at Wrangell not long after the park was signed into 
legislation as part of the the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act 
in 1980. He left his home of Fairbanks, jumped on a bus and arrived with little 
more than a backpack and enthusiasm.

Stevenson and a partner, Pat Flanagan, would go out and explore the unknown 
terrain for two weeks at a time, their heavy packs filled with freeze-dried 
foods and a radio to connect them to the outside world. Sometimes Stevenson’s 
boss, Jim Hanna, would fly overhead to check in and drop down a loaf of banana 
bread, baked by Hanna’s daughters. With no trails to follow, the two 
backcountry rangers hiked or floated rivers. “It was incredible. I thought: ‘I 
should be paying them,’” Stevenson said of the experience.

The rangers had one major animal-related problem: poaching. The Dall sheep, 
fluffy and white with curved brown horns, was seen as a “trophy animal”, 
Stevenson said. One of the rangers’ jobs was to stop the poachers – a difficult 
task in an area the size of Wrangells. The rangers went out in teams for 10 
days or so, watching for illegal activity, sometimes working with Canadian 
rangers in Kluane park, just across the border.

It was incredible. I thought: 'I should be paying them'
Dan Stevenson 
Search and rescue was part of Stevenson’s job when planes, hunters or hikers 
would go missing – usually due to bad weather. He and other rangers, along with 
Alaska state troopers, would be dispatched to find them – searching with 
planes, helicopters or people on the ground.

There are no roads leading to the nearby town of Kotzebue, where Stevenson is 
based with his wife, but Stevenson said it was pretty easy to catch a flight up 
from Anchorage. The town has one road that it is “pretty proud of”, but most 
people get around by boat or by snowmobiles once the ocean freezes.


The ranger has divided his time between Alaska, where he was born, and 
Montana, where he went to high school, college and worked during the 90s. He’s 
a fourth generation National Park Service employee – his great-grandfather was 
one of the first rangers at Glacier national park in Montana, he said. “Maybe 
it’s in my blood,” he joked.
 