
When Britain’s largest surviving jeans factory in Cardigan, Wales, shut down 
in 2002 one in 10 local people lost their jobs. Nine years later, entrepreneur 
David Hieatt set about re-establishing the town’s denim legacy and launched his 
businessHiut Denim <http://hiutdenim.co.uk/>. 

Hieatt, originally from the South Wales valleys, wanted to harness the denim 
craftsmanship of a town that had been making jeans for 40 years. “Between our 
16 employees we have 200 years of knowledge of making great jeans,” he says. 
And so far, it’s paying off. “We’re growing and we’re profitable. Things are 
going in the right direction.”

Something that sets Hiut apart from other brands is that all its jeans are 
made from raw denim. Jean production’s biggest impact on the planet is through 
washing and ironing, so by not processing the jeans in this way, the 
environmental impact is greatly reduced. And as theCEO of Levi’s recently 
confirmed 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/fashion/levis-ceo-explains-why-you-should-never-wash-your-jeans-a6881031.html>
, denim really doesn’t need to be washed.

However, the first time you wear raw denim, it can be stiff and uncomfortable. 
To solve this problem, along came Hiut’s denim breakers. Fresh pairs of Hiut 
jeans are sent to breakers across the world, to wear them in over six months. 
They’re told not to wash them until the time is up, then wash and send them 
back to the factory. Hiut sells on the broken in jeans, and the breaker takes a 
20% cut. Buyers, meanwhile, enjoy free repairs for life and are encouraged to 
join the no wash club.

Facebook and Instagram have both been vital to showcasing Hiut’s unusual denim 
breaker community, and, in turn, growing brand awareness. Hiut has fans across 
the world – 20% of its annual sales are to outside the UK (10% to Europe and 
10% to the US) and most come through these channels. Connecting with people 
online and nurturing those relationships has become an integral part of their 
success.

“Facebook is probably the second most important tool we have, the sewing 
machine being number one,” says Hieatt. “I was a bit cautious about whether 
Facebook would work, but now I’m a complete convert: I know it does.

“We spent all our marketing budget on coffee machines [instead]. When I tell 
people that they laugh, but we did.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffacebook-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fif-theyre-into-great-jeans-theyre-into-great-coffee-understanding-your-customer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93d42ed6b742c35a8a2fb8882ee574d8daf41783%2F0_0_5008_3230%2F5008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='If%20they're%20into%20great%20jeans%2C%20they're%20into%20great%20coffee'%3A%20understanding%20your%20customer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffacebook-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fif-theyre-into-great-jeans-theyre-into-great-coffee-understanding-your-customer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27If%20they%27re%20into%20great%20jeans%2C%20they%27re%20into%20great%20coffee%27%3A%20understanding%20your%20customer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffacebook-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fif-theyre-into-great-jeans-theyre-into-great-coffee-understanding-your-customer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93d42ed6b742c35a8a2fb8882ee574d8daf41783%2F0_0_5008_3230%2F5008.jpg>
 The Hiut Denim Co was started by David (pictured) and Clare Hieatt and is 
based in Cardigan, West Wales, UK. Photograph: Gareth Phillips for the Guardian 
Hieatt praises the power of a Facebook page and Facebook ads for pulling in 
sales, which he keeps track of through his website. He explains that the 
platform has helped him understand who his target audience is and what they 
like. He can then find them and lookalike audiences via Facebook’s interest 
filters.

“If they’re into great jeans, they’re into great coffee and if they’re into 
great coffee, they’re probably into craft beer. [On Facebook] you can go and 
tell them about your product. It’s one of the most powerful advertising tools 
on the planet right now.”

Facebook has also been a space for Hiut to share videos, from short films of 
its jeans being made, to humorous clips such as a drone taking flight over the 
ocean, a pair of jeans in tow, and calls to action, urging customers to take 
part in #worldnowashday.

Instagram has also been a great tool for branding. The platform itself made a 
film of one of the company’s projects, but on Hiut Denim’s own page, they’ve 
been able to highlight their craftsmanship; images include its sewing machines, 
denim being dyed indigo, its new designs and the scenery on its team’s travels.

He says you can make great videos using an iPhone, and Hieatt has also pulled 
in favours from friends, so the budget has been small. But he’s found video 
effective as a medium. “They are a really powerful tool in terms of telling 
your story because people are happy to watch a two minute film.”

Hieatt took on an intern, Huw Thomas, to get the business started on social 
media. He quickly excelled at the task and Hieatt hired him full-time and to 
help build the business’s global community.

“We live in that global shop now and our aim is to start a global denim 
company,” says Hieatt. Brand Britain is also an important selling point for the 
company: it plays on the expectation that UK manufacturing is of high quality. 
Plus, if you’re living in Europe or the US, it’s now cheaper to buy jeans from 
the UK.

While Thomas works on Hiut’s content, Hieatt focuses on the brand’s number one 
mission – to make great jeans. It’s that quality which he believes is driving 
the company’s growth. Each month, sales have been growing by 25%, compared to 
the same month in the previous year. “We just do one thing well, like crazy 
well,” Hieatt says. “That, if you do persevere, is kind of interesting.”

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Facebook 
sponsor of the Guardian Small Business Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> 
Connected for Success hub.
 