
Ask a dozen experts to explain why Australia has suddenly had two successive 
spikes in the road toll and you are likely get a dozen answers.

It’s statistical noise, or increased drug-driving, smartphone-induced driver 
distraction or simply more traffic on the road. Regional roads are 
deteriorating, police budgets have been cut, or road safety campaigns have been 
ineffective.

The president of the Australian College of Road Safety, Lauchlan McIntosh, 
says it’s the question that must change, not the answer.


Why do we accept road deaths at all?

Australia's 10 most dangerous stretches of highway revealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/australias-10-most-dangerous-stretches-of-highway-revealed>
“We need a paradigm shift.” McIntosh says. “It’s a good buzzword but it is 
necessary. We need to have a different way of thinking about addressing road 
trauma. The urgency, in my view, is not there.

“We have to say it’s not acceptable for anyone to die on the roads. We don’t 
expect people to die in aircraft, we spend millions after plane crashes doing 
investigations.”

After decades of declining fatality rates, Australia’s road toll climbed from 
1,065 from January to November 2014, to 1,110 for the same period last year, 
and to 1,185 deaths to November this year, according to theBureau of 
Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics 
<https://bitre.gov.au/statistics/safety/index.aspx>.

The number of casualty crashes has also been rising since 2000 
<http://acrs.org.au/wp-content/uploads/National-Injury-Statistics-BITRE-Sept-2016.pdf>
. The hospitalised injury rate increased from 141.7 per 100,000 people in 2000 
to an estimated 160.3 per 100,000 people in 2013.

The results appear to buck an otherwise long-term downward trend. 
A graph showing the long-term road toll trend. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/aus/2016/dec/road-deaths.html> 
As double demerit periods begin across the country this week, it’s worth 
remembering that the decline in road deaths has been one of the great public 
health success stories of the late 20th century. Before the introduction of 
compulsory seat-belt use in all states in the early 70s and the gradual 
tightening of drink-driving laws, the figures reached horrendous proportions.

In 1970 3,798 people died, a rate of 30.4 per 100,000 population 
<https://bitre.gov.au/publications/2010/files/is_038.pdf> – nearly four times 
the absolute number of people killed in recent calendar years, and about six 
times the rate when population is taken into account. Vast advances in car 
safety, road infrastructure, law enforcement and licensing schemes have helped 
cut the road toll further;from 2,801 in 1989, or 16.7 per 100,000 people 
<https://bitre.gov.au/publications/2010/files/is_038.pdf>, to 1,465, or 6.9 per 
100,000 people by 2008. In thefull calendar year 2015 
<https://bitre.gov.au/publications/ongoing/road_deaths_australia_annual_summaries.aspx>
 1,205 people died, or 5.1 per 100,000 people.

The genesis of the “paradigm shift” referred to by McIntosh lies in an 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report 
<http://www.oecd.org/publications/zero-road-deaths-and-serious-injuries-9789282108055-en.htm>
, published in October, which is based on the premise that road crashes are 
predictable and preventable.

The UN believes the world can cut road deaths and hospitalisations by 50% of 
2010 levels by 2020. Volvo recently pledged that no one would die or be 
seriously injured in its cars by 2020.

Is such a shift pie-in-the-sky thinking? Is it that far fetched that road 
deaths could become as unacceptable as air disasters or train crashes? Not for 
Peter Frazer.

His daughter, Sarah, was killed in 2012 when a distracted driver hit and 
killed her and tow truck driver Geoffrey Clark while they stood in the 
breakdown lane of the Hume Highway near Berrima in New South Wales.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnot-inevitable-sudden-rise-road-deaths-search-answers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee5f9b54bf28ecf062e27d3c7676df239345bbc1%2F0_0_4752_3168%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20not%20inevitable'%3A%20sudden%20rise%20in%20road%20deaths%20prompts%20search%20for%20answers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnot-inevitable-sudden-rise-road-deaths-search-answers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20not%20inevitable%27%3A%20sudden%20rise%20in%20road%20deaths%20prompts%20search%20for%20answers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnot-inevitable-sudden-rise-road-deaths-search-answers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee5f9b54bf28ecf062e27d3c7676df239345bbc1%2F0_0_4752_3168%2F4752.jpg>
 Sarah Frazer, who was killed when she was struck at high speed in the 
breakdown bay of the Hume Highway in Australia in 2012. Photograph: Peter Frazer
Sarah was 23. She had just returned home after backpacking across the world 
and her car had broken down as she drove from her family’s Springwood home to 
start a photography degree at Charles Sturt University. The high-speed impact 
killed her instantly.

“I think the thing that I only understood after going through this is that you 
never, ever get over it,” Frazer says. “The horror of my daughter’s death, the 
need to identify her, is something that stays in your heart forever.”


Frazer could have let grief and anger consume him. Instead he forgave the 
driver, who was later jailed, and set about achieving change.


He set up the Safer Australian Roads and Highways (Sarah) group and has 
campaigned on road safety since. As hard as it was for Frazer to talk about his 
daughter’s death, he knew driver behaviour would only change if people were 
confronted with personal stories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnot-inevitable-sudden-rise-road-deaths-search-answers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4529fcb35de54219437ecb5bca53b82c9e78c5c7%2F0_0_3152_2368%2F3152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20not%20inevitable'%3A%20sudden%20rise%20in%20road%20deaths%20prompts%20search%20for%20answers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnot-inevitable-sudden-rise-road-deaths-search-answers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20not%20inevitable%27%3A%20sudden%20rise%20in%20road%20deaths%20prompts%20search%20for%20answers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fnot-inevitable-sudden-rise-road-deaths-search-answers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4529fcb35de54219437ecb5bca53b82c9e78c5c7%2F0_0_3152_2368%2F3152.jpg>
 Peter Frazer with his daughter Sarah, pictured when she was 8. Photograph: 
Peter Frazer 
“At a statistics level, everyone turns off,” he said. “The motivator for 
people is to hear a story and then they think ‘that could be me, that could be 
my family, that could be my loved one’.”

Australia’s national road safety strategy, an agreement between the 
commonwealth and states and territories, sets a target for 30% reductions in 
deaths and serious injuries by 2020. But the results of the past two years, 
should they continue, put Australia on a worrying trajectory of failure.

The federal transport minister, Darren Chester, called state and territory 
road safety ministers together for an inaugural meeting last month. They agreed 
the worsening road toll was unacceptable and pledged to place greater emphasis 
on safety when investing in infrastructure.

They also agreed to find ways to increase drug-driving testing and hold public 
awareness campaigns on phone use and distracted driving.

But the University of Adelaide centre for automotive safety director, Jeremy 
Woolley, warns that it is rarely one or two factors that cause a short-term 
change in the road toll.

Woolley cautions that the successive rises may just be a statistical 
discrepancy. If anything was behind it, he said, it was likely to be greater 
exposure. In other words, simply more cars on the road.

“My best advice is you just need to look over a longer period of time to see 
if it settles down again,” Woolley says. “It just needs further monitoring to 
confirm that it is actually going against the trend.”

There are relatively few levers available to quickly respond to short-term 
increases in the road toll. Awareness campaigns and law enforcement activity 
are chief among them. But the more effective measures – road upgrades and 
technological advances in car safety – take longer.

New safety technologies can take a decade to reach the population en masse, 
because they rely on uptake by manufacturers and then a gradual replacement of 
older car stocks. The average vehicle fleet takes about 20 years to renew, 
creating a significant lag between technological advancement and safer roads.

“The way to look at it is that the safety that we’re enjoying today is 
actually from cars designed 10 years ago,” Woolley says.

But McIntosh believes Australia is still moving much too slowly in encouraging 
the uptake of new safety technology.

Road safety: confronting sculpture shows human vulnerability to crashes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/road-safety-confronting-sculpture-shows-human-vulnerability-to-crashes>
Collision avoidance, autonomous emergency braking, lane departure warning and 
fatigue monitoring technology could be mandated through car safety standards, 
or incentivised by government through subsidies, he says.

McIntosh, who until recently was on the board of the Australasian New Car 
Assessment Program (Ancap), is frustrated at the lack of urgency.

Just this week, the European Commission issued a directive 
<http://www.autocar.co.uk/car-news/industry/european-commission-targets-new-mandatory-safety-equipment>
 that seeks to have all of the above technologies mandatory in new cars by 2020.

“We haven’t done that in Australia yet. The question is why not?” McIntosh 
says. “Because we have this federation, the issue of responsibility for road 
safety is sort of shared around the place. Every state’s keen and eager to do 
something, the new federal minister is very keen and eager, but the 
institutions that we have aren’t geared for urgent action.”

McIntosh believes if governments could see the true economic impact of road 
trauma, greater urgency might follow.

“I hate using the word toll, because a toll sounds like something you have to 
pay. We shouldn’t have to pay for this,” he said. “The injuries, at 34,000 a 
year, serious injuries, is a huge load on the health system but it doesn’t 
recognise that, it just accepts it.”

Frazer continues to lobby governments on road safety in the memory of his 
daughter.

He agrees the kind of shift McIntosh and others have talked about is what’s 
needed to bring greater urgency to road safety.

“People have just tended to assume that this is inevitable and it’s not 
inevitable,” he says. “That’s the key.”
 