
A few days after I met the composer Adam Donen <http://www.adamdonen.com>, he 
sent me an email. In our interview, he’d made so many artistic references in 
describing his vastly ambitious new work,Symphony to a Lost Generation 
<http://www.symphonytoalostgeneration.com/>, that I’d asked for a breakdown, 
which he duly supplied: Hegel, Wagner, TS Eliot, Brecht, Otto Dix, Anselm 
Kiefer, Georg Baselitz, Robert Wilson, Slavoj Žižek. But he also added an 
addendum, in case I thought his 80-minute work was a shoo-in for Pseuds Corner.

“Apologies if I ranted unnecessarily detailed philosophical fuckwittery at 
you,” he wrote, “to explain what is, essentially, a story about the first world 
war and its place in our present. While there are references to be found 
everywhere in the work, and I am proud of having pulled these many strands 
together, I should be disappointed if anyone felt they were necessary to ‘feel’ 
the work – for the work is, absolutely, about feeling more than fact.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff67da9a261671b704d5bb7a71347e7e1f28cc5e9%2F957_0_3744_3744%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%E2%80%99s%20a%20grand%20undertaking%20for%20anybody'%3A%20Adam%20Donen%20on%20his%20holographic%20symphony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%E2%80%99s%20a%20grand%20undertaking%20for%20anybody%27%3A%20Adam%20Donen%20on%20his%20holographic%20symphony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff67da9a261671b704d5bb7a71347e7e1f28cc5e9%2F957_0_3744_3744%2F3744.jpg>
 Adam Donen Photograph: Magnus Arrevad 
The apology in part explains why I warmed to Donen. He has bitten off an 
impossibly huge subject – the first world war, its aftermath and how we see it 
today – and attempted to write a five-movement Mahlerian symphony that 
encapsulates it. Not satisfied with that, he has dramatised the music to create 
what he describes as “the first holographic feature-length work”, with 
projections of dancers – including the starry ballet coupleSergei Polunin and 
Natalia Osipova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/05/ballet-stars-osipova-and-polunin-confirm-show-and-relationship>
 – giving the illusion of a live stage performance.

The scale of the project is insane. If a composer, working with a trusted 
dramaturg, attempted it in the latter part of his career, it would be seen as a 
bold attempt at a summation of all that had gone before, theirParsifal 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parsifal>. But Donen is just 30 and only 
recently moved from writingsweetly nihilistic pop songs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ECbnL7m0QE> to classical works. His Symphony 
to a Lost Generation is mad – and the music, with echoes not just of Mahler but 
of Rachmaninov at his most Russian Orthodox, is sure to be criticised as 
derivative – but also rather magnificent. You’d have to be crazy, or 
super-confident, to attempt this. Possibly both.

I meet Donen – a striking-looking young manwith a shock of black hair and 
intense, bulging eyes – in a former banqueting hall in northwest London, which 
he and his team have requisitioned to do last-minute filming, plus all the 
technical work that goes into producing the holograms of the performers and the 
backdrops to the action. He shows me some of the work in progress, and it is 
astonishingly lifelike. You soon forget these are holograms and believe you are 
watching a stage show. The filmic nature of much of the music also benefits 
from being attached to images, with sopranoYana Ivanilova 
<http://www.mariinskiy.com/?person=346&page=catalog>’s third-movement aria (a 
setting ofAnna Akhmatova’s poem July 1914 
<http://www.poetrybyheart.org.uk/poems/in-memoriam-july-19-1914/>) especially 
affecting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3484e7fc3aa32867931e4257c343332e8b5194be%2F0_369_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%E2%80%99s%20a%20grand%20undertaking%20for%20anybody'%3A%20Adam%20Donen%20on%20his%20holographic%20symphony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%E2%80%99s%20a%20grand%20undertaking%20for%20anybody%27%3A%20Adam%20Donen%20on%20his%20holographic%20symphony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3484e7fc3aa32867931e4257c343332e8b5194be%2F0_369_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Feted ballet dancers Sergei Polunin and Natalia Osipova are projected onto the 
stage. Photograph: Magnus Arrevad 
Donen explains the symphony’s structure. “It concerns itself with the 
historical break that was the first world war, and travels from the 
prelapsarian world that preceded it to mass-mechanised butchery.” He describes 
it as the musical equivalent ofEliot’s The Waste Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2014/apr/17/ts-eliot-waste-land-radical-text-wounded-culture>
. “The fourth movement is a complete disintegration, with echoes of many great 
classical works – as if I’m smashing plates.”


Donen says this transition from pastoral ideal to narrative collapse is 
mirrored both musically and visually. “Over the course of the third and fourth 
movements, it moves into the sort of modernist-cum-postmodernist nightmare that 
has been our inheritance for the best part of the last century. It’s an attempt 
to get to grips with our present through the first world war, which is the 
break point that brought our present into being. Musically, the goal is to 
reach a fifth movement that is tonality, and is able to get to a justified, 
rather than a bullshitty resurgence of tonality.”


Polunin and Osipova dance the leads in the first movement, which encapsulates 
the pastoral idyll. Actors flesh out movement two, and in the third movement two
Japanese butoh dancers <http://www.sadlerswells.com/dance-genres/butoh/> 
represent the suffering of the millions who died on the battlefields. Donen 
says using butoh dancers – who embody lost souls in no man’s land – allows him 
to “distance the butchery”.


The music, performed by the Lithuanian State Symphony Orchestra under 
conductor Martynas Staškus, was recorded in March 2015; filming began in June. 
The music producer is the Los Angeles-basedRobert Harder 
<http://www.harderproduction.com>, who Donen says is the reason he stopped 
writing pop songs.

“He told me to grow up and do something useful with my life,” says Donen. “I 
was a 21-year-old idiot jumping up and down making an incredibly loud noise 
believing that people were terribly interested in my words, whereas actually 
they just wanted to jump up and down and hear a loud noise … He encouraged me 
to move into orchestration, one thing led to another, and somehow I made the 
transition into classical and theatre.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b90fc70fb908b19359aef107c3059f944180b8%2F0_308_7525_4518%2F7525.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%E2%80%99s%20a%20grand%20undertaking%20for%20anybody'%3A%20Adam%20Donen%20on%20his%20holographic%20symphony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%E2%80%99s%20a%20grand%20undertaking%20for%20anybody%27%3A%20Adam%20Donen%20on%20his%20holographic%20symphony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fadam-donen-symphony-to-a-lost-generation-holographic-opus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b90fc70fb908b19359aef107c3059f944180b8%2F0_308_7525_4518%2F7525.jpg>
 Pages from a history of the first world war are flown as the orchestra plays 
from the second movement. Photograph: Magnus Arrevad 
Donen is a self-taught musician – he learned orchestration from 
Rimsky-Korsakov’s Principles of Orchestration 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/33900/33900-h/33900-h.htm>. “I only knew about 
it because I loved the 60s rock band Love, and Dave Angel did their 
orchestrations and cited the book in a couple of interviews.” He wrote his 
first classical piece in 2010, only three or four years after he became aware 
that there was a world beyond pop. “I feel I’ve developed a musical language in 
which I’m very comfortable.”

I suggest that it’s a grand undertaking for a young composer​. Donen says, 
'It’s a grand undertaking for anybody'

He had previously made three pop albums, but says that phase of his career is 
now over. “I discovered what I’d always intended to be doing, but never quite 
had the comprehension to do. When I was writing songs, I was always trying to 
push them and my stage performances to something they were never meant to be. I 
was always trying to create on an epic scale in forms to which it was never 
suited.”

Donen grew up in Cape Town and came to the UK to study English literature – he 
had wanted to start a rock band, but his parents insisted on university. He 
sounds an impossibly precocious youth – he gave his first poetry performance at 
the age of six and was a teenage theatre director – and you can’t help feeling 
for his younger brother, who wisely stayed in South Africa and became an 
accountant.

Symphony to a Lost Generation has cost around £500,000 to produce. The first 
substantial chunk of money came fromBloomsbury Cultural Renaissance 
<http://bloomsburyassociation.org.uk>, which made Donen its composer in 
residence, and much of the rest from private backers. It probably helps that 
the producer, Daniel Reynolds, has a background in finance and has run a 
successful crowdfunding campaign to get the investment needed. Much of the 
backing is equity based, with investors hoping to get a return. One of the 
biggest investors is based in India, and there are already plans to tour there.

The appeal of a holographic work is that it can be moved around very cheaply. 
“It can tour more affordably than a half-decent string quartet,” says Donen. 
“One of my key ambitions was that I wanted to create a serious and epic form 
that wasn’t going to be stuck in London, Paris and Berlin, but would be able to 
go to the sort of places that a younger me might see it. Holographic work can 
tour very simply and without substantial expense.”


Whitney Houston, Billie Holiday and the hologram craze – but is it worth a 
tour?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/15/whitney-houston-billie-holiday-hologram-craze>
I suggest that it’s a grand undertaking for a 30-year-old who has been 
composing for only five or six years. Donen takes the remark equably. “I would 
hope it’s a grand undertaking for anybody,” he says. “I believe the creation of 
a work like this, now, is necessary … Much like a century ago, we are at a 
point where many arts are in danger of being perceived to have reached end 
points. I think that attempting to create something that pulls various strands 
together is very important.”


“People of my age don’t go to opera, we don’t go to ballet,” he says. “For the 
most part, we also don’t live in London and we don’t have access to the sorts 
of performers who demand that one go to such a thing. So to create a work that 
is able to travel and in a form that I hope people of my age will engage with 
seems necessary rather than just ambitious.”


 * Symphony to a Lost Generation 
<http://www.symphonytoalostgeneration.com/#!book-now/a7dgu> is at LSO St 
Luke’s, London <http://lso.co.uk/lso-st-lukes.html> 28-31 May. Then touring.




 