
“Do you remember the girl who did that thing with the stocking: she put it in 
her mouth and then pulled it out ... somewhere else?” asks former dancer Jo 
King. “And who was the girl with the snake? I remember she used to clear the 
pub. And Canadian Linda, who was the most graceful, fairy-like doll ... Then 
there was me, shouting at people if they didn’t put money in the jug!”

It’s Saturday 30 July, and the White Horse strip pub in London’s Shoreditch is 
packed for its closing night. On the stage dancers sparkle, people cry, and 
three generations of landladies wave goodbye. “I’m going to miss it terribly,” 
says Sue Bristow, the pub’s outgoing boss.

Behind the scenes, coins are counted from collection jars amid a clutter of 
flowers, cards and cake. It’s Legends Night, and dancers across the decades 
have come back to pay tribute. One woman’s parents are here; another has 
brought in old photos. At one point in the evening, everyone does the conga. It 
feels like an anachronism: in Shoreditch, traditional East End boozers are now 
as out of place as horse-drawn carts.

The Bristows opened the White Horse 38 years ago, on the corner of what was 
then a Hayes warehouse and had previously been a bacon factory (it was built 
between 1890 and 1931 for the Lipton family of grocers and tea merchants). 
Shoreditch in the late 1970s was an unloved and unprofitable corner ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. The pub struggled, too – until the 
family decided to expand it into a strip club.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7fd2d9a72ab8803473d8717f333c9622be3372b%2F0_0_4683_3122%2F4683.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family'%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family%27%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7fd2d9a72ab8803473d8717f333c9622be3372b%2F0_0_4683_3122%2F4683.jpg>
 ‘There’s a camaraderie here …’ Behind the scenes at the White Horse on its 
closing night 
For decades after that, the White Horse held its own as father, mother, 
daughter and finally granddaughter pulled the pints. “Everyone thought you were 
Peggy Mitchell,” Sue tells her mother, Pauline. “No, that was you!” Pauline 
replies.

Shoreditch has since undergone successive identity shifts, colonised first by 
artists, then by the inhabitants of luxury flats. In the process, this old 
factory-warehouse became prime real estate, and in 2001 was bought for around 
£22m (a snip compared to its current value)by Derwent London 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/markets/2814788/The-Derwent-London-trend-that-bucks-the-market.html>
, whose property portfolio in the capital is valued at £5bn.

Derwent rebranded it the Tea Building, and brought in architects Allford Hall 
Monaghan Morris to whip it into stylish shape: exposed industrial piping and 
smooth concrete, complemented by a Lipton-inspired “Green Tea” energy-saving 
initiative. The building became a cornerstone of the “new” Shoreditch: home to 
members’ clubShoreditch House <https://www.shoreditchhouse.com/> and filled 
with marketing agencies, media companies and fashion brands.

In these circumstances, it is perhaps surprising the White Horse managed to 
hang on so long. This year, however, Derwent raised the rent considerably, then 
offered to buy out the White Horse. The Bristows agreed, signing a 
non-disclosure agreement about the deal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c1f682133da0ad0124c756e79fd231b6db1780b%2F0_331_4961_2976%2F4961.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family'%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family%27%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c1f682133da0ad0124c756e79fd231b6db1780b%2F0_331_4961_2976%2F4961.jpg>
 The tips jug passed round after each dance 
The dancers, however, are outspoken and angry. After all, the White Horse is 
the birthplace of theEast London Strippers Collective 
<http://ethicalstripper.com/site/> (ELSC), which formed in 2014 to fight strip 
club closures in Tower Hamlets and improve working conditions across the 
industry. An atmosphere of mutual support, rather than bitter competition, 
allowed the collective to flourish.

But the White Horse is among the last of its breed. The power to grant 
licences for sexual entertainment venues is in the hands of local councils, 
which are expected to make decisions based on evidence of public nuisance. In 
2010, however, the local borough, Hackney, imposed a “nil limit” policy, 
meaning that whenever such venues sell up, the licence is gone forever and no 
new one will be issued. The decision was madedespite 66% of those who took part 
in a public consultation 
<http://www.hackneygazette.co.uk/news/majority_say_no_to_hackney_ban_on_strip_clubs_and_sex_shops_1_772197>
 voting against this effective ban on strip clubs.

“Sue’s been pushed out, and we’re all devastated – this is the best place to 
work in London, ” says White Horse dancer and activist Edie Lamort. “There’s a 
camaraderie here that I haven’t experienced in any other job. Everyone’s well 
looked after, and there’s a family atmosphere. The rest of the places are 
cut-throat.”

Sue’s been pushed out and we’re all devastated. This is the best place to work 
in London
Edie Lamort 
Strip clubs divide opinion, of course, and there will be many who find little 
to mourn in the closure of the White Horse. The dancers, however, argue their 
workplace security should be the priority, and that moral concerns are rarely 
so vociferously voiced around other industries.

The White Horse has always worked on the old “pound-in-the-jug” model, meaning 
dancers could make money without having to hustle for private dances, as is the 
case in most strip clubs. “It fosters creative stage shows,” Lamort says. “And 
Sue used to let us come in to practise, she let us run life drawing classes 
upstairs, and we filmed here for a documentary. You’d never get that in the big 
clubs.”

For the dancers, it’s not just sentimentality that is making them tearful 
tonight. Many are wondering what they’ll do next in a city increasingly hostile 
to their industry. Some already have second jobs; others say it’s going to be a 
struggle. Sue Bristow’s daughter Emilie is breaking from the family tradition, 
and has an accountancy apprenticeship in the City.

‘Shoreditch is dying’: White Horse voices
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca215f28e9d0ced673bb3eac061e767f528c4555%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family'%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family%27%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca215f28e9d0ced673bb3eac061e767f528c4555%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 From the left: Emilie, Sue and Pauline Bristow, three generations who have run 
the White Horse since 1978 
Pauline Bristow, former landlady: “When we first came here, Shoreditch was 
derelict. You never used to see anyone walking up Redchurch Street. I’m not 
sure if it started to change because of our pubs, but I do think we started 
getting people into the area. People always accepted that women were running 
this. That’s how it was: a pub would revolve around the landlady.”

Sue Bristow, outgoing landlady: “I was six when we first came here; I couldn’t 
even see out of the windows. I started working behind the bar when I was a 
teenager and I’ve been running the pub with my mum for the last 13 years. We’ve 
seen so many changes, been through two recessions. When we gave the news we 
were closing, everyone was in tears. I wasn’t expecting that. I’ll miss the 
dancers. It feels like I’ve got loads of adopted daughters here.”

Emilie Bristow, bartender: “I’ve always been here, so I don’t know what it’s 
going to be like once the place is gone. I’m not sure if I’d have ended up 
taking over. I wanted to see if I could do something else, like get a job in 
the City. I’ve got an apprenticeship with an accountancy firm.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19be3fbd9394255e2c778929c4af5dc483822b89%2F0_0_5141_3428%2F5141.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family'%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family%27%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19be3fbd9394255e2c778929c4af5dc483822b89%2F0_0_5141_3428%2F5141.jpg>
 Barbara, who sings and also runs the White Horse guestlist 
Barbara, singer and door staff: “It’s a shame because a 38-year family 
business is going. It’s been done to clear the area, but this is what makes 
Shoreditch. The heart of Shoreditch is going. It’s like Shoreditch is dying.”

Laura Scott, accounts: “I’ve been here since 2009. I’m Sue’s best friend and 
our daughters are friends. They’re so easygoing here; that’s why they’ve put up 
with me for so long! I have been barred from doing karaoke, though. To be 
honest, I think it’s out of order they have to close. I get that Shoreditch is 
up and coming, but they’re losing their home as well as their livelihood.”


Tracy Coleman, singer with Plum Busby <http://www.plumbusby.co.uk/> and former 
dancer: “I think the phrase ‘Don’t let your daughter on the stage, Mrs 
Worthington <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l7ay6E345e0>’ is pertinent to lots 
of us in here. I’ve performed my entire life. I just used to do it naked and 
now I do it with clothes. I was a dancer for 20 years and I think it’s a great 
shame that such an amazing cultural establishment is being blocked from the 
area.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e0502d6ac0a965ad93294f5382acb452bf2290c%2F0_379_5608_3365%2F5608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family'%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family%27%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e0502d6ac0a965ad93294f5382acb452bf2290c%2F0_379_5608_3365%2F5608.jpg>
 Stacey Clare started dancing at the pub in 2010, and later helped found the 
East London Strippers Collective 
Stacey Clare, dancer and co-founder of the ELSC: “The White Horse provided 
reasonably good working conditions in an industry where licensees are under no 
obligation to uphold dancers’ welfare. Many venues are surviving because 
they’re allowed to financially exploit their workers, and there are no legal 
mechanisms to stop this. The White Horse was one of the few places that didn’t 
relentlessly fuck dancers over and now it’s closing, because the business 
couldn’t keep up.”

Alexyi, hairstylist: “I’m here for the girls, to zhuzh them and spruce them 
up. I’ve been coming in for about five years and now we’re all like family. So 
even when I’m not doing their hair, I jump in to brighten their day. It’s the 
end of an era. There’s a decline in the art of dancing and in the art of going 
out.”

Christie, dancer: “My parents are here tonight. I wanted them to experience 
the White Horse. They’re not going to see me naked, but they wouldn’t care if I 
was walking around in my bra and knickers. I’ve been here for 12 years – it’s a 
community. You come to work and whatever shit you’ve got going on in your 
personal life, it’s OK. Stripping gives people the freedom to travel, study, do 
what they need to.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed51de2b6e7e8d5ce7b922a4fd2a50f26327a929%2F0_310_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family'%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family%27%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed51de2b6e7e8d5ce7b922a4fd2a50f26327a929%2F0_310_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Original landlord Jon Bristow with former dancer Jo King, who now runs a 
school for burlesque and striptease 
Jon Bristow, Sue’s father and former owner: “When we opened there was nothing 
here, just the telephone exchange down the road, and that was where all the 
customers came from. The lorry drivers used to park up on top of the bridge and 
they’d come in, too. My mum used to come up and spend the night here watching 
the girls. She’s 93 now. She’d sit in the corner and drink dry martini and 
lemonade. She knew all the girls – got on with everybody, she did.”

Jo King, striptease teacher and former dancer: “I was about 26 when I came in 
1983. I worked here until I was 40, then I threw my knickers in the air and 
they landed on the curtains. I said, ‘If you miss me, you can smell my 
knickers!’ – I’m such a lady. I think it’s very sad the White Horse is closing. 
It’s the last bastion of proper strip clubs and a bit of a legend.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e433f8e825da6212ee5400026b022a9baee81c%2F0_231_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family'%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family%27%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e433f8e825da6212ee5400026b022a9baee81c%2F0_231_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Doormen David, left, and Kamil outside the White Horse on closing day 
David, bouncer: “The White Horse is the best place in London for atmosphere: 
the girls, the bar staff and especially the owners. Why is it closing? Money. 
That’s always the reason.”

Kamil, bouncer: “I’ve enjoyed working here and I’m upset it’s closing. I heard 
the reason why it’s closing is because people say I’m too handsome and they 
couldn’t handle it.”

Vera, photographer and former dancer: “A place I would call home is closing 
down. It’s breaking my heart. Shoreditch, Soho ... so many places are 
disappearing. London is selling its soul.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5814ebc9adc1c55bf51674dbf72e92c67adcd0d%2F0_233_5227_3136%2F5227.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family'%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20weird%2C%20sexy%20family%27%3A%20priced-out%20London%20strip%20club%20bids%20a%20fond%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fshoreditch-strip-pub-club-closed-priced-out-london-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5814ebc9adc1c55bf51674dbf72e92c67adcd0d%2F0_233_5227_3136%2F5227.jpg>
 Regular dancer Foxy: ‘I’ve got no idea what I’m going to do now for work’ 
Foxy, dancer and member of the ELSC: “The reason the White Horse is closing is 
the same as everywhere else in London: gentrification. I don’t know what’s 
going to happen to it, but I can only guess it’s going to be a hipster cafe. 
I’ve got no idea what I’m going to do now for work. I’m a stage girl, and there 
aren’t any places left where you can work like this.”

Ottilie, dancer: “I’ve been here on-and-off for six years. It’s like a weird, 
sexy family here. The owners respect us and that hierarchy of respect trickles 
down from the staff to the punters. The closure is indicative of what’s 
happening in London. Small communities are being eroded in pursuit of corporate 
interests. So roll on the next Pret.”


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 