
As you look out from Khizr Khan’s home in Virginia, the Blue Ridge mountains 
sweep magnificently to one side. Monticello, Thomas Jefferson’s idyllic estate, 
is a few miles in the other direction. And in between, still spiked into his 
neighbour Richard’s front lawn, is a plastic campaign sign that says “TRUMP”.

“Maybe he’s going to leave it up for the next four years,” says Khan, with a 
smile that turns into a sigh. Shaking his head, he takes a sip of tea and 
reaches for a small box of chocolates.

It is a month since the man who taunted Khan and his wife Ghazala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/donald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech>
 following their headline-making appearance at the Democratic convention was 
elected to the world’s most powerful office, and reminders of Trump’s victory 
are everywhere.

But around the Khans’ living room, so too are mementos of having lived through 
much worse. Theirlate son Humayun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/07/humayun-khan-donald-trump-military-arlington-national-cemetery>
 stares down from one wall, handsome and steadfast in his army portrait. His 
posthumous Bronze Star and Purple Heart awards are nearby. Humayun, a captain 
who was killed defending his unit from a suicide bomber in Iraq in 2004, would 
have turned 40 this year. “We miss him so very much,” says Khan.

Still, Khan is shaken by Trump’s win and a subsequent spike in hate crimes 
across the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/trump-related-hate-crimes-report-southern-poverty-law-center>
. Muslim friends say their children are being bullied. A doctor from Long 
Island told him a new patient refused to be treated by her when he saw her 
headscarf. Hostility toward Muslims is more intense than at any time since Khan 
arrived in the US in 1980, he says.

“The far right feels that their voice has been heard and they have a licence 
to commit these crimes,” he says. “I have seen the fear of immigrants heighten 
after turmoil in the past. But never to this degree.”

Khan has taken advice from the police about securing his home. He advises the 
women in his family not to travel alone. He is furious at Trump for not doing 
more to help. “These are your people, whom you have encouraged to commit these 
crimes,” he says. “You have a responsibility as a leader to end it.”

Rather than move to calm the anti-Muslim fervour, Trump has made one of its 
most prominent advocates his national security adviser.Mike Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/michael-flynn-national-security-adviser-profile>
, a retired army lieutenant general who described Islam as“a vicious cancer” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/11/22/politics/kfile-michael-flynn-august-speech/> 
and said “fear of Muslims is rational”, will help Trump direct US military 
policy. Suggesting that Flynn is “ill, mentally”, Khan is deeply concerned 
about the implications for foreign relations.

Not that the appointment should be surprising. Having dismissed Mexican 
migrants as rapists and criminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
 in his first campaign speech, Trump told voters rattled by terrorist attacks 
in California and Paris that he wouldban all Muslims from entering the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
. He later proposed barring only those from countries compromised by extremism.

Khan doesn’t expect Trump to actually implement the ban, nor a new “registry” 
of Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-muslim-registry-policy-possibility>
 he also floated. These were more likely cynical ploys “to get votes from the 
simple-minded people that fell for it”, he says. But damage has still been done.

It was Trump’s announcement of the Muslim ban last year that led a reporter to 
call Khan, who was quoted hailing his son’s patriotism and sharply criticising 
Trump. “Muslims are American, Muslims are citizens,” he said. An aide to 
Hillary Clinton saw the article, and invited Khan to appear at July’s 
convention in Philadelphia. His six-minute speech, with Ghazala at his side, 
caused a sensation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fkhizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Father%20of%20Muslim%20American%20soldier%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%2C%20you%20have%20sacrificed%20nothing%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fkhizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Father%20of%20Muslim%20American%20soldier%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%2C%20you%20have%20sacrificed%20nothing%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fkhizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention&media=>
Khizr Khan gives a stirring speech at the Democratic convention in honor of his 
son, Humayun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/28/khizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention>
“You have sacrificed nothing and no one,” he told Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/28/khizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention>
, who avoided serving in Vietnam because of alleged bone spurs on his feet. 
Waving a miniature US constitution that he’d pulled from his jacket pocket, 
Khan asked Trump if he’d even read the document. “I will gladly lend you my 
copy,” he said, to thundering applause. Khan keeps a stack of the booklets on a 
table beneath Humayun’s portrait. Visitors struggle to leave without one.

Incapable of letting a slight go unanswered, Trump called Khan “very 
emotional” and suggested he didn’t allow Ghazala to speak because of their 
religion. He moaned on Twitter: “Mr Khan, who does not know me, viciously 
attacked me from the stage of the DNC and is now all over TV doing the same – 
Nice!”

Horrified Republicans disowned Trump. Khan said he had a “black soul”. The 
dispute was pencilled in as a chapter in the political obituary Trump seemed to 
be writing for himself.

Things turned out differently. As the results rolled in last month, the Khans 
were VIP guests at Clinton’s election night event in Manhattan, where Ghazala 
was treated as a rockstar by actual rockstars. “A lady comes to Mrs Khan and 
says: ‘Mrs Khan, can I take a picture with you?’,” he recalls. “She pulled the 
hood on her hoodie down … and it was Cher.” Katy Perry and Lady Gaga did the 
same, he said.

But then, “it all got quieter”. Tearful supporters, who had been dancing in 
the aisles, traipsed out of the hall as the outcome became clear.

Khan, 66 and on a break from work as a legal consultant, has tried to stay 
upbeat by stepping up a speaking tour that grew out of his convention 
appearance. He has been preaching tolerance and pluralism to schoolchildren 
across the US. “Never be disheartened,” he tells them.

The packed schedule has exhausted him. Sniffing and coughing, he visibly 
drains over the course of our two-hour conversation. He is posing for 
photographs with a team of Japanese journalists as I arrive; an evening 
function beckons after I leave.

But he is energised by encounters while traversing the country as a 
recognisable face. Sitting in the eighth row on a recent flight home from Ohio, 
he was approached by two men sitting in first class. They shook his hand and 
offered him their seats. “We voted for Trump, but we want to thank you,” they 
told him. He politely declined.

As we speak, Ghazala, 65, is busy with one of their four grandchildren, who 
are between eight months and five years old. She and Khan were born in Pakistan 
and met at university in Lahore. They came to the US after a spell in Dubai, 
and live in a smart but unflashy four-bedroom house on a tranquil bluff a few 
miles outside Charlottesville. They have two adult sons, who advised them 
against getting involved in politics.

Sinking slowly into his sofa, Khan says the volume of abusive emails he 
received following the convention has declined, but he still deals with a 
couple of racist messages each day. He won’t show the worst, saying he erases 
them. In one new arrival on his iPhone, though, a man named Scott Glover felt 
the need to gleefully remind Khan: “Trump won the election and you, Hillary and 
the rest of the deplorable libs lost.”

Rightwing websites including Breitbart News <http://www.breitbart.com/>, run 
until recently by Trump’s top adviser, went after the Khans with undisguised 
venom following the convention. One spurious story, based on a 33-year-old 
essay Khan wrote,claimed he championed sharia law 
<http://www.breitbart.com/national-security/2016/08/02/khizr-khan-constitution-sharia/>
. Another accused him of taking money from the Clintons. It was actually 
another lawyer named Khan.

Such was the vitriol that Clinton, who knows a bit about brutal media 
coverage, asked him when they met at a rally in New Hampshire: “Oh my God, how 
are you putting up with all this?” He told her it was worth it, and she assured 
him: “You’re doing something good.” He has no regrets about entering the 
political warzone: “There comes a time when one has to take a stand.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fkhizr-khan-vilified-trump-far-right-voice-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd24d6defe3ce5b01c88c012a29857d4684e38f5a%2F44_0_3213_1928%2F3213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%8BKhizr%20Khan%20on%20being%20vilified%20by%20Trump%3A%20'The%20far%20right%20feels%20that%20their%20voice%20has%20been%20heard'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fkhizr-khan-vilified-trump-far-right-voice-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%8BKhizr%20Khan%20on%20being%20vilified%20by%20Trump%3A%20%27The%20far%20right%20feels%20that%20their%20voice%20has%20been%20heard%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fkhizr-khan-vilified-trump-far-right-voice-heard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd24d6defe3ce5b01c88c012a29857d4684e38f5a%2F44_0_3213_1928%2F3213.jpg>
 Khan at his son’s grave. Photograph: Brendan Smialowski/Getty Images 
And much of the response has been cheering. Their dining room table is covered 
in fanmail from across the world. Letters addressed with only their names and 
Charlottesville now find their way to the house. Khan is particularly proud of 
one letter, which he pulls from an A4 brown envelope. “Mayor of London,” the 
header says.

“As Salaamu Alaikum,” meaning “peace be unto you”, the two-page handwritten 
letter fromSadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/31/sadiq-khan-london-mayor-tony-blair-aspiration>
 begins. Saying that he was “deeply moved” by the convention speech, London’s 
first Muslim mayor tells Khan it demonstrated the power of “diversity, 
tolerance and liberty”.

“These great American values are also Islamic values,” the mayor writes, “and 
your determination to live by these values has inspired many Londoners of all 
faiths and backgrounds.”

A bitter argument has broken out among Democrats since Clinton’s defeat about 
whether she spent too much time on these issues of identity and not enough 
appealing to struggling white males from the rust belt. Khan sides with those 
who dismiss this as a false dichotomy.

“I am biased,” he says, “but sometimes a moral stand has to be taken, and it’s 
worth the cost. I am glad that she spoke up. I believe in equal dignity. We all 
have equal rights regardless of our gender or our preferences.”

Nonetheless, Khan, a political independent who voted for both Ronald Reagan 
and Bill Clinton, does think Hillary also failed to stress the dangers of 
Trump’s wild economic threats against China to the farmers and factory workers 
of the midwest.

“You will not be able to sell your soybeans if we have a trade war with 
China,” he says. “They will rot right here, and we will have the same people 
who voted Trump in standing outside the White House trying to throw him out.”

He makes the case better than Clinton did, but has no interest in running for 
office. He reveals Terry McAuliffe, Virginia’s governor and a close ally of the 
Clintons, asked him to. “But it would limit me,” he says. “Just let me speak.” 
He is also, he notes, still not a Democrat.

It may be the tiredness talking, or the practised search for optimism of a 
parent who has lived through the worst possible grief. But Khan veers from 
despair about Trump’s election to predictions that maybe it won’t be as bad as 
it seems. “We just have to hang in there a little longer,” he says. “When he 
moves to Washington, things will surely be different.”

One thing he’s sure about, though, is “Trump needs to come off Twitter”. Khan 
stays away from social media, having seen its perils. In his legal career, Khan 
specialises in electronic evidence discovery. In one case he worked on, a 
driver involved in a deadly 2007 vehicle crash was told by his lawyer to erase 
a Facebook photo showing him holding a beer and wearing a T-shirt that read “I 
♥ Hot Moms”. But the other side had already downloaded it. The lawyer is now 
serving a five-year suspension.

“Nobody is telling Trump the damage it can do,” says Khan. He does not, 
however, offer his services as a consultant to the president-elect.

At a loss for many more words of his own, Khan unfolds a printout he shows his 
student audiences. It is a quotation by Elie Wiesel, the writer and Auschwitz 
survivor, who died in July. It is what he believes.

“We must always take sides,” Wiesel said. “Neutrality helps the oppressor, 
never the victim. Silence encourages the tormentor, never the tormented. 
Sometimes we must interfere.”
 