
Though it has been 18 years since a doctor first told Jennifer Stewart she had 
cancer and she can now call herself a survivor, she is excited about the White 
House “moonshot” panel to cure cancer and what it means for people who are just 
starting their journey through the disease.

'Moonshot' cancer panel calls for US to create national research database
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/07/cancer-moonshot-panel-research-joe-biden-national-database>
Less than nine months after Barack Obama announced the plan, a panel of top 
cancer scientists and patient advocateson Wednesday presented a report on how 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/07/cancer-moonshot-panel-research-joe-biden-national-database>
 the “moonshot” could destroy the disease.

For cancer survivors like Stewart, the panel’s 10 recommendations present a 
promising model. “If I could spare anyone from going through even a portion of 
what I went through, I would in a heartbeat,” said Stewart, who was diagnosed 
with acute myelogenous leukemia at age 20.

The Cancer Moonshot Blue Ribbon Panel initiatives 
<http://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/moonshot-cancer-initiative/blue-ribbon-panel/blue-ribbon-panel-report-2016.pdf>
, led by Vice-President Joe Biden, include organizing a clinical trial network 
for immunotherapy and creating national databases of patient and clinician 
information to profile cancer cases and model tumors. This information-sharing 
is meant to further research, but is also seen by survivors as having the 
potential to fill gaps in the isolating process of learning about, and coping 
with, a cancer diagnosis.

“I’ve relied on my community, the young adult cancer community, to find out 
about things they are talking about putting in the database,” said Stewart, a 
volunteer with the not-for-profit StupidCancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer>.

She said some information, like how to be a part of clinical trials, is 
typically not known to people when they are first diagnosed. For people less 
connected to the cancer community or far from top research facilities, 
acquiring this information can be a slow process that the moonshot databases 
would address.

But some survivors worry they will be left behind in the plans for the biggest 
federal push against cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/14/cancer-cure-joe-biden-medical-research>
 since Richard Nixon declared a war on cancer in 1971. Moonshot aims to 
accomplish 10 years of cancer research in five years, so the panel’s report 
emphasizes science and research, not what happens to those who survive the 
disease.

“If at the end of the line a vaccine comes out of this and we don’t have to 
worry about this any more, well, wow, that’s great, but you’re still not 
educating me on what I should be doing,” said Mailet Lopez, a breast cancer 
survivor and co-founder of the social network for cancer patients, survivors 
and supporters, I Had Cancer.

'America can cure cancer': Obama announces national effort to fight disease
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/12/obama-state-of-the-union-address-2016-cancer-cure-initiative>
She is excited about moonshot, but had hoped the recommendations would do more 
to address survivorship, which affects things such as mental health, fertility 
and financial health – for a lifetime. “I want to know what I’ve been doing or 
what I’ve done or what I can do to prevent this,” Lopez said.

There are approximately 15.5 million people in the US who are cancer survivors,
according to the American Cancer Society 
<http://www.wrex.com/story/32132409/2016/06/03/report-there-are-155-m-cancer-survivors-in-the-usa>
. And there are expected to be 1.6m new cases nationwide this year.

Emily Giegerich, communications director at I Had Cancer, said these concerns 
about survivorship were echoed in the social network, which has more than 
250,000 users worldwide. “Even if all these 10 recommendations are met, there 
is still life after cancer and there are still so many things people don’t talk 
about,” she said, noting that most people with cancer are only patients for a 
short percentage of time.

One of two patient advocates on the 28-person Blue Ribbon Panel, David Arons, 
the National Brain Tumor Society CEO, said “the highest and best use” of 
moonshot’s time was to find things that are going to destroy cancer.

“That’s why there was such a strong focus on science and on research and 
things that are going to accelerate drug development, and the development of 
new technologies which will help us understand better if a tumor exists, if a 
cancer exists, if a cancer is growing, whether we can detect it early, whether 
we can treat it early and whether we can save patients,” Arons said.

He said tools like the national databases are meant to help researchers and 
clinicians understand patients better by giving them the opportunity to put 
their data in a national network and have improved access to clinical trials. 
“We’re trying to end cancer, we’re trying to make cancer – all different types 
of cancer – a chronic, manageable disease,” Arons said.

To do this, of course, will require funding. 

Obama asked for $1bn to fund moonshot and Biden secured a $264m increase in 
federal funding to the National Cancer Institute before moonshot was announced.

“I hope it comes to fruition,” said Stewart, who also said she hoped moonshot 
would not lose sight of the long-lasting effect cancer has on survivors.

“I think we need to take what we [the cancer community] have, and a lot of it 
is out there already, and make sure that that’s all incorporated into 
everything moonshot is doing because the more people that survive cancer the 
more important survivorship is going to be, and how people deal with that and 
the issues can only come up along the way are only going to become more 
prominent and more important”.
 