
Top US cancer scientists have urged the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> to create a national 
cancer database for clinicians and patients as part of a slew of 
recommendations presented on Wednesday by the White House-supported cancer 
“moonshot” panel.

Vice-President Joe Biden assembled the scientists as part of the 
administration’s effort to make the US the country that cures cancer “once and 
for all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/12/obama-state-of-the-union-address-2016-cancer-cure-initiative>
”.

The Cancer Moonshot Blue Ribbon Panel report 
<http://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/moonshot-cancer-initiative/blue-ribbon-panel/blue-ribbon-panel-report-2016.pdf>
 said the recommendations, if implemented, “will transform our understanding of 
cancer and result in new opportunities to more effectively prevent and treat 
the disease”.

The 10 recommendations include existing programs that need more funding – such 
as research to update guidelines for patient symptom control – and brand new 
initiatives including a human tumor database to monitor and analyze 
multi-dimensional cell behavior.

Why Joe Biden's call for a 'moonshot to cure cancer' may not be far-fetched
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/14/cancer-cure-joe-biden-medical-research>
The panel also called for the creation of a network of databases for patients 
to profile their cancers and pre-register for clinical trials; the organization 
of a cancer immunotherapy clinical trial network; and the study and development 
of therapies that prevent or overcome drug resistance.

The panel also recommended initiatives to improve the understanding of a 
protein tied to pediatric cancers; increase monitoring and management of 
symptom care and treatment; support development of new testing and treatment 
technologies; and improve prevention and early detection.

But the funding necessary to fulfill these recommendations has not been 
approved by Congressdespite lobbying by the Obama administration 
<https://www.statnews.com/2016/02/02/cancer-moonshot-funding-congress/>, which 
said it hoped to spend $1bn on the program.

“Congress should seize this historic opportunity – when researchers are on the 
brink of so many new and potentially life-saving developments in diagnostic 
tests and treatments – to boost funding for the NIH [National Institutes of 
Health] and NCI [National Cancer Institute],” said Gary Reedy, CEO of the 
American Cancer Society (ACS) and the not-for-profit organization’s action 
network, ACS CAN,in a statement. <http://pressroom.cancer.org/BlueRibbon2016> 

The ACS said in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/07/us-cancer-rate-deaths-declining>
 that it expects 1.6m new cancer cases to be diagnosed in 2016, the equivalent 
of about 4,600 new diagnoses each day.

Barack Obama announced that he had tasked Biden with leading the moonshot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/14/cancer-cure-joe-biden-medical-research>
 program in his final State of the Union address in January. Theprogram aims 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/01/12/inspiring-new-generation-defy-bounds-innovation-moonshot-cure-cancer>
 to accomplish “a decade’s worth of cancer research progress in five years”.

It is a personal effort for Biden, whose son, Joseph “Beau” Biden III, died 
from brain cancer in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/31/beau-biden-dies-of-brain-cancer>
 at the age of 46. Last year, Biden helped secure a $264m increase in federal 
funding to the National Cancer Institute in the spending bill.

The panel report is a major step in that direction, and will be presented to 
the NationalCancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Advisory Board 
on Wednesday, where it is expected to be formally accepted.

New drug 'wakes up' immune system to fight one of deadliest cancers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/06/new-drug-wakes-up-immune-system-to-fight-one-of-deadliest-cancers>
To determine the recommendations, the country’s top cancer scientists were 
divided into seven working groups to focus on elements like immunology and 
clinical trials.More than 1,600 ideas and comments 
<http://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/moonshot-cancer-initiative/blue-ribbon-panel/supporting-materials/brp-cancer-research-ideas-summary.pdf>
 were also submitted by the public.

Along with the recommendations, the panel also listed policy issues that 
needed to be addressed so that the recommendations could be efficiently 
implemented, including laws around patient privacy, the clinical trial system 
and insurance coverage.

Biden and Obama have acknowledged that it is unlikely cancer will be cured in 
the next five years, but they have said the moonshot program could create 
unprecedented strides in the fight against the disease.

“The key for us now is to put a lot more money into research,” Obama said in 
January. “If we do, I think we’re going to see some really big breakthroughs 
soon.”
 