
The business secretary has insisted there was “no cheque book” involved in the 
assurance given toNissan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> before 
the carmaker agreed to keep investing in Britain.

Greg Clark reportedly gave a “last-minute written promise” to Nissan to 
protect the company from the consequences of Brexit, in a pledge that will fuel 
Labour’s demand for the government to publish any private guarantees.

Speaking on BBC1’s Question Time on Thursday night, Clark indicated there had 
been no offer of financial compensation or state aid. “There’s no cheque book. 
I don’t have a cheque book,” he said.

“The important thing is that they know this is a country in which they can 
have confidence they can invest. That was the assurance and the understanding 
they had and they have invested their money.”

Nissan plans to turn its Sunderland factory into one of the biggest car plants 
in the world, producing two new models, after gaining “support and assurances” 
fromTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> about the 
UK’s withdrawal from the EU.

The agreement with the government will safeguard the future of more than 7,000 
jobs and delivers what will be perceived as a major boost to the economy after 
the referendum.

However, the commitment from Nissan to stay in the UK sparked a political row, 
with Downing Streetforced to deny that it had offered the Japanese company a 
sweetheart deal. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-decision-to-stay-in-sunderland-averts-catastrophic-consequences>

The Guardian understands the government has privately told executives in the 
car industry that it is confident the sector can retain tariff-free access to 
the single market. The government and senior executives believe the UK 
automotive industry is in a strong position when it comes to negotiations about 
leaving the EU because Britain imports more cars fromEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> than it exports.

The Nissan announcement was made soon after new figures showed the economy had 
faredfar better than expected in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/uk-economy-defies-brexit-slowdown-fears>
 In the first official verdict on how the economy has performed since the 
referendum on 23 June, the Office for National Statistics said GDP had grown by 
0.5% in the third quarter. This was down from 0.7% in the previous three months 
but well ahead of City forecasts of 0.3%.

In a further boost, Toyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota>, 
which has a large factory in Derbyshire, also appeared to commit its future to 
the UK. Didier Leroy, the chief competitive officer and executive 
vice-president, said Brexit was not a reason to abandon its operations in the 
country and that he had “trust in the UK government that it will offer fair 
treatment” for companies when negotiating its exit from the EU.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftheresa-may-hails-nissans-decision-to-build-new-car-in-uk-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20hails%20Nissan's%20decision%20to%20build%20new%20car%20in%20UK%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftheresa-may-hails-nissans-decision-to-build-new-car-in-uk-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20hails%20Nissan%27s%20decision%20to%20build%20new%20car%20in%20UK%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftheresa-may-hails-nissans-decision-to-build-new-car-in-uk-video&media=>
Theresa May hails Nissan’s decision to build new cars in UK – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/oct/27/theresa-may-hails-nissans-decision-to-build-new-car-in-uk-video>
Nissan has committed to building its new Qashqai and X-Trail models in 
Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-decision-to-stay-in-sunderland-averts-catastrophic-consequences>
, potentially creating hundreds of jobs. It will be the first time the X-Trail 
will be made outside Japan. Nissan said it wanted to develop Sunderland into a 
“super plant” that would build more than 600,000 cars a year.

The future of the Sunderland factory had been in doubt since the referendum. 
Carlos Ghosn, the chief executive of Nissan, warned that the Japanese company 
could decide to build its next-generation models outside Britainif it did not 
receive compensation for any loss to competitiveness it suffered after Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/nissan-hard-brexit-compensation-new-uk-investment-tariffs>
.

May hailed Nissan’s decision as “fantastic news” and a vote of confidence in 
the UK. It is the first major investment decision in the automotive industry 
since the referendum.

Although Ghosn said the government had offered support and assurances, Nissan 
and the government repeatedly refused to say what had been promised and whether 
any public money was involved, despite pressure fromLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>.

A source close to Jaguar Land Rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jaguar-land-rover>, which employs more 
than 35,000 people in Britain and is the biggest carmaker in the country, said 
it was relaxed about Nissan’s deal and had also been “reassured” by the 
government about access to the free market during private discussions. “The 
government is fully aware of JLR’s plans. Discussions are taking place,” the 
source said.


Although Downing Street refused to reveal the details of its discussions with 
Nissan, it signalled that it had not made any declaration to the EU about a 
proposal to offer state aid. The prime minister’s deputy official spokesman 
said: “The assurances are that we will get the best possible deal. There was no 
special deal for Nissan.”

Asked whether Nissan had been promised that it would not face tariffs on its 
exports to Europe, he added: “I can’t be any clearer. The dialogue we’ve had 
with Nissan as we do with other companies is a reassurance that we are 
determined to get the British industrial sector the best possible deal. It is a 
reassurance. There is no deal. We have a dialogue with Nissan and many other 
companies.”

He declined to comment on whether the industry had been promised lower energy 
costs, which is another potential financial incentive for Nissan. Industry 
sources said the government could provide subsidies towards training existing 
staff and hiring new workers.

Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, said he was pleased there would be continued 
investment in Sunderland, but said concerns remained about any secret deal 
between the government and the carmaker.

“If there are any inducements that have been offered, and quite obviously if 
you are offering big inducements to one industry or one manufacturer, then all 
the others will quite reasonably say: ‘Well, what about us?’” he said. “We are 
only a few months into Brexit and we don’t know what the terms of the agreement 
are between Nissan and the government.”

May met Ghosn at Downing Street for a private meeting earlier this month while 
Clark, the business secretary, met company representatives on a recent trip to 
Japan. In an interview on BBC Radio 4’s World At One, Clark declined six times 
to say what support had been offered to the company. “We have had, obviously, 
as you might imagine, lots of communication between us, but actually what it 
rests on is a very strong mutual confidence,” he said.

No 10 denies 'sweetheart deal' with Nissan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/no-10-denies-sweetheart-deal-with-nissan>
“There is no question of financial compensation over tariffs because we have 
said that what is necessary is that we are going to maintain the 
competitiveness of the sector, and we are going to get the best deal possible. 
We think that the mutual interest between our European neighbours and ourselves 
is very strong in this way.”

Colin Lawther, senior Nissan official for Europe, told the Guardian that there 
had been “no financial package outside the normal, in the public domain 
request, for grant support”.

He added: “It comes down to trust at the end of the day. We are confident the 
government is taking sufficient measures to make sure the whole of the 
automotive industry will be competitive at the end of the process.”

He said Nissan had stopped production lines at 11am in Sunderland to inform 
staff of their announcement.

One in three British cars are manufactured in Sunderland, where Nissan has 
invested more than £3.7bn since it opened the factory in 1986. More than 7,000 
people are employed at the site, with a further 28,000 supply-chain jobs 
reliant on the factory, mostly in the north-east.

“Our dream is a 600,000-car super plant; there’s not many of those in the 
world,” Lawther said.

The news led to a split in Labour and the trade unions. Union leaders and 
local MPs such as Iain Wright praised the news while senior Labour figures such 
as John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, criticised the government for a 
“chaotic” strategy.

“We know nothing about it,” McDonnell said. “Are they literally going to 
decide factory by factory which one gets support? We have to have a 
comprehensive plan, and this is chaos at the moment. We are trying to get a 
consensus and heal the divisions the referendum brought and we cannot do that 
with secret deals behind closed doors. It will divide our country once more.”

The government’s position on the single market has been unclear since May took 
over as prime minister. She has repeatedly said the UK wants to maintain as 
much full and free access to the trading bloc as possible.

But neither No 10 nor the Treasury has ruled out the possibility that certain 
industries could face tariffs as a result of a post-Brexit deal with the EU or 
a reversion to World Trade Organisation rules.

David Mundell, the Scottish secretary, confused matters further on Thursday by 
declaring: “If we are leaving the EU, we are leaving the single market.”


 