
The word surreal is overused and often wrongly used, but in the case of the 
Washington Post Election Night Live party, the word was apt. First of all, it 
was a disco. There was a DJ playing a frenetic mix of contemporary Top 40 and 
pointedly apropos songs such as Pat Benatar’s “Hit Me With Your Best Shot” 
(“You’re a real tough cookie with a long history … ” ). Behind the DJ there 
were dozens of screens showing various television networks’ coverage of the 
election. The screens were so bright and so huge, and the colours so primary 
and vivid, that the experience was like being trapped inside an enormous jar of 
jelly beans.

How Trump took middle America | Gary Younge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/nov/16/how-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election>
Women dressed like Vegas showgirls made their way through the crowd with 
towering tiered hats adorned with chocolates from one of the evening’s 
sponsors. The chocolates, round and the size of strawberries, were offered in 
pairs, enclosed in loose plastic sacks – a bizarre but perhaps intentionally 
lewd optic? The bartenders were setting out Campari Americanos by the dozens. 
The food was by chefsJosé Andrés <http://www.joseandres.com/> and the brothers 
Voltaggio. The Washington Post has a right to celebrate – the paper is thriving 
and its political coverage extraordinary – but this felt like Rome before the 
fall.

At some point early on, the music was turned down for 20 minutes so Karen 
Attiah of the Post could moderate a live conversation between the current 
German ambassador, Peter Wittig, and former Mexican ambassador Arturo Sarukhan. 
The talk was serious and enlightening, but the ambassadors seemed baffled by 
the nightclub atmosphere, and besides, few people were listening. The party was 
about the party.

And everyone expected Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> to win. The attendees 
were largely Washington insiders – lobbyists, staffers, legislative aides, 
pundits and producers. Most were liberal and most were confident. The night’s 
only potential for suspense centred around whether or not Clinton would take 
some of the toss-up states, like Florida and North Carolina. When she was 
declared the winner – which was expected before the party’s scheduled end-time 
of 10 o’clock – there would be talk of who would be appointed what, with a 
not-insignificant portion of the partygoers in line for positions in the new 
administration.

Thus the mood was ebullient at seven o’clock, when the event started, and was 
electric by eight. Kentucky and Indiana were announced forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and that news was met with a 
shrug. More scantily clad women walked through the rooms serving hors 
d’oeuvres, and soon there were at least three showgirls wearing hats of 
towering testicle-chocolates. Young Washingtonians swayed to the music. Drinks 
were set under chairs and spilled. A young girl in a beautiful party dress 
walked through the drunken partygoers looking for her parents.


Then nine o’clock came around and the party began to turn. Most of the states 
thus far had gone for Trump. None of these victories was unexpected, but the 
reddening of the national map was disheartening, and the margins in those 
states were often greater than expected. He took Texas, North Dakota, Kansas, 
Mississippi. Not a problem for the crowd, but by 9.30, people were panicking. 
Trump was leading in Florida and North Carolina.Nate Silver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nate-silver>, the statistics shaman who 
had been roundly criticised for overestimating Trump’s chances, now posted that 
a Trump victory was likely. Ohio was in the bag, Pennsylvania was trending 
toward him, and it looked like he could win Wisconsin and Michigan. A hundred 
guests turned their attention from the big screens to their little screens. 
They paced and made calls. The party emptied and we all spilled into the 
streets. Beyond the Washington Post building and beyond DC, the country had 
been swamped by a white tsunami few saw coming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F141772e2084bac3ddfef1ee22e3c752e3c285eec%2F0_119_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F141772e2084bac3ddfef1ee22e3c752e3c285eec%2F0_119_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Election night at The Washington Post. Photograph: The Washington Post/Getty 
Images 
For a few hours, the city had the feeling of a disaster movie. People scurried 
this way and that. Some wandered around dazed. Following the returns, we 
travelled from restaurant to bar to home, and the Somali and Ethiopian cabbies 
were stunned, worried less about Trump than about the prospect ofRudy Giuliani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rudygiuliani> serving in the cabinet in 
any capacity. We all talked about where we will move: Belize; New Zealand; 
Canada. We no longer knew our own country. In Columbia Heights, when the 
election was settled, a young woman biking up the hill stopped, threw her bike 
into the middle of the road, sat on a kerb and began weeping. “No no no no,” 
she wailed.

The omens were there if you looked. A month before the election, I’d driven 
from Pittsburgh to the Philadelphia suburbs and saw nothing but Trump/Pence 
signs. In three days I covered about 1,200 miles of back roads and highway – 
some of the prettiest country you can find on this continent – and saw not one 
sign, large or small, in support of Clinton. The only time any mention of her 
was made at all was on an enormous billboard bearing her face with a Pinocchio 
nose.

I did see Confederate flags. James Carville, the political strategist, 
recently quipped that Pennsylvania is Pittsburgh and Philadelphia with Alabama 
in between, and there is some truth to that. There are a lot of men in 
camouflage jackets. There are a lot of men out of work. When you stop at gas 
stations, the magazine sections are overwhelmed by periodicals devoted to guns, 
hunting and survival. Then there are the tidy farms and rolling hills, the 
equestrian centres with their white fences, the wide swaths of Amish and 
Mennonites and Quakers.

I was in rural Pennsylvania to see the United 93 National Memorial in 
Shanksville – a monument to the 40 passengers and crew who died in a windswept 
field on 9/11. The day I visited was bright and clear. The surrounding country 
was alive with autumn colours and, far on distant ridgelines, white windmills 
turned slowly. Just off the parking lot, a park ranger in forest green was 
standing before a diverse group of middle school students, admonishing them. 
“Boys and girls. Boys and girls,” he said. “You’re standing here where people 
died. There are still human remains here. You’re goofing around and laughing, 
and I shouldn’t have to tell you to be respectful. They deserve that.” They 
quieted for a moment before one of the boys nudged another, and the giggling 
began again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcf64015b5152776d4ddc7cd3be682b7369314a0%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcf64015b5152776d4ddc7cd3be682b7369314a0%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Trump supporters rally in Oceanside, California. Photograph: Bill 
Wechter/AFP/Getty Images 
The memorial is beautifully constructed and devastating in its emotional 
punch. Visitors can walk the flightpath of the plane, a gently sloping route 
down to the crash site, which is separated from the footpath by a low wall. 
“It’s a grave,” another ranger explained. “So we don’t walk there.” Higher on 
the hill, there is an indoor visitor centre that recreates every moment of the 
day in excruciating detail. There are video loops of the Twin Towers being 
destroyed, fragments of the plane, pictures and bios of every passenger, 
details about the calls they made from the plane once they knew they would die. 
It is shattering.

Leaving the museum, a man in front of me, young and built like a weightlifter, 
couldn’t push the door open. I reached over him to help and he turned to thank 
me. His face was soaked with tears. I got into my car, shaken but heartened by 
the courage of the 40 humans who had realised what was happening – that they 
were passengers on a missile headed for the White House or Capitol building – 
and had sacrificed their lives to save untold numbers in Washington DC. The 
American passengers of United 93 were from 35 different cities in 11 different 
states, but they died together to save the capital from incalculable loss of 
lives and what might have been a crippling blow to the nation’s psyche.

Muslims in Trump's America: realities of Islamophobic presidency begin to sink 
in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/muslim-americans-donald-trump-hate-crimes-surveillance>
I left the memorial and turned on to a two-lane road, part of the Lincoln 
Highway that runs through the state –part of the first coast-to-coast highway 
in the United States. Just beyond a sign advertising home-grown sweetcorn, 
there was a residential home, the first house anyone might encounter when 
leaving the United Memorial, and on this home, there is a vast Confederate flag 
draped over the front porch.

It’s important to note that this was the Lincoln Highway. And that the civil 
war ended 160 years ago. And that Pennsylvania was not a state in the 
Confederacy. So to see this, an enormous Confederate flag in a Union state, a 
mile from a symbol of national tragedy and shared sacrifice, was an indicator 
that there was something very unusual in the mood of the country. Ancient 
hatreds had resurfaced. Strange alliances had been formed. None of the old 
rules applied.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1144cd58aa4042c272beb293c64d452685cae489%2F0_227_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1144cd58aa4042c272beb293c64d452685cae489%2F0_227_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 The Flight 93 National Memorial in Shanksville, Pennsylvania. Photograph: Mark 
Makela/Reuters 
Steven McManus has come out of the closet twice. First as a gay man, then as a 
Trump supporter. We were sitting at a coffee shop in Detroit’s Eastern Market 
neighbourhood, and McManus was almost vibrating. This was two days after 
Trump’s election, and McManus was elated – about the victory, yes, but more 
personally, about the fact that after Trump’s election, he’d had the courage to 
post a message on social media declaring his support of the president-elect.

“I lived a lot of my life as a closeted guy,” McManus said, “and the 
liberation I felt as a man coming out was similar to how I felt coming out for 
Trump. You really truly think you’re the only one who has these feelings. It’s 
liberating. I felt it was time to come out again.”

The Smithsonian's African American museum – a monument to respectability 
politics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/16/smithsonian-museum-african-american-history-respectability-politics>
McManus is a thin man in his late 30s, bald and bespectacled, with a 
close-cropped beard. He grew up in the part of the Detroit suburbs known as 
Downriver. Many of the area’s residents had come from the American south in the 
1940s to work in the auto factories, and the area still retains a southern 
feel. His father was a salesman who brokered space on trucking lines. Looking 
back on it now, McManus appreciated the fact that his parents could raise five 
children on one salesman’s salary. But then came the Nafta, and the gutting of 
much of the Detroit auto manufacturing base. McManus watched as Detroit and 
Flint hollowed out and caved in.

“Trump was the only candidate talking about the trade imbalance,” McManus 
said. “Being a businessman, a successful businessman, he understood why 
business decision-makers, at the highest levels of their companies, move their 
production overseas.” McManus was angry when auto companies, after receiving 
bailouts from the US government in 2009, continued to move production to 
Mexico. “In Detroit, we gave America the middle class. But this is now a false 
economy. The housing market is decimated, and the middle class is shrinking. I 
want someone to shake it up. Let’s move the whole country forward.”

There is something unusual in the mood of the country. Ancient hatreds have 
resurfaced. Strange alli­ances have formed

McManus is not blind to the rareness of an openly gay man supporting Trump. 
“But I don’t have to vote a certain way based on my sexuality. In my mind we’ve 
moved beyond having to vote Democrat just because you’re gay.” And he’s not 
worried about a reversal of the hard-fought right to marriage gays just 
achieved. “We’ve got our rights now,” he said. “It’s settled.” McManus and his 
husband got married three years ago in New York, before the supreme court 
decision legalised gay marriage nationwide, and it was in his new place of 
domestic tranquillity that McManus watched the Republican national convention. 
Two moments affected him profoundly. First was the appearance ofPeter Thiel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech>
, the former CEO of PayPal, who was given a prime speaker’s spot and said from 
the stage, “Every American has a unique identity. I am proud to be gay. I am 
proud to be a Republican. But most of all, I am proud to be an American.”

McManus was moved then, but he was even more affected by an unscripted part of 
Trump’s speech. “It was shortly after the Orlando massacre, and for the first 
time in my life, a Republican candidate for president said things like, 
‘forty-nine wonderful Americans’, or ‘beautiful Americans’ or whatever he said, 
‘were savagely murdered’. And he said, ‘I will protect gay and lesbian 
individuals.’ Some people at the convention cheered and some people didn’t 
cheer. And then Trump said, off the cuff and off the teleprompter, he said, 
‘For those of you who cheered, I thank you.’ And I cried. I cried.”

McManus’s husband works for the army, as an IT specialist, and they both 
became bothered by Clinton’s email setup. “If my husband had done the same 
thing, he’d be fired. And it’s pretty hard to get fired from a government job.” 
McManus began to follow Trump more closely, and found that he was agreeing with 
most of his positions on trade, immigration and national security. “I began to 
realise that I’m more conservative than I thought.” But he couldn’t reveal 
this. He lives in Detroit, a liberal city, and works in the restaurant industry 
in town, where left-leaning politics dominate. But after coming out as a Trump 
supporter, he is finding himself emboldened. The day after the election, 
McManus saw his doctor, who is Muslim, and he mentioned that he’d voted for 
Trump.

“I just wanted to get it off my chest. I was feeling a little … ” McManus sits 
up in his chair, to indicate the new confidence he felt that day. “I told him, 
I came out as a Trump supporter today. And he went off for 15 minutes – to the 
point where I almost walked out. He was impassioned about how he felt that 
Trump was disenfranchising Muslim-Americans. But our present state of terrorism 
does have a religious undertone to it. Finally I managed to get something off 
my chest. I can’t remember who said this to me, either my husband or my ex, but 
I said to my doctor, ‘You know, it wasn’t a group of Catholic nuns that flew 
planes into the World Trade Center.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F335c473fa5f70738ed6a04126a36386339d2a934%2F0_33_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F335c473fa5f70738ed6a04126a36386339d2a934%2F0_33_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Proud to be a Republican … Peter Thiel. Photograph: ddp USA/REX/Shutterstock 
Later that night in Detroit, I ran into Rob Mickey, a professor of political 
science. He grew up in Texas, but has spent about 10 years teaching at the 
University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. We were at a party benefiting an 
educational nonprofit. Doing something concrete and positive felt good, and 
being around kids felt good, but everyone was exhausted – no one had slept 
since the election – and 30 seconds into every conversation it turned to Trump, 
Clinton, what had gone wrong and what would happen next. One of the event’s 
attendees had been living in a central American cloud forest for years, and 
there was much talk about following her down there.

I told Mickey about McManus, and to him, the story of the gay Trump supporter 
was both surprising and unsurprising. Everything about 2016 was upside down. 
Parts of Michigan who had voted twice for Obama had turned to Trump. Rob and 
his wife Jenny had gone canvassing for Clinton on the Sunday before the 
election, and the reception they received was not warm.

“I would say it was hostile,” he said.

They had gone to Milan, Michigan, an overwhelmingly white town 50 miles 
southwest of Detroit. “It’s spelled like the Italian town, but pronounced 
MY-lan,” Rob pointed out. The Clinton campaign had given Rob and Jenny a list 
of names and addresses of white working-class residents who had registered as 
Democrats but were labelled sporadic voters. Milan had voted for Obama in 2008 
and 2012, and winning towns such as Milan was key to delivering a Clinton 
victory in Michigan.

The homes they visited were run-down, with “No Soliciting” placards on every 
door. They saw no Clinton signs on anyone’s lawn. There were Trump signs 
scattered around town, but most of the residents they met were disgusted by the 
entire election. “One woman said, ‘I don’t want to have nothing to do with 
that,’” Mickey recalled. “Another said, ‘I hate them both, including that guy 
of yours.’ When I pointed out that our candidate was a woman, she said, 
‘Whatever’ and slammed the door.”

The liberation I felt as a man coming out was similar to how I felt coming out 
for Trump
Steven McManus 
One house with a Bernie Sanders sign on the lawn looked promising. Mickey 
knocked on the door. A white man with a US ARMY shirt answered. He was missing 
an arm. Mickey introduced himself as a Clinton canvasser, and told the man he 
had supported Sanders, too, during the primary. “That’s great,” the man said, 
and closed the door.

“The people we met that day were straight out of central casting, if you were 
making a movie about the disaffected white working class,” Mickey said. 
“Between 55 and 65, without college degrees. You could see that Lena Dunham and 
Katy Perry were not going to do anything to form a bridge to these people. If I 
hadn’t read any polls, and I was basing it just on the people I met, I would 
have thought, boy, Clinton’s going to get wiped out.”

It was different in 2008. Knowing that Michigan was securely in Obama’s column 
and Ohio was on the bubble, Rob and Jenny went to Toledo to knock on doors in 
trailer parks and housing projects. Foreclosure signs were common. When they 
introduced themselves as canvassers for Obama, the residents, all of them 
white, were welcoming and chatty. “The interactions were long,” Mickey said. 
“The people were worried and they wanted to talk.” Ohio’s 18 electoral votes 
went to Obama in 2008 and 2012.

“This campaign wore a lot of people down,” Mickey said. “The state was 
bombarded by pro-Clinton ads, but she failed to offer any sustained and 
coherent economic message. She said, ‘I’m not crazy’ and ‘I’m not a sexist 
racist pig’, but for working class whites that’s not enough. I would say that 
of the people who slammed their doors on me, most of them didn’t vote for 
either candidate.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf9cee06f37cc40b916d29d0bf467bbb16bd10d7%2F0_163_4933_2960%2F4933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf9cee06f37cc40b916d29d0bf467bbb16bd10d7%2F0_163_4933_2960%2F4933.jpg>
 A Hillary Clinton supporter applauds her televised concession speech. 
Photograph: Steven Senne/AP 
In fact, an unprecedented number of Michigan voters cast ballots without 
choosing either Clinton or Trump. This kind of voting happens every election – 
where voters make their preferences known down-ballot but don’t mark anyone for 
president – but never in such numbers. In 2012, there were 50,000 Michigan 
voters who declined to choose any presidential candidate. In 2016, there were 
110,000.

Clinton lost Michigan by 10,704 votes.

The week after the election, the business of the United States went on. 
Schools and banks were open. The stock market plummeted and rose to a new high. 
Commuters commuted, and I was headed from Detroit to Kentucky. All of this was 
travel planned months before, and none of it had anything to do with the 
election, but it felt like I was making my way, intentionally, into the heart 
of Trump country.

At Detroit airport it was impossible not to feel the tragedy of Tuesday as 
having realigned our relationships with each other. Because the voting had 
split so dramatically along racial lines, how could an African-American or 
Latino pass a white person on the street, or at baggage claim, and not wonder, 
“Which side are you on?”

The emergence of safety pins to symbolise support for Clinton (and equality 
and inclusion) was inevitable – it fulfilled a need, particularly on the part 
of white Americans, to signal where they stand. Otherwise all iconography is 
subject to misinterpretation. At the airport, I found an older white man 
staring at me. His eyes narrowed to slits. I was baffled until I realised he 
was looking at my baseball hat, which bore the logo and name of a Costa Rican 
beer called Imperial. Was this man a Clinton supporter who suspected me of 
being a white nationalist? Was the word Imperial sending a Ku Klux Klan/Third 
Reich signal to him?

Anyway, I was in the wrong terminal. I was in danger of missing a flight to 
Louisville, so I left and poked my head into a Hertz bus and asked the driver 
if he would be stopping near Delta anytime soon. He paused for a moment.

“Yeah, I’ll take you,” he said.

His name was Carl. He was a lanky African-American man in his 60s, and we rode 
alone, just me and him in this enormous bus, for a time. He asked how I was 
doing. I told him I was terrible. Iwas feeling terrible, but I also wanted him 
to know which side I was on. He laughed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0188823b3d42ee1e39d5b39a535921d919a12b1d%2F0_221_2495_1497%2F2495.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0188823b3d42ee1e39d5b39a535921d919a12b1d%2F0_221_2495_1497%2F2495.jpg>
 A traveller in Detroit airport. Photograph: Jim Young/REUTERS 
“Yeah, I was surprised on Tuesday, too,” he said. “But I almost feel sorry for 
Trump. I don’t think he thought he’d actually win. You see him sitting next to 
Obama at the Oval Office? He looked like a child.”

In Louisville, three days after the election, I sat with 32 students at Fern 
Creek high school. This was supposed to be a regular classroom visit by someone 
passing through, but the atmosphere was different now. The students at Fern 
Creek are from 28 countries. They speak 41 languages. There are refugees from 
Syria, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo. We sat in an oval and 
ate samosas. Nepalese samosas, I was told. Three of the students in the class 
were from Nepal, and had a particular recipe. The food was extraordinary.

I told these students, three girls still learning English, that I’d always 
wanted to go to Nepal, and asked them to write down some places they’d 
recommend. They wrote “Jhapa, Damak (Refugee camp).” They were from Bhutan and 
had grown up in a UNHCR camp in eastern Nepal. A young man to my left had come 
from Iraq two years earlier.

‘Could he actually win?’ Dave Eggers at a Donald Trump rally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/17/could-he-actually-win-dave-eggers-donald-trump-rally-presidential-campaign>
Their teachers, Joseph Franzen and Brent Peters, guided the conversation 
through topics of creativity, social justice and empathy. The students were 
without exception thoughtful, attentive and respectful of each other’s 
opinions. Every time a student finished a statement, the rest of the class 
snapped, Beat-style, in appreciation. We didn’t talk politics. For the time 
being, the students had had enough of politics. The day after the election, 
they’d had a charged discussion about the results, and, still feeling raw, they 
had written about the discussion the next day.

“The thing I didn’t say yesterday was that Muslims scare me. The thing with 
Isis is out of control and I don’t trust them at all and I don’t get why 
Mexicans can’t take the test to become legal? Are they lazy?”

“The election didn’t really bother me even with the outcome, I didn’t support 
Trump. The main reason I cared about Clinton winning was ’cause I didn’t want 
my family to be affected. My mom is gay and married to a woman.”

“As a Muslim female in high school it’s hard to deal with this and let it sink 
in. But I know Trump doesn’t have full power of his actions. So I feel like 
even if he’s president, everything will be the same.”

Our only hope will be that the 100 million or so young people in American 
schools behave better than the presi­dent

“I was downright disappointed in the country. Because Trump won, racism, 
sexism, misogyny and xenophobia won. It goes to show what our country values 
now. Either this is what we value, or this is what the majority is OK with.”

“I feel like everything said yesterday doesn’t even matter anymore. We as 
American citizens can’t change what’s been decided. Not everybody gets what 
they want. That’s what life is. Trump will be our new president and we can’t 
change that. WE need to make America great again, NOT Trump. That’s our job as 
people.”

“I think Trump and Hillary are both crazy and I’m kind of eager to see how 
trump runs this b---h.”

And so we see how differently we express ourselves on paper. The students, 
sitting in their oval with the smell of Nepalese samosas filling the room, were 
unfailingly kind to each other. But on paper, other selves were unleashed. 
Despite the many international students, the school’s population is mostly 
American-born, 48% white and 38% black, and it was easy to see how Trump could 
bring dormant grievances to the fore, could give licence to reactionary 
theories and kneejerk assumptions. The students had witnessed eight years of 
exquisite presidential self-control and dignity, and now there would be a 
70-year-old man in the White House whose feelings were easily hurt, who called 
people names, and who tweeted his complaints at all hours, with rampant 
misspellings and exclamation marks. Our only hope will be that the 100 million 
or so young people in American schools behave better than the president. A 
president who has not read a book since he was last required to. Think of it.

After the class, a tall African-American student named Devin approached me. 
He’d introduced himself before the class, and had asked some very sophisticated 
questions about using imagery to convey meaning in his poetry. He was a wide 
receiver on the school’s football team, he said, but he was also a writer. He 
handed me a loose-leaf piece of paper, and on it was a prose-poem he wanted me 
to look at.

We sat on top of my house, laying back, looking at the stars, the stars 
shining, waving back at us. They told us hello. Time froze. I turned my head to 
look at you. Still fixated on the stars, you paid me no mind. I studied you. 
This was the true face of beauty. Your royal blue eyes, the brown polka dots on 
your face. Your smile making the moon envious because it could not compare in 
light. I reached out to grab your hand. You turned your eyes to look at me. Our 
hands intersected and we both smiled. I told you you were were beautiful.

Below the piece, Devin wrote, in red ink, “Do I have something here? Should I 
continue?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffde34143afea5d9e775dd3a27508a3f0d62cd20%2F0_226_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffde34143afea5d9e775dd3a27508a3f0d62cd20%2F0_226_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Anti-Trump Protesters march through Los Angeles on 12 November. Photograph: 
UPI / Barcroft Images 
That night in Louisville there was another benefit event, this one for an 
organisation called Teach Kentucky, which recruits high-achieving college 
graduates to come to the state to teach in the public schools. Joe Franzen and 
Brent Peters are among Teach Kentucky’s recruits, and if they are any 
indication of the quality of humans the organisation is attracting, the 
programme is a runaway success.

At the event, Franzen and Peters spoke about their craft, and about making 
sure their students felt they had a place at the table. There was much talk 
about their classrooms as families, of meals shared by all, of mutual respect. 
It was very calm and heartening, but there was also a moment where the audience 
was encouraged to let out a primal scream (my idea, I admit it), and 200 people 
did that, screamed, exorcising our election-week demons. Later on, Jim James – 
Louisville resident and leader of the rock band My Morning Jacket – performed a 
medley of songs, fromLeonard Cohen  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen>to “All You Need Is Love” and 
“Blowin in the Wind”. And then everyone got drunk.

There was good bourbon. It was called brown water by the locals, and after 
stomachs were full, we all vacillated between despair and measured hope. But 
the questions loomed over the night like the shadow of a Nazi zeppelin. Would 
he really try to build a wall? Would he really try to exclude all Muslims? 
Would he actually appoint a white nationalist as his chief of staff? And did 
42% of American women really vote for a man who threatened to overturn Roe v 
Wade and who bragged about grabbing them by the pussy? Did the white working 
class really elect a man whose most famous catchphrase was “You’re fired”? Like 
a teenager with poor self-esteem, the American people had chosen the flashy and 
abusive boyfriend over the steady, boring one.We’ve had enough decency for one 
decade, the electorate decided. Give us chaos.

It is not easy to get a ticket to Smithsonian National Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/30/smithsonian-african-american-museum-slavery-prince>
 of African American History and Culture. This is the newest museum on the 
National Mall in Washington, DC, and its design, by the Ghanaian-British 
architect David Adjaye, is so successful, at once immediately iconic and bold 
but also somehow blending into the low-slung surrounding architecture, that it 
has become the most talked-about building in the United States.

Admission is free, but there is a six-month wait for passes, and the passes 
are timed. If you get a pass, you must enter at the assigned hour or wait 
another six months. I had gotten such a timed pass, and it so happened that the 
pass was for the day after the election. That morning, I had the choice between 
staying in bed, forgoing my one chance at seeing the building in 2016, or 
rising on three hours’ sleep and keeping the appointment. Like millions of 
others, I did not want the day to begin. If I woke up, I would check the news, 
and if I checked the news, there would be confirmation of what I had remembered 
foggily from the night before – that the people of America had elected a 
reality television host as their president. I closed my eyes, wanting sleep.

Then I remembered the Gazans.

Back in April, I had been in the Gaza Strip and had met a married couple, 
Mahmoud and Miriam, journalists and activists who badly wanted to leave Gaza. I 
had e-introduced them to an asylum lawyer in San Francisco, but from 7,000 
miles away, she couldn’t do much to help. The impossible thing was that they 
actually had a visa. A real visa issued by the American state department. All 
they had to do was get out of Gaza. But permissions were needed from the 
Israelis or Egyptians, and they were having no luck with either. Finally, one 
day in October, an email arrived. Mahmoud and Miriam were in Brooklyn. They’d 
bribed an Egyptian guard at the Rafah gate and had made their way on a 14‑hour 
journey through Sinai.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55d99022cd073f86e5bfc0e1fffadff9e40b4a0%2F0_0_666_714%2F666.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98None%20of%20the%20old%20rules%20apply%E2%80%99%3A%20Dave%20Eggers%20travels%20through%20post-election%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnone-of-the-old-rules-apply-dave-eggers-travels-through-post-election-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55d99022cd073f86e5bfc0e1fffadff9e40b4a0%2F0_0_666_714%2F666.jpg>
 National Museum of African American History and Culture. Photograph: Michael 
Barnes/Smithsonian Insitution 
So on a lark I told them to meet me in DC. Frederick Douglass had said, after 
all, that every American should visit the nation’s capital at least once. And 
given they would soon be Americans, wouldn’t it be good to do that duty right 
away, and do it the day after the first woman had been elected president? (We 
had made the plans a week before.)

So they had planned to meet me at this museum celebrating African-American 
history in the shadow of the obelisk dedicated to George Washington, great man 
and also slaveowner. The morning was clear and cool. A small line had formed 
outside the museum before the doors were to open. I looked around, and didn’t 
see them. Then I did.

They were aglow. They’d spent their lives in an open-air prison of 141 square 
miles, and now they were here. They could move about freely, could decide one 
day to go to the capital of the United States and be there a few hours later. 
No checkpoints, no bribes, no Hamas secret police. I’d seen Miriam suffer in 
Gaza because she refused to wear the hijab and favoured western clothes. In 
Gaza City, she was yelled at, cursed. “I hope your parents are proud!” people 
yelled to her. Now she was herself, uncovered, dressing as she chose. Her smile 
was incandescent.

The Statue of Liberty was built to welcome immigrants – that welcome must not 
end | Dave Eggers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/04/the-statue-of-liberty-immigrants-independence-day>
“I’m so sorry,” I said. I was apologising for what we’d done the day before. 
Electing the man who wanted to ban all Muslims from entering the country. The 
man who might bring Giuliani into a seat of unspeakable power. This could mean 
terrible things for Palestinians. There was already talk of the end of the 
two-state solution. Netanyahu, it was assumed, had danced all night.

“It’s OK,” they said.

They handed me a gift. It was a piece of the Gaza City airport. The airport 
had been destroyed by Israel in 2002. The piece they’d brought me was tiled; it 
looked like part of the airport bathroom. I thanked them, put the chunk of 
concrete in my bag, and we wondered aloud whether the security check at the 
museum would object to the entry of a shard of Gazan airport. We passed through 
the doors, and I was allowed to keep my bag with me, so we three, and part of 
the Gaza City airport, made our way through the museum’s halls. It was glorious 
of course, and altogether too much to take in in one day. We ate in the 
basement cafeteria, and talked about what was next. They would need an asylum 
lawyer, and fast. Ninety days, and then anything could happen.

“Don’t worry,” Mahmoud said.

The Gazan asylum seekers were telling me not to worry.

But I was worried. Worried enough to change their names in this piece. They 
aren’t Mahmoud and Miriam. We are entering an era where uniquely vindictive men 
will have uniquely awesome power. Dark forces have already been unleashed and 
terrible plans are being made. On 3 December, the Ku Klux Klan are holding 
their largest public rally in years, to celebrate Trump’s victory, which they 
claim as their own. I also changed Steven McManus’s name. I worried for him, as 
well.

You should be worried, too. George W Bush, a man of comparative calm and 
measured intellect, started two foreign wars and cratered the world economy. 
Trump is far more reckless.

We are speeding toward a dark corridor, my friends. Keep your eyes open, your 
hearts stout and be ready for the fight.

 * The Circle and A Hologram for the King. His latest book, Heroes of the 
Frontier, is published by Hamish Hamilton.
 