
It has famously been said 
<http://www.beverlymcphail.com/feminismradicalnotion.html> that feminism is the 
radical notion that women are people. While this distinction may seem obvious, 
it remains a confusing area for some – not least sports reporterJohn Inverdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/john-inverdale>. Congratulating Andy Murray 
on his second tennis Olympic gold medal,Inverdale told him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-john-inverdale-olympic-tennis-bbc-williams>
: “You’re the first person ever to win two Olympic tennis gold medals,” leaving 
Murray to point out: “Venus and Serena [Williams] have won about four each.”

Just days earlier, while commenting on the men’s rugby sevens event, Inverdale 
reportedly announced <https://twitter.com/mhughesuk/status/763859031958093824> 
that the winning team would be taking home the first-ever Olympic medal for the 
sport, despite the women’s title having already been claimed by Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/olympics-rugby-sevens-australian-women-win-gold-against-new-zealand>
 less than a week before. All this has led to the mystery of the week, the 
question on everybody’s lips: has Inverdale forgotten that women exist, or does 
he just not realise that they are people?

In fairness to Inverdale, he is far from alone. Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> have a pesky habit of slipping 
minds at important moments – just ask those reporters who discussed our 
hypothetical new prime minister using “he” and “him” before being left 
red-faced by Theresa May’s victory.

It’s not surprising that Murray picked up on the error – it’s only three years 
since he was lavishly congratulated on the front pages for ending the “77-year 
wait” for a British Wimbledon champion. Which is true.As long as you don’t 
consider Virginia Wade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shortcuts/2013/jul/08/virginia-wade-wimbledon-champion-tennis>
, who won Wimbledon in 1977, and three previous female winners since Fred 
Perry’s 1936 victory, to be people.

It is telling that we are so used to such omissions that Murray’s simple 
statement of fact about the Williams sisters has received rapturous applause 
across the media and the internet. Under the circumstances, it is remarkable 
and hugely welcome to see a man in his position be so thoughtful as to 
acknowledge women’s existence. But wouldn’t it be nice if it was the norm 
rather than the exception?

The problem isn’t confined to sport either. When Tim Peake was hailed in the 
media as the first Briton to blast off into space 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/tim-peake-isnt-the-first-brit-in-space---dont-forget-ballsy-york/>
 last December, it must have come as a surprise to Helen Sharman, who beat him 
to it by more than 20 years.

So ingrained is our society’s default male norm, in fact, that many media 
outlets choose to point out that people are female in newspaper headlines, as 
if the idea they aren’t male is as newsworthy as the event they were involved 
in:“Hero gas station clerk saves female doctor from suspected kidnapper” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3317805/Philadelphia-gas-station-clerk-hailed-hero-saving-woman-alleged-armed-kidnapper.html>
;“Female judge Constance Briscoe investigated over leaking Chris Huhne case, 
court told” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/female-judge-constance-briscoe-investigated-over-leaking-chris-huhne-case-court-told-8511662.html>
;“Female Belgian rower falls ill after racing on Guanabara bay” 
<http://www.ibtimes.com.au/rio-2016-olympics-female-belgian-rower-falls-ill-after-racing-guanabara-bay-1525249>
;“Woman cyclist fighting for life after horrific crash at danger junction” 
<http://www.camdennewjournal.com/woman-cyclist-crash>.

Handbags and kitten heels – how not to write about prime ministers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/12/theresa-may-handbags-and-kitten-heels-how-not-to-write-about-prime-ministers>
The same shock manifests itself when subjects deviate from other expected 
norms, too, as swimmer Simone Manuel discovered when her gold medal victory was 
reduced in headlines to:“Michael Phelps shares historic night with 
African-American” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/san-jose-mercury-news-rio-olympics-story_us_57ad7acbe4b007c36e4e2184>
. The implication is that white men are individuals – human beings in their own 
right, with personalities and quirks and rich, rounded lives – while other 
people are still defined as members of homogenous “othered” groups.

This matters beyond the technicality of who gets named in a headline. It 
impacts on how sympathetic our society is likely to be towards those described. 
It contributes to the stereotyping and vilification of entire groups who are 
tarred, sweepingly, with a single brush. It writes out of history those whose 
contributions we most need to highlight in order to rectify inequality in 
sport, science and other fields.

Leaving women out of the story isn’t a simple slip up. It is a consequence of 
a world that tells us they just aren’t quite as important. That their 
achievements don’t really count. It means that even in 2016, some of us do 
still need reminding that women are people, too.
 