
The Australia Day-themed lamb commercial starring Lee Lin Chin has come under 
fire for depicting a military campaign called “Operation Boomerang” on what is 
considered a day of anger and mourning for many Indigenous people.

Lee Lin Chin promises to rescue expats from lambless Australia Day in new ad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/10/lee-lin-chin-promises-to-rescue-expats-from-lambless-australia-day-in-new-ad>
The ad also attracted more than 50 complaints about a scene making fun of 
vegans.

The commercial for Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA), released online on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/10/lee-lin-chin-promises-to-rescue-expats-from-lambless-australia-day-in-new-ad>
, features SBS newsreader Chin leading a military operation to extract 
“stranded” Australians from around the world, bringing them home for an 
Australia Day lamb meal.

It features famous Australians including the former “lambassador”, Sam 
Kekovich, the Wallabies captain, Stephen Moore, and the retired cricketer, 
Mitchell Johnson.

The ad has been criticised for a number of reasons including the depiction of 
Australians militarily invading foreign countries and the appropriation of the 
Indigenous word “boomerang” to celebrate the arrival of European settlers.

Australia Day, also referred to as Invasion Day or Survival Day, routinely 
attracts protests against celebrating the arrival of the first fleet – the 
beginning of Indigenous dispossession, colonisation and massacres.

It’s time to forge a national day to unite original and new Australians | Paul 
Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/25/why-we-need-a-national-day-to-unite-original-and-new-australians>
Celeste Liddle, a trade unionist and social commentator on Indigenous and 
feminist issues, said while “boomerang” is a very commonly known word, it is 
still an Aboriginal term, and its use felt like misappropriation ahead of 
planned national protests by Indigenous groups and their supporters on 
Australia Day.

“We’re still very much trying to struggle for our rights and once again we’re 
being assimilated into a concept, this proud Australiana concept that a lot of 
us aren’t remotely comfortable with,” Liddle said.

“If we don’t like this proud Australiana sort of thing it ends up being our 
issue, rather than about the fact that [the boomerang] is our weaponry and a 
lot of us maintain a very different position on the settlement of Australia and 
what it means to us as a people.

“We don’t really appreciate being ignored while our images are being used.”

Ruby Hamad, a writer on race and feminist issues, said “[the ad] probably 
wouldn’t be so bad if not for the ‘boomerang’ ”.

“The issue with the ad is that it appropriates a specific aspect of a culture 
that is often derided and mocked in order to promote a supposed shared cultural 
celebration [Australia Day], which also happens to be one that many Aboriginal 
people feel largely excluded from because it has come at the expense of their 
own culture and history.”

Hamad said a lack of diversity in the Australian media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/australia-media> industry led to incidents 
like this.

“If there had been someone at the table who could have raised that issue and 
said, ‘Wait a minute. Look at what we’re actually doing here,’” she said.

“We’ve come to a place in our discussions on issues of racism where a lot of 
it’s not deliberate hatred and antagonism, it’s just blindly going through and 
not even thinking about how this affects people from different groups.”

The commercial, which will be screened on Australian television on Monday, 
also made a joke at the expense of vegans, attracting more than 50 complaints 
in 24 hours to the Advertising Standards Bureau,Mumbrella reported 
<http://mumbrella.com.au/torching-of-vegans-home-in-lamb-australia-day-ad-draws-dozens-of-ad-standards-complaints-338933#more-338933>
.

The complaints were primarily about the violence displayed when a man’s table 
is torched with a flame-thrower.

The ASB was fast-tracking its hearings for the complaints, given the short run 
for the ad.

 The group marketing manager for the MLA, Andrew Howie, said it was natural 
for a brand or produce to have a competitor. “For us, it’s non meat-eaters,” he 
said. “Last year we had a light-hearted jibe at the gluten-intolerant ... The 
year before there was a vegetarian gag.

“It’s a light-hearted joke.”

 Howie said the ad had been well-received and resonated with a lot of 
Australians who had spent extended periods overseas and been homesick on 
certain days and dates.

Howie said he had been unaware of criticism from Indigenous people and when 
making the ad did not consider using the word boomerang would be controversial.

“We’re a brand that’s for a long time celebrated what it is to be Australian 
and bringing people together,” he said. “The notion of boomerang is just 
something that returns and it seemed suitable given we were setting out to 
return Australians home.

“The thing with a campaign as high-profile as Australia Day is we set out to 
appeal to as many people as possible, but it’s impossible to appeal to 
everyone. That’s always a very tough balancing act.

“The higher the profile the greater risk you have with criticism, but it’s 
really important to note that every year what we set out to do is always in 
good will and ultimately in good humour.”

Australia Day is too political for it to be just a celebration, said Luke 
Pearson, founder of the IndigenousX Twitter account on which guest posters 
share their stories and opinions to increase awareness and education on 
Indigenous life and history.
Pearson In The Wind (@LukeLPearson) 
That Australia Day ad is funny; Australia invading all those countries... It's 
so good I think we should all call it#InvasionDay 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/InvasionDay?src=hash> instead.
 <https://twitter.com/LukeLPearson/status/685996384701399040> January 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LukeLPearson/status/685996384701399040> 
“That Australia Day ad is funny; Australia invading all those countries … It’s 
so good I think we should all call it #InvasionDay 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/InvasionDay?src=hash> instead,” he tweeted on 
Sunday.

“I just thought it was odd that on a day many of us call Invasion Day there’s 
an ad about Australia invading other countries to bring all those white guys 
‘home’,” he said.

“I did notice Sam Kekovich saying he wanted to avoid politics 
<http://www.news.com.au/finance/business/media/the-iconic-australia-day-lamb-campaign-ad-is-back-with-a-bang/news-story/52d718f45718e5fad4422ecace654679>
 and just celebrate a day where we can all come together as one though, and 
that is an awesome idea, and I’d love to have a day where we could do that to 
promote healing and harmony between all of the many peoples who now call these 
lands their home. It just can’t be on Invasion Day. It’s not a date which 
epitomises ‘bringing people together’. It is a date that celebrates invasion 
and colonialism.”
 