
“You’ll never raise that much!” This was the response from most of my friends 
and family when I shared my plans to crowdfund £500,000 to take my wine 
importing business to the high street.

I’d been importing wines directly from boutique vineyards for five years – 
selling them to private clients and hosting tastings for corporates. Many of my 
clients had suggested that a wine bar or shop would be a great way to showcase 
the wines and connect the winemakers to the customers. So, in May 2014, I 
looked into crowdfunding and felt that this would be the best way to raise some 
cash.


A few spreadsheets later, I’d decided that £500,000 was the amount required to 
cover the premium for the site, the first six months’ rent and other running 
costs, with a big chunk left over for marketing and potentially a second site 
soon after.


However, of all the challenges I’ve faced in business, funding was the easiest 
to overcome. The real challenge, and one I hadn’t considered would be a problem 
at all, was to find a site.

Shazam co-founder: 'We were growing a business in a collapsing market'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/dec/07/shazam-co-founder-we-were-growing-a-business-in-a-collapsing-market>
There seemed to be lots of sites available in central London, and after 
registering with a few agents, potential sites were emailed to me on a daily 
basis.


We were looking for a central London site, with Shoreditch as our favoured 
location. The agents were helpful enough, although none of them explained how 
the process really worked. They simply encouraged us to pitch. I fell in love 
with the first site we saw in Shoreditch, which was an old bank.


Immediately, as with finding a new home, I’d mentally moved in. I’d imagined 
where the bar would be, the tables, even designed the sign in my mind. But a 
few weeks later we were informed that the landlord had decided to go with 
another bar brand.


We continued looking and pitching. Each time we refined our pitch. Yet each 
time we were rejected. It seemed no landlord would consider us, because we were 
a new concept. It makes sense with hindsight. Why would a landlord gamble on a 
new venture, headed up by someone who had no experience running a wine bar, 
when they could opt for an established brand instead?


Nearly a year later, after we’d pitched for dozens of sites, our investors 
started asking questions. They were losing faith in us and some were even 
asking for their money back. We were starting to worry that we’d let them down. 
I was losing sleep. I registered with more agents. I scoured the 
businesses-for-sale websites and we kept pitching and pitching.

The market was booming and big brands were always given priority. All that was 
left for us were sites with huge premiums, £300,000 to £1m for the right to a 
lease. Our brand is Humble Grape. Our ethos is making great wines accessible to 
all. Only concepts with huge profit margins could pay back a premium like that, 
something I was not prepared to do. I knew I had to stick to my principles and 
not compromise the ethos of the brand.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhumble-grape-investors-wine-bar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b8cc804d5b2ded47b0c2504181dea64d9cb5762%2F13_199_4900_2939%2F4900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Our%20investors%20were%20losing%20faith%20in%20us%20and%20I%20was%20losing%20sleep'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhumble-grape-investors-wine-bar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Our%20investors%20were%20losing%20faith%20in%20us%20and%20I%20was%20losing%20sleep%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fhumble-grape-investors-wine-bar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b8cc804d5b2ded47b0c2504181dea64d9cb5762%2F13_199_4900_2939%2F4900.jpg>
 James Dawson, founder of Humble Grape wine business in London. Photograph: 
John Erskine 
Eventually, after yet more sleepless nights, I decided to take matters into my 
own hands. I ditched the agents and started walking the streets looking for 
bars and restaurants that might be failing that I could approach. As you might 
expect, the owners weren’t thrilled. They thought I was an agent and told me to 
go away. When they found out I was a business owner looking for a site they 
seemed even less receptive or else quoted a crazy sum to sell for. One small, 
and very empty, restaurant offered to sell for a £900,000 premium.

I finally had to accept our wine bar would not be in central London.


The following week, in February last year, my wife and I got chatting to a 
lady whose restaurant was behind our house, on Battersea Rise in south-west 
London. She told us she was in financial trouble and desperate to get out of 
the restaurant business. Straight away I made an offer, and she accepted. I 
spoke to the landlord the following day and he was happy with the arrangement.


Spread the word: rising business costs are manageable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/dec/12/rising-business-costs-pivot-minimum-wage-efficiency>
It wasn’t the ideal site; in fact, it was a big risk. It’s on the corner, at 
the top of Battersea Rise, without much footfall and had changed hands many 
times. However, I was determined to make it work. Within three months of 
opening, Humble Grape wine bar was buzzing. We quickly climbed to the number 
one slot on TripAdvisor and within six months word in the industry spread. 
Landlords started contacting me directly asking if I’d be interested in their 
sites.

Then an agent approached us about a site in central London, just off Fleet 
Street, formerly the Press HouseWine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wine> Bar. It was stunning and 
offered to us with no premium. It opened in May and has been a huge success.

Now it seems we can have our pick when it comes to sites. Yet if I hadn’t 
faced that initial challenge, I wouldn’t have realised that our offering worked 
as a neighbourhood wine bar, something which has heavily steered our future 
plans. And in desperation, I may have been tempted to compromise our ethos, 
which would have been suicide for our brand. I’m glad I kept it Humble and will 
continue to do so for all future sites. Whatever it takes.


James Dawson is founder of Humble Grape <http://www.humblegrape.co.uk/>

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 