
Much like Donald Trump’s candidacy for president, preparations for his 
inauguration on 20 January have been unorthodox. One main sticking point, 
making headlines in the music industry and beyond, is which artists Trump and 
his team can convince to play for the polarizing incoming president. Playing 
the inauguration, once a hallowed gig, has become a poisoned chalice, according 
to some.

The Beach Boys consider playing at Trump inauguration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/23/beach-boys-donald-trump-inauguration>
“It should come as no surprise that Trump’s team is struggling to find 
big-name entertainers for the inauguration,” notes the industry observer and 
freelance music journalist Steven J Horowitz. “If you look at the pre-election 
support from artists for the presidential nominees, Hillary Clinton was the 
overwhelming favorite.”


Top performers such as Katy Perry and Beyoncé came out in support of Clinton, 
with Trump struggling to gain backing from mainstream acts. His divisive 
rhetoric and statements made it difficult for artists to side with him and show 
support, even in traditionallyRepublican-siding genres like country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/03/country-music-election-politics>
, for fear of turning off fans. Beyond the tongue-in-cheek offer from Trump’s
bete noire Alec Baldwin, who suggested he could sing AC/DC’s Highway to Hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/23/alec-baldwin-donald-trump-inauguration-performance-offer-twitter>
, the president-elect has struggled to secure concrete offers.

According to a recent report 
<http://www.nbcwashington.com/news/local/DC-Area-Marching-Bands-Opt-to-Sit-Out-Trumps-Inaugural-Parade-406387625.html>
, not a single local Washington DC marching band has applied to perform during 
Trump’s swearing-in, making it the first time in decades regional band acts are 
not going to be involved in the festivities. For other artists, engaging in any 
form of politics is anathema, let alone when the politician you’d be backing is 
arguably the most controversial of the last 50 years in US politics.

“I think musicians are keenly aware of the dangers of isolating their fan 
bases by admitting they’re in favor of one political party over another,” notes 
Horowitz. “Artists who are traditionally non-political, like Bruno Mars and 
Justin Timberlake, risk making grand statements when they accept a gig like the 
Trump inauguration.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftrump-inauguration-music-performances-beach-boys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0670cfd1be600b4c8b3dcb140ab087b511dfb1%2F0_52_2757_1654%2F2757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Performing%20is%20a%20political%20statement'%3A%20who%20will%20play%20Donald%20Trump's%20inauguration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftrump-inauguration-music-performances-beach-boys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Performing%20is%20a%20political%20statement%27%3A%20who%20will%20play%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20inauguration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftrump-inauguration-music-performances-beach-boys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0670cfd1be600b4c8b3dcb140ab087b511dfb1%2F0_52_2757_1654%2F2757.jpg>
 Lip-sync battle: Barack Obama, right, as Beyoncé sings the national anthem at 
the ceremonial swearing-in Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
Howard Bragman, chairman of Fifteen Minutes Public Relations, echoes that 
sentiment. While he hasn’t been involved in inauguration planning, Bragman has 
advised a laundry list of high-profile celebrity clients over the years and 
knows the insight he’d offer if they were asked to perform. “In the past, one 
could say: ‘He’s the president,’” suggests Bragman. “But I’d tell a client who 
was asked that this one is different. In our politically charged world, 
performing for Trump is a political statement, and if one chooses to perform 
they should go in with their eyes wide open.”

At press time, the Trump team had managed to secure only one contemporary 
name: Jackie Evancho (althoughthe Beach Boys haven’t turned down the offer they 
received yet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/23/beach-boys-donald-trump-inauguration>
). The 16-year-old singer, who rose to fame on America’s Got Talent and has 
since launched a successful career, is slated to sing the national anthem. It 
was recently reported that the Mormon Tabernacle Choir was set to perform 
alongside the Marine Corps band, both positioned on the outdoor stand during 
Trump’s swearing-in, while the Rockettes will also perform.


'Country music has become apolitical': why have acts kept quiet on the 
election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/03/country-music-election-politics> 
The Italian tenor Andrea Bocelli was also approached by the Trump camp, but he 
declined the offer after a viral social media campaign dubbed #BoycottBocelli, 
in which his fans made their displeasure known. Meanwhile, curiously absent 
from discussions, at least so far, is the small crowd of artists who have 
publicly voiced their support of Trump, from the Vegas showman Wayne Newton to 
the country crooner Loretta Lynn and the rockerTed Nugent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/ted-nugent-grabs-crotch-donald-trump-rally-michigan-election>
.

The speculation and caution over taking the gig is in stark contrast to 
inaugurations past, none of which have met with such scrutiny. At Obama’s 
inauguration in 2013, the biggest controversy came whenBeyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> allegedly lip-synced the 
Star-Spangled Banner. Meanwhile, at Obama’s 2009 proceedings, performers 
included Aretha Franklin and Yo-Yo Ma, who provided a shareable moment rather 
than anything approaching controversy.

When George W Bush took office in 2001, he opted for a lineup of military 
choirs while also holding a full-blown concert boasting top pop acts of the 
day, such as Ricky Martin and Jessica Simpson. Past inaugural performers have 
included the likes of Mickey Rooney, on hand during Franklin D Roosevelt’s 
swearing-in in 1941, and Frank Sinatra, who handled the entertainment for John 
F Kennedy’s 1961 festivities.

Unlike any other year, however, the overarching theme of performing at Trump’s 
swearing-in is that of risk. “An artist would be risking too much,” notes 
Horowitz. “Their career, their fan base, their relationships in the music 
industry. As one of the most divisive president-elects in history, Trump 
shouldn’t be surprised that he’s facing a lack of support.”

Musicians who have turned Trump down:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftrump-inauguration-music-performances-beach-boys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faabd56f53055e6bbd7a26653b44b0e6946e87a3e%2F170_409_3811_2287%2F3811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Performing%20is%20a%20political%20statement'%3A%20who%20will%20play%20Donald%20Trump's%20inauguration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftrump-inauguration-music-performances-beach-boys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Performing%20is%20a%20political%20statement%27%3A%20who%20will%20play%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20inauguration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftrump-inauguration-music-performances-beach-boys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faabd56f53055e6bbd7a26653b44b0e6946e87a3e%2F170_409_3811_2287%2F3811.jpg>
 Elton John Photograph: Atlantico/REX/Shutterstock 
Elton John 

John was the subject of initial speculation about Trump’s inaugural after 
Anthony Scaramucci, vice-chairman of the inauguration committee, floated his 
name. John’s camp retaliated with the simple statement: “Elton will not be 
performing at a Trump inauguration.”

Garth Brooks 

The country singer was also approached by the Trump camp and initially seemed 
open to the possibility in the press. However, he ultimately declined the offer.

David Foster

The Canadian mega-producer, who has worked with everyone from Alice Cooper to 
Mary J Blige, was rumored to have also been approached by the Trump camp to 
have a hand in planning the proceedings. Foster confirmed he was indeed asked, 
but he later nixed the idea, saying on Instagram that he “politely and 
respectfully declined”.

Gene Simmons

The Kiss frontman has praised Trump in the past (calling him “the truest 
political animal”), but later declined due to scheduling conflicts.
 