
I signed up to take a bus to canvass voters on behalf of the Democratic party 
inPhiladelphia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philadelphia> two days 
before the election because of fear. Fear of a Trump presidency. Fear that I 
could have tried harder. Fear that if the worst happens, it would be my fault.

My day door-knocking with Trump supporters: 'It’s like a French revolution'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/donald-trump-supporters-door-to-door-campaign-pennsylvania>
“What did you do in the election?” I imagined my nephews saying, in a 
post-Trumpalyptic world. I went to Philadelphia so that at least I could say, 
“Well, on a Sunday in early November, I knocked on some doors.”

But I’m hardly your typical hardcore Clinton supporter. I do want her to be 
the next president of the United States, but I’ve not yet peeled the 
“Billionaires can’t buy Bernie” sticker off my laptop. For most of the 
election, the lack of excitement I felt about Clinton was enough to keep me 
from getting more involved. I didn’t care that she was bad at managing email – 
so am I, to be fair – but I just wasn’t inspired by her ideas.

But then I became anxious. In that, I was not alone. As the election nears, 
across America 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2016/09/trump_induced_anxiety_is_a_real_thing.html>
 there are reports of rising anxiety in people opposed to Trump – especially 
women, people of color, LGBTQ people and children. I posted on Facebook: did 
anyone else want to deal with their anxiety by coming to knock on doors in 
Pennsylvania, the nearest swing state to where we live in Brooklyn? My friend 
Sid offered to join me. Even better, she offered to drive us from Brooklyn to 
Philadelphia in her car so we could leave seats on the campaign bus for other 
volunteers.

A year on the US election campaign trail: 'There's an irresistible energy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/us-election-campaign-trail-presidential-race-images>
When we arrived at the field office in the neighborhood of Fishtown in 
Philadelphia, a tall young man at the door signed us in. “Take a sticker,” he 
said, indicating a big roll of Clinton-Kaine labels, designed for lapels. Then 
he gave us our instructions: we were to only talk to registered voters who 
planned to vote for Clinton – and not try to change the minds of Trump 
supporters. Our job was to ensure that everyone knew how to get to their 
polling place on Tuesday and to remind them to bring ID and vote early. If they 
seemed unsure about their decision, our script directed us to say “I can 
certainly understand not being sure” and to choose one of three reasons why we 
had decided to support Clinton: her support for children and families. Her 
preparation and experience. The fact that “she never quits anything she 
believes in” and “keeps fighting when she gets knocked down”. None of the 
reasons had to do withbeing terrified of fascism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/donald-trump-nigel-farage-fascists-intolerance>
.

Fishtown was once home to the Delaware river’s shad fishing industry. Today, 
many of the narrow, cozy-looking rowhouses in the town are still decorated with 
fishy motifs, but they house middle-class families, young couples, groups of 
cohabiting twentysomething roommates. The people in the neighborhood we covered 
were predominately white.


I know these demographics in part because this is the nature of canvassing: in 
a couple of hours, you get an unprecedented window into the homes of the 
strangers who open their doors to you. Roommates sitting around coffee tables. 
Some foyers were lit with fancy chandeliers; others with modest lamps in paper 
shades. A woman drinking a beer and making a delicate watercolor.

In Fishtown, very few people had doorbells. Maybe they’re obsolete devices in 
an era where no one stops by unexpectedly. Showing up unannounced is an act of 
social awkwardness in 2016. Many folks didn’t answer their doors to us. Why 
would they? We stuck Post-It notes by their doorknobs with details to remind 
them to vote.

US election: five scenarios that could play out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/five-scenarios-us-election-results-predictions>
Sid and I divided the work. I talked. She identified houses and names, tracked 
responses and directions on the clipboard. Some people we spoke to were happy 
to see us. “You’re doing great work!”. Some people were less happy. “I’ve 
talked to ten of you in the last few days!” said a woman in a house with jaunty 
autumnal decorations in her windows, before shutting her door.

This is the burden that people living in Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> and other swing states must 
carry for all of America: relinquishing their right to a quiet Sunday afternoon 
at home two days before the election. One household erected a friendly sign: 
“Dear HRC volunteers,” it read, in buoyant handwriting, “We can’t wait to elect 
the first female president ... Please skip our door and go knock where it’s 
needed. Thank you for all your hard work.” It was signed with a heart.

Sunset in Fishtown was rosy and beautiful. Sid and I finished all of the 
houses on our list – 74 – and started to walk back to the office. The streets 
were mostly quiet. Two men walked past us, across the street. “He’s gonna vote 
for Trump!” one called over, pulling on his friend’s sleeve. “Nah,” said the 
friend, “I’m not gonna vote for anyone!” We shook our heads. Our work was done.

 