
You can tell everything about a person, says a common piece of wisdom, by how 
he or she treats the waiter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/15/never-trust-anyone-rude-waiter>
. It’s a dependable and convenient yardstick, given how the bistro tables and 
corner booths are, very often, the places where we decide upon whom we let into 
our lives – acquaintances who might become dear friends, depending on how urged 
we feel to linger on after the bill has been dropped; those we may choose as 
colleagues, gauging by whether their ideas are so dull we require a second 
coffee; dates who remain just that, failing somehow to attach to our ideas 
about the futures we’ve imagined. Beyond bantering with the staff or failing 
to, forgiving the waitress her misstep or snapping at her for it, there’s 
another element of our comportment as diners that serves as a kind of 
shorthand: the public element of the transaction ends up serving as a kind of 
censor, limiting the largeness of our expression but placing a premium on the 
smallest of gestures and phrases. In the expensive cities where I’ve spent all 
my adult life, where the luxury of the space to cook is rare and a halfway 
point between subway stops seems the only polite solution, white tablecloths 
and Edison bulbs and pale green espresso machines have almost always been the 
backdrop when I have chosen people, and likewise when I have let them go.

Shortly after I arrived in New York, 22, the ragtag child of hippies, a girl 
who had never learned to use a fork and knife quite correctly, I sold my first 
novel and began attending the sort of meals I’d rarely been able to afford 
before. The first came as a surprise; my editor called late one afternoon to 
let me know that the house’s publisher, an imposing and rigorous woman with an 
interrogative Belgian accent, happened to be in town from Boston the next 
morning. Could I have breakfast at the ungodly hour of 8am, somewhere uptown? I 
have always been the type of person who remains monosyllabic until noon, but I 
agreed, with the kind of excitement I have never felt before or since. It 
seemed I had entered the next part of my life. I wore a pencil skirt striped 
vertically in blue and white and a short-sleeved secretary blouse in peach silk 
and some absurd purple suede flats, still convinced glamour was something that 
waved and winked from every angle. Early to arrive in the empty dining room, I 
sat alone at a pristine table in the deepening morning light and watched the 
water glasses take on the greens of the park across the street. When they 
showed up, both towering over me at six feet, my editor hugged me but the 
publisher only shook my hand. It was the first in a series of what could only 
be described as appraisals. My coffee had only just appeared when the 
publisher, who had spent the first 20 years of her career as aLacanian 
psychoanalyst <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacques_Lacan>, looked at me with 
the scrutiny of a fairytale stepmother before launching a missile into the 
conversation. Jacques Lacan, I had read, believed the heart of the matter could 
be reached in under three minutes; this woman apparently believed she could 
trim that down to 30 seconds. Our orders not yet taken, she asked, in reference 
to my novel, which concerned two children who grow up as neighbours and enter a 
sexual relationship too early, “What happened to you? Incest?” It makes me 
laugh now to think of it, having to address that query before I was even 
caffeinated, but at the time I was nailed to my chair, actually apologising, 
“No, actually, but …” flailing to provide the biographical summary that would 
explain my dark little book. What did I learn there – besides that I didn’t 
trust the Lacanian method? That I was afraid of a person who could speak so 
freely before espresso, that I communed best with those who were soft and 
gentle in a conversation’s opening notes. In the many lunches I shared with my 
first editor after that, we babied each other upon greeting, complimenting 
earrings and taking quick squeezes of the other’s hands, and it was in that way 
we developed the space in which we could truly discuss the work before us. She 
also never winced when I sent a fork clattering to the floor or managed to 
leave a little childish halo of breadcrumbs around my plate, but rather asked 
for a new utensil and swiped a napkin across the table I’d littered without a 
word, small acts of elegant kindness for which I’ll always be grateful. It is 
those who cringe easily, or ask for a more appropriate spoon to stir their 
americano, or apologise for the volume of the music, who are the most likely to 
prove rigid and pedantic colleagues. To put it another way, I would never do 
business with anyone who would never drink wine out of a plastic cup.
 Illustration: Eili-Kaija Kuusniemi 
My dining manners, I’m happy to say, have improved with time, but I spent half 
a decade with a man made deeply uncomfortable by them, as well as any marked 
public sentiment, and it took a great portion of that relationship to 
understand that the emotional censorship in place for him and not for me when 
out to eat was an indicator of how intrinsically, prohibitively different we 
were. In the months after my mother died, we ate out constantly, neither of us 
able to care for ourselves or the other, and though she was the only thing on 
my mind we had to develop a kind of semaphore for talking about her; worried it 
might bring me to tears, he didn’t believe it was proper dinner discussion, but 
I had little else of which to speak. In one of many such conversations, which 
took place in a Brooklyn farm-to-table establishment where the staff were 
rumoured to have breastfed their children while taking orders of grass-fed 
meat, we discussed our different attitudes about grief under the systematic 
metaphor of someone who has lost a limb.

“What would I say if you had lost your arm,” he began. “It would be 
insensitive to go around talking about it all the time, pointing out your 
disability.”

I’m embarrassed to admit that my rejoinder came in the form of a primordial 
hiss. “You would say, ‘I’m so sorry about your arm,’” I replied. “You would 
say, ‘I know you must not believe it’s actually gone.’”

It puts a pain in my ribcage to think of us, now, unable to enjoy those peach 
chutneys and mushrooms foraged upstate, both of us intent on conversing in a 
way the other could not stomach. Some time towards the end, during a month we 
spent on my native northern California coast, I braked and accelerated around 
serpentine curves to get us to Nick’s, an oyster bar always rich with the 
smells of eucalyptus and the bay lapping just below the window. Given my 
foolish tendency to see favourite places as talismanic, I hoped that the visit 
would restore something we’d neglected or forgotten. It was late afternoon and 
beginning to rain by the time we settled into the dark wood dining room, and we 
were one of a few tables, and there was no music, only the tinks of spoons 
hunting the last of the clam chowder. The water stretched and glowed and after 
10 minutes we were bickering, following a squalid conversation to its rotten 
end: I had wanted to behave loudly, to tell bawdy punchlines, to lean 
dramatically across the table and kiss him, and he had stiffened like an 
austere grade school teacher and tsked my outsized affection. There was nothing 
the matter with my inclination, but neither, I’ve come to think, was there with 
his. During the drive that followed, which felt reflective in the manner of 
incarceration, I finally saw the way we functioned in restaurants as the 
performance of our relationship that it was. Like the appearance of a rich meal 
in a room with a view made me loose with feelings of all kinds, I needed my 
life to mimic the arrival of courses, for milestones to be processed and the 
next step to be celebrated and the closing of the ceremony to be well-noted. My 
ex-boyfriend, who had grown up in a home where the dinner table was a great 
stage of conflict and eventually divorce, wanted to live his life very much 
inside of himself, for one phase to pass seamlessly into the next. He wanted 
the hushed and gentle description of specials, the plates brought without 
fanfare, the matter of who was to pay and whom was owed never discussed. The 
greatest luxury, to him, the greatest comfort, was quiet. I will never eat that 
way and I will probably never live that way, but now that I’ve left it puts a 
happy tear in my eye to think of him in his favoured seat, at the marble bar of 
an Italian restaurant we visited at least once a week, never talking too long, 
never glancing at himself in the long mirrors, folding the pages of theTimes 
back along the old-fashioned wooden holder.

If my understanding of my working and romantic lives has been helped by 
observing colleagues and lovers as diners, my assessment of friends has been 
supplied almost entirely by seeing them in this way: it is easy, in the setting 
of a restaurant, to offer the little kindnesses that reveal an innate 
generosity, and easier still to withhold them. I often think of the poise of 
the friend who, should the water carafe become empty, without commenting or 
asking, raises her pretty hand to transfer a swallow from her glass into mine. 
Likewise fondly remembered is the pal who, upon receiving his dish but noting 
the absence of yours, asks after it on your behalf – in the transference of the 
question from your mouth to his, it changes from a complaint to a gesture of 
affection. It’s a small act, but it’s the selfsame equation that matters in 
times of crisis, when our friends are willing to ask questions we cannot, to 
meet the needs we are helpless even to voice. The person who scans the whole 
table at a group dinner, asking after untouched appetisers and drinks that 
seemed daring but ended up exorbitantly sweetened, is always the one who calls 
to check in without our having to say we need that, always the one who shows up 
with the little trinket or surprising plan that provides a needed shift of 
focus.

I feel privileged to know this, having spent this summer licking the wounds of 
the aforementioned separation, shuttling between guest rooms and airports while 
I looked for a new home, seeing friends always in public although everything 
about my life felt dark and private. In Los Angeles, a girlfriend from 
adolescence made us reservations at her favourite restaurant, a converted 
Craftsman home with a narrow, twinkling back patio of two tops. In a brilliant 
gauge of my assertiveness at that moment – why does making the largest decision 
always render us incapable of facing the tiniest? – she ordered a litany of 
small plates, charred chilli octopus and watermelon salad and pâté with 
pomegranate, without truly consulting me, only squeezing my hand under the 
table as she spoke. All you have to do right now, she was saying, is show up. 
The rest has been arranged. It was an act of compassion that caught in my 
throat, as was the tendency of a friend in New York to look out for my newly 
diminished appetite. A blond and a gesticulator who functions as a devoted 
diplomat in our group of friends, forever on the phone, forever making 
another’s emergency his emergency, he took me to lunch as though it were his 
vocation. Though my normal meal tends to include a cream-based soup and an 
amount of bread that would cover any dieting witnesses in sweat, this summer I 
often felt undeserving of anything rich or warm, and I took to ordering enough 
kale and quinoa to bore even a rabbit. The friend in question would let me 
order my anaemic beet dish without protest, but then he’d put in a side of 
fries “to share”. Oh, I’d say, once his heaping sandwich arrived. But yours 
already comes with some. He’d feign weary surprise and gingerly place a 
half-eaten one on the side of the plate and mutter, like a heartbroken 
fatalist: “We can’t send it back now. I guess you’ll have to eat them all.”

I’m already losing the visceral memory of splitting up a home and a life, how 
it felt to recycle the children’s books I bought for daughters we never had, to 
leaf through the dinner party guest book we kept so zealously, convinced we’d 
return to it fond decades later. What I see instead is the flashing wrists of 
the friends who batted away my advances on the bill, the wine lists pushed 
across the table as though they were contracts that needed my signature 
immediately. I’ve learned to be many things in a restaurant – a young woman in 
love, intent on communicating a great breadth of affection or hurt with a 
certain touch of another’s elbow or a failure to look up; a writer learning to 
speak about her work, to understand that she must never apologise for it – but 
of all these educations in miniature, it’s the lessons in platonic devotion for 
which I’m most grateful. Sometimes I consider how foolish it is for someone 
with a middling income to spend considerable money and time on the theatre of 
eating out, and I have certainly snorted at the preposterousness of the hay 
reduction or the dinner menu sewn into some vintage book, but I can’t think of 
the institution that has taught me more – about who I am, and who I’ll sit 
across from, and when to ask for the bill.

Kathleen Alcott is the author of Infinite Home (Harper Collins, £8.99). To 
order a copy for £7.64 go tobookshop.theguardian.com  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378901/>or call 0330 
333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of 
£1.99




This article was taken from Observer Food Monthly on 15 January 2017. Click 
here 
<https://imvoucher.uk/Templates/register/go/4/register.aspx?INTCMP=gdnwb_mawns_editorial_newspapers_Jan-newspapers-editorialfoot_>
 to get the Observer for half price.
 