
When asked what makes Edinburgh a worthy winner of 2016’s entrepreneurial city 
of the year award, Jim Galloway, head of enterprise and innovation at the city 
council, said: “Edinburgh was the original seat of enlightenment in the 18th 
century. David Hume, Adam Smith, Robert Burns walked the streets of Edinburgh, 
they bumped into each other, and into the common people as well. This is still 
part of whatEdinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> is today. We 
are now the seat of the enlightenment point two.”

It was Galloway, remembers Lucy-Rose Walker, CEO of accelerator 
Entrepreneurial Spark <http://www.entrepreneurial-spark.com/>, who had the 
vision to turn Edinburgh into a startup hub. He’d been inspired after hearing 
about Boston, which is among the top startup hubs in the US.

“He always said he wanted to make Edinburgh an incubator – for the city to be 
seen as one,” she says. Entrepreneurial Spark worked closely with Galloway when 
it opened an office in the city in 2013. “I certainly think that’s what they’ve 
been able to achieve.”


Edinburgh beat London, Cambridge and Manchester to the title at the Great 
British Entrepreneur awards <http://www.greatbritishentrepreneurawards.com/>, 
judged on its quality of life, access to capital and talent, entrepreneurial 
culture and access to support networks. One of the judges, Michael Baxter, 
group editor of the Fresh Business Thinking group, said about the decision: “If 
you talk to the people in Edinburgh who are trying to drive its 
entrepreneurism, you detect pride, a real sense they love the city and want it 
to thrive.”


Edinburgh is home to two unicorn startups, so-called because they’ve been 
valued at more than $1bn (£800m), FanDuel and Skyscanner, the latter of which 
was recentlybought by the Chinese company Ctrip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/skyscanner-sold-to-chinas-ctrip-in-14bn-deal>
 for £1.4bn. Gareth Williams set up the business in his spare room in 2003. He 
has seen the city’s business landscape change considerably over that time.


“In the years following the dotcom bust, being an internet economy startup in 
Edinburgh felt a little lonely. The scene could not be more different now,” he 
says. “There’s a real kinship between fellow startups and internet economy 
businesses here … the community is incredibly open in sharing lessons, 
something that is both refreshing and valuable.”

Mentorship and a strong network is something that comes up time and time 
again, when entrepreneurs are asked what makes Edinburgh a worthy winner of 
this award. CEO of cyber security firmZoneFox <https://zonefox.com/>, Dr Jamie 
Graves, says the tech scene in particular is booming, partly because of other 
success stories.

“We’ve got Skyscanner and FanDuel leading the way. In terms of the quality of 
mentoring support, you have got a lot of people who have started and exited 
their businesses and still live up here … [and] you’ve got people who’ve made 
some cash, who are interested in seed or angel investment.”

He adds that Edinburgh’s relatively small size as a city, makes it the perfect 
microcosm for entrepreneurs, and has been an asset when it comes to boosting 
innovation and trying your idea out on the market. There are an estimated
498,800 people living in the city 
<http://www.edinburgh.gov.uk/downloads/file/7975/edinburgh_by_numbers_2016>, 
compared to London’s 8.67 million.

“It’s a small place, but you can reach different types of industries and 
perspectives in order to test your ideas out quite quickly,” he says. “There’s 
no such thing as a solid career path any more … If you’ve got an idea, everyone 
else is doing it, why not you.”

One woman who asked herself that very question was Alex Feechan, founder of 
FINDRA <https://findra.co.uk/>, which specialises in female mountain biking and 
outdoor wear. Feechan was a successful knitwear designer with 20 years’ 
experience when she received an email fromScottish Enterprise 
<https://www.scottish-enterprise.com/> inviting ideas for a cycling or mountain 
biking business. Feechan had taken up mountain biking a year or two before but 
had been disappointed with the women’s clothing, describing it as a “pink it 
and shrink it” version of the men’s line.


“It’s bizarre,” she says. “I remember the day I received it. I was in a really 
good job, but I thought ‘yeah, I’ve got an idea’.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fstartup-edinburgh-city-entrepreneur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4a65fcdff9384e074c279022a945bee2adeb702%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Seat%20of%20enlightenment'%3A%20How%20Edinburgh%20became%20startup%20city%20of%20the%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fstartup-edinburgh-city-entrepreneur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Seat%20of%20enlightenment%27%3A%20How%20Edinburgh%20became%20startup%20city%20of%20the%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fstartup-edinburgh-city-entrepreneur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4a65fcdff9384e074c279022a945bee2adeb702%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Alex Feechan, founder of FINDRA. Photograph: Graham Riddell Photography 
 It seems an incredibly proactive move from a government body, but one that is 
indicative of how the organisation works. Scottish Enterprise had recognised 
the growing interest in cycling in the country, particularly among tourists, 
and wanted to encourage homegrown entrepreneurs to explore the market further.


Eleanor Mitchell, entrepreneurial growth and grant management director for 
Scottish Enterprise, says the organisation’s approach to startups has changed 
considerably over the past couple of years – particularly when it comes to 
talent coming out of Edinburgh’ssix universities 
<http://www.citymetric.com/horizons/which-british-city-has-most-universities-and-whats-largest-city-without-any-2157>
. The city’s student population makes upapproximately 7% 
<http://www.edinburgh.gov.uk/downloads/file/7975/edinburgh_by_numbers_2016> of 
all of its residents, aged 16-64.


“[Back then] we were at the start of a review [with the Stanford Research 
Institute] of how we support entrepreneurship and commercialisation of 
university technology in particular,” Mitchell says.

“[We looked at] how we translate more of that academic strength into 
commercial opportunities in Scotland that [can] grow to scale. How do we get 
the right people with commercial experience alongside our technology 
entrepreneurs … how do we get them to understand their competition on an 
international marketplace, and get out there?”

International vision is a key focus for Scottish Enterprise, which Mitchell 
says is needed if these businesses are to grow to scale and benefit the broader 
economy. With its support, and that of Scottish Development International, 
Feechan was taken to a cycling trade show in Europe before FINDRA had even 
launched, where she met potential wholesale customers and the cycling industry 
media.

“I got a huge amount of feedback and interest, plus some really good PR,” she 
says. The business, which launched in December 2014, now has a commercial 
agreement with the online cycling superstore, Wiggle, andwon an international 
bike industry 
<http://www.bikeradar.com/women/gear/article/findra-is-breaking-the-mould-with-grown-up-mountain-bike-kit-for-women-46312/>
 design and innovation award.

Feechan believes much of her success has been down to her involvement with 
Entrepreneurial Spark, which taught her how to think like a business owner. 
“What it does that is different from government funded bodies is it focuses on 
what the entrepreneur has to do themselves to achieve their goals and vision.”

A Scottish export itself, Entrepreneurial Spark now has 12 offices around the 
UK – Edinburgh was its third. The accelerator works with an estimated 1,000 
entrepreneurs a year, including around 100 companies in the Scottish capital.

“We really felt we needed to be there because you could see the 
entrepreneurial spirit in the city, which was growing,” Walker says. “Our ethos 
is about putting the entrepreneur at the heart of everything we do, and every 
decision is based on that. The city council have [also] been doing that … 
There’s a can-do attitude.”

And while there are bigger markets around the world, Williams at Skyscanner 
believes their future would not have been so bright if they’d moved somewhere 
else. “At one point in our early years we debated whether we should move to 
somewhere like Silicon Valley, I don’t believe we’d have been so successful had 
we started out there, in such a fail-fast environment.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 