
I first came to Istanbul on a wave of youthful romanticism, making my way 
across eastern Europe on foot, treading woodland paths from the Baltic to the 
Bosphorus. I was 26 years old. I stood beneath the dome ofAya Sofia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/08/istanbul-city-guide-eat-drink-hotels-galleries>
 in awe. The bread in the cafes was dazzlingly fresh, the mackerel straight 
from the boat, and in theGrand Bazaar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/blog/2012/sep/27/grand-bazzar-istanbul-restaurants-eating>
 a concoction of mint and chicken blew away months of dreary, Soviet-style 
meals.
 The Grand Bazaar. Photograph: Sergio Delle Vedove/Getty Images 
Istanbul is a turnstile – between Asia and Europe, the Black Sea and the 
Mediterranean. A medieval ambassador to the sultan’s court once said it seemed 
designed by nature to be the capital of the world, and I still get goosebumps 
when I stand overlooking the Bosphorus, watching a supertanker, a Russian 
submarine or a Ukrainian ferry gliding through the heart of the city. Istanbul 
feels powerfully geopolitical. Given that it was Constantinople, successively 
capital of Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman empires, perhaps that’s not so 
surprising. Ataturk demoted it when he made Ankara the capital, but you can 
still sense the power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50a0c43e510b1e52c01e8e22813d5d09a5284c5b%2F574_0_2592_2592%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Standing%20by%20the%20Bosphorus%20gives%20me%20goosebumps%E2%80%99%3A%20Jason%20Goodwin's%20Istanbul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Standing%20by%20the%20Bosphorus%20gives%20me%20goosebumps%E2%80%99%3A%20Jason%20Goodwin%27s%20Istanbul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50a0c43e510b1e52c01e8e22813d5d09a5284c5b%2F574_0_2592_2592%2F2592.jpg>
 Jason Goodwin 
It’s a city with history on every corner – a Roman inscription, a Byzantine 
wall, an Ottoman fountain. You move between civilisations in a couple of steps. 
The whole city seems layered, from the Roman cisterns and ruins underfoot to 
the top of the 14th-century Galata Tower. It has style and grandeur and 
spectacular views. Istanbul is a very hilly city: seven hills, like Rome, they 
always say. You can always find a breeze, even in high summer.


One of the great pleasures of the city is to escape onto the water – you don’t 
have to take a tourist boat, just hop on one of the old ferries, thevapur, that 
shuttle between the Asian and European sides, or go up the Bosphorus to 
Ortaköy. There you can sit out with a glass of tea and watch the city’s domes 
slide into view along the Golden Horn – the Blue Mosque, Aya Sofia, the 
Süleymaniye. Just avert your eyes from the mood-busting skyscrapers that have 
started springing up on the skyline.

Istanbul’s growth over the past 25 years has been explosive: a city of two 
million is now 14 million, and you can feel the resulting buzz. But the 
central, historic districts are surprisingly intimate, intricate and walkable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536837b11dab9b72d0108272a9f96c4ed5018f16%2F0_319_4529_2717%2F4529.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Standing%20by%20the%20Bosphorus%20gives%20me%20goosebumps%E2%80%99%3A%20Jason%20Goodwin's%20Istanbul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Standing%20by%20the%20Bosphorus%20gives%20me%20goosebumps%E2%80%99%3A%20Jason%20Goodwin%27s%20Istanbul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536837b11dab9b72d0108272a9f96c4ed5018f16%2F0_319_4529_2717%2F4529.jpg>
 The Galata tower. Photograph: Lefteris Pitarakis/AP 
Aya Sofia – the Church of the Holy wisdom – was built in the sixth century and 
is one of the wonders of the world. Now is a good time to visit, without 
crowds. Its sheer volume is overwhelming, and it was the first building to 
solve the puzzle of placing a circular dome on a square base, almost a thousand 
years before Brunelleschi fudged it in Florence.

The Blue Mosque, with its Iznik tiles, is lovely  – but I prefer the 
16th-century mosque of Rüstem Pasha, down in a side-street off the Spice 
Bazaar. It’s a great little street, too, with a shop selling everything sharp 
from hairdresser’s scissors to pruning knives, always crowded. I hunt for the 
dark stone staircase between the shops and step up onto a platform above the 
bustle and noise, a quiet court fronting a mosque. It was built by Mimar Sinan, 
the architect behind the Topkapı Palace kitchens and the great Süleymaniye 
mosque (he was appointed chief royal architect in his 50s and carried on 
getting better and better until he was almost 100 years old), and it is 
panelled in the finest Iznik tiles. There’s also a very decent kebab shop 
opposite, where you sit out on tiny stools and eat for a pittance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe93c738f62142a992af333662083b76c645f6353%2F0_32_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Standing%20by%20the%20Bosphorus%20gives%20me%20goosebumps%E2%80%99%3A%20Jason%20Goodwin's%20Istanbul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Standing%20by%20the%20Bosphorus%20gives%20me%20goosebumps%E2%80%99%3A%20Jason%20Goodwin%27s%20Istanbul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe93c738f62142a992af333662083b76c645f6353%2F0_32_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 The Rustem Pasha mosque. Photograph: Alamy 
It’s touristy but the Grand Bazaar is a must-visit: a warren of arcades with 
its own mosques and hammams. Speaking of which,Doctor’s No 1 
<http://www.egintekstil.com/> does very fine hammam towels and other textiles. 
I always like the Book Bazaar at the northern end, and in particular Dilmen 
Kitabevi, a tiny crammed bookshop selling old and new books in every language, 
including English. The last book I bought there was about the Ottomans’ sex 
lives. Fascinating stuff, weirdly translated by Google. There are also some 
good bookshops along the old Grande Rue, Istiklal Caddesi, which is Istanbul’s 
Oxford Street.

Being a nostalgist, I adore staying at the old Grande Hotel de Londres 
<http://www.londrahotel.net/>, in the lively Pera district. It hasn’t been 
dolled up and it still exudes an air of raffish melancholy.

With a 500-year tradition of palace cooking, Istanbul is a food-lover’s 
paradise, whether you’re after smoky kebabs or delicious vegetables, pilafs and 
puddings: tryÇiya Sofrasi <http://www.ciya.com.tr/> in Kadiköy. Check out 
Istanbul Eats <http://istanbuleats.com/> to winkle out good local places to try.
Kantin <http://kantin.biz/lokanta> in Nişantaşi is a chic place to eat, and 
serves Gallipoli white wines – Turkey’s wines can be brilliant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37e63d6ae120f9f4f9b5102aad534628e2fb931b%2F0_79_951_571%2F951.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Standing%20by%20the%20Bosphorus%20gives%20me%20goosebumps%E2%80%99%3A%20Jason%20Goodwin's%20Istanbul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Standing%20by%20the%20Bosphorus%20gives%20me%20goosebumps%E2%80%99%3A%20Jason%20Goodwin%27s%20Istanbul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fistanbul-turkey-bosphorus-jason-goodwin-why-i-love-byzantine-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37e63d6ae120f9f4f9b5102aad534628e2fb931b%2F0_79_951_571%2F951.jpg>
 A dish at the Kantin restaurant in Nişantaşi 
Ever since I first walked in through the ancient city walls Istanbul has 
dominated my writing life. I’ve written about the city in travel books, and a 
history, and five mystery novels set in the 19th century when Ottoman Istanbul 
was as cosmopolitan as modern London.

• Jason Goodwin is author of Yashim Cooks Istanbul: Culinary Adventures in the 
Ottoman Kitchen (Argonaut Books £25). To order a copy for £20.50 inc UK p&p go 
tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/yashim-cooks-istanbul-culinary-adventures-in-the-ottoman-ki.html>
 