
The death of former England manager Graham Taylor was met with a wealth of 
tributes from our readers. Supporters of the clubs he managed, including 
Lincoln City, Watford andAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>, shared stories of their 
encounters with the man, alongside a general appreciation of his achievements 
and character.

‘A really decent man’

Graham Taylor made Lincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> into 
a goal machine in 1975-76. We scored over 100 goals and set a points record 
that hasn’t been beaten under the two-points-for-a win system. He would take 
Lincoln’s players around the city, to the factories, to the shops, the stores, 
the offices to meet the supporters. His point was: “They pay to watch you at 
work and now they’re letting you watch them work for free – never lose sight 
that supporters are the lifeblood of football.”

In 1976, Taylor was also asked to give some help the Lykewake Walk – a charity 
15 mile trek across the Viking Way on the Lincolnshire Wolds. All the 
dignitaries and councillors turned up for the start at the village of Bigby at 
9am on a Sunday morning and stood around waiting for Graham to turn up and cut 
the ribbon to start it. At around 9.30am, along he comes, with his usual 
customary smile and a word for everyone. “Sorry I’m a bit late.”. Turned out 
that rather than just turn up and start the walk, he’d driven to the finish at 
Tealby, then jogged the whole distance to be at the start. He then walked it 
again along with all those who had come out to join him. A really, really 
decent man.StuartRG <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1464967>

‘One of the good guys’


Very sad news. He took Watford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> 
from the fourth division to the top tier and once managed a runners-up finish. 
Then he took Villa from the second division back into the top tier and managed 
another runners-up finish.

It was no surprise that he was appointed England boss after Bobby Robson’s 
resignation and, although he was harshly criticised for failure to qualify for 
USA 94, he had previously managed to qualify for Euro 92, which in those days 
was an eight-team tournament and the equivalent of a quarter-final finish, 
which is probably the most you can reasonably ask of anEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> boss in any particular 
tournament.

But more importantly he always came across as a decent individual, always 
politely and professionally responding to questions even when he had good cause 
to despise some of the hacks who were asking those questions. One of the good 
guys.Hibernica <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2822285>

‘A true gentleman’


Very sad. I met him when I was working at a mechanics for my work experience 
in his second spell at Villa, I told him me and my dad were season ticket 
holders and he stayed and talked with me and the guys there for a good half an 
hour at least. He signed David Platt, Dwight Yorke and Paul McGrath, arguably 
the three best players Villa have had in the last couple of decades. A true 
gentleman, RIP.dinglebungle <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15924958>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-readers-tributes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F113d803bc145c3ffef314934255c753b4f382573%2F0_312_3700_2220%2F3700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20nicest%20man%20in%20football'%3A%20our%20readers%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Graham%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-readers-tributes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20nicest%20man%20in%20football%27%3A%20our%20readers%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Graham%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-readers-tributes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F113d803bc145c3ffef314934255c753b4f382573%2F0_312_3700_2220%2F3700.jpg>
 Graham Taylor while in charge of Aston Villa in 1988. Photograph: Bob 
Thomas/Getty Images 
‘A genuinely nice guy’


I had the pleasure of working with Graham for a year at the ill-fated ITV 
Sport Channel. A genuinely nice guy who had time for everyone. He was always 
passionate about the game he loved and, despite his time with the national 
team, has to be considered one of the best English managers of his generation. 
Sympathies to his family. RIP Graham.ID8981136 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2393867>

‘Everyone has a story about how lovely he was’


Top manager who had astounding success – imagine taking a club from the bottom 
to the top and leaving a legacy as he did. Everyone has a story about how 
lovely a man he was; he even turned up to be best man at a Hornet’s wedding a 
few years ago. On top of that, professionally, he always conducted himself with 
dignity despite the dogs abuse he got. I hope that there’s a fitting tribute on 
Saturday at the stadium with the stand named in his honour. RIP.WatfordDave 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15770131>

‘His compassion was wonderful’

Sad to see him go - always managed to keep his dignity even when under huge 
pressure. My respect for him went up immeasurably after reading the Paul 
McGrath book – his compassion was wonderful.godowd 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4777197>

‘One of a kind’


In a collection of Martin Amis’ writings there is a piece about Taylor when he 
managed Watford. He was one of a kind. Not just for what he achieved with the 
club but also in his efforts to give his players a broader education about the 
world and their place in it. On a club tour to China, Taylor organised lots of 
extracurricular events to show his players a bit about life in the country.

I never met him but he always came across on the telly as a thoroughly nice 
and decent chap. His love for the game was infectious and made him a great 
pundit after his retirement from the game. RIP.Youregghunt 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11590103>

‘There simply would not be a Watford without him and Elton’


Awful news. On holiday in Malta and my dad phoned me in tears. I would give 
anything to be able to be at the game against ‘boro on Saturday. There simply 
would not be a Watford without him and Elton.Jonathon Ó Maoldomhnaigh Moloney 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13378366>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-readers-tributes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F616960ae4b3983d9b970ac7ab4e9d368fb96c2e4%2F0_230_6500_3902%2F6500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20nicest%20man%20in%20football'%3A%20our%20readers%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Graham%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-readers-tributes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20nicest%20man%20in%20football%27%3A%20our%20readers%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Graham%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-readers-tributes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F616960ae4b3983d9b970ac7ab4e9d368fb96c2e4%2F0_230_6500_3902%2F6500.jpg>
 Elton John with Graham Taylor, the men in charge of Watford. Photograph: PA 
‘He always treated everyone with respect’

I lived in Lincoln when he was the manager there and he did a great job with 
them gaining the most number of points in the Fourth Division in the era of two 
points for a win. He also did stuff in the community and I remember our school 
football team going to watch a training session and also him setting up a 
f-a-side competition. Lincoln were storming in the Third Division when he left 
to join Watford and the rest is history.

I was always saddened by the treatment he got during his England tenure and 
tried to stick up for him. I’m glad to see he is getting a lot of respect. He 
seemed a thoroughly decent man who always treated everyone with respect. I 
remember reading in Tony Adams’ autobiography that he took time to contact him 
in prison, which seemed typical of him.Swissroll 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2760377>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-former-england-manager-dies-aged-72-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Graham%20Taylor%2C%20former%20England%20manager%2C%20dies%20aged%2072%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-former-england-manager-dies-aged-72-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Graham%20Taylor%2C%20former%20England%20manager%2C%20dies%20aged%2072%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-former-england-manager-dies-aged-72-video-obituary&media=>
Graham Taylor – video obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-former-england-manager-dies-aged-72-video-obituary>
‘An incredibly genuine man’


We don’t have many famous sons or daughters in Scunny and even fewer who we 
can be as proud of as Graham Taylor. His old man was the local paper sports’ 
reporter and I had the privilege a few years ago of hearing Graham recounting 
how he used to go along to the Old Showground with his dad and help him 
identify players during the game. That speech was at a dinner held shortly 
after streets had been named in honour of both of his parents in Scunthorpe and 
his pride was palpable. He never played for us but he retained his links with 
the town even though he made his name elsewhere.

I always found him an incredibly decent and genuine man, one who will be much 
missed, at least in North Lincolnshire.mrscunthorpe 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2794964>

‘A great club manager’

My wife used to work at the FA and she said he was the nicest man in football. 
His England tenure was not great though, injuries to Gazza and the nonsensical 
exile of Chris Waddle robbing the team of a lot of it’s creativity. Still, he 
was a thoroughly decent man and a great club manager.LeBur 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2108487>
 