
Mike Izava Olendo, programme coordinator, WWF Kenya 
<http://wwf.panda.org/who_we_are/wwf_offices/kenya/>


Vast amounts of plastic clog the seas and beaches of Lamu. With support from 
Mike and his team, who work all hours of the day and night in some of the most 
remote and risky parts of Kenya, a women’s enterprise has been established to 
collect the plastic and turn it into trinkets, crafts and art pieces to sell. 
Mike and his team also support several microfinance village savings and loans 
associations (VSLAs), enabling people in the community to access financial 
credit by pooling their resources. I met Mike when he was training young people 
in monitoring marine turtle nesting. One young man told me he wanted to grow up 
to be like Mike – a sentiment I heard repeated by young people across the 
community.Nominated by Alexis Barnett

Edith Kagoya, programme manager, Sightsavers <http://www.sightsavers.org/>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEQLeRlqe80c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEQLeRlqe80c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEQLeRlqe80c&media=>
Edith oversees Sightsavers’ Connecting the Dots project, which trains young 
Ugandans with disabilities and places them in internships and jobs. “It’s so 
much more than a job for her. Edith doesn’t just ensure their practical 
wellbeing or ability to earn a living; she works to build up the confidence 
that so many other people have knocked out of them,” says Kate McCoy, who 
nominated her.
Kate McCoy (@K8McCoy) 
Most inspiring, dedicated person I've ever met. Edith empowers youth w/ 
disabilitieshttps://t.co/h6miHbPIfL <https://t.co/h6miHbPIfL>. She's a 
@GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> #NGOhero 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NGOhero?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/K8McCoy/status/811155904234135552> December 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/K8McCoy/status/811155904234135552> 
Edith works tirelessly to ensure they know their potential, stresses that they 
have as much to offer as anyone else, and empowers them to stand up – not just 
for themselves but for all people with disabilities.

Mario Raimondi, founder, El Desafío Foundation <http://www.eldesafio.org/>

After the 2001 economic crisis in Argentina, Mario started a social movement 
to kick poverty’s ass
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa854e3ee450fc4d71a75430f26f5cfba76f7d7af%2F234_174_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I've%20ever%20met'%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I%27ve%20ever%20met%27%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa854e3ee450fc4d71a75430f26f5cfba76f7d7af%2F234_174_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
 Mario Raimondi (with book) established the El Desafío Foundation after the 
2001 economic crisis left 50% of the Argentinean population living in poverty. 
Photograph: Jorn Wemmenhove 
After the 2001 economic crisis left 50% of the Argentinean population living 
in poverty, Mario started a social movement to kick poverty’s ass. He created 
the El Desafío Foundation and developed a theory of change focusing on two 
areas: youth development and stimulating civic participation. He created an 
urban innovation lab for actions in public space, including free, public mini 
libraries in the city, urban art and a Happy Cities Festival. He took personal 
risks to do this; taking a second mortgage on his home and quitting a 
comfortable job at Nike. “Mario has inspired thousands, changed the lives of 
hundreds of children and given hope to people in a country that is desperately 
looking for honest leaders,” says Jorn Wemmenhove, who nominated him. “He is a 
true changemaker and gamechanger. His innovative ideas are making a revolution 
on how social work should be done and how to approach real solutions to 
poverty.”

Alin Hilowle, founder, Isha Human Rights Group 
<https://www.linkedin.com/in/isha-human-rights-org-2439a647>


Alin has worked tirelessly to promote the human rights of his community in 
south central Somalia for more than two decades. He founded Isha Human Rights 
Group in Baidoa in 1999, where warlords were committing serious human rights 
violations against local clans.

In 2009, when al-Shabaab took control of areas where Isha Human Rights Group 
operated, the group continued to be a vocal and visible figure in the 
community. Hilowle was arrested and tortured by al-Shabaab, but managed to 
escape the country with the help of other human rights defenders in his 
community. He now lives in exile in Sweden but still continues to support and 
defend his community.Nominated by Linnea Gelot

Bassam Hawas Quru, community health worker, International Medical Corps 
<https://internationalmedicalcorps.org/>

Where children have no access to vital vaccinations, Bassam organises trips to 
local towns where they are available
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbd2e1b4bb26564039e32fb2395ccd87fb5c1cde%2F0_0_640_427%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I've%20ever%20met'%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I%27ve%20ever%20met%27%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbd2e1b4bb26564039e32fb2395ccd87fb5c1cde%2F0_0_640_427%2F640.jpg>
 Bassam Hawas Quru organises trips to local towns so that children can have 
access to vital vaccinations. Photograph: GuardianWitness 
Bassam Hawas Quru was one of many Yazidis forced to flee their homeland before 
the Islamic State-led genocide in Iraq in 2014. Finding himself in a refugee 
camp, Quru decided to use his experiences to help others. He joined the 
International Medical Corps as a community health worker and helped thousands 
gain access to medical supplies, despite considerable personal risk.

“In the remotest areas, where children have no access to vital vaccinations, 
Bassam organises trips to local towns where they are available,” says Larissa 
Schneider who nominated him. “He has worked in Kapartu camp, supporting a 
28,000-strong population, leading health promotion services and working to 
address psychological scars from the conflict. Not only have disease outbreaks 
decreased, but health and hygiene practices among residents have leapt forward 
meaning that many more can avoid succumbing to common diseases.”

Ruth Shrestha, counsellor, The Leprosy Mission 
<https://www.leprosymission.org.uk/>

In the past year, Ruth has provided counselling to hundreds of people who have 
passed through the hospitalAnandaban Hospital in Nepal. This includes people 
who have experienced anxiety and depression due to being excluded or 
discriminated against because of leprosy; some have even been disowned by their 
families. “Ruth is a humble lady with a huge heart and has spent her life 
supporting the mental health of those most in need,” says GuardianWitness user 
SianTLM, who nominated her. “Many have said that Ruth’s care and compassion has 
helped to rebuild their sense of dignity and self-esteem.”

Robert Tamuzade, project coordinator, Send a Cow <http://www.sendacow.org/>

Robert travels many miles every day, crossing rough terrain to support the 
newest generation of HIV/Aids orphans in Uganda. He visits families to offer 
them emotional support and teach them about basic sanitation and hygiene, 
farming and household management – life skills they haven’t been able to learn 
from their parents.

“Young people look to Robert for guidance and they often come to see him as 
part of the family. Many of them call him ‘uncle’,” says Azita Shamsolahi, who 
nominated Tamuzade.

Noelene Nabulivou, founder, Diverse Voices and Action for Equality 
<http://www.divafiji.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49daf774c3fdf17e28519abbd8cd8d34599348d%2F0_0_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I've%20ever%20met'%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I%27ve%20ever%20met%27%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49daf774c3fdf17e28519abbd8cd8d34599348d%2F0_0_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Noelene Nabulivou (left) has worked to create a space, in a devout country, 
where young people can express themselves and their sexuality. Photograph: 
Marita Manley 
Noelene Nabulivou wears many hats. She advocates for action on climate change, 
sustainable development, and gender equality – and she has an amazing ability 
to link all the work she does. She founded the Diverse Voices and Action for 
Equality, which has emerged from a grassroots collection of advocates to a 
respected and well-regarded NGO. The organisation focuses on climate justice, 
violence against women, human rights and LGBTQI rights – creating a space in a 
devout country where young people can express themselves and their sexuality. 
Noelene represents her community, specifically women, to ensure that the voices 
of the Pacific are heard locally and globally.Nominated by Marita Manley

Hongthong Sirivath, programme director, Village Focus International 
<http://www.villagefocus.org/>


Hongthong is one of the busiest people I’ve ever met, yet he always has an 
aura of calm, a ready smile and a kind word
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc09798215650772ad144d6f543de945b65ec7b%2F30_0_900_540%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I've%20ever%20met'%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I%27ve%20ever%20met%27%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc09798215650772ad144d6f543de945b65ec7b%2F30_0_900_540%2F900.jpg>
 Hongthong Sirivath at work in Laos. Photograph: GuardianWitness 
Hongthong Sirivath works in Laos to educate local people on their land and 
legal rights.

“Hongthong always impresses me with his optimism and energy,” says Justine 
Sylvester. “Since he was a teenager, he has worked to improve the lives of 
rural people in Laos. He is an expert in so many areas and he inspires everyone 
to stay positive and keep focused when things are tough. Hongthong is one of 
the busiest people I’ve ever met, yet he always has an aura of calm, a ready 
smile and a kind word.”

Mauricio Paredes, region III vice president, Honduran Red Cross 
<http://www.ifrc.org/en/what-we-do/where-we-work/americas/honduran-red-cross/>

As a first responder and mentor, Mauricio plays an instrumental role at the 
Honduran Red Cross, but his unwavering dedication to migrant human rights has 
made a major impact within his community.

“Mauricio was part of the initial efforts to address the humanitarian needs of 
migrants being deported from Mexico back to Honduras,” says Kari Williams, who 
nominated Mauricio. “For more than three years, he led the migrant reception 
centre in Corinto, a town along the Honduras-Guatemala border, with a dedicated 
team of volunteers and limited resources. His leadership, advocacy, and 
dedication helped to lead the way for a new Honduran Migrant Reception Centre, 
which continues to provide much needed services to Hondurans being deported 
back from Mexico daily.”

Máxima Acuña, human rights defender
 Maxima risks her own wellbeing while standing up for the right to live on her 
own land. Photograph: GuardianWitness 
Máxima Acuña has become one of the leading voices in Peru’s anti-mining 
movement: speaking for the thousands of Peruvians affected by projects 
destroying their land and water supplies. Máxima has bravely stood her ground 
against the second biggest gold mining company in the world, Newmont, which
sought to drain the pristine Lake Azul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/19/goldman-prize-winner-i-will-never-be-defeated-by-the-mining-companies>
 (near her 18-acre farm) and turn it into a waste pit for mine by-products. The 
lake is one of the only freshwater sources for the local community, and Máxima 
often risks her own wellbeing while standing up for the right to live on her 
own land.Nominated by GoldmanPrize via GuardianWitness

Grace Makonyola, Malawi regional director, Maternity Worldwide 
<http://www.maternityworldwide.org/>


Grace has helped to save hundreds of lives in childbirth through her passion, 
knowledge, respect and dedication
Maternity Worldwide (@maternityww) 
Our #NGOhero <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NGOhero?src=hash> is Grace, our 
Malawi Country Director, who has worked tirelessly over the years to ensure 
women can give birth safely in Malawipic.twitter.com/9QgEB4le3Z 
<https://t.co/9QgEB4le3Z>
 <https://twitter.com/maternityww/status/810816430740504576> December 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/maternityww/status/810816430740504576> 
Grace Makonyola was a dedicated volunteer for years before becoming Maternity 
Worldwide’s Malawi regional director. Working with a small local team, Grace 
has established women’s groups in 80 villages to provide maternal and newborn 
healthcare information. She has facilitated income generation programmes to 
empower women to become financially-independent, and trained skilled birth 
attendants to safely deliver babies.Nominated by Kirsty Erridge

Fatik al-Rodaini and Riaz Karim, founders, Mona Relief Organisation 
<http://monarelief.org/>

When international aid failed to provide countless Yemenis with their basic 
need, two friends decided to take action. Fatik Abdullah al-Rodaini, a Yemeni 
journalist in Sana’a, and Riaz Karim, a humanitarian in London, founded the 
Mona Relief Organisation, a grassroots charity for humanitarian relief and 
development aid. The Mona Relief Organisation is committed to offering critical 
aid to the poorest and and most vulnerable people in Yemen, and since its 
conception, has fed more than 7 million people in the country.Nominated by 
Alkarim Haji via GuardianWitness

Esther Nyambu, emergency reproductive health coordinator, International Rescue 
Committee <https://www.rescue.org/> (IRC)

Esther's career is a reminder of our responsibility to ensure reproductive 
health services are available in crises
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc994d0fe07a113e1bd77c781cad827f2289ef57%2F0_0_2556_1533%2F2556.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I've%20ever%20met'%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I%27ve%20ever%20met%27%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc994d0fe07a113e1bd77c781cad827f2289ef57%2F0_0_2556_1533%2F2556.jpg>
 Esther (left) spearheaded the IRC’s reproductive health response, enabling 
more than 20,000 women to access reproductive health services in Borno State, 
Nigeria. Photograph: IRC 
Esther Nyambu works to give women and girls in Niger, Burundi and Nigeria 
access to lifesaving health services. She recently spearheaded the IRC’s 
reproductive health response, enabling more than 20,000 women to access 
reproductive health services in Borno State, Nigeria. Esther also helped to 
open the only health care facility in Bakassi IDP camp, focusing on women who 
were pregnant or had experienced complications due to mismanaged deliveries.


“Esther has tirelessly served, sacrificed and spoken out on behalf of the 
needs of women and families affected by crisis,” says Rita Nehme, policy and 
practice officer at IRC. “She has demonstrated extraordinary courage, working 
in some of the world’s most difficult environments. Her career is a reminder of 
our collective responsibility to ensure reproductive health services are 
available in crises, and of the immense potential and impact we stand to make 
when we live up to it.”Nominated by Rita Nehme

Afroz Shah, founder, Versova Resident Volunteers 
<https://twitter.com/versovabeach>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ad17d4e2fb67273a13f2a83e715e087ba4557a%2F0_0_640_427%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I've%20ever%20met'%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20most%20inspiring%20person%20I%27ve%20ever%20met%27%3A%20your%20aid%20worker%20heroes%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ad17d4e2fb67273a13f2a83e715e087ba4557a%2F0_0_640_427%2F640.jpg>
 ‘On any given weekend, between 20 and 40 volunteers scavenge for garbage, 
joined by around eight municipality workers.’ Photograph: GuardianWitness 
Driven by the piles of refuse washing ashore Versova beach each day, lawyer 
Afroz Shah founded Versova Resident Volunteers, the biggest beach clean-up 
initiative in the world. Since its conception in October 2015, the group has 
been recognised by United Nations Environment Programme’s executive director, 
Erik Solheim, who visited the site on the first anniversary of the clean up.

“On any given weekend, between 20 and 40 volunteers scavenge for garbage, 
joined by around eight municipality workers,” says GuardianWitness user 
cruisechelsea who nominated Afroz. “Together they pick up, on average, three 
tonnes of garbage in two hours each Saturday and Sunday. During the week, the 
unforgiving tide brings more.”

 * This article was amended on 27 December 2016 to remove some personal 
details. 
Is there someone you’d like to recognise as an NGO hero? Why not tell us about 
them in the comments.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 